THE GOOD MAN'S GRACE. OR HIS STAY IN ALL DISTRESS.

BY RIC. BERNARD.



LONDON, Printed by Felix Kingston. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL HIS VERY GOOD Lady, the Lady SUSANNA BILLINGSLEY, and
to the Virtuous and Christianly affected Gentlewoman, Mistress REBECCA STROWDE,
all saving graces, with daily increase and practice thereof unto the end.
Madame,
I Cannot but make account that I am bound to return thanks, where I find
favor and acceptance: acknowledgement is the least part of my duty. He that
will not confess a debt, never means to pay it: some such there be: And
others again, will ingenuously confess, but not pay; not for that they will
not, but because they cannot. And inability gives an acquittance, though the
debt be never so great: and the greatness of a debt, is to be judged not
always in the value of the thing, but after the free disposition of the one,
and the little deserving of any such favor of the other. Thus is it with me. I
have found your Ladyship my loving friend, and this Virtuous Gentlewoman very
Christianly respective toward me: to whom, as also to her second self, I
acknowledge my self deeply engaged. It is not a hard matter to find friends,
though in these days few enough, but to find a faithful friend, one that will
know a man in adversity, is not so easy. Complementall are obuious every
where: but substantial friends be rare: a face of favor is in those, and that
only in prosperity, but the force of love is only seen in these; when a
friend needs them, they fail not, they faint not. True love, as Saint John
speaks, drives away fear. I am bold to present you both with this little
Manual. It is thus little of purpose, that it may be often read over, to help
only for matter of meditation, to further you in prayer. I beseech you to
accept it in lieu of payment, and it shall bind me to pray for the blessing of
our God, still upon you, to whose gracious guidance and protection, I commit
you, and humbly take leave.

Your Ladyships, and yours (my very good friend) ever to be commanded, RIC.
BERNARD.
Batcombe, Feb. 27.
THE PREFACE.
IT is a saying of the Psalmist, The fool has said in his heart, there is no
God: this is an Atheistical fool; and amongst other marks, he is known by
this, that this wicked fool calls not upon God. He does not pray, for he
cannot pray, is not a gift of nature: but a work of Grace. We know not how to
pray as we ought, but as the Spirit helps our infirmities, to pray with
groans that cannot be expressed. John taught his Disciples to pray: this
Christ's Disciples observed, and also saw their own want, and therefore desired
the Lord to teach them to pray. Whereupon he gave them, and in them to us, a
perfect pattern and form of prayer. After this all our prayers are to be
directed. It is then necessary that this short prayer be well understood: for
which cause I have made this short exposition, and drawn out briefly manyfold
observations, the better to acquaint such as know it not, with the meaning
thereof. It will administer sufficient matter for meditation, at all times, and
upon any occasion, to enlarge our thoughts in prayer: the practice whereof is
the special grace of a Christian. It is the fruit of Faith, so as he that
believes, prays; and so excellent a duty is this, as Saint Paul says, Pray
continually, as if man's life consisted in it. And Christ says, Watch, and
Pray, It is a means of our preservation from evil, and a conservation of us
in an estate which is good. Wonderful is the effect of prayer. Moses by it
makes way through the Red sea, overcame the Amalekites, and obtained pardon for
the people. By this, Joshua had the Sun standing still the space of a day,
waiting upon him in the pursuit of his enemies; by this, Hezekiah reuersed the
sentence of death, and had his life prolonged; by this, Peter escaped the hands
of Herod; Jonah gate out of the Whales belly. By this, Eliah shut heaven three
years; and again brought rain from heaven. By this Elisha raised one from
the dead, and got sight to Gehezi to see vision of Angels. Incredible is the
power of prayer; the prayer of faith avails much, if it be fervent. Let
therefore here in every good Christian exercise himself, and this let him know;
that it is a great honor to be admitted into Gods presence, to put up his
requests unto so high a Majesty. The due esteem of prayer, will make us
exercise our selves in prayer: for as we prize a thing, so we practice, so we
employ our selves about it. Therefore little praying argues, we make little
account thereof: but the less we esteem and practice it, the less grace we
have, and the more corruption of heart is in us. The truth of this is cleared
in such as we see to make no conscience of this duty. But this evil be far
from the faithful, in whom the gift of prayer is ever found, as a peculiar
property of them that shall inherit Glory.

A BRIEF EXPOSItion with observations upon the Lords Prayer.
The Preface.
Our
IN brotherly communion.
By the Grace of adoption.
And sealed by holy unction.
Father,
Tender in loving.
Careful in providing.
Liberal in bestowing.
Which art in Heaven,
The place of thy Majesty.
The Throne of thy Glory.
The fullness of Felicity.
The first Petition.
Hallowed
In heart be thou feared.
In speech reverenced.
In our lives honored.
Be thy Name.
Thy attributes so glorious.
Thy works so marvelous.
Thy heavenly Word so Gracious.
The second Petition.
Thy Kingdom
Of Power general.
Of Grace special.
Of Glory Celestial.
Come.
With power to defend us.
With Grace to convert us.
With glory to crown us.
The third Petition.
Thy Will
In thy holy Word revealed.
In works of providence showed.
In good examples confirmed.
Be done,
In our true believing.
In our Godly living.
In our patient suffering.
In Earth
The Wickeds best heritage,
The place of our Pilgrimage.
And here to Heaven our passage.
As it is in Heaven.
By holy Angels most faithfully.
By the blessed Saints most cheerfully.
By all of them there most constantly.
The fourth Petition.
Give us this day
By thy provident hand mercifully.
By the labor of our calling honestly.
By all good means prosperously.
Our daily bread.
Necessary for lives sustentation.
Convenient for states preservation.
Sufficient for Needies consolation.
The fifth Petition.
And forgive us
Of thy mercy freely.
In Christ deservedly.
In our hearts assuredly.
Our trespasses,
In nature originally polluted.
In evils wilfully committed.
In duties carelessly omitted.
As we forgive them,
From our hearts most vnseignedly.
Expressed in words most lovingly.
And showed by deeds most cheerfully.
That trespass against us,
In heart maliciously.
In tongue slanderously.
By deeds injuriously.
The sixth Petition.
And lead us not.
By laying objects before us.
In the danger so leaving us.
And by withdrawing grace from us.
Into temptation,
Satan's powerful suggestion.
Natures wretched corruption.
This present worlds pollution.
But deliver us
By thy Divine inspiration.
By inward fanct fication.
By a holy conversation.
From evil,
Past, by freely remitting.
Present, by powerful protecting.
Future, by grace preventing.
The conclusion.
For thine is the Kingdom,
External, in the Church apparent.
Internal, in the Church militant.
Eternal, in the Church triumphant.
Thy power
Of subduing sin victoriously.
Of renewing grace continually.
Of bestowing glory eternally.
And thy Glory,
Due from all in living to thee.
Seen by thine in dying for thee.
Known by all in judgments from thee.
For ever,
Before time, without begininng.
In time, and that without changing.
And after time, without ending.
Amen.
As thou do say.
So we do pray.
Lord, say not nay.
Even so be it,
Amen.
A BRIEF EXPOSITION WITH observations upon the Lords Prayer.
THe prayer consists of a Preface, of six Petitions, and of the conclusion.

The Preface.
In making a Preface, we learn, that preparation is to be made before
prayer: rashly to rush into Gods presence becomes not us, neither is meet we
should do it to so high a Majesty.

Our
Thus we begin, not with My, but Our Father: to teach,

1. That God is the common Father of all the elect.

2. That prayer is to be made in brotherly love.

3. That he which prays, is to be one of Christ's mystical Body, and in the
communion of Saints.

Father
This is the Title of Honor, and the Name importing the greatest love; thus
Christ wills us to pray, and thus to call God, Father: to teach,

1. That prayer is to be made in faith and assurance of mercy.

2. In the Spirit of adoption, as the request of a Child to a Father.

3. In the Name of Christ; because in him he is our Father.

4. In distinct knowledge of the Trinity.

Which art in Heaven.
Here God is said to be, who yet fills Heaven and earth: to teach,

1. That prayer is to be made with a heavenly mind, without any earthly
representation, or any carnal affection.

2. With all reverence, devotion, because God is in heaven; not to be rash, to
utter any thing hastily before God. The wise man's reason, Eccle. 5. 2.

3. That prayer is to be made to God alone; for he is the only Father in
Heaven.

4. Therefore not to Saint, Angel, nor to the Virgin Mary, because none of
these are our Father in Heaven.

5. That Heaven is the true home of all the elect; for there our Father is.

6. That God sees all things, and does whatsoever he will; for he is in
Heaven, as the Prophet speaks.

The first petition.
This concerns Gods Glory, and is therefore in the first place: to teach,
that Gods glory chiefly is to be preferred in our desires, 1. Cor. 10. 31.

Hallowed be thy Name.
In this petition we be taught to desire to acknowledge, ascribe and to procure
holiness, to be given to the Lord in those things, by which he makes
himself known unto us, as by a Name, that is, his Titles, Attributes, Words
and Works; whence we learn,

1. That God has made himself known unto us.

2. That holiness belongs unto him.

3. That such things are to be thought of, spoken and done by us, as his Name
may receive glory.

4. That therefore such things are to be avoided, as may cause his Name to be
blasphemed, and polluted among the wicked.

5. That sorrow should possess our hearts, to see God dishonored; for as our
desire should be to see his Name glorified: so grief should arise in us, to
see his Name abused.

The second Petition.
This follows the former, as the means to hallow Gods Name: teaching this,
that if he rule in us, he shall be honored of us.

Thy Kingdom come.
In this we are taught to beg of God, that he would take the rule and reign of
all things, and to show it according to his power, grace, and glory. Hence we
learn

1. That God our Father has a Kingdom.

2. That it is the desire of his children, that this should come, that is, that
he should reign over all, and rule all.

3. That it is not in our power to bring men under the rule of God, but the
Kingdom, that is, the Lords supremacy and dominion comes from him. It
comes upon us, it arises not from within us, or from among us.

4. That to have God to rule and reign, is a mercy to be craved at his hands.

5. That Gods Kingdom does but in part here come upon us, because we desire
whilst we live, that it may come.

The third petition.
This follows as the manifestation of our subjection to God; teaching, that
the doing of Gods will is the evidence of his rule and dominion over us.

Thy will be done
Here we are taught to desire of God, that what his pleasure and will is, may
be performed of us. Hence we learn,

1. That God has his will, decree and purposes.

2. That this is only to be known and observed, and submitted unto.

3. That we are to beg of God this his grace to be obedient.

4. That it is not in us of our selves to submit to his will.

5. That it is not enough to know the will of God, to have good desires and
hearts, but to be doers of Gods will and to show forth good works.

In Earth,
Wheresouer we dwell, and whatsoever we possess, and so long as we here
live on earth, Gods will must be done. Whence we learn,

1. That wheresoever we abide in great or mean families, among Christians or
heathen, Gods will is to be our rule, and we are to resign our selves to it.

2. That no earthly thing is to withdraw our obedience from Gods will.

3. That so long as we be on earth, his will is to be done of us.

As it is in Heaven.
The manner of doing Gods will is here set forth: teaching,

1. That God requires as well the right manner of doing, as the very doing of
the deed it self.

2. That only in Heaven, and not on Earth, are patterns of perfection, and of
perfect obedience.

3. That in obedience the perfectest examples are to be set before us for
imitation.

4. That we are to strive to perfection, to live here an heavenly life, the
life of Angels, if it were possible.

5. That the doing of Gods will well, is his gift, and not of our selves.

The fourth petition.
The former petitions concern Gods glory, the rest following the good of our
selves; teaching, that Gods glory, his Kingdom and Will are to be preferred
before our own lives and salvation, in our desires.

Give us this day, our daily bread.
We be here taught to ask earthly blessings of God our Father. Hence we
learn,

1. That its lawful to ask temporal blessings, and bodily means of life.

2. That all these things are his mere gift and of his goodness to us.

3. That none can get them but as God is pleased to give them.

4. That therefore enjoying them he is to be praised, or wanting of them, we
are to learn patience.

5. That present provision should content us, and not be troubled with
distrustful cares for the time to come.

6. That our desire is to be moderate and to rest with that which is necessary.

7. That the bread, that is, the means which we live upon is to be our own.

8. That we are every day to depend on God for these outward things.

9. That care of provision is to be had of our brethren, as well as of our
selves.

The fifth petition.
The former petition was for the body, so Christ descends to our weakness,
to let us begin there first, with the care whereof we be most troubled: this
petition is for souls safety: teaching, that with care of bodies welfare, the
souls danger should be seen unto.

And forgive us our trespasses,
We be here taught to beg of God pardon of sins. Out of which we learn,

1. That all and every one are offenders against God: for all are to ask
forgiveness.

2. That we offend, not in one, but in many things: we are to acknowledge not a
trespass, but trespasses.

3. That therefore every man's sanctification is weak to resist sin, and
imperfect here.

4. That God only can and does forgive sins.

5. That Gods pardon is a free pardon, we get it not by satisfaction, but beg
forgiveness of his mercy.

6. That all the children of God do obtain pardon of their sins, and are
assured thereof. Else Christ would not bid them ask pardon, if their sins
were not pardonable, and to be pardoned, when they ask forgiveness being
truly penitent.

7. That repentance is daily to be renewed for our daily slips: for this
request must be daily put up to God.

8. That we are to pray that God would forgive our brethren, as well as our
selves.

9. That therefore we are not to provoke men to sin, nor make a sport of
their sinning.

As we forgive them, that trespass against us.
Here is the sign of forgiveness, by which we may know to whom remission
belongs, and it is for strengthening of our faith, in the assurance of pardon.
The words are not a comparison; nor any sampler to God how he should forgive
us: Nor do they plead any cause, to move God, but are as a witness from this
grace and mercy to others, that God will be merciful to us. If we that have so
little mercy yet can forgive, how much more our Father the God of mercy, yea
and mercy it self? Hence may we learn,

1. That our forgiving one another, is not of the sin, but of the injury and
damage against our own persons.

2. They that look for pardon of their own sins from God, are to remit the
trespasses done against themselves to their brethren.

3. That the merciful may assure themselves that they shall obtain mercy.

4. That though men do trespass one another; yet are they to forgive one
another.

The sixth petition.
The last petition concerns the safety of body and soul. The distinct care
of the one and of the other, makes us care for the good of both together.

And lead us not into temptation.
This is the petition, in which we be taught to desire, as in the last place,
Gods aid and assistance against our spiritual enemies, to teach us,

1. That the Godly are here subject to temptations. They may not think to live
securely.

2. That no temptation can or does befall us, without the will and guidance of
God.

3. That God will not suffer us to be tempted above our power; seeing he
wills us to pray thus unto him.

4. That it is in Gods power, and not in us to prevent temptations.

5. That we should tender our brethren in their spiritual temptations.

6. That therefore we should not be tempters our selves, to draw them to evil.

But deliver us from evil.
This is as the explanation, showing how far we desire not to be led into
temptation, to wit, so far, as we be not left in the danger and destruction
thereof. Whence we learn,

1. That we are not to pray simply not to be tempted at all, but respectively
as it may be evil and sinful to us.

2. That evil is the thing we are to desire to be freed from.

3. That it is not in man's power to free himself from evil in time of
temptation.

4. That God only can and will free his from evil: for what we are willed to
ask, that we may look to obtain of God.

5. That we are to pray for our brethren that evil seize not upon them, that
they be not overcome in temptation.

The conclusion.
Which is in part a reason why we ask all these of God, partly a confirmation
of our faith, with an acknowlegement of the things herein, which is a praising
of God: which teaches us, that our requests should be grounded upon good
reasons, and such as God affords us. And in that the conclusion follows the
six petitions, we learn that these contain all things needful to be asked
of God, either for his glory, or our safety; else would Christ have added more.

For thine is Kingdom, power and glory for ever.
We are taught here what to make the grounds of our requests, and what to
ascribe unto God.

Whence we learn,

1. That soueraginty, power and glory, belong only to God, and to him to be
ascribed.

2. That these three, with the consideration of the eternity thereof, are strong
confirmations of our faith in prayer.

3. That Gods Kingdom, power and glory are endless.

4. That praises as well as prayers are our duty to God.

Amen.
It is an asseueration or wish, and an earnest longing to have what we pray
for. And hence note two things,

1. That the desire is to be inflamed after those things which we beg of God.
So must we be fervent in prayer.

2. That we are to be persuaded, that what we ask, according to this holy
form of prayer, we shall obtain.

Honor and glory, and power, and praises, and dominion over all, be ascribed
to God our Father, in Christ Jesus, by the operation of the Spirit now and ever.

Amen.
A PRAYER FOR A Family at all times.
OBlessed Lord God, and Our Father which art in Heaven, thou that lovingly
tendrest the welfare of thy people, carefully providing for them, and liberally
bestowing thy blessings upon them, we thy poor children by adoption in Christ
Jesus, assured hereof by thy holy Spirit, do, in the brotherly fellowship of
love, with the rest of thy Saints, most humbly sue unto thy Divine Majesty, for
thy heavenly grace, that we may serve thee. Hallowed (O Father) be thy Name;
let such fear and reverence possess our hearts, that by our words and works,
we may set forth thy praise and glory, according as thou have and do make
thy self known to us in thy Word and in thy Works. We know (O Father) that we
owe this duty unto thee, for our election, for our natural being, for our
heavenly vocation, for our justification, sanctification and our happy
preservation both bodily and ghostly: but we are not of our selves able to
glorify thy Name by well-doing, but as thou thy self shall enable us
thereunto: for it is thou (O Father and Author of all goodness) that workest
in us both the will and the deed. Let therefore, Thy Kingdom come, send forth
thy Word to teach us, thy Spirit to convert us more and more; subdue the
kingdom of sin and Satan, and do thou take the rule and government over us
into thy own hands; and by thy power so defend us, and by thy especial grace
make us such faithful, such loyal subjects to thee always and in all things,
in this Kingdom of Grace, that at the length of thy Fatherly mercy, we might
attain to the Kingdom of Glory.

And because our hearts be deceitful through too much ignorance, self-loue,
and hidden hypocrisy, that we may be thereby easily deceived, in living only
in an outward bare profession of thy Name, and only in an outward formal
worship and service to thy Majesty, give grace (O heavenly Father) that by us
thy Will may be done in earth, as it is in Heaven. Make us in this our
pilgrimage, while we here live from home, mingled among Aliens and strangers
from the life of God, so faithful in believing, so conscionable in living, so
patient in suffering for well-doing, as hereby our hearts by thy Spirit may
ascertaine us that we be truly the children of regeneration and grace. Work
in us this good work, that we may wholly renounce our own wills, dye to our
selves and to the world, submit to thee, and to thy will in every condition,
and say, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. What thou
command, that put into our hearts to practice, and whom we see to be examples
of well-doing before us, give us grace to follow them, and to strive even to
imitate the holy Angels of heaven in doing thy will, readily without lingering,
cheerfully without murmuring, faithfully without adding or diminishing,
sincerely without sinister respect, and constantly without wavering, and never
be weary of weldoing. What though we have crosses and many discontentments,
yet let it never repent us, that we have repented, denied our selves, and
renounced the world to follow thee, even in the straight way which leads to
life and immortality in the end.

And now (O Lord) for that we live in these decaying Tabernacles, in these
bodies of clay, needing daily sustentation, we beseech thee give us this day
our daily bread; of thy goodness, put forth thy liberal hand toward us, in
granting us what is necessary for life, and convenient for our present estate
and calling, in which we live. Afford us health and peace, if it be thy will,
and such abilities of body and mind, as may enable us to walk painfully in
our vocations. Bless the diligent labor of our hands, and so guide us, that
our gettings may be in justice and honesty, our keeping in commendable
frugality, and our expending in wisdom and charity. If we have but little,
let it content us; if much, make us thankful and merciful. And whatsoever we
possess of these outward things, Lord, grant that with a good conscience we
may enjoy them, and make a good use of them, that they may be blessed to us and
ours. And if it please thee to try us in any loss, let not our inward peace
be troubled, nor our hearts fret, or be any way disquieted there with; but say
contentedly. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be his Name
for ever. We know (o Almighty Lord God) that thy hand is not shortened, thy
goodness is not lessened, nor the fountain of thy mercies drawn dry, but that
thou can give us all these things, and whatsoever we stand in need of in a
most plentiful manner: but alas, alas, we looking upon our unworthiness,
and our wretchedness, do acknowledge that we have many ways sinned against
thee, of ignorance, of knowledge, of infirmity, and sometimes wilfully: we are
borne in sin, we have broken forth into trespasses against thee. Oh how do we
daily commit one evil or another, in thought, word, and deed against thee, and
against our brethren! Oh how usual a thing is it with us to omit our duties to
thee and our neighbors, and never to be grieved at it! What other thing
therefore may we look for at thy hands, than thy deserved wrath? But (O our
Father, the God of mercy, that art infinite in goodness, and take no
pleasure in the death of a sinner, we humbly beseech thee to be merciful unto
us, to forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
We that be by corruption of nature merciless, through thy love powered into
our hearts, do freely forgive our brethren their offenses and injuries done
unto us; we therefore trust that thou being our Father, a merciful God, yea
mercy it self, wilt freely remit our sins, and never lay them unto our charge
in this life, nor in the life to come. We beg this forgiveness at thy hands for
Jesus sake our Savior, in whom thou art well pleased. He is our atonement
accept him for us, by his death he has paid our debt, thy justice therefore
is satisfied, of thy mercy be reconciled unto us. And here of (good Father)
persuade us by thy good Spirit that we may be comforted against despair; and
that the dread of thy wrath do not interrupt our prayers, nor break off our
daily access unto the throne of Grace. Be favorable, and not fearful unto
us thy children and servants: for we are sorry for our offenses; the
remembrance of them is grievous unto us, and we do desire more carefully
hereafter to please thee, and ever to walk before thee, as it becomes thy
Saints. But (o Lord our God, thou that beholdest al things) do know ye we are
very weak of our selves, and are compassed about with enemies; our nature is
corrupted, and plays the Traitor; the whole world lies polluted in
wickedness, and Satan seeks restlesly whom he may devour; we cannot prevent
temptations; we cannot free ourselves from the evils thereof. And therefore
(Holy Father) tender us in mercy, have compassion upon us, and lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil. Hold us up by divine inspiration against
Satan's suggestion: by inward sanctification against natures corruption, and by
a holy conversation against the worlds pollution, that although we be tempted,
we may not be overcome, and though through infirmity we fall, yet help thou to
raise us up again. O thou God of strength and power, go before us we pray
thee, and enter into this spiritual battle with us; in danger leave us not,
and do not withdraw thy good grace from us. And if in the multitude of thy
mercies thou will be pleased to pardon what is past, to watch over us for the
time present, and to prevent us by thy grace for the time to come, we will
acknowledge, as thy due praises, from most thankful hearts, that thine is
Kingdom, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

Let thy Almighty hand be with us in our defense against the Devil, the world
and the flesh. Thy tender mercy in Jesus Christ save us: and let not our sins
be a wall of separation between thee and us. Thy true and holy Word instruct
us, and give us grace to cast off al vain inventions of man, superstition,
will worship and idolatry. Thy gracious Spirit comfort us, by the sweet promises
of the Gospel, and free pardon in Christ, and not by the idle conceit of our
own merits and works of satisfaction, we being altogether thy unprofitable
servants. Thy holy Angels pitch their Tents about us, and about all belonging
to us, that we may be preserved both in body and soul, from all perils and
dangers of this present life, through our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
To whom with thee (O Father) and that blessed Spirit, be all Honor, Glory,
Praise, Majesty, and Dominion for all thy blessings and mercies toward us, and
toward thy whole Church, henceforth and for evermore.

Amen.
AN ADMONITORY Conclusion.
2. Tim. 2. 19.
LEt every one that names the Name of Christ, depart from iniquity. God will
not hear such as come in their sins, Esaias. 1. Such as despise the Word of
reproof, and will not be reformed, Pro. 1. 24, 25, 28. Therefore if we look
that God should hear our prayers, let us unfeignedly repent of sin, and
depart from iniquity.

First, from Atheism, which is the denying of a God, either secretly or openly.

We depart from this iniquity, when we renounce Atheism, and do know, and
acknowledge that there is a God. They that come to God, must believe that he
is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6.

The second is Gentilisme, which is the acknowledging of many false gods, and
the taking of them for God, which are no gods.

We depart from this iniquity, when we protest against Gentilisme, and do know
and acknowledge but only one God, and the same also the true and everliving
God.

The third is Turcisme, which is the profession of one God, even that God which
made Heaven and Earth, but not as he has manifested himself in his Word, nor
acknowledging God in Christ.

We depart from this iniquity, when we detest this Turcisme, and when we know
and acknowledge God in Christ reconcyling the world, the Trinity in unity, and
the unity in Trinity, as he has made himself manifest unto us in his holy
Word.

The fourth is Iudaisme, which is the serving of the true God, after the
ceremonial law of Moses, rejecting Christ the true Messiah already come, and
vainly expecting another to come.

We depart from this iniquity, when we disclaim salvation by the law, and do
know and acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the true Messiah, by whom we look to
be saved, serving God in spirit and truth, according to the doctrine of the
Gospel.

The fifth is Will Worship, which is (under what show and pretense soever) a
volu^tary worshipping of God, in and by such means, as man inuenteth, either
against or without the warrant of Gods own revealed will, in his written Word.

We depart from this iniquity, when we forsake our own wisdom and wills in
his worship, and do know, and acknowledge how, wherein, and after what manner
God has commanded himself to be worshipped, and then do strictly observe the
same.

The sixth is Heresy, which is an obstinate maintaining of any error, to the
overthrowing of any fundamental point of our Christian profession.

We depart from this iniquity, when we willingly disclaim our errors, when
they be made known to us; and when we know and readily acknowledge the verity
and truths of God, according to our measure of knowledge given unto us.

The seventh is Schism, which is an uncharitable disunion, and an unlawful
separation from the true Church of Christ, or any true member of the same,
forsaking the fellowship of the Saints wilfully in a factiousnesse of spirit
making unlawful assemblies within and among themselves.

We depart from this iniquity, when we condemn such an unchristian division,
and do know and acknowledge the true congregations of Gods people, abiding
with them, keeping among you the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace.

The eighth is Profaneness, which is to live unworthy the holy profession of
a Christian, after the liberty of the flesh; not respecting religion for the
pleasures, the profits, and honors of this present evil world; but in
comparison of these, valewing nothing of religion, being the children of
Belial, children of disobedience, and wrath. By whom Christianity is stained,
and God himself greatly dishonored.

We depart from this iniquity, when we deny ourselves, fly from the company of
such, having no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
reproving them rather, and endeavoring to live godly, righteously and soberly in
this present world, being zealous of good works.

The ninth is Hypocrisy, which is the shadow only of piety, and show of
well-doing before men, without any power or conscience of religion before God in
the heart, serving the times, and making profession of religion for advantage.

We depart from this iniquity, when we hate this sin, and do take daily an
examination of our hearts by a well informed judgment, setting our selves
before God, and making conscience the Judge of all our doings, so as we dare
appeal to the Alseeing God of Heaven, concerning our uprightness in that
which outwardly we make show of.

The tenth is Papisme, which is man's superstitious invention, a counterfeit
Christianity, unchristianly Iudaizing, and wickedly imitating the heathenish
idolaters, teaching old heresies, and the professors thereof practicing, by
Machiauillian policies, all deceit, treachery, treason, and merciless cruelties
to uphold the same.

We depart from this iniquity of the bottonlesse pit, when we disclaim that
Antichrist of Rome as the Head, and yt Romish Church, as now it stands, as the
whore of Babylon, and being come out from her, shall zealously uphold and
maintain this truth, and faith which we now stand in, unto the end, which God
grant. Amen.

Thus we see these ten heads of iniquity (to which may be referred all other
sins) which we must depart from, and all the particular branches thereof, if
we ever draw near unto God, with hope to be heard of him; for he is a God that
hates wickedness: and if in our hearts we delight in it, the Lord (as the
Psalmist speaks) will not regard us. And therefore when we come before our
God let it be in unfeigned repentance, faith and assurance of Gods mercy, to be
accepted in Christ Jesus, in whom our God is ever well pleased: to whom be
Glory and Praise for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

