FALSE COMplaints.

Or The Censure of an unthankful mind, the labor of Carolus Pascalius
translated into English by W. C.

A work very learned and fit for all Estates in this age of unnecessary
discontentments, showing how all complain, but all without cause.

Re^pub. nunquam expedit vt sit Ingratae. Symmachus.



AT LONDON. Printed by Humfrey Lownes, and are to be sold at the West-dore of
Paul's. 1605.

To the Right Gracious and Noble Prince Henry, etc.
SEeing all affections are imployd to pay atributarie duty, to that great
happiness, whereunto all are bownd; let it not seem strange to any, if (after
al others, and in an other manner) I presume, both to testify my humble duty,
and to make offer of that service, which I am able to perform: I have done in
this, little; saving only, giving occasion to your Princely towardnes, for the
increasing of both the tongues, to labor in this kind: there are few
arguments, which carry with them more variety, better invention, sounder
judgment, then this does. And being a disease both common and dangerous, fit
for all men to learn, how it may be cured; if your princely Wisdom
vouchsafe but to read this translation, and compare it at sometimes with the
author himself, you shall easily see, the excellency of the English tongue,
not refusing to express with much propriety the elegancie of the hardest
latin style; and withal, discern how all men, are almost weary of their own
happiness, and how most, most unthankfully co^plain, that have least cause: It
was not (though but a translation) a labor unfit for me, seeing it was so
commended unto me, as a pains to you, and for you. And considering that your
princely forwardnes, promising great hope, in the perfection of all virtues
has been already thus blessed, to receive in your infancy a Testamentary
Council, full of the wisest precepts, that any man, ever vttred out of the
seat of a King, since the days of Solomon: vouchsafe (Noble Prince) to accept
these, though far weaker then the other (and peradventure, such as shall find
little in you to reform of this error) yet they willshew unto your Highness a
great part of that disease, wher-with the World at this day, is so much
troubled. But howsoever; being for this time, all that, wherein I can express
my humble affection, to your princely wisedo^e: I doubt not, but your Highness,
will (both) pardon it, and accustom your self, in your young years, to a
diligent consideration of all those unspeakable blessings, that are heaped
upon you; and doubtless out of this fountain of thankefulnes, shall flow
continual streams of far greater blessings. For which there are, and shall be
many Zealous prayers, as incense offered daily up unto God, in your behalf, to
whom nothing can be wanting, whereby, in all princely Graces, you may not
exceed all that have been before you: If you your self (which is not to be
feared) be not wanting to your self; thus desiring, that from above, your
Highness may be continually blessed with all the blessings of Heaven, and earth:
I do humbly crave pardon, and take my leave.

Your Highnesses in all duty. W. C.

To the Reader.
TO tell you, that I have translated, this book shall be an honor to the
Author, but a hazard (peradventure) of your opinions to my self. But seeing a
desire to benefit others, must not look at those curious obseruatio^s, which
displease some: I thought there was small loss, if I benefitted the better
sort, though I gain unto my self the scoffing reprehension of some few; there
are in my opinion few books of a more general information or fitter for this
age; this age, this unthankful age, wherein all states (almost) are infected
with this poison, to be discontent; and by reason of their discontentments to
be unthankful; for there is no evil, that man sooner apprehends, then the
opinion of his own; which makes him (for the most part) an unjust esteemer of
what good, he has received, and so consequently unthankful unto him that gave
it. If I could cure this disease, this natural and contagious disease (which
grows by the increase of sense and decay of virtue) I should in some things
reform their judgments, whom I know to be far wiser then my self. I will
not tell you (a thing too well known) how all conditions are unthankful, but I
will say with my Author (which may serve to cure them) that the great and
awful ruler of men, times, and things; the liberal and wife disposer of all
that are annexed to man's life, Knows how to divide, much better, then we can
choose. In this Treatise, thou shall find much rypened wisedo^e to cure this
sickness. If thou understand the Author himself, read him, as he wrote;
for he receives but darkness, and a blemish from my pen, Faults which I
do unto him, yet against my will. If thou understand him not, read this,
for it is better to hear a good tale evil told, then not at all; it is labor
to me, more then to thy self; If thou think, that I am worthy small
thanks, I know, in this I deserve as little blame; unthankfulness is that
fault, which is reproved in this Treatise; I would be sorry this fault should
be in thee, if it be, it is dangerous, seek to cure it, accept this well, and
to me, thou art thankful enough; greater benefits require greater thanks;
consider to whom thou art most bound, and make him the contemplation of thy
thankfulness; so shall thou make benefits, not to be losses; nor thy self
unhappy.

This which thou read translated into thy own tongue (for thy
understanding) is the work of a very wise, and great man; and such a one (as
in my weak opinion) to Chronicle the civil wars of that great Kingdom
France, has not in the circuit of his large Empire, any more judicial, or
more eloquent; I think a History written by him, would not be much inferior
to that of Tacitus; whose impenetrable judgment (doubtless) had not been so
great, if he had not set down great vices striving with great virtues; much
evil, with much good; all concurring in new governors, what he has performed
in this, toward the curing of the common disease of vnthankfullnesse, thou that
read, may easily judge; and though he need not, yet I crave thy pardon
(courtious Reader) and so end. farewell, the 2. of October, 1604.

W. C.

The Contents of the Chapters of this book.
1 A preface containing the reasons of undertaking this treatise. 2 The stain
of an unthankful mind is from hence, that man is ig^orant of Gods benefits,
and his own worthiness. 3 In the person of the base, he reckons his
baseness, and from hence is angry, and complains against God for it. 4
Falsely he complains of his baseparentage, who by the help of virtue, may
obtain honor and renoune. 5 He that boasts of his petigree, is many ways
unthankful to god. 6 The Insolecie of him is confuted, who boasts of his
kindred, not of his virtue. 7 The poor man is unthankful, who vpbraideth God,
which has made him poor. 8 In this I teach, that god has not given less to
the poor then to the rich. 9 The rich man is no less unthankful then the
poor; and of three sorts of rich men, Delicate, Prodigal, Sordide, and here
in this Chapter of Delicate rich me. 10 Of the Prodigal rich man. 11 Of the
Sordid and covetous rich man. 12 Amongst unthankful persons, I find him who is
troubled with sickness. 13 Him that is worn with grief, in that he is
unthankful, I neither pardon him, nor speak him fair. 14 He also that is in
perfect health is many ways unthankful. 15 Kings and Princes are unthankful
who reckon up what estimation men make of their calling, to take occasion from
hence, to show how false it is, and how justly he may complain as being evil
deals with all: 16 Here the Prince goes about to extenuate the opinion which
the common people have of his souerainty, for he proves that he is compassed
with miseries, that men may see in comparison of others how little he is bownd
to God. 17 The prince proceeds to reckon up those things which may diminish
men's opinions of his felicity. 18 Here I show by how many benefits the prince
is bound to God; and in all these that he shows himself unthankful: 19 I
do here admonish the prince that intending those things which appertain to
his calling, he shows himself thankful; and mindful of gods benefits. 20 To
these former Iannex more arguments that the prince may learn by them to
acknowledge Gods goodness and his great favors toward him. 21 Here I show how
this sin of unthankfulness is ingrafted in man's nature, in that, children
are no less unthankful then others. 22 Here I do teach the Child how he may
lay aside this infection. and show himself thankful unto God. 23 Here I do
teach that women are no less unthankful, then those whom I have remembered: 24
Here the woman is diligently admonished, that omitting all unjust complaints
against God she acknowledge, that the benefits upon her are not less then
those bestowed upon men. 25 The number of unthankful persons, none more
increase then he that is of man's estate as appears by his unthankful
complaining speech in complaining of the world: 26 All the former reasons which
concern man's estate are confuted, and he is seriously admonished to be
thankful and to acknowledge Gods benefits: 27 Among unthankful persons I
account the old man, whom neither the plenty nor the greatness of Gods
benefits: nor any wisdom gathered out of long experience can reclayme from
this unthankfulness: 28 The old man is blamed for his complaint, and
admonished to acknowledge Gods benefits; even in that respect, that he is old
and near unto his grave. 29 I do proceed to show unto the oulde man all
those several benefits, which God has heaped upon him. 30 Of those that are
unthankful to men: 31 Of the punishment of unthankful persons: 32 Every
benefit received ought to be requited; and how it may be.
Laus Deo.
A Preface Containing the reasons of undertaking this Treatise. CHAP. 1.
WHen I consider, why every man thinks himself evil dealt withal, that he
is, that. which God would have him to be (Great and Right Honor.) (and that
which is more worth and better then all titles) (right virtuous): I find no
other reason; but that every man's unthankful mind toward God, is the
fountain of this evil. For many are most sparing, but most, most unjust
esteemers of his benefits: not so much accounting those things which they have
received to be benefits, as those things which they have not received, to be
losses; we pass all moderation with our shameless wishes, whilst whatsoever
(foolishly) we covet wickedly, we hope; and whatsoever we so hope for, that
with insatiable eyes, and greedy unlimited thoughts we feed upon. From hence
is our impatience, from hence are the perpetual complaints of men, from hence
are the frantik and wicked speeches of rauing impiety, from hence is that
mutual rancour that burns inwardely; In one word, there is no word so
common in our mouths, as these cogitations are in our minds. O unequal and
Unjust Lost, how have thou aduaunsed him without all merit unto a hye place,
whilst thou hold me who am (many ways) more worthy, in low estate; These
and such like terms, we repiningly utter by reason of our rashness, and
whilst in nothing we think humbly, in all things we ouerweiningly flatter our
selves; accounting whatsoever we receive, not to be given, but paid. And
although no man be so impudent, that he dare openly accuse God; yet that which
they speak not, they either murmur or conceal in the secret of their
thoughts, and whilst every man bitterly complains of his lot that is not, he
does itreligiously think of God, who truly is; and whose name he concealeth
his power and Majesty he despises. This inborn impiety with man's nature, I
pursue with this labor in this treatise, neither do I it so much to confute
inconsiderat and wicked speeches, as to control secret and impure thoughts;
for from wicked thoughts arise infected and poluted words, and therefore to
suppress those, is to repress these. Neither will I circumuent or
treacherously undermine this fault, but deal plainly, not deceitfully; I will
lay open the deformities of this sin, I will pull up the roots of it, the
boughs and branches I will cut off. Neither have I proceeded more slougthfully
in this task, for that as soon as the title of this book is seen, I know
many either disdainfully will repine, or (as the manners of most are) proudly
scorning will say, what can there be in this argument either witty, or learned?
Nay, what is there not here rather cold, frozen, worn, and common? For this
argument is usually withal bitterness handled of the Preachers at this day,
and plentifully in those books, which every vulgar eye may read. And besides
peradventure they will say, these are but the fragments of some ancient wits,
as the Tragedies of Aesculus were of Homer. I confess, I am not ignorant, that
the Argument of this treatise, must pass deprived of his chiefest
commendation, and is unfit to show any exquisite learning, unpleasant to the
care, and too low and humble, to participate with same. And least any thing
should happen new or unexpected; besides all these, I have considered with my
self, the severity and distastes of Readers at this day; the delicacies of
men's eyes, and ears; their whisperings and secret reproves, that resolutely
despising these, I might pass them over. With me the necessity of this
meditation has only prevailed, and that alone has imposed this labor upon
me. Neither can the rumors of the common sort, or the dark clouds of secret
estimation, hinder me from observing those things which are fit, or from
bridling (as far as I am able) these impieties, undoubtedly the best men, whose
virtues (though with far distance it is honorable (even creepingly) to
follow; have bestowed most of their leisure to this end. Neither have I from
hence a confidence to overtake the^, but a love to follow them. Neither is
there in this, any ostentation of nouelty, to slirre up or feed any man's
curiosity. Scarce shall I say in this any thing, Famous, new, or as yet
unspoken by others, there is little pleasant to the reader, or hearer; because
I affect nothing less then curious trimming; I would please, I confess if I
could, but I know not to smooth; I labor wholly to profit. I affect no name
from hence. I do not ambitiously woo the voices of the learned, nor covet the
applause of the multitude; I know these things are reserved for those wits that
mount hier. For my self, who in humility scarce creep, it is sufficient not
to be blamed; not to be provoked; whilst thus I labor to make some defense
against those troops of vices, that are every where dispersed. To this I
exhort all, against whom these monsters bark, cheefely unthankfulness, which
is the worst of all; No sin sooner does estrange God from Man then this; by
no enemy, are we more cruelly and more treacherously undermined, then by this;
with this monster, man can have no trust, but deceitful, no peace, but deadly.
Our armor therefore must never be put off; as ever being in the sight of an
enemy, most watchful to overthrow us. No combat is of such importance, no
conflict of more resolution, nor any that requires more valor? In this
victory are al those things, that are propounded to be the reward of piety.
But there is no conquest that is harder, later, or more doubtful. For this
poison of unthankfulness (being plucked up) often grows again; being
subdued, often rebelleth, conquereth us often, when we think, we have overcome
it: to conclude, unthankfulness is never extinguished in us, but by a pyety
most perseuering and everlasting. Wherefore it is fit, that all virtuous and
religious minds do stir up, and arm themselves, in the understanding and
provision of such danger; and with continual and earnest prayers obtain of
his divine goodness, necessary defenses against such an enemy; He erreth, that
in this, waits upon others; This business admits no delays, here every
man must be a spur, and a guide to himself. Every man must stir up and
awake himself with excellent examples. Here every man must be an example to
others, and whatsoever help is necessary for his own safety, that he must
employ, for a common good. There is no virtue if it be seasonably used, wherein
there is not some help and advantage for this victory; Often times those,
whose chardge is least, both in the Church and Commonwealth, if they labor
that they may overcome; if with wishes, vows, endeavors, if with all
diligence they favor this business, they are reckoned amongst Conquerours.
Think (Right Honorable) thou that art the light of this age, that amongst
these I account my self; if I be not in this conflict a captain of approved
valor (as I confess I am not) yet in my holy wishes, I am a faithful
soldier, who respect not my self only, but seek for a common good, to
advance that chardge, that is laid upon me. Now I earnestly entreat your
Honor to patronize these papers (how mean soever they are) if you think they
have any public profit in them; the thing is small, yet it attempteth a great
work; and the matter at the first sight is easy, but if you look nea^er, of
more weight and severity. Whatsoever it be, it shall receive no small
authority, from your authority. For all men almost that know you, so admire
your unspotted, your humble and sincere behavior, your grave and excellent
wisdom, that they reverence you wholly, as some sacred and saving power. God
has bestowed so many great and excellent ornaments upon you, compassed you
about with so many rich, strong and Honorable defenses, of all which I might
and would speak if it were not to your self. And howsoever I may seem to
have erred in other things, yet in this all that know you (and all almost that
are virtuous know you) will think that I was wise, who have made choice of
your Honor, as virtuously to admire and follow at other times, so to be a
patron to this work; who have been ever a favorer of al those means, which
do lead to virtue.

The stain of an unthankful mind is from hence, that man is ignorant of Gods
benefits and his own worthiness. CHAP. 2.
Whosoever understands, how he ought, not to accuse his estate and condition,
but how thankful he ought to be toward God, has ascended the highest step
of piety; where daily less and less he is provoked with those spurs, with
which men are driven (through their corrupt affections): from hence proceeded
those unwise speeches of God, and those unjust complaints against him. But how
has every man not only not attained to this, but not indeauoured toward it.
For who is there almost that accounts not himself unhappy? That is, that
professes not, himself unthankful? Show me him, who has that aequall
temper of mind; who does measure his own happiness, in that measure that
GOD accepts, and not rather insolently, and with pride, treads under foot,
tnoie benefits, wherewith God has loaded him. If men could entreat of
themselves to lay aside this pride, they should likewise lay aside their
ignorance, and their eyes should be opened; those eyes, those equal eyes,
wherewith they should look about, and within themselves.

Themselves, that is, that great argument of this divine goodness. For man is
the glass of God, wherein he behouldeth himself, and his benefits; truly
benefits, because they are free, and indeed received of us, before they are
either thought of, or expected by us: And indeed benefits, never enough
known, never enough understood, or esteemed of us. O man, it is nothing, that
God has made a difference betwixt thee, and the liuelesse, and senseless
creatures? from those that are without reason? from all those who are created
to this end: to bestow all their benefits upon thee: to admire, and worship
thee? to thee, and for thy use, the Stars arise: they arise, as to their
better: they strive to compass thee about with their heavenly light, to follow
thee in obedience, with their favorable aspects, because they see thee to be
man, and in man God. If this heavenly army, serve thee with such diligence, as
being appointed to thy use, what ought, and must those do, in the midst
whereof thou art placed? do thou not know these things to be appointed for
thy service? Thou command the Sea; thou rulest the earth, thou searchest the
secrets of it, thou trauellest to the furthest, and most unknown parts of it:
whatsoever the air, the earth or the sea contains, whatsoever the floods, or
the sennes have nourished, or whatsoever is contained in this rich warehouse,
the globe of the Moon, all that is appointed for thy use: will thou look at
things past, these are to thee present, these things that are present are set
(as it were) before thine eyes, things that are to come (an infallible argument
of thy Divinity) thou collectest, gatherest, diuinest, and representest, as if
they were present. In one word, that which is called the World, is thy house,
built, and every way richly furnished for thee: there is no part of it but is
passable, known, and wide open to thee, as to his owner. Now it remains for
thee, that thou know thy self what thou art.

If thou know thy self, then thou shall understand, that this great frame, and
curious building, is bestowed upon thee, wherein, thou may govern, wherein,
thou may teach thy self, to be worthy of this dignity: where thou may
reward him, that is thy reward er, with holiness, and a thankful mind. In
this thy dignity, to represent the dignity of God in human shape, thou
shall then (I say) understand, that thou art placed over this household as a
Lord (I had almost said) as a God. These are thy birthrights; this is that
excellency, whereunto thou art borne: Whereunto if thou labourest to be equal
in the height of thy mind, then thou shall plainly see, all these things
placed below thy greatness. Thou shall see nothing without thee, greater then
thy self, nothing shall distract thee, puff thee up, cast thee down, or make
thee sad. Then thou shall deride so many foolish complaints, wherewith men do
vex themselves, and their lives.

In the person of the base, he reckons his baseness; and from hence is
angry, and complains against God for it. CHAP. 3:
I hear this man complain, that he is low borne, or rather basely; alas
(says he) wheresoever I am, there my baseness offers it self unto me, not
so much a perswader to make me desire to live, as an vpbrayder that I do live;
that I am of obscure parents, it makes me blush, and the Nobility to contemn
me; I live obscurely, as an unknown part of the base multitude, neither does my
health, or strength, so much help me, nor any other thing that is bestowed
upon me, as my base parentage does cast me down. I am ashamed, that I have no
honor from the commendations of my Ancestors; it is my reproach, that I am
borne amongst the multitude, amongst those, who are more safely trodden upon,
then the worms. Before we were, and he that is borne in high place, in this
we were both equal, that we neither were, both of us lay then hid in that
bottomless darkness, of those secrets that were to come; but as soon as we
began to be, he obtained a famous, and honorable, and I a base, and unworthy
condition. Alas, with what desert, either of him or mine? surely none; what
unequal, and unjust power shall I call that, which has compassed him new
borne, and unknowing it with so great and glorious a light, whilst, I
(undeservedly) do live in darkness? This is the first injury, and not to be
forgotten, that I am unfortunately born; that he has ancestors full of honor,
and I full of baseness; that from him, all impediments are removed, that tend
to honor; and that I must creep through obscure and unknown paths; and
through so many lettes must endeavor to that which is doubtful, and most
uncertain.

Falsely he complayneth of his base parentage who by the help of virtue may
obtain honor and renown. CHAP. 4:
YEa, and is it so? Dare thou call thy self base, whose kindred is with the
Heavens, do thou call that blood obscure and unworthy, from whence Kings may
proceed? Have thou no ancestors, who may (if thou tendest thither) pass
along in the step of every man, that is excellent? I demand of thee, which
is that ignoble and base multitude, wherein thou art borne? What, of brute
beasts? Men are a Heavenly offspring; those are they (say you) which without
controulement are trodden down: you speak of men, that are innocent, and
accepted of God* with what strength soever they might have, choose rather to
suffer, then to do injury. Oh, these are they, amongst whom, are the
ancient, and uncorrupted manners. His condition and mind (you say) where both
alike before we were. What, do you say there was a time, when neither of you
were? yea rather, if you esteem your self by that part, which truly is, you
are not now born. Thou have a soul derived from that everlasting divinity,
which has more truly beautified thee, with this title to be called man, then
these sinews, flesh and bones, taken out of the earth, which are truly earth.
All of us, are equally an offspring of the Gods, and therefore in respect of
this original, ye are both equal. Thou art nothing I say, whosoever thou art,
less, or inferior to him, whosoever he is. If any thing make a difference
betwixt you, it is that earth, wherewith you are both covered. And is it this
that troubles thee? Do you esteem this a thing of that worth, that it should
make you repent you of your condition? or rather if there be any blemish in
this earthly parentage; why do you not blotte it out with your virtuous arts?
If there be any darkness, disperce it with a better light; if any baseness,
advance it with virtue. Surely every excellent thing is low borne; and those,
whom virtue first made eminent, she brought out of darkness. From hence they
sent out most bright beams (as the Sun out of a cloud or storm) look upon
those great lights of Antiquity (those famous professors, I mean of
wisdom, and eloquence) and others excellent in all other Arts, Sciences, and
learning; few of these but were meanly borne, and yet have ingrafted their
names to fame; that fame which we see is the inseparable companion of
immortality. To Aesop Athens did that monument erect,
And placed the servant on eternal ground:
That virtue might to honor men direct,
And not that greatness which in birth is found.


Let me not remember other great and (for deserts) famous names, I mean the
great performers of wars, and builders of large Empires, who wrestling out of
obscure births, from low beginnings, have attained the height of things;
compelling all things and men, to yield unto them with virtue, glory, and
felicity. These are they who were the famous Autors of that, which afterward
was called the ancient progeny, which have made men believe that they are not
borne of man, but of God: who after they had made the newness of their birth,
great with virtue and admiration, they made themselves to be Imitated of all,
and Imitable to few. These I account greater, then their posterities, and in
the opinion of wise men, much more honorable, in that the giver is greater then
the receiver, and the pattern then him that imitates, vainly we derive our
sluggishnesse to our kindred; But he is noble enough, who has that in him,
whereby he may make himself noble: neither is virtue, from our stock, but
contrary. Virtue only does adorn men. It is that only, which makes the
euerflowing and lasting stream of Nobility, Honor, and Glory. Who can
therefore deny, but that humility or baseness, or whatsoever it be, is much
bound to virtue, who only inableth all men, to become Honorable and excellent,
He that carries himself worthy his ancestors, does that which does become
him, but he that gives an honor to others, is to his posterity a sacred
dyety. Ridiculously you object obscurity to those, who do draw after them an
excellency, and whose late vprising does eminently shine, amongst those that
are excellent, for not to be degenerous, and the light we have received from
our ancestors, to convey to our posterity; although it be worthy praise, yet
it is common, this latter as it is more famous, so it is more difficult. This
is that, which Honorable and unusual virtue does undertake, at this it
aims, to this it directs it self; that to persons places and things
unknown and obscure it may give Nobility. From hence we may conclude, not the
lower a man is, but the worse he is, the more obscure he is: and an obscure
kindred is a^ an unclean puddle, from whence none can pull a plant, but he to
whom virtue does reach her hand, and whom she undertakes to advance and
increase. If thou propoundest this, to ascribe thy greatness only to virtue,
nor any other sinister means, by proceeding thou shall be inricht, honored,
learned. And to conclude, then it shall be manifest unto thee, how untruly
thou have complained of God, by whose commandment thou art borne in that
condition, which with much disdain thou call baseness. Furthermore he,
whom thou esteemest noble, does bring forth the old and wormeaten monuments of
his ancestors, in this more vehement vpbraiders of the unworthiness of their
posterity. And thou, to whom, thy ancestors have left no outwrad ornament,
where of thou may boast, draw forth out of the generous, virtuous, and noble
heart (the lively image of the soul) true virtue; which thou may deliver to
thy posterity to be imitated, subject to no age, to no forgetfulness. By this
means thou shall rise to honor, and with infallible arguments, leave thy true
Nobility witnessed, and sealed to everlasting posterities. From hence may
thou see how much thou art bound to GOD, who has ingrafted that in thee,
whereby thou indeauourest thy self, thou may be excellent. And if thy
affections be not so erected, nor thy liveliness so awaked, if thou do not
affect the highest dignities, if thou do not aspire to these large advantages
of praise, yet endeavor that thou may be found in the second rank. At the
least compose thy self to Innocence and Simplicity; virtues no less
acceptable to God, then the other that are more conspicuous. With these adorn
thy self, and thy obscure family; so shall it come to pass that in this
humility, thou shall find matter large and sufficient, to make thee
thankful; which though they be not exquisite, or curious, yet they shall not
want their commendation, being private and sincere; and by so much more
acceptable to him, who will be worshipped sincerely and in truth. Thus by thy
example and inuitation, the rest of the unthankful multitude, shall learn to
acknowledge, and worship that divine benignity; neither art thou only
unthankful, for there is no mortal man that lies not sick of this
Infirmity.

He that boasts of his petigree is many ways also unthankful to GOD. CHAP.
5.
I See him also who swells with the long catalogue of his auncestou rs, to be
no less unthankful to God, then he that is borne darkely and of obscure
parents. And although he does not expostulate with God ^is condition, in
g^dging and complaining terms (such a^ usually are uttered from opinion and
sense of misery) ^t whilst ^th contempt and insolency, he disdaineth others, he
shows his evil and unthankful mind, toward him that made him. In one
word, he wholly swells with foolish cogitations, and does as ill inter^t
the benefits of God, as he that is most unthankful; neither can it be
maruailed at, seeing he admits into counsel, Pride, Ignorance, Slouth^ all
which possess him with an opinion of a false greatness, From hence he
begins to esteem, and to love himself, and in the fruition of this
persuasion to despise others. The multitude (that is the common sort) both of
town and country, it is strange how he disdaineth. It is the property of a
sluggish insolent disposition, to think that he has right to use any man
without respect as a vassal. For (says he) I was no sooner a man, but I was
borne Honorable. If I do respect both my parents, I am able to derive my
petigree from auntie^t memory, and Honorable families: From hence I have noble,
and many affinities, upon which I may lean and support my self. My riches and
estate are answerable to these; and that which chiefly contents me, I see base
persons borne to scarsity, and the bondslaues of poverty. This man drudgeth
continually at plough: that man all the day long sits at some sordide trade
to gain his living: An other man he buieth cheap, to sell dear: and to that
end saileth with danger into foreign seas: Another, he studieth unpleasing
learning, to make a gain of in the market; I do not mean in the market where
things are sold, but the market of gainefull knowledge, and the mercenary
tongue, who ever finds out of other men's business a good advantage to enrich
themselves. And the minds of all these, are base; and to this baseness are
joined deceits; and as brokers to these deceits untruths. Now as I scorn all
these courses, so I live as a King amongst them; and that which these labor
for, to that am I borne. Therefore my mind is not, as every base fellows;
groueling; but hauty, erected, and full of high thoughts. For it wears not it
self away, in these sordide and obscure things, nor lives entangled in any
base gain. This is my excellent prerogative, that I am beholding to none. And
other men before I was borne were in my debt, that men may understand that I am
not borne to my substance, but my substance to me. Besides I have the best
advantages to rise to honor, to come to great preferments; and what other men
can wish for, that can I no sooner hope for, but obtain it. Last of all (which
is the chiefest of all) that other men do live in safety, it is by the means
of me, and such as I am. For if any public danger arise, then is the common
safety required and expected, at our hands. It belongs to our honors, to
defend our countries, and offend our enemies. It belongs to us, to have the
chardge, and the leading of them. We perform these businesses, as with the
advancement of inferiors and mean persons, so with the in larging and
increase of our own Honors.

From hence are derived special ornaments to persons and families; from hence
riches, authority; from hence fear and reverence amongst all; who will not
confess, that he, that is nobly borne, blessed as it were again, mighty in
followers: great in honor: strong in power: lives the life, and the only
living life? and that he has cause sufficient, to gratulate his own good
fortune, for his own happiness. And that he may proceed, to make
experience, of his own felicity, in all things that himself desires:
therefore freed from al cares, I will take what pleasure so ever may be had: I
am purposed to taste all that may season my life. Tush away with those sour
fellows, which urge (if we would hear them) harsh and severe admonitions and
do odiously impose upon us, I know not what sad wisdom gotten out of
schools and hid in books; whereupon they often knit there severe brows, as
if the common wealth did lie upon them: all which for mine own part, I esteem
not a rush; and to say truth, to me there is nothing more odious, then these
men, whom I may very well call ditchers to dig out truth of, and torments to
vex other men's simplicities; for my own part I am taught sufficiently, by my
Honorable ancestors.

The insolency of him is confuted who boasts of his kindred, not of his
Virtue. CHAP. 1.
I See thy disdainefull spirit, and hear thy words and the discouerers of thy
folly; and to conclude thy blindness, and unthankful mind; which thou
confidently opposes against the benefits of God, least thou should confess
them. So far has thy disdain wholly besotted thee; so far has thy
sinister disposition spotted thy fair estate and honorable condition: thou
say thou were a man and noble, both at once; thou do please me in that at
the first entrance, thou confessest thy self a man; although I know this
speech, rather foll from thee unawares, then was spoken with any consideration.
For in that word, thou art putt in mind of thy beginning, which is common to
thee with the lowest of the common sort; And although thou contemn him in
respect of thy self, as one growing out of the dunghill, yet he has the same
beginnings of humanity, that thou have; His life is to be run in the same
race, and with the same course, must he finish the period of his mortality and
to conclude, he flies aloft with the same wings of eternity that thou do.
In one word thou art not more a man then he (or to say more plainly) he is
as much a man as thou. But thou proceedest further, to set forth thy self, and
him, that by comparing, thou may grow insolent; depressing him, whilst thou
aduancest thy self; esteeming him, as base, and of no reckoning.

Herein, if any man should ask thee, what Nobility is, I know thou will
answer, it is the Honor and Antiquity of Kindred; But I will tell thee
something more plainly, and more soundly, that thou who do admire nothing
so much as thy kindred, by which thou growest insolent, yet may confess, to
be true: Nobility, I say is an honor due to a virtue emine^t, and publikly
profitable; not only in his person, that first does it, but also in his
posterity, which are not adulterate, ingrafted, or degenerous: And therefore
Note, is onething, and Nobility is an other. Many are of Note, of whom we are
to take heed, as of monsters, but he that is truly Noble, it is a virtue, and
a duty, to know him. Thou, when thou were first borne, broughtest no virtue
into the world with thee, therefore thou might be of Note, as one richly
borne, and of a great family, but thou could not be Noble; but only in the
suffrages, and wishes of those, who favor the name, virtue and posterity of
the Ancestors, from whence thou art descended; and from thence presupposing
all these to be in thee. For men are naturally apt, to hope for those virtues
in thee, which are promised in thy birth. For all good men (says Tullie)
favor Nobility, both, because it is profitable to the Commo^wealth, that
Noble men be worthy their ancestors, and because the memory of honorable men,
who have deserved well of the Commonwealth (though dead) does and ought to
prevail, with us. And therefore thy Nobility; then when thou were borne, was
in hope, not in being, peradventure in the root, not yet in the branches;
neither does always, The Son in equal line,
The Fathers praise succeed.


Now when thou art grown up, and strong, I demand, wherein thou do make men
know, that the honorable, and happy virtues of thy famely, are not withered in
thee. How shall we understand that thou who art begotten, and borne of great
hope do grow to the glory of thy ancestors, and that the fruit so much
hoped for, does grow out of thy branches? Where is thy ancient blood? Where
is the Industry of thy forefathers? Where is the glory of thy house? I
grant the signs, and tokens of honor, may be received either from thy
Ancestors, or from the Prince: but Nobility and honor it self, is the
reward of thy own virtue. That virtue, which in things acceptable to the
people, doubtful, and full of profit, and hazard, at all times, and by all
means, does show it self; which in the time of peace, and security, erecteth
the ensigns of piety, and justice, wherein all both public and private
felicities are contained; and then does bring forth troppes of all those
virtues, which are handmaids to both. And when the Commonwealth, is disquieted
with wars, either at home, or abroad, does oppose against the enemy,
Fortitude, and what virtue soever is a companion to it; for what virtues, for
what praises art thou to be esteemed? speak boldly. Instead of answer, I see
thy doubting: for that which is not, neither can the tongue utter, nor the
mind conceive. Seeing therefore thou will say nothing, I will answer for thee.
But can thou here? In one word, neither virtue, nor praise, that either I, or
thou, or any man else knows, is in thee. But go to, with what right or with
what confidence, do thou usurp this same honorable title of Nobility, which
thou admirest in thy self, and for which thou think thy self so excellent?
It is (thou say) the gift of my ancestors, as are the other signs of
Nobility, whereof I boast. I hear the name; I see the signs; but I desire
the thing. I fear least the ancient honor of thy forefathers, in thy person,
be darkened and grown out of use. If not, as it was first gained by men,
virtuous, and truly valiant, so it ought to be borne again, in thee, this
Nobility, which thou boastest to be born with thee: neither can any thing be
more foolish, then to be called, that which thou art not. Nothing has more
affinity with sloth, then to be willing, to be taken for another, then thou
art. Nothing is more unjust, then to usurp another man's, for thine own.
Nothing is more shameless, then to desire to be esteemed Noble for kindred, not
for virtue. Neither is virtue transferred with the same facility, that
possessions, are to the heyers. Virtue is every man's proper, and peculiar
good: and whosoever has not this, does not only carry the Idle, but the
odious name, and title of Nobility. But thou boastest of those, whose
posterity thou art, and desire men to observe thy petigree. Well if I should
do so much for thee, and by degrees go back with thee, to him whose father
first gave honor to thy family, peradventure I should bring thee to a
beginning, thou would be ashamed of: why art thou pase? It is ancient,
that Plato says, Servants do come of Kings, and of servants do come Kings.
And what marvel? For virtue her self, does give bondslaues, oftentimes not
only liberty, but Kingdoms. And virtue exposed to the injury of fortune,
does best show what every man is. And therefore if thou will know what thou
art, who and how great thou art, defend not thy self with this glorious
title, borrow not the virtues of others, but bring forth thy own; thou
foolishly boastest the benefit of thy stock, if thou suffer thy ancestors
that are dead, to be better known then thy self, that art alive: Show how much
true nobility there is in thee, that is, how much virtue in thy mind, how
much faith in thy words, and deeds. Show from what stock thou art. By this
means shall men esteem thee in hope greater, for fame better, and for inward
uprightness, more commendable, that thus honors, may be given thee, not thy
kindred, thy person, not thy name, thy manners, notthy ancestors. And though
thou have thy ancient praise in store,
Yet not content with glory of their fame:
Nor boast their virtues that did live before,
Seek thou thy self, for to surpass the same.


Kindred and our stock is like a fair Table, which either may be made more
beautiful by a picture, or polluted and defaced with stains. If those things
be joined to thy birth which do make thy birth great, the^ are the praises of
thy ancestors renewed; if those things, which do blemish thy stock, then
there is little greatness in thy kindred, and in those things that are annexed
to it; Infamy, and reproach? These are those polluted stains, that deface the
Images of our forefathers, which the more honorable, they show our ancestors
to be, the greater and more intolerable; is the sloth of their sluggish and
degenerous posterity.

Now with the insolency of thy kindred, thou do arrogantly remember thy
supporters, thy Affinity, and Riches; which are good to those that use them
well, but to those that use them otherwise, are evil; Nay, carefully take
heed least the abundance and harmfull plenty of overmuch riches, drown thy
narrow, and weak mind in many vices, and consume those seeds of virtue, that
are planted in thee, for Minds of men much plenty ouerwhelme,


If thou truly vndestoodest how little or nothing, riches do help to virtue,
then thou would think more mildly, and more honestly of poverty, and of
the poor multitude painefully, and profitably disposed into virtuous courses.
For Cities do not sound with noise of work men, and artificers to no purpose.
Let these seem base to dilicat minds, whilst experience tells us, that they
are only commodious, but of most known and absolute necessity. esteem not so
disdainefully of those things, without which riches has nothing, for which
they are more to be desired then poverty: And to conclude, without which, no
kind of life can well be. Neither the Country, the City, the Court, nor the
camp. For as in the body, the thighs, legs, and feet, though they be in
inferior, yet are not in worse and less needful place, then the arms, and
the shoulders; so these kind of men do inioye that room, and place in the
Commonwealth, which if they for sake, it must needs fall. For whethersoeuer
Necessity extends it self, thither reaches art, which is natures follower.
For as great and wise statesmen govern our lives, so artificers and workmen
serve our lives: whilst they furnish and adorn our lives with their necessary
uses. Woe unto man's weakness if it be destitute of these helps, for none of
these but lives according to Gods rule, because he can show how he lives;
which whosoever in old time could not do, it was death unto him; which custom
Augustus, that famous name, amongst the Roman Emperors, precisely observed,
when he obtained the Decemuirs of the Senate, that every Knight might give an
account how he lived, And of those that were disalowed, some were punished,
and some noted with infamy. Therefore if thy birth advance thee, their
industry commended them; and as thy condition of life is hyer, so theirs is
much saffer, and more assured; For whilst they are about good business, they
avoid Idleness, and serve the Commonwealth, whatsoever is necessary to the
commonwealth to apply thy wit, and thy hand, to that, though it be not
glorious, yet it is honest. Furthermore in that thou reprehendest husbandry,
thou dealest frowardnes, and after the manner of the Thralians which prouokest
thy nourisher, without which thou may need, thou may hunger: Besides it is
a kind of life, most sincere, and most innocent. In it, there is again,
virtuous, most stable, least envious; For the Divine nature (says Varro) gave
feilds, but humane art built cities. Surely of husbandmen (says Cato) are
borne the strongest, and best soldiers; and men of least harmefull thoughts,
are they that live of husbandry. Next unto these are Merchants, which
seasonably provide for men's necessities, whilst they so mingle the commodities
of several Countries, that whatsoever is afforded any where, may be found
every where. It is a favorable trade, and that which mingleth in traffic,
all the Kingedomes of the earth: But at this day, with much loss to the
Commonwealth neglected. For there are a kind of vulgar and common people, who
neclecting the honest course of avoiding poverty, and enriching their
families, do ambitiously affect honors, which are ever sumptuous. From hence
poverty creeps into their houses, and from their houses into the
Commonwealth, which wants wealth to uphold it. Besides, that which is gotten
by Merchandise, is not so much to be termed the pray of covetousness, as the
Instrument of bounty, cleanlines, honesty, and honor. Take away the spots of
the mind, and with all you take away the stains of the thing; and whereas you
say that Merchantes weary their time with oars, and pass the trobled seas,
that in my opinion, is the chief praise of such resolute Industrey, which,
that it may perfect that which it has begun, strongly contendeth with all
difficulties, and ever aduentureth upon new dangers, whilst it passes into
far places, in despite of all lets. Surely men travailing from their native
soil, dismayed with no distance of place, afraid of no barbarism, tamed with
long and often patience, ever employed, always careful of their affairs,
must needs return homefull of all knowledge. From hence rich advantages are
derived to the commonwealth, because all, from that which is every man's, does
justly receive a benefit. Besides, the wits and capacities of many, by this
means are made more exquisit and in the managing of afaires have a riper
knowledge, and more perfect wisdom, whilst every man makes a profit of an
others experience. Now Judge if there be any thing in this which either thou or
any man can dispraise, and not rather commend, and admire. Besides, from great
Merchandise, arise often great revenues, and from great revenues derived
innocently to their virtuous posterities, Nobility. And this I see to be and
ever to have been the judgment and account of every honest, and wise man, as
right so by public consent most approved. But whilst out of every thing, you
take that which is worst, that from the faults of men (an usual fault) you may
take occasion to debase whatsoever you despise, as your manner is) you also
scoff the Lawyer. Neither you do consider, that every man's doubtful estate,
destitute of this so profitable a defense, does easily run headlong, and the
help which a man wants in himself, by this means he finds in an other.
For this cause there is nothing more excellent, then to exceed in faith,
wisdom, and eloquence; because there is nothing more full of humanity, and
more divine then to bestow so many and so great ornaments, and the whole course
of our life in defending of other men's dangers. For whosoever amidst so many
and so great tempests of this life, and in this unbridled licentiousness of
impiety, mildely does help the afflicted, or bestows his labor in so
troublesome an office; he is to all men as a fortunate and saving Star. For
men are not more bound to any man for any thing, then to see part of their
burden derived upon an other; and by a substitute care with an united force,
their own weakness to be supported. Of what reckoning the praise of this
has been (that I may call thee to ancient and famous exampels) the Noble
Romans well understood; From hence they made their entrance to fame, and
besides these, Consuls and men worthy to have triumphed gained in the defense of
causes before Judges, no less opinion and matter of praise, then when they
before had triumphed over their conquered enemies.

For these men after things valiantly and fortunately performed, made known
that the valiantest breasts are often accompanied with the happiest wits; and
that the best wits have often the greatest eloquence, and that the praise that
rises from hence, is equal with the camp, and deserves as much, as to be a
valiant Leader. For the profits that arise from hence, are not less then those
which proceed from the other. Therefore I beseech you what envy is it, if at
this day there be not a means of more honorable advantage, both to attain
riches, and greatness then this is? In that you say mercenarily, they set to
sail, a thing that is excellent, you note forth the faults of men, and not
diminish the dignity of their calling; take from them extortiones, remove
wranglings, cut off indirect courses, abolish all base and unworthy dealing,
(things severely punishable by law) the honesty of the thing remains from
which these fees and deserved allowances do no whit detract, nor any other
law does give just imputation of baseness, which forbid the corruption of a
mercenary tongue. Neither is it fit, that this kind of men, both privately and
publicly so profitable, should be deprived of the just recompense, and fruit
of their labor, seeing those ancient honors, due to this gowned warfare are
taken from them, dignity and Office; in place whereof have succeeded these
which properly and fitly are called Honorable fees; both, because they are
given for honor, to honest men, and for an honest cause. Besides, this is as a
seminary, from whence princes do take not only men skillful in law and
justice, but those who wear fit to sit at the helm of the common wealth, and
to be of counsel to kings: And seeing their office is but a part of the Prince
his charge, what has the armor and the shield, why it should despise as base,
the gown, and the pen. Let these employments be accounted obscure shadows,
whilst we must needs confess, that they are very great, and very profitable,
and therefore very honorable. And whereas thou say, thou have no base mind
but high and generous; I should praise thee if this were truly spoken; if in
stead of high and great, thou did not show thy self a contemner of those
things, which ought to be much esteemed. For the greatness of the mind, is
not discerned by swelling words, but by the often and accustomable use of
virtue; and things that are boasted of, are nothing but a disdain of the
ears; and a loathing and hatred to the mind. And this appears in that thou
say those things wheare-with thou swellest, were first thine, before thou
were the worlds or inioyed this light. From hence thou gatherest, that thou
were not borne to serve them, but all these things to serve thee.

These speeches are the rules of pride, and the arguments of thy Ignorance: as
though thou were borne to some other end, then all others are; and not to
worship and reverence him, whose gift it is, that thou art, and who has
commanded thee no less to procure other men's good, then thy own. Which is
not done, by idle thinking, and proud expecting, what honors men do unto
thee, And wherein they do worship thee but in a diligence of profitable
duties, and in a virtuous* and willing readiness, to do good. This will
prove those Honors that do come to meet thee, not rashely to be cast and
thrown upon thee, as a liberty, not to be as spoils are, but to be given
with good advise, as to one who places true honor, first in his own
conscience before the judgments and opinions of men; rather in the uprightness
of behavior, then in the glory of titles. For he that is any thing or little
less then his honor, is not honored by it at all, but ouer-loaden. Therefore
thou must consider circumspectly upon what confidence thou boastest thy
honors; which are so, to those whom they do adorn, or thy great
Ecclesiastical dignities which thou esteemest best, that are most rich, not
most holy; and what holiness is required of those, who aspyre unto that
honor. A Priest says the Archbishop of Rauennas (who had his Name from his
goulden speech) is the form of Virtue. Thou boastest also thy Dukedomes and
thy Lordships, which to who^soeuer they are committed, to those also is
committed the common and public safety. Take from a General the arts and
true properties of a general, he is not a general, but a trifler; fatally
erected as a destroier, and subuerter of the common good.

If thou vnderstoodest the greatness of this burden, thou would constantly
refuse it, seeing, whosoever governs without just furniture for such a
chardge, does not govern and command, but man does commit this chardge to a
vain glorious, and improuident man, exercised in nothing, strengthened with no
good counsel, relying only upon his birth, not his own firm virtue, what
shall become of the commonwealth? Do you not see, and must you not confess,
that a sword is given to a mad man wherewith he wounds himself and him that
meets him? Nay, wherewith he slaieth the common wealth? Do you then call this
praise, honor, fame, which is a stain, and infamy, a reproach? Alas, I am
sorry, least thou flatter thy self with a favorable and plausable error, and
that be happiness to thee which is unhappiness in the opinion of others, whilst
thou boastest of the goods of the body, and fortune, insteade of the goods of
the mind, and things which are of low place, thou placest a lost and which are
impediments, thou set in the forefront of honor: Man's true goodness is in
the mind, which if it be furnished with profitable arts, it neither admireth
these as rewards, nor refuses them as accessions, to his rewards, as things
wherein there is neither praise nor honor, because they make no man better,
they make no man worse. He is very idle that admireth these things; seeing
then that kindred without virtue is neither good, nor evil, and that
possessions by many casualties may fail, and so the multitude of followers
forsake a man, it must needs be, that honor is no greater then you that have
it; the strength of it then being in the hands of others, what is it that thou
carriest thy self so proudley? and as though thou had placed thy self and
all that is thine in safety? thou aimest only at this, that laying all care
aside, thou may cast thy self into the arms of pleasure, which will poison
the good blood if there be any in thee; if any virtue, it will weaken it, if
any beauty, it will stain it. O strange error! He that may have true and
permanent good things, to take pleasure in things of no continuance; believe
me, to live a life; idle, and full of pleasure, is not to live, but he which
bestows his time upon virtue, all parts of his life, are beautiful and full
of pleasure. This is that, which the severity of the school teaches, and
which is contained in the monuments of those, who labor to draw men from
vice, and commend virtue. Do thou account these severe admonitions, that are
wholesome, and indeed nothing else but Gods own voice, which awaketh those
which are drowsy, calls back those that do err, confirms those that are
weak, and blesses all? To these counsels thy forefathers obeyed, whose
examples in like manner, I wish thou would follow, in this respect that
they are familiar, domestical, and not far sought. It was not their sluggish
and voluptuous life, that gained those things to thee which puff thee up.
But first they were Conquerers of their own faults, and of their enemies
forces: With both these they gained triumphant Garlands: which with thee I
fear me will wither, wax pale, and lose their greenenesse; From these if thou
have received any motions to virtue, thou art very unfortunate, if thou do
not perfect them, with all labor, and immitation. By this means thou shall
not be laden with the honorable Images, of Ancestors, but thou shall
increase thy Country with a great Citizen, and an Honorable Author, to thy
posterity. This one thing, shall be a means, to make thee like those, from
whom thou art descended; so that, they shall be thought either borne again,
or to live in thee, whose glory by thy virtue, thou have renewed. From hence
may thou be thankful to GOD, who has placed thee in this watchtower, that
thou may never cast thy eyes, from the Commonwhealth; but be as profitable
unto it, as thy condition requires; which by this means only thou may make
excellent. If thou art otherwise minded, the more insolently thou boastest of
that prerogative, the violently does thy arrogancy discover it self; thou
shall perceive (but too late) thy great fault, and thy greater punishment.

The poor man is unthankful, who vpbraydeth God, which has made him poor.
CHAP. 7:
AMongst unthankful persons, I note the poor man also, whom it is strange not
to see quarelous, and co^plaining of his estate, what (says he) is this
strength of body, this beauty, this health, if I must wrestle with poverty,
which defaceth all these? I see other men's houses full of riches, but mine
empty, and full of spiders; I see this man borne fortunatly, but my self
under some ill, and unfortunate planet; for at this day every man is esteemed,
as his riches are; this man is hawtie, proud, and insolent, because he
possesses much; but I am low, and base, because my estate is small; this man
(because he is rich) wants no occasion of praise every where, and I that am
poor, of reproach and disgrace: Poverty that great reproach does still command:
To do and suffer all that men impose,
And virtues course for want of means to lose.


Who then can deny, but that I have cause to complain, that I am evil dealt
with all? For to what end should he live, who is compassed with all the
discommodities of life?

In this I teach that God has not given less to the poor man then to the
rich. CHAP. 8.
O Man, I did think thee to be poor, but not in this manner that I now see
thee, namely with a poverty much worse, and far more dangerous. to thee as
to the rest of the multitude, whether thou have riches or no, it is in others
men's power; and thou do not consider that nothing is more subject to robber,
thieves, fire, and other innumerable casualties then they are; Oh, how rich
were thou, and consequently how happy, if thou know how these things are to
be valued at their just price; then thou should understand, true riches to
be placed in the mind, which if it be equal to it self, not a covetous,
not an admirer of another, not an enuier of any man's estate, not an ambitious
affector of any man's greatness, it may then contend in happiness, with any man's
felicity. But from poverty to virtue thou say the way is hard, full of
difficulties, and almost beset: hard I grant, but not beset, for a mind that
is truly great, having virtue propounded as a reward, does cast down
whatsoever is a let unto it; and the diligent and industrious mind, does
co^quer those things which to sloth seem impregnable. Nay, what if virtue be
nearer in freindship to poverty, then to envious riches? Surely, the way to
virtue seems more ready, by which poverty creeps, then that wherein
riches boast. Learn thou from hence, the power of sober want.
Carius was poor, when Kings he over came.
Fabritius poor, that scorned Pirrhus gold,
From sordid plough to rule Serranus came,
And men controld, that late did till the mold.


For poverty, and faith, a good mind and true valor, are often inseparable
companions; but to riches, there cleaves oftentimes, the dross of lewdness,
insolency, and sloth, many have lived fortunatly, by enduring poverty
patiently; a weak mind (and who almost has not a weak mind) is easily
corrupted with riches. Antiquity made Plutus the God of riches, to be the
son of fortune.

To evil men, a friend, and with gain a corrupter of all things: and as a
man may bring forth an infinite number of poor men, which with frugalitie, and
sparing, as with sure, stayres, have climed up a loft. so there be millions of
rich men headlonge cast down, whether riotousnes, and pleasure, sweet (but
pesti'ent vices) have led them. From this womb, have proceeded so many troops
of sins, so many Idle slow bellies, as the Gretians call them: fat and
vnweildly. No sin from thence, nor act of lust did want,
Since poverty did Rome forsake.


For it often happens that whosoever seeks to enter into fame, begins
with virtue, and ends with sin, and injuries: with virtue, whilst he is
poor, with sin, through the persuasion of increasing riches. Thou say,
rich men have a plain way to virtue: I grant it plain, but deceitful; and
in it there are a thousand windings of vices, a thousand allurements of
pleasures, a thousand by-pathes of errors: for to rich men, that desire to
sin, all ways are open, but a poor man that declineth sometimes from the
way of virtue, necessity (as it were by the hand) leads him to the right
way: for whilst he indeuoureth himself, to that which is hard, and full of
difficulty, he scarce ever turned his eyes, from virtue, which is his
loadestarre. Then in suffering labor, he inuiteth diligence, frugalite,
modesty, and going unto virtue, he only treads the right paths of virtue.
The way peradventure is hard, but direct, and sure; for he is much more nimble
in this course, then he that walks laden with burdens, whom many things
call aside, many things do hinder, and how much he goes on, so much he
soundly rejoices that he has profited.

Then he is infinitely inflamed to the rest of his journey that remains, and
he is so joyful in his proceeding, that he is scarce content with a
mediocritie; and to conclude, he thinks nothing done, if he have not
perfected what he has begun, and by so much more he imbraceth his own
poverty, by how much he sees, more occasions hereby offered to lay a side,
and to put off his baseness, and to conquer lettes, and also to obtain
honor.

Surely, if a man wash away those staynes, that cleave to every man from his
birth, if then he be beautiful, and like the Champion of virtue, if he then
be reckoned amongst those, that be honorable, if with the guiding of virtue,
he come for to govern the Commonwealth, if from the plough (as the proverb
is) he be advanced to the scepter, if he be in his own knowledge a
performer of honorable attemptes; then shall he perceive what it is to serve
under such a captain, when he sees so great allowance made unto those that
follow him; besides oftentimes to a man in danger, there is no haven safer then
poverty. O safe condition of the poorest life, O gift
Of God, as yet not rightly understood.


Therefore yet reverence thy poverty, O thou poor man, that the rich man may
understand, that he has not more safety in his riches, then thou have in the
provident dispensation of thy want, and as one, that now stands in the
entrance, and door to happiness, lay aside that malicious and unthankful
mind, which does more pollute thee by much, then thy own poverty; cast away
deformed sloth, and the complaints annexed to it; frame due thanks unto God
not borne in the mouth, but in the heart; know that he can divide better, then
thou can choose; Give more largely then thou can ache; and provide far
better then thou can wish. If at any time thy thoughts licentiously do
wander, persuaded by a leuity, and oblivion, that is by an ungrateful mind,
then bridle them with the raines of fear, and of modesty; if they be shut up
and narrow, stir them up and enlarge them to receive GODS benefits bestowed
upon thee; for GODS goodness oftentimes, offering it self to thy mind, with
often handling, will make thee of a quarrelous and ungrateful complainer, a
secret admirer; and a diligent worshipper of that goodness, which has made
thee poor for so rich a reward.

The rich man is no less unthankful then the poor, and of three sorts of
rich men; delicate, prodigal, and sordide; and here in this Chapter of
delicate rich men. CHAP. 9.
THough baseness and poverty do challenge unto themselves this liberty, that
without controlement they may be quarelous, and ever barking, yet thou that art
rich, what meanest thou, to thee alone, and to thy use, there is as much
dug, and ploughed, as is sufficient to serve a multitude: thou buildest more
largely, then any of thy neighbors, men ^urrowe the seas, for thy proffit; in
one word thou do not possess riches, but treadst them under foot; yet for
all this, I do not see thee more religious, more thankful, then if thou
had none of those, I do observe thy mind to be narrow, and incapable of
those things, wherewith thou aboundest, so that thou art not mad after one
fashion; for I find three sorts of rich men, the delicate, prodigal, and
sordide: I call those that delicate rich men, which are ever loathing and
taking dislike; to whom the plenty of these things are wearisome, which other
men much desire; they are almost dull if they be not ever awaked with some
new thing, they are always doubting of so many inticements of pleasures
which they may choose, which they may take, which they may use presently, which
they may differ; those things which now please them, presently they
mislike, thus giving themselves over to all delight^, they know not what to do
with riches* so scornefully does this delicate sort of people use them. Thus
plenty is a burden to them, so has riotousnesse made their minds effeminate:
Riotousnesse that sweetest ill, which granted to the mind,
VVeakeneth the sense, corrupts all, and man himself does blind*
Her fairest looks (en^g much) do harmefull (...) hyde,
Whilst painted shows deceitfully into man's heart d^ (...).


O ye trifling rich men dissolved and without sinews, which from so many
benefits of God have learned to forget him. O men worthy to suffer cold, heat,
and hunger; who only seem to have a curious judgment in an evil cause; who
are not gluttons, and belly-gods, to haunt brothell houses and stews, but ever
being neatly dect, profess a learned riotousnes; who only speak finely, and
filthely; who only seem to know and profess all parts of pleasure, who suffer
no home-borne-thing to be about you, for whom only are invented so many
effeminate arts. and unseemly travails of this age; yet notwithstanding you
must confess, that these so many commodities, have brought so many
discommodities to you, that no pleasure can delight you, nothing (how great
soever) can make you happy, nor any of these womanish ornaments can set you
out. Can it possible be that endued with such proposterous minds, you should
acknowledge the favor of God? You should esteem it? you should speak of it?
But rather ye, if ye have any respect unto your selves, leave off to be so
angry with your selves.

Those things which are superfluous to you, because you corrupt them with evil
using, those things (I say) divide amongst the poor, as too much for your
selves; lay aside this (...) as ouergreat for you; learn to be content with a
little, and this little, to use well; seeing ye have abused so much, so long;
never being equal and upright to your selves, to others burdensome, and
unjust. O ye much more happy, if this abundance of loathed and superfluous
choice, wear taken from you; and those pleasures wherewith ye are drunk: so
that there were no more left unto you, then wherewithal to maintain life. If
so many benefits of God cannot tell you to a sounder judgment, yet at least have
pity upon your selves: fear and tremble, at the end of unthankful persons.
Chiefly take heed least being brought unto poverty, ye learn when it is to
late, to esteem those things which so proudely ye now loath, and that which
is now by too much abundance a weariness, in the end by want and scarcity
become your sorrow.

Of the prodigal rich man. CHAP 10
YE prodigal rich men, which grow insolent with foolish pleasures, and do
scoff your riches, which with unseemly expenses do waste that which was
gotten with other men's labor; doubtless for you is wouen a web of much ill;
alas how am I affraide for you, least you make restitution to the last farthing
for these evil expenses; and least in the shipwreck of a rich patrimony, you
perish against the rock of extreme necessity. In what place should I reckon
you, you that are so inconsiderate, such enemies to your own estates? And to
conclude, such unmindful and sluggish contemners of so many benefits of God;
If I call you foolish, filthy swine, gulphes and whirlepooles; if roging and
riotous eaters, I speak but as it is. For there is nothing can deliver you
from infamy and from those punishments which are companions to it; will you
never understand, that this substance was so richly bestowed upon you, not to
be an iustrument of madding and frantic desires, not a coach to draw you to
all pleasures not a nourishment to your ryotousnesse; not food to your
insatiable bellies, But that rather amidst heap of riches, should shine your
modesty, shamefastness, frugality, sobriety, and your especial thankful mind
to God. It is no praise to be rich, but it is a glorious thing in the midst of
riches to be temperate; and from his daily allowance ever to lay some thing
aside, to relieve those who have need of a helping hand and a ready and
seasonable liberality. These are those grateful thanks, which he requires of
you, who is the great bestower of all benefits, and whom mortality can
requite in nothing, but in a thankful mind. If in this ye are deaf, if ye
are taken with a deadly sleep, if you continue thus lewdly, and riotously to
wast that which is left unto you; then when you have worn out your riches, and
are commen to extreme poverty, and later then was fit are awaked out of this
Lethargy; you shall find none of all those things, which your folly has
already spent, your throats have already devoured, your lusts have already
consumed, and your madness has prodigally wasted. Do ye not perceive,
(vnlesle you have lost all sense) what punishment there is in this sin? Do
you not perceive an injury to your strength, to your valor, to your name, to
your health? Does not all the force and vigor of your mind, by degrees waste?
does not the strength of your body by little and little fail you? Does not
this manifold, and deformed evil privately pestilent, overthrow Cities and
great Empires? Was not this ever the opinion of ancient severity, which made
so many laws against sumptuous riot to expel this monster? Oh GOD, why at
this day is not the like severity revived? seeing this furious Monster yet
lives, that it may repress it? Surely if it were, things would not have
commen to this monstrous dissoluteness of riot, in this kind exceedingly
ingenious, to find out every hour something, whereby every man wasting his
substance, may perish after a new manner. If you have no respect, if no shame
can keep you in any limits: if your own reputations will not, yet let your
losses move you; especially that fatal consumption which wastes both you and
yours: for Riot it is riches bane, and poverty at last
Does theare succeed where riot all does waste:
And if all this will not awake you, yet
fear the judgments of GOD; And least you be found amongst those, who are
most unthankful, and most impure; learn at length to spare those things to
good uses, which that divine bounty, not only with gentle, but liberal hand,
has bestowed upon you.

And these things, being thus recovered from your riotous madness, divide
them to the use of those, by whose holy prayers, and devout wishes, you may be
delivered from eternal puniment.

Of the Sordide and covetous rich man. CHAP, 11.
But O thou sordide and covetous rich man, I see thee also drowned in this
puddle. I do find thee also amongst those that are unthankful. Thou, O thou
that art malice it self, who with bleared eyes look upon every thing that
is not within thy own hedges.

Who in the midst of thy riches layest open thy poverty, whilst thou do not
esteem those things thou have, but look at those things thou couetest;
whilst thou gapest after other men's, and scrapest from thy neighbors; Ever
being a thirst, even in a doubting and fear, with a headlong hope, and gready
devouring insatiable expectation. thou man, of no rekconing, who art the
sightest apendix of thy substance; O clay wrought up with the filth of
coueteousnesse. O Insatiable gulf; Ovnsatisfied puddle; are these the thanks
that thou give to God? do thou so esteem his bounty? For what else shall
I call these mad wishes, and endless desires? this theeuish robbing
disposition, but a co^plaining and unthankful mind? This substance (asit
seems) is not a pleasure unto thee, but a torment. Do thou think that
these were heaped upon thee to this end, to make a hook of, to pull all
things to thee? that no eye, no watch, no man's care, can be a sufficient
defense, but that thou spoylest this man, thou robbest that man, thou hurtest
him, thou vndoest an other, whersoeuer thou have any thing to do, all things
are wasted, consumed and deformed by thee? O God he that has bestowed so much
riches upon thee, has bestowed them upon thee to that end, that with a
bountiful mind, and liberal hand thou should imitate the giver, thou
should inioyne thy self a sober abstinence, and willing poverty, thou
should worship him in the person of the poor, who when he was here,
preferred poverty before riches: not that thou should compass and infold
about thine own, and others; as a Dragon does a hid treasure, which neither
takes it himself, nor suffers others to use it.

And amongst so many benefits of God, thou do only be wray a ravenous,
furious, and vnthfankull mind. I beseech thee acknowledge that these lets are
removed from thee, which hinder the attaining of things excellent; and that
the occasions are taken away, into which, poverty does often thrust men with
violence: Surely, from riches to virtue, the way, if it be not straighter, yet
it is more easy, then from poverty: peradventure thou will say, it is more
deceitful: I grant, to a man that is not sufficiently circumspect: but to a
man wary and diligent, this way by riches is much the shorter. Blot out of thy
mind (O thou rich man) whatsoever does defame thee, as a ravenous wild beast,
in the mouths of men; and the richer thou art, by so much, live more warily:
and then enjoy and spare not, what thou have gotten; at length rest and favor
thy self; torment not thy self with perpetual gaping after whatsoever may
begotten; this done, then more reverently and more carefully, give thanks to
him, who as (when he might not have given these things to thee) yet gave them
freely, so he now may take them from thee, provoked by thy unsound and
unthankful mind.

Amongst the unthankful persons I find him who is troubled with sickness.
CHAP, 21:
THen these that I have remembered, he is no less unthankful, whom infirmity
of body, and desperate sickness, has tied unto his bed; who afflicted with
continual torments, pineth and wastes; O life (says he) liker a death, then
life; yea a continual death do I live, who am borne to continual punishment,
whom greefes daily torment, what profit is it for me to be borne into this
light, when this light is to me a punishment? If this my life be continually
vexed with fear of death, misery, and grief: if in the end it be concluded
with a death, slow and bitter, and aunswerable to the rest of my life; As
poverty is grievous to the poor man, baseness a reproach to the ignoble, and
to every man that which does most oppress him; yet no man's condition is more
intolerable then mine; from me those two fearful companions never depart,
fear and sorrow; I cannot rest, I must not mutter, I may not breath, there is
no calamity so great, no plague so cruel, wherein the mind with some comfort
is not refresht, but this of mine is increased with comfort, It does grieve me
if anyman go about with artificial terms to appease my grief. I seem to be
derided, I am not mytigated, but made worse, for grief drives away,
whatsoever drives not away grief.

Him that is worn with grief, in that he is unthankful, I neither pardon
him, nor speak him fair. CHAP, 13
I should confess my self very void of humanity, if I should not pity
thee, whosoever thou art, who art plunged into this bottom of grief; I am not
ignorant that their is scarce any strength of mind, to be found, which grief
does not wear and cast down, to triumph over grief, is not the parts of a
man, but of some divine power; it is a cruel tyrant, and seildome leaves a
man before it have brought the body low, and afflicted the mind, for the
affinity with it; but if thou do remember thy self, that thou were a man
before thou weart miserable, before thou weart laden with that misery and
those diseases, consider a little, remember with me thy condition: Thou art a
man* Therefore thou art not only a body, but a soul, The soul ought to have
rule over the body, not the body over the soul, why art thou no^ therefore
erected and listed up, O thou soul, that thou may behold that place which
belongs unto thee: and preserve that dignity and worthiness, which is thine
safe and untouched? what, will thou suffer the body to have greater
pre-eminence then thy self? shall those foolish, and irreligious voices of
this earthly frame, detracting from thy commandments, following which way
soever sense leads them, and shall not thy commandment be heard? Go to, say
unto thy body it is my duty to rule, and then to obey, is it not my part to
affect the body, and to impose upon it whatsoever I please? say, I will lead
thee, and thou shall follow me, and as I feell, and am affected, so speak
thou, I am, and have a being without thee; but thou (unless thou art quickened
by me) art but a lump of flesh, mere claye, or if any thing can be more
filthy then clay, thy dignity is nothing but as I have advanced thee to a
divine knowledge; and as all things with me are excellent and admirable, so
with thee they are contemptible and base; and to say truth what have thou in
thy self; that is not common with the brute beasts? would not thy weight
depresse thee into the deepest bottomes, if I did not lift thee up and ingraft
thee to a divinity?

Therefore (O body) whatsoever it is that offends thee, I reckon it as those
things that are under me, which neither ad nor detract from me*

These griefs to thee peradventure are bitter, and to me also (I do not say
unprofitable) but for the a^* f^ty that I have with thee, unsweet and
unpleasant. But that they should have power over me, that they should compel
me to despair; that they should rob me of my felicity; that they should
couns^* and I ^e persuaded; that they should command* and I obey* that they
should compel* and I be inforst; this were to make me (whose essence is more
divine) sub^ct to corrupt^ (...) all* these things which com^se (...)* which
have their affinity with thee, and where of the a^ made, are true assurances
and direct paths to mortality. But I am immortal. I am without the danger and
reach of these darts; and therefore with mortal things I can neither be
touched nor aff^ed; ^ay with these shadows of fear* and aff^le me O grifes at
your pleasure; be mad and fear as you think good, m^ (that is the inward
and better part of a man) ye cannot ^rt: I will keep my (...), no^ only
unconquered, but untouched; (...) nothing from hence, whereof to glory* I will
(...) ye with my strength, and are solute h^t, (...) i^ bearing, I will
overcome you; I that (...) not to ^e wounded, that am (...)* that am not to
(...) with these (...). N^y I am the most fr^de, most at mine own command,
then do I most triumph, when I see thee (O body) affected with grief; as if a
strong tower and hold of dangerous affections wear beseedg^ and taken by me;
Thus will a wise and a valiant man think; Thus will he compass himself,
thus firmly and resolutely will he stand; and the more he understands his
misery, and feels his grief, the more wisely will he deal, the more
valiantly will he suffer that, which he must needs suffer* (...) more
generously will he speak, the more gloriously will he triumph; to conclude,
he will persuade himself, that those remedies, which bring grief, are best
and most ^fectuall; and then as griefs hinder the o^ces of the ^ody, so they
stir up the strength of the mind, and cure the incurable diseases of it;
that is, they cut off these luxurious hopes* they bridle those wandering
thoughts, they repress that admiration of our selves, which deceitfully
steals into our familiarity. For we must confess, no man has more modesty,
more appetite, more honesty, then when he is wrapped up in diseases* then
does he truly know of what value all humane things are. Then does he
learn to detest the hurtful plagues of all mankind, Ambition, and
Covetousness; then the tempests, those vyolent tempests of lust are cal^;
then all try^es, pleasures, cares, are of no reckoning; he is conversant so
amongst men, that he seems rather to be with GOD; then he is altogether out
of him self, that he neither thinks nor speaks of these inferior and
humane things, but as is needful for ^ne ready to depart, and to advise his
own. These things do sicknesses, diseases and griefs perform; in this
respect (I had almost said they are to be embraced of us,) that they give every
man occasion, to take experiment of himself, and with a faithful though hard
exercise to obtain a strength not only to suffer, but to challenge, the
uttermost and ex^emities of all evil; And therefore we are often indebted to
diseases, for Innocence; Innocence that is the pathway to salvation. But these
are (say you) sharp and cruel strypes: Let them be cruel, and sharp, so
they be wholesome. For what if thou peradventure be such a one as cannot be
cured, but by this means; Do thou think it fit that GOD should lead
thee, warn thee, correct thee, at thy appointment and direction? To some men
their own conscience is a sufficient motive to virtue, some other stand in
need of one to admonish them, one to correct them, some others are dull and
drowsy, and ever doing that they should not, whom thou can not move and
awake, but with spurs dull and incapable wits are not to be taught, but with
stripes; and what if thou art one of those? What if almost lost thou can no
otherwise be saved but by this means? Do thou take it grievously, and
repiningly, murmurest, that God does burn thee, does cut thee, and and lance
thee, that he may cure thee? that unwilling and striving against him, he
saves thee by that means which he knows fittest? for Wounds that enter
deep, with danger to the life,
Are seldom cured with case, but fire, and knife.
Take heed therefore least whilst thou fauourest thy self too much, and with
wicked complaints prouokest him, who careful provides for thy good, thou also
beesovnd amongst the unthankful, and so (as the reward of thy
unthankfulness) these bodily griefs be not diminished, but increased with
adition of those everliving (and yet deadly) griefs of the soul.

He also that is in perfect health is many ways unthankful. CHAP. 9.
ALthough he, from whom the impatiency of incurable griefs extorteth dishonest
and unwise complaints be unthankful, yet he sins more with excuse, then he
that is sound and strong. For he, because he is never almost admonisht with
diseases, nor with griefs awaked out of sleep, grows drowsy for want of
pain; deceives himself with overmuch cherishing, and is altogether in the
leaven of pride. By this means he more and more pleases himself; by this
means he madly thinks, and foolishely hops, and in his whole life does
altogether otherwise then he ought. In one word he tryfleth. From hence his
life is either but a sluggish idleness or a wicked and filthy business, with
both these, thy life is stained, (Oh thou man distracted, whosoever thou art,
whom health of body has brought to a sickness of mind) who therefore art in
health, that thou may perish; and therefore perishest, because knowing and
willingly thou perishest. Wherefore do thou think this found and healthful
state of body was granted thee? What? that thou might employ this
inestimable benefit of GOD, to no good use, that thou might spend thy life
in the windings of error, amongst the thorns of desire; that never quiet
never favorable to thy self, thou may ever seek the means and instruments
of life, only to be tossed in these follyes? thus being wrapped in those
foolish affections, will thou never free and deliver thy self? But ever wallow
in that mire, without once looking to Heaven? Do thou live, that (as the
proverb is) thou may with the cords of idleness, draw the day from
morning to night, and as the dead sea (never moved) with any desire of honesty,
and with no good employments, do no memorable thing, distinguished from those
that are most stuggish, so thou may be he Whose life is dead (living) and
yet alive,
Who spends in sleep the circuit of the year.
And waking does dreams to himself derive
And wastes a life securely without fear.
That thus groueling to the earth, obeying thy belly, and serving thy pleasure,
thou may quench the heat of thy lust, and unclean puddles of sin; thou
do ill esteem the benefits of GOD, if thou do abuse so foully so great a
favor.

Surely, that any man's life is sweet unto him, it is the benefit of health;
but the sum and scope of our life, is to come to the knowledge of our selves,
and from hence to the knowledge of him, whose work we are; therefore there
can be no part of our life well spent, that is not bestowed in perfecting of
this knowledge; This ought to be every man's purpose and endeavor, without the
direction of this star, to live, is but to err, and go astray; From hence
therefore, we may esteem holiness and pyety to be the chief and only work
of our life; this I require as trusting to prevail of our inward senses, of
our mouth, of our manners; that is, of our whole man: the holiness of our
inward senses, is to know God; of our mouth to praise him; of our manners to
bridle vice and to increase virtue; and to endeavor that thou may be, if not
a great and honorable, yet a good and virtuous example.

He that has time in his power, spares the very moments of it; because he
knows that nothing is turned about with such swiftness as is every part of
life; and therefore he must remember the counsel given to the husbandmen.
Watch O ye men, for time with silent sound,
And steps unseen the year still turns round.


And indeed what is it to live, but perpetually to watch? What is it to watch,
but to intend our calling? Again, what is liker to death then to be sluggish
and cast into this pestilent sleep? I mean into this variety; and vanity of
unprofitable things. To conclude, to show how dull we are, and how greatly
toward GOD unthankful, who will have his benefits contained in our life, and
that life bestowed to his worship, and the public profit; alas how many do
we see, who, because they cannot give a reason of this their idleness, too
late do lament that they have passed not a life, but rather a frustration, and
a dream. To conclude to these From pleasures great much bitterness does spring,
Which vexes often, when flowers are in the prime:
When self remorse, does grief and sorrow bring,
With Idle steps to tread our happy time.


Kings and princes are unthankful who reckon up what estimation men make of
their calling, to take occasion from hence to show how false it is, and how
unjustly they may complain as being evil dealt withal. CHAP, 15:
IT is strange, to find so many sorts of men, as I have reckoned before, to
be unthankful, but much more, will he be astonished, which considers thee
(chief of mortal men) upon whose persons is more heaped, then upon whole
countries, to be of that mind, and to be so affected, that none are more
quarelous and co^plaining then they are. This speech if it be not often in the
months of princes, yet it is often a thought in their minds; They say, that I
(whatsoever I am called) sit in the highest government of things; my least
signification any way is as a rule, whereunto every man composeth himself,
that there is a necessity from my pleasure imposed upon all those, who live
under my government: because it is in my power to will and to be able. If any
thing please me, it is a law: my words with no contrary sense are to be
frustrate, nor with any consent of men to be confuted. It is in my power, in
what condition every man shall live. If I like peace, my country shall live in
quiet. If I prefer war before peace, all places sound with the noyce of
armours; what I will do, or what I will not do; it is only in my own
determination: thus are all things guided with my hand: and that which is the
happiest thing in all this, is, that nothing can compel me. Those whom I
admit in counsel, as perswaders or diswaders of things; they first search
out my meaning, before they express their own, least they should think any
thing from which I do dissent. This emulation possesses all the fauorits of
princes, and that live in Courts, who may find me at leisure, and who may
most, and longest please me, to perform obedience to me, to be admitted into
my inward friendshipp; to execute my commandments, to be almost no other
thing then to be accepted into familiarity with this high and great power,
which way soever I go, I have ever the attendance of Majesty, and state; and
fame it self (even at whose only mention the greatest gape) which they prefer
before all things, cleaves unto me, even against my will, and that both great
and everlasting, doubtless I am much in the mouths of those that are present,
absent, and a far off; so that I cannot easily tell, whether absent, or
present, I am more honorable. My authority, and my power is every where
feared. It concerns men publicly to know my kindred, my wisdom, and my
actions.

To conclude, it is their labor, and advantage, to set down the most hidden
and secret parts of my life: yea (if it were possible) my inward thoughts; what
and of what kind soever any thing is, that belongs unto me, that after-ages
(out of Chronicles) may read them, and fame report the^. The hands of many men,
their industry, their labor, their faith, and endeavors, travel only for my
use, to procure my quiet, my security, my riches, my honor, my contentment: and
finally, to commend my name, and memory to posterity, yea even those
pleasures are obuious, prepared, and offered unto me, which often the most
dangerous wits, have pursued with the loss of their lives, fames, and
fortunes In this the greatest difficulty is, the choice of these things; my
wishes are not only ever performed but usually prevented; In one word I do so
much exceed all others, as much as any man can desire; these are public in the
eyes of men, and such things as no man can contradict; these men are the
lookers at my Crown and dignity.

Hear the Prince goes about to extenuat the opinion which the common people
have of his Soueraintie; for he proves that he is compassed with miseries,
that men may see in comparison of others, how little he is bound to God. CHAP,
13
BBut Oh men overmuch deceived, in whose opinions I am (if not every way
happy) yet of far more excellent estate then others: For With false names
great things do please,


This outward brightness is a guide to this great error; this affects and
dazeleth the eyes of the false esteemers, of my condition: and of those, who
are altogether ignorant, what this is, which they call Soueraignetie; will thou
know what principality is: It is a Tower seated in a place narrow, slipperie,
headlong; In this standing am I set; that I may perpetually watch; from hence
(if I chance to sleep) I shall fall dangerously. No man lies more open to
assaults; no man more violently is cast down; none has less advantage to rise
again. They say my least signification is a law to men. Oh I would to God, I
did not find it daily otherwise, who am drawn thither, and against my will,
whether occasions of others lead me, not whether I my self had purposed. My
pleasure you say is a necessity to others: nay, that necessity is imposen
upon me, which arriseth out of things themselves: neither can I will any thing
otherwise, then of necessity must be, unless I will that, which I connot
obtain. For as we command men, so things command us, and no man has things in
his power, but he that obeys the necessity of them. They say, whatsoever
pleases me is a Law; these are trifles. For it is much truer that the law
often ouerturneth what I like. For the law to me is hard and inexorable: and
as it restrayneth the multitude, so to my words and deeds it is a most severe
censor. My words (they say) with no contrariety nor no consent of men can be
deluded. There is nothing so false as this, seeing I am compelled, often to
speak one thing, and think another. It is often my greatest advantage, that I
am not understood. Surely, whosoever with a reaching head understands me,
sometimes does understand a little more then is fit. Therefore to my words
(but when they are solemn and conceived with deliberation) men must not ever
give credit. And although often I do speak truly, yet those that do catch my
words, either with a perverseness of their own, or an ingrafted sinister
disposition, turn them to what they please: they say it is in my power, in
what state and condition every man shall live. If I should grant that this were
so, yet I must confess that even in this respect, I scarce ever have true
quiet.

For I am ever doubtful, and in suspense, least I offend any man unwillingly,
least I discountenance him that is worthy, advance him that is unthankful,
or unawares overthrow my self, and my own state: For even this very
Soueraintie it self, exposes me (both publicly and privately) to the enuies,
hatreds, and iealousies of men: all which easily overthrow this state.

And to conclude, the longer they lurk, the more fatally and more dangerously
they break out. Besides you say (as I please) I do give to my subjects peace,
and war. Yea even this, is amongst the ils of princes, that great
distructions, and public calamities, are referred unto them only, as to the
chief authors: when indeed the true causes of them are hid secretly, in the
deep, and stick fast in more hidden roots, then the counsels of men. This is
that unjust ignorance of the common people, from whence so much envy is
derived to the prince. Of things well don, every man draws the honor to
himself, but the prince alone, must bear the burden of others madness. They
say, I have that pre-eminence, that whatsoever I will, or will not, is in my own
power. It were indeed an excellent thing, if it were. If thus a man might
satisfy all; if all men were of one mind. But whosoever thinks thus, does
not consider, that I only never sail in a calm, but am perpetually tossed in
the waves of opinion; and lie only open to the differinge censures of good and
ill, and to every light ignorant and idle fable. Therefore in this respect,
that so much is lawful unto me, I have reason greatly for to fear, least I
should do any thing to overthrow this liberty. If any man consider well, he
shall see, that in this great liberty there is least. Neither do men take
unto themselves more hard judgment, or secret speeches then against the
pince; Of whom to speak evil, and to dislike his doings (whether they be
good or badde) it is not a corruption of a few, but of long time, a popular
virtue, you say, those whom I do admit into Counsel, they do first gather
out my meaning, before they express their own, least they should think
something differing from me.

Let it be so, may not my cruelty and that fear, which men have of me, be
gathered from hence, as also their own sluggish and injurious distrust of me.
For if they be admitted, to this end to guide me with their counsel; why do
they dissemble it? If they think well, profitably, and for the good of the
common wealth; why do they first gather what is my meaning? Why do they so
carefully and warely deliver their own opinion to try mine? why do they so
slauishly submit their voices unto me? doubt less, they do it to that end
that they may seem to think the same that I do; that thus by the likeness of
council, they may make themselves easily more near unto me. Do they not thus
withdraw their faith and fidelity from me? Am I not by this means forsaken of
those I ought not, in things that are most weighty? Namely, those who ought to
call me back when I err, to hold me up when I slide, to raise me up when I
fall, craftily do cast me headlong into destruction. So far do they
proceed in the contention of flattery, in the impudency of lying, and in the
study of deceit. Then in what state am I, if these be true as they are most
true? Do not these devouring gulphes ever gape after my fortunes? what? if I
bestow so much upon them as they wickedly covet or impudently beg? If in those
things which falsely and fraudelently they steal, they see our winking at it,
are we not straight made a pray unto poverty, then which, no enemy can be
greater to a kingdom? If I do give with moderation, and according to men's
deserts, presently they account me base and nigardly. So whether I give, or
not give, I must either want or be envied; but you say all men strive to
insinnuate themselves into my favor, to be nearer and more powerful with
me, seeing to be inward with princes and to execute their commandments is
nothing else but to part and divide soueraignety with them; this may teach all
men, in what slippery estate were stand, and how little we are at our own
pleasure, who must be subject to other men's vices, to obey other men's wits, and
to be led whether they will have us. If vices would show themselves as they
are, there is no man but would be afraid and tremble at them; but to Princes
they offer themselves disguisde, they carry a shape of virtue with them, and
so easily insinnuate themselves. From hence is that, which they call our
facility, liberal to the worst sort and more favorable often to vices, then
to virtue, when we are most officiously observed of our attendants, then
audatious spirits in our gates do work tragedies; modesty being banished, for
which there is scarce any parts in princes courts, there scarce it retains
the name of virtue when it has lost all the ornaments and graces of it; It
is often covered with a base garment, and then it is not so much called
modesty, and fear, sluggishnesse, and baseness; therefore if any man
thinkerightly, we are rather troubled with other men's faults then our own,
whilst we live in this ignorance of things, and looking with other men's eyes,
scarce ever see any thing truly, from hence proceed so many errors, so many
complaints, which on every side are stirred up to our envy; who are said to
know all things, to govern all things, to be able to do all things, when
indeed we know all things last of all, neither do men tell us things as they
are, but as it pleases them to devise, so that every man's particular fault
is laid upon the PRINCE, be he never so innocent, But they say, I ever
walk, being guarded with a train of Majesty and State. Indeed thus I am
safe, as a City, all whose gates are diligently kept, except one, which is
open to the enemies; neither can the Prince (though with his authority he
command every man) eschew the trecheries of all; for there will never some be
wanting, which (moved with unjust hatred) conspire his overthrow; there be
every where examples of this, by which we may see how the lives of Princes, are
open to every man's wicked conspiracy; yea and oftentimes such furious assaults
are joyfully accepted amongst the multitude, So that those are thought to have
deferued best of the common wealth, who have compast us about with such
treacherous factions, and amongst the vulgar multitude, there is no news
received with greater applause; nothing more acceptable to the ignorant people,
then this; that the yoke of a tyrant is taken from their necks, and rewards
are bestowed upon the murderers. Thus undefended, unheard, and often the
innocent is punished; no law nor majesty can be a protection to him, in whose
only safety the safety of all consists, besides it is not in the providence
and wisdom of any, but of him that is the great defendour of kingdoms, to
escape those storms, which a man shall see thence to arise often, from whence
in all reason they are least expected; for the nearest and most inward friends,
do often become the most dangerous traitors. This is that guarde which so
defends our bodies, that it does often wound them; which we nourish at our
own expenses, not so much to defend us as overthrow us.

The Prince proceeds to reckon up those things which may diminish other men's
opinions of this felilicitie. CHAP. 9.
ANd fame, which all mortal men expect above all things, what does it profit
me, if it does dishonor and blemish my name? Should I therefore esteem it
because it is great? Yea, the greater it is, the more dangerous; and the more
it does stain me; what am I greater that I am more famous? All men point and
say that this is he
what earth to few that life has given to me
And am I by this more famous? more excellent? and not rather more stained,
more vexed? whatsoever belongs to me, that they say it is fit to be known
publikly. This also is to be reckoned, amongst the infelicitie of Princes;
that private men's faults oftentimes humility, conscience, and charity does
hide, and the least blemishes in us, are publicly showed as great deformities;
from hence it comes, that whatsoever sin, or filthiness is any where, all
that almost, is thought either to proceed from the PRINCE, or to rest upon
him; neither do private men sin more sparingly, but more secretly; men
easily do pardon their own faults, but never the PRINCES, nay the more
equal every man is to himself, the more unjust he is to the PRINCE; and as
concerning pleasures, from the plenty whereof, comes a difficulty of choice,
I would to GOD those could see the end of them, who from these do measure our
felicity, with grievous (yet deserved punishments.)

They should well understand, how light, how flitting, how fearful, they are
and full of repentance; for the very abundance of these things, which you so
much esteem does take from every thing, the sweet and the pleasure of them;
neither does that ever delight us, which truth commends to us, but which
nouelty; what is exquisite, special, and not common; Every common thing be it
never so excellent, grows base; and as soon as there be many of them, they are
cheap; It is scarce any pleasure at all; that is a pleasure to all; but these
which in the opinion of the multitude are so much to be desired, do compass
the princes young years about, before he learn to know them, hate them, or
eschew them; he first tastes evil things, before he knows them to be
evil, he first understands himself to be taken, before he has any power
to take heed of these inevitable deceits; neither can he with any force he
has, repel the violence of those pleasures, that do assault him. Away with
that felicity, (which if it be any) yet is not of that value, that thereby
the mind should be besotted; the body weakened; and the fame darkened; and to
follow pleasures, what is it but to hunt sickness, grief and shame? True
pleasures, and which indeed deserve the name of pleasures, are few, and do
happen to private men oftener, then to Princes; our pleasures are counterfeit,
masked, and full of danger, and to conclude, they are not that they seem, and
that which truly is in them (if there be any thing truly in them) is less
then that which is not, or worse, or more dangerous. My wishes they say are
not only performed, but sweetened. Those wishes must needs be low, and
beneath the dignity of this place, which a man may so easily obtain; they aim
at nothing that is great, at noning worthy of this fortune; surely as soon as
it is understood, that any thing is attempted by me, whereby my riches, my
dignity, my dominion is to be enlarged; all men by all means do seek to
hinder it; so obstinately and of set purpose do men rise to subvert me, to
keep me under, to oppress me; No man is sooner frustrate of his hope, no man
has more dangerous attempts against him, then the PRINCE; Those sluggishe and
base wits, borne to servitude, by how much they increase in slothful secret
practices, by so much more dangerously, they assault our safeties and fortune;
that I may not speak of other Princes, and great persons, which with Iealousy
envy our states and calling, who, by how much our fortunes are advanced, by so
much they suppose their own to be cast down; because there is no enlarging of
the bounds of Empire but into the limittes of an other; which must be to him
that inuades troublesome, and full of danger; besides doubtful, and unhappy
events do often cross endeavors that are excellent, and worthy of this place;
that it may seem to be better to sit and rest, like sluggish beasts, then
to adventure themselves, into so many headlong downefalles, which ruinate their
states and their whole Kingdoms. These are those felicities, wherewith our
fortunes are measured.

From hence there springs so much envy to us, as we nan scarce endure; as
though we had gotten the uttermost happiness upon earth, So that our kind of
life is scarce known to be unsafe, miserable, full of danger, of any other,
then of those that are borne to be Princes. All things with us are full of
suspicions, cares, and fear. O men thrice fortunate, to whom a life is
granted, not tossed with the tempests of envy, subject to no storms of
hatred, and conspiracy; who have a condition, and estate beneath the envy of
this place, and yet above the common equality.

These are they that live in security, who have in safety whatsoever they
possess, these have tranquillity, pleasure, joy, and happiness.

Seldom does envy or malice, lie in wait for them. To conclude, these have
all those commodities and pleasures; which falsely are said to be proper unto
princes, who cannot use them, but with great danger; neither were it strange,
if Princes (the greatest of mortal men) layinge aside this public care, and
freed from this heavy burden, did betake themselves into this safe and quiet
harbor.

Next unto these, are the multitude, who are safe (if not in the greatness of
their riches) yet in their condition and multitude of their like.

Last of all (if in no other respect) yet for their contempt, which to the
lowest is as a strong wall. When heavy news the people does oppress,
The princes greatness is in danger much,
Where lower states are safe, and fear no such.


Here I show by how many benefits the prince is bound to God, and in all
these, that he shows himself unthankful. CHAP, 13
WEll I see what the matter is; he that is almost over laden and oppressed with
the benefits of God, does scarce perceive them; he that has more lent him,
does more impudently deny the debt.

He that ought to be altogether in giving of thanks, is ashamed to be seen
thankful: he whose condition is above all, places himself lower then all;
not in want of understanding; but in that (though his place be excellent) yet
he dare boldly vpbraid the bestower of it, with what terms shall I censure
this corrupt and sinister disposion: Shall I call him blind, that cannot see
those things, whose brightness shine in every man's eyes? Or rather mad,
which proudly treads under foot, which all men admire, that they are
bestowed upon him? or dull and earth ly, which perceives not those things, in
the midst whereof he is placed? or to say more truly wicked, which with a
strange confidence acknowledges none of those things that appertain to his
calling? Well I will deliver my self, and thee whosoever thou art that read
this, out of this doubt I will call him unthankful; and in this one word
contain all his sham. And first in the very entrance thou bewrayest thy
friuoulous boasting, who say that they know nothing which esteem thy
condition better then the condition of other men; As though thou only in
respect of all other men (who think thus) thought truly, and other men were
deceived, who see thee in the midst of the Son to complain of light. But
indeed it is much truer, that thou only have weak eyes, which together with thy
mind are both blinded, with that light that does shine about theee; This first
dazeleth thee, then others; whose minds are infected with thelike error. Thou
say that principality and Soueraintie are like a Tower seated in a strait,
and slipperie place, where a man must perpetually watch: this hitherto is well
spoken, If thou speak it with that mind that it ought; but I see thou
showest not the excellency of that place, but the danger. Thou do not
acknowledge, that thou art seated in a glorious, and high place, but
complainest that it is slipperie, and full of downefalles; Neither do thou
speak as one wary, but as one quarrelous, and complaining; not as one
remembering, and magnifying thy condition, but detracting from it. Art thou in
that mind that thou think it is lawful for any man to be Idle, and
secure? Suppose thy self not to be in that place, set thy self with the
common people, make not thy self singular, yet thou can not deny, but thou
art committed to thy own charge; if no other, yet this charity (I am sure) is
ingrafted in thee; For to this end thou art borne, that thou should never
leave thy self, but toward thy self keep a continual guard, go whether
thou will, be as dissolute and as negligent as thou can; yet thou may not
fly nor escape thy self; from thy self without any teacher, thou art warnd,
that thou must nourish, frame, and till thy self; Surely no hard province, no
laborious work, whereunto willingly thou come and by the light of nature;
But as it is easy to be carried to this, so it is as hard and difficult to
perform it: For all other things are to be left, or rather al other things
are to be done, that this one thing may be perfected.

There is no mortal man, that has not this person, this charge, put upon him:
and therefore what care, or labor soever is bestowed in this, it is not Labor,
but Nature. And if thou bestow this care and pains upon others, it is
Government, that is a duty to rule others. But whether it be a duty, or a
burden, upon whomsoever it is imposed, with all it is commanded him to bear it
valiantly; and firmly to obey him, whose only benefit it is, that every man
is. Therefore rightly thou may call Government or rule, a care of an other
man's welfare: seeing the great weight of it, can neither be ballanst, nor
stand without a governor. Therefore whosoever is advanced to this dignity, to
him is the public profit propounded and he is given (as it were from heaven)
as a remedy and safeguard for all. This if thou more carefully considerest, what
and how great it is, then shall thou understand the excellency and majesty of
this place: wherein whosoever stands, he so far exceeds all other men, as
far as every man exceeds all those things which admire man as their Lord,
their governor, and their ruler. Therefore it is true that thou (who art a
Prince) sustainest the person of God: and performest his office, in Authority,
example, government. And do thou think that any thing can be spoken, or
wished for, higher and more honorable then this? But if this dignity do not
erect thee, but ouerwhelme thee, take heed that thou accuse not the bounty of
God, but secretly acknowledge the narrownes of thine own breast, and the
weakness of thy mind, unfit for so great an honor, and incapable of such a
Majesty. But because Soueraintie (as thou call it) is a Tower, know that
therein thou art a continual watch man, a searcher out of men's manners, a
continual obseruer of all that is done, least a passage be made through
sins and faults, and other pestilent infections, to overthrow those things
which are committed to thy faith, and credit. If thou excludest these things,
if thou layest Justice as a foundation of concord: If this concord of thy
subjects thou increasest with faith; If thou sharpenest the love of the
Commonwealth with virtue; If all thy subjects perceive thee to be a Prince,
not by Impositions, but benefits; If with these benefits thou preuentest their
desires; to conclude, if thy goodness be equal to thy power; if the higher
thou art, thou art so much the better; thou shall assure men that Majesty is
well bestowed upon thy person: thou shall possess their hearts, and every
man's vows and wishes shall be, that God the great King, and governor of all
things, will be as gracious to thee, as thou art to those that live under
thee. Last of all, this Majesty shall supply unto thee, those sweet
pleasures which are laid aside, for those only whom God aduanceth to so high an
honor. Further, he that cares for the good of the Commonwealth, the whole
Commonwealth watches for his good, and the guard, that he is attended with
all, are not so much a defense as an ornament: he that establishes this
concord of all, this concord is to him an invincible defense, he that imbraceth
al with a true love, him al men embrace with a true and happy love. This
therefore is to be a Prince, in the most highest place; that is, for the
safety, of all to bestow his care, his labor, his study, to be the president
of laws: to plant a love of that which is just and honest, and to ingraft a
hatred of vice, diligently to care that none perish, no not those that are
willing, he that thus disposes himself, shall have the helps of virtue,
whereunto if he lean, he shall not fall, as from a slipperie and dangerous
Tower, but shall remain firm in that state of Majesty: there his busied care
in the business of all shall keep him safe.

And if at any time (as humane things are uncertain) sleep stealing upon him,
he chance to fall, he is carefully supported in their hands, which with their
good will, defense, and safety, are desirous to preserve his life; Neither
shall his fall bruise him, but admonish him: For the swords of enemies shall
have their edges rebated in the love of his people; in this shall deceits be
disclosed, and trecheries be discovered. For there is scarce any other Prince
oppressed with faction, but he that first oppresses the people with so many
injuries: Neither is it strange that he lies open to the injuries of all,
that he is torn in pieces with their opinions, wishes, and reproaches, who
laboreth himself, to procure the destruction of all.

Therefore how safe thou art; how dear and desired thou art, how great and
honorable, how quietly obedient thou have thy subjects, it is in thy power,
whosoever thou art that art a Prince. And as thy safty, so are thy dangers
ascribed unto thy self; if thou indeauourest still that thou may stand, thou
shall never need to labor that thou may rise. If thou live for the good
of all, all will bestow their lives for thy good.

I do here admonish the Prince that intending those things which appertain his
calling, he show himself thankful and mindful of Gods benefits. CHAP. 18
Doubtless it is truly said, that thou art the Lord of times, and moments of
time, and that thou so command necessity, that thou art not drawn with the
violence of it; if principally, thou take heed, that thou do not with thy
own inconsideratures inuit it. If thou admittest into council, these two
companions Wisdom, and Providence: For with the direction of these two, thou
shall easily escape those almost inevitable snares of this Monster necessity;
yea and occasions will be ready; occasions, good and lawful, safely and
profitably to meet thee. For seldom, are any other driven into the straights
of time; then the slothful, inconsiderate, and improuident. But if thy mind
be hedged about with a daily and diligent care, that it slide not, I dare
promise thee, no unfortunate thing, shall happen unto thee; nothing unlooked
for. But all things happily, and forward before hand. If banishing this rashness
thou look unto things that are to come, with the eyes of wisdom, then as
thou shall wisely bear, whatsoever happens, so thou shall easily anoyde
error. And if all things come not to pass which thou would; yet those
things shall happen which thou have before thought of: And if things succeed
not as thou have determined, yet thou shall quietly entertain those things
whereunto occasions shall lead thee. There shall scarce any thing be, which
shall impose a necessity upon thee; Nay, it shall be in thy own power, what
shall be of necessity, and what not. For so imperious are circumspection; and
watchfulness, that wheresoever they are, from thence they exclude all
necessity. So far do diligent men exceed the slothful, the inconsiderate,
the desolute, which that great Poet well understood, when elegantly he song
thus:

Iapetus Sons the authors of our being,
With unlike hand, a race of men did frame,
Prometheus Sons the power had of foreseeing
When the other race more dull, saw not the same
Air in the one a spirit divine infused,
When heavy Earth the other down did cast:
One things to come, the one in wisdom mused
Whilst these did sigh for things were fondly past
Surely thus the Prince may do every thing, if whatso ever he thinks, he
applies to this rule; Thus whatsoever pleases the Prince shall be a law;
neither is a law any thing else but the rule of right. Command the best
things, and whatsoever at any time or in any place thou commaundest, shall
obtain force and strength of a law. If there be not to subvert these at any
time a difference betwixt the PRINCE and the law. For the PRINCE must be a
help to the law, and the law a safeguard to the PRINCE. Thus shall there be
much worthiness in thy deeds, much reverence and authority in thy words;
neither shall thou at any time be compelled to use dissembling or deceit; the
weak and unfaithful supporters of a kingdom; which indeed are rather the
forerunners of craft, then the companions and witnesses of true wisdom. Ever
go the right way, fly all bypathes, let no false opinions touch either thee,
or thy subjects. Let no suspicions stain the chaste mind of either. Let both
live truly, and sincerely, speak ingeniously and fear not to be understood;
and whatsoever is sincerely spoken, let it be accepted and construed with a
sincere and virtuous ^ction. For truth the PRINCE Has taught to shun deceit,
Nor false to speak nor secretly to hate,
Nor kind in shows, to harm to ly in wait,
With open truth to guide and rule his state.
Thus obedidence, shall ever confirm what is uttered from a mouth so ingenious
and void of deceit. Thus shall the success ever be answerable to all that
thou intendest; in the choice of any whom thou aduauncest to any place. For if
laying aside favor and affectatio^, laying aside al base and sinister
respects, thou only aymest to prefer and honor those that are most worthy,
thou shall derive unto thy self no hatreds, neither public nor private, but
love ingenious, and sincere, and the religious vows and wishes of all men for
thy safety. For all men will understand how nearly it concerns them to obtain
of God by their prayers a long and a happy life, for so good and gracious a
Prince. For by this means every man prays, that himself may live well. For
the state and condition of every man, is happy under a good and a gracious
Prince. But you say the public calamities (whose causes are hid in secret) are
referred to the Prince, as to the chief author; as though it could be denied,
that war and peace were not in the hands of the Prince; shall I tell thee how
truly this is spoken? Entreat thus much of thy self, that thou may be able
to quench those sparks of desiring and coveting Ambition, which ever seek to
enlarge themselves, and do inwardly burn thee, that they grow not to a flame;
and then shall thou cut off all causes of war. Look not how narrowly, or how
largely thou rulest, but how justly; then thou shall perceive thy self placed
in a large field, were thou may muster an army of virtues, which do al
fight under these two ensigns Piety and Justice. From whence I beseech thee
(do thou think) arise the greatest part of the public calamities?
Doubtless, seldom from foreign injuries, but most often and usually from the
unquiet mind of those, who think they possess nothing, unless they invade
that which is an others. Doubtless, I think him to be the most mighty
Prince, whose mind and wishes are at unity with themselves. O thou Prince,
(whosoever thou art) quiet and calm thine own heart; erect thy self hyer and
above all those things which inflame the mind; hold the desires under a
bridle; so shall thou prevent wars, seditions, tumults; if any thing
turbulently fall out, thou shall not buy thy peace of strangers, with great
sums of money, or with deminishing or dishououring of thy Empire; but thou
shall make the Articles and Covenants of peace thy self; If any man shall
propounde thee, and thy kingdom as a pray: if any foolishly cruel, and
placing right in violence, comes to oppress thee, doubtless all men will
arise in arms to defend thee; because whilst they establish the authority in
thee, they do likewise fortify their own. Last of all, he will defend thee
himself, who as he is Justice it self, so he ever firmly stands and
fights for that virtue. Thus, whatsoeuerthou wilt, shall be lawful for
thee; that is, if thou ever embrace, that which is just and honest; andremooue
from thee, whatsoever is unlawful.

Thus, no man's wishes shall differ from thine, no man's wishes shall hurt thee;
no tales shall trouble thee; nothing so popularly shall come to the ears of
the common people, as thy praises; neither shall any man compare thy faults
(which are none) with thy good deeds as doubtful, which in the balance do
weigh the heauiest; thy virtues shall be hurt with no affinity with vice; the
multitude of thy virtues and the greatness of them shall take judgment from
men, and place instead thereof Admiration. This shall ingraft thy name to
posterity; but thou complainest, that those who are intimate and of counsel
with thee do not deal faithfully, and sincerely, when as first they gather out
the meaning, before they express their own. This (thou say) is an argument
of a mind corrupt, and unfaithful. Indeed I do think so with thee: there can
be nothing more wicked, more corrupt then these. But me thinks thou seem
not to know that the greatest part of this unfaithfulness altogether
proceeds from thy self; consider what these are to whom thou have committed
thy self, thy name; thy dignity; and in one word the Souereignty of state.
They are either chosen of thee to that place, and esteemed for their virtue,
and worth; or rashely admitted into council. What ornaments have they brought
to thy friendship? with what pyety? with what manners, with what gifts of the
mind are they advanced? Or rather have they not possessed that place with
boldness? Are they not servants unprofitable, servant of their own and thy
unlawful desires? Are they not stains to thy friendship? Blemishes of thy
Empire rather then instruments and servants of a good government? If thou
acknowledgest any of these, thou must first accuse thy self before thou accuse
them; neither can thou marvel that this sort of men should show any
other thing then those they are furnished with. To conclude, it is no argument
of a Great PRINCE to have such friends, and surely what Mortal Man can expect
either truth or sincerity from those, who neuersomuch as heard of virtue,
being the bondslaues of vice; who with boldness have rusht into the council
of PRINCES, who scarce where ever known unto him, but by dangerous fawnings;
which only compass him about, that they may rob him; thus they begin.

First they blind the PRINCE with flattery; they not only power oil into
his ears (as the proverb is) but with their filthy mouths dangerous and
deadly poison, thus they proceed to deceive him; first by soothing, then by
scraping: if any aduersirie be at hand, these stand never sure to the Prince;
nor to the better cause, but to the stronger, and the greater faction. They
incline especially thither, whether gain, leuitie, and falsehood lead them;
they rest not in their watch-Towers, to yield themselves to their chief and
lawful Prince, but to him that shall conquer. These never seek what is
honest, but what is safe and profitable. But if thou desire, never to be
deceived, never to have the faith of subjects, to shrink from thee: If thou will be strong in Counsel; to conclude, if thou will have firm rule of
government; diligently inquire into the lives, the conditions, the fame of
those, whom thou admittest either into Counsel to thy self, or to the
government of the Common wealth, choose, and carefully choose not the most
popular and most in favor; but the best. These will counsel thee and persuade
good; but those will suggest ill. Thus shall the state of things be very good,
whilst thou thus gouernest; thou shall ingraft into thy contrie the true notes
of happiness. For when men shall understand, how hard it is to counsel such a
Prince, wholesome and profitable things: very few will think it belonges unto
them, to be admitted to this honor, to be of thy secret counsel; when men
shall observe that men only conspicuous, in wisdom and honesty are admitted
of the Prince and to the Prince, they will not floc^e unto thee in such
swarms. There is no man can so far forget himself, but that in his own
mind, he will think thus; who am I that should go about to be of counsel
with the Prince? What virtues am I furnished with-all answerable to so high a
place? Have I given any testimony of my life, of so profitable and honorable a
pains; that I should deserve that place, that I should be called into
counsel with him, who has the principal and chief government of things? How
often shall there be consultations of doubtful and uncertain things: when in
Courts, fears and terrors are thick dangers barking on every side, the^ what
is there in all my store of wisdom, learning, and experience, wherewith I may
ease either the Prince, or the Commonwealth. The more learned that every man
is, the more experienced, the wiser; the more earnest he is in such a cause,
in such a place at such a time. What part shall I play here of a wise man, or
of a fool? Or shall I not lay open my own ignorance and folly, shall not this
honor bestowed upon me, be like a wonder* these and such like true thoughts
will drive a man into a conscience of himself: therefore to aspire to such a
place, to such an honor, men must have fear, respect, modesty, things not ever
seen in the affectation of these places. Every man first must fear himself,
his own judgment, then the judgment of his most grave, and most wise prince:
then the judgment of all. Therefore there is no cause, why a Prince should
fear men of ill disposition, when his Court is not open to any such monsters,
when honors are not stayde either by selling them, or casting them upon
unworthy persons: but rather to mark and observe, men excellent in virtue,
although private and obscure, and to compel such (how unwilling soever) to
take the charge of government of things, and to be of his own Counsel.

Surely such a Prince, shall never be in danger of evil Counsels, and
untruths; for such will ever speak to him as it is. Thus excluding the
dregs, he shall make choice of the most sincere, and with a sharp eye, he
shall wound masked and counterfeit vices. For they shall not dare to mingle
themselves with virtues; which he shall ever have true; eminent and conspicuous
about him, with the help of these, he shall sustain the heavy troublesome
weight of government. Thus from the Court shall be banished continual boldness,
and Impudency. Now thou say (O Prince) that it is in thy own power; that
there be no bottomless gulphes in thy kingdom, which to fill up, thou shall be
brought to a dangerous poverty. Be bountiful, but not a waster: set unto thy
self Limittes for thy liberty: nor relieve not others, with thy bounty, but
such, as with true praises, may celebrate thy virtue. These will not secretly
break thy treasury, but silently deserve thy liberality. Then such a Court
shall vomit out no plague to infect the air; from whence are heapt together
pestilent clouds that do threaten storms and tempests. But there shall be a
perpetual and everlasting Seminary of most firm and sownd tranquillity. From
hence shall every man take example of life; there thou that art the Prince
shall shine as the sun amongst the other stars; the nobility shall look
into thy wisdom as into a bright and true glass; thy wisdom shall be
stronger then the craft of any; so far shall thou be from having the sins
and the vices of others imputed to thee. To conclude, all the darts of envy
(darts that are oftentimes dangerous) shall be rebaited and dull in the
sheeld of a public love, which shall make thee not to be wounded. Go to (O
Prince) give an assurance in thy whole life, that thou have cast an 'account
with thy Kingdom, as one ready to render an account to God, and men, and that
thou art not only, not a tyrant, but a defender of the public state, and so
consequently, that thou art the soul of the Empire, and that life that the
people breath. In one word, that thou art in the place of God, whom the good
love, and reverence as a father, the wicked fear as a seueire Judge. If thou
art endued with this understanding, with these virtues, no danger shall assault
thee, no treasons, no poisons, no murders. Valiant and most faithful guards
shall defend thee. Thy subjects love, and that which is thy inseparable
companion, a celestial grace. For what Prince soever is chaste, holy, and like
unto God, as he shall seem to be advanced to that place by God him self, so
evidently it will appear, that he is under the defense of the most high. This
is that strong and safest guard, which can never be moved against the life of
the Prince; which can never be corrupted with any reward, nor forced with any
violence, against the Prince his safety.

To These former I annex more arguments, that the Prince may learn by them to
acknowledge Gods goodness, and his great favors toward him. CHAP 19,
NOw to all these the last thing I can ad, is Fame; not a deceitful, and
trifling benefit, but that which alone takes the defense of every man's good
name against all the injuries of time: I confess it is a late recompense, and
the last reward, but with all, the greatest and the most precious, to this a
Prince ought to direct his chief care of government: for I see not what a
Prince should greatly desire besides this one thing; neither every kind of
fame, but that which is good. For any fame is great enough, if it be good
enough. This is that which to man prepares the way to immortality: nay, it
self is an Image, a beginning, and not the least part of eternity, with this
touchstone in the end every man's life and manners are tried: For seildome is
fame untrue, if it be Constant, and continual: Neither, do I call that fame,
which is but the indiscret rumors or the rash speech of the common people, or
the voices which are extorted from fear or violence; neither every estimation
of those that are present do I call fame: but the judgments of strangers, and
of late posterity: then both which nothing is more uncorrupted. whatsoever
thou art (O Prince) know that all that is placed in thy fame: This is to thee a
treasure much more precious then any metal: From hence do thou draw a
name, and honor, a memory of thee, not only continual, but continually
glorious. There is nothing which thou can carry from hence saving this.

If thou should be such a one, as all men do promise themselves of thee:
as all men would have thee to be, and to be accounted: such a one shall fame
report thee. A glass does not more truly represent the face, then the fame
does the man, especially thee, who can escape the judgments of none, because
thy brightness has set thee in the eyes, the speeches, the opinions of all, thy
life shall be looked into, thy wisdom shall be examined, thy manners shall be
sifted, and against thy will, thou shall be pictured in an open table, where
every eye (though not curious) may read thee, that is in the Chronicles, and
in those monuments which amongst posterities, must out-liue all memory: to
what end think thou? that every man may propound thee as an example, if of
virtue to be followed, if of vice to be eschewed; for as good fame follows
the name of a good Prince, so of a wicked, unfortunate, and never resting
stains, attend upon their ghosts, from the courses of posterity. Now choose
which thou will, whether those things which are written of thee, shall be read
to thy honor and praise, or to thy everlasting infamy, weigh and balance both
these, thou can not choose or eschew both; the one thou may avoid. I do
not think that thou art such an enemy to thy self, but that thou had
rather favor thy honor, then procure thy shame; that thou had rather be
esteemed virtuous, then dishonest. Therefore exercise this severe government
upon thy senses, upon thy affections, that there may be nothing, wherein thou
need to be behoulding to any: pardon thy self nothing, let there be
nothing, which any man may forgive thee. So excel amongst men, as thy honor,
thy dignity, thy power does, that thy honor may be above mortality, propound
unto men thy life, as a perpetual censure, build this commendation to thy
self, that thou (which deuidest honor to all) may worthily sit in that high
seat of honor thy self. As thy original shows thee to be Lord of many
countries, so let thy virtues assure men, that thou art a preferrer of them.
Never place more in thy will, then in equity; never more in force, then in
justice; gain unto thy self a good Name, which often flattery will not
affoorde unto thee, nor these riches which thou obtainest by entreaty, nor the
strength of thy mighty Kingdom, nor so many thousands of men warring for thy
safety; thy fame must be thy own gift. Vices will gain unto thee a fame
odious, and hateful, but virtues, honorable, and everlasting. Entreat this
fame of thy self; show in this, how favorable thou art to thy self, to thy
country. For the fame of the PRINCE is oftentimes the fame of his country: and
though fame (as I said) be the name of a future and late-lasting good, yet
notwithstanding thou in deserving well of the common wealth, inwardly shall
perceive those joys, which advance the best men, above the common delights of
the ignorant and base multitude. All Earthes shall speak of thee,
And sundry coasts shall register thy Name,
When times to come shall Chronicle the same.
Thus thou understand, how little acquaintance, thou ought to have with
sordide and infectious pleasures, which most of all do hurt him, whom most of
all they flatter, which effeminate any man, be he never so strong;
wheresoever thy are, from thence, strength both of the body and mind are
speedily banished; whosoever he is (be he never so valiant) after that
pleasures have laid hold upon him, he is nothing else, but the relikes and
shadow of that he was.

To conclude, pleasures do drown the mind in that gulf from whence it cannot
easily be freede. ^ye, what can be more unworthy, him that is beautified with
that honor to be called a man? what can be a greater enemy to him, who is a
Prince? Neither the armed troops, nor the enemy that has possessed the field,
or shaken the walls, is so much to be feared by a Prince, as this sorrow
making monster pleasure: These do not besiege the walls, but deceive the
senses; they come not a far off, but are at hand and within our selves; they
assault us not with foot, and horse, but they stir up our whole body and
all parts of it against the soul; I say they distract man and are authors of
a civil war within himself. In man's inward parts they fight so fiercely and
so treacherously, that the better, and more noble part of man is brought into
subjection to the worse; so that whilst man particularly dissenteth in
himself, he is wholly conquered; all brought under the rule of an other;
wholly compelled to yield altogether from himself; and plainly transformed
into a brute beast.

Therefore (O Prince) if thou desire that thy Name may be grateful, and
honorable to posterity, and from hence obtain joys, that are sound and
continual; if thou will have this dignity, to be a step to those happy and
everlasting rewards, that are reserved for good Princes; blow away and
disperse these dark clouds of vulgar and base pleasure which interposed
before thy eyes, eclipse from thee the sight of those heavenly joys: If thou
at any time be brought into a true contemplation of these, then thou would
not know what those impure pleasures are, which are allotted to sordide and
base persons. Let them keep unto themselves that which is fit for them,
undergo thou that difficult labor, in the end whereof there is true
felicity. It is every man's work to look at that which is before his feet,
But it is thy office, to look further and to aim higher, and those things
which are either behind or beneath thee (as being over base) not once to
regard them.

Surely whosoever is drawn thoroughly with the love of heavenly things, can be
no more entangled in these base and vile desires, then an Aeagle in the small
threades of a spyders web. Therefore resolve thy self, that no base thing is
to be thought of by thee; that nothing is to be desired of thee, which is not
great and excellent. And last of all, that nothing is to be esteemed great by
thee, which is not indeed such in the judgments of all. Thus shall thou
obtain, that thy wishes shall be worthy thy self, and that place which thou
sustainest; and in the highest place, thou shall obtain the highest honor.

Thus, if thou never sever thy wishes from the common wishes; if thou intendest
nothing, that is of a private and unlawful hope, if thou equalest thy hopes to
the rule of right; al men will strive, who shall most further them: he will
think to have gained much unto himself, who shall approve himself most to
thee: who shall perform to thee most labor, most study, most service. Thus
walking this way, thou shall never be thrust into those headlong and dangerous
downfalles; thou shall covet nothing that is another; thou shall never take
arms for glory, and only to boast thy greatness and power: Cover not thy ill
ambition with false names; think it not a Kingly thing to strive for that
which is an others, and inglorious only to defend thine own: but proceed
unwillingly (and as it wear compelled with the malice of those with whom thou
have to deal) to revenge public injuries, and recover the right of thy
kingdom from unjust possessours, with a virtuous and religious war. Admit
for thy companions not headlong Covetousness, and blind desire, but duty, and
fortitude; and then doubt not, but thou shall break open those passages that
are shut; thou shall go through those paths that are beset; thou shall make
plain those places that are uneven; and easily escape all difficulties
whatsoever; in one word, what course soever thou take, it is sure to be
ballanst and certain. The reason is manifest, because all things are easy,
obuious, and open to these two virtues, Justice and Fortitude. And as
infelicity, repentance, and sorrow are usually the end of wicked and unwise
designs, so victory, success, and felicity, are the recompense of those
actions that are well begun. If these and such like thoughts, be firmly rooted
in thy inward soul, thou (whosoever thou art that sit in the throne of
Majesty) if thou professest the fear of GOD, if thou crauest his holy spirit,
to be the author of thy council, and the directour of thy life, thy mind
(doubtless) shall be purified, and all blemishes of an unthankful mind being
removed, and thy eyes cleared, thou shall then perceive those heavenly and
happy gifts wherewith thou art compased, and advanced to that honor. Thus
banishing all inward blindness, thou shall not measure this place with his
watchful cares, with his ungrateful labors; not with the liberties of vices
not in the opertunities of pleasure, but in the occasions of just advantages
of well deserving of mankind, which is the only and chief end of
Souereignity, and by this means thou shall give just, and deserved thanks
with due honor, and a grateful full mind, to the KING of all kings, who is
only most great, and most wise.

Here I show how this sin of unthankfulness, is ingrafted in man's nature, in
that Children are not less unthankful then others. CHAP. 20.
I Did think that I had finished this labor of rehearsing, of admonishing, of
chastising ungrateful persons; and I was ready to lay aside my pen; when
behold sudainely I saw a great troup of unthankful creatures, and indeed such
a one, as that those who^ I have reckoned already, are but few in comparison of
these. If I should go about to rehearse them, all the day would hide it
self, before I had fully acomplisht half: And indeed as many men as I see,
so many men likewise do I see unthankful, wicked, and injurious esteemers of
those benefits that they have received; Nay I do not except him, who although
he can scarce speak, yet even the words of his infancy are but lamentatio^s of
that misery which he faineth to himself, and being so little, yet he carries
a heart swelling, and full of anger. He scarce is, and yet he is altogether
unthankful. Oh happy (says he) are men which do live at their own
disposition, and are not kept in this hard government of Parents; or of those
to whom their parents have committed the chardge. Oh what ill luck have I,
who, if I desire any thing, be it never so small, and such a thing as without
loss to any may be given un to me, yet it is either denied me proudly, or by
force taken or secretly conuaied from me, only of purpose to cross me. There
is no man that is elder then I, which does not as it were of right, with a
kind of boldness, challenge authority over me; the basest flaue in the house
is made more account of then I, that am appointed to be the heir: All men
abuse my weakness, my tenderness, my simplicity; There is scarce any man that
thinks it fit to please, or obey me; I must ever hear sharp words, hard,
bitter, and cruel speeches, as peace, hear, come hither, go, do this, do not
that, take heed sirrah: and such like. I see nothing but teachers and
correctours every where (that is vexers and tormenters of this young age): and
if I do any thing childishly, or speak or do any thing merrily, O bold boy
(they say) They threaten, and indeed beat me; my nurse when I was a child did
wrappe up my body straightly in my swaddling clothes; but now is all that liberty
more straightly shut up, which I ought to have had from my mothers womb; I must
now live at others men's direction, at other men's pleasures; if this be to
live, thus to live under so unjust and cruel government. And thus am I used,
although I see and know well enough, what is fit to be done, and for any
thing that I see, me thinks I have more wit and understanding then these
ancient folk, which seem to be so wise, which speak nothing but these old
doting sayings, ever imposing hardness upon me, labor, study, watching,
manners, respect of my elders, and all sad and hard things. And all these
things (say they) belong to virtue: When indeed they know not what virtue is.

This I am sure of, that by this means they take unjustly from me my
pleasures, my play, my delight; thus obstinatly they deal, to take me from my
pleasure, whilst they seek not only to keep me from being merry, but hardly
and straightly keep me in, imposing upon me at these years ancient and grave
behavior: Neither do they consider that by this means, they do weaken that
liberal, and ingenious disposition, which I know no comparison of others, to
be in me: Shall I never come out of this bondage and government? Shall I
never live at my own pleasure? Must I ever be ruld by others? They call also
in derision the scoole a play; were we scarce play, but I am put thither, that
they may play Ludus.
upon my skin; and such as I am. A play indeed, nay a most unpleasant place
where still I am either beaten, or afraid; There I must ever live under a
tyrant, who if he inflict any punishment, I cannot appeal from him, he
himself accuses, subscribeth, inquireth, knows, and punishes.

Thus do their ieastinges prove earnest to us, and in their confidence they
rule in this play as if they were in earnest. Thou shall never see them, but
frowning to terrify us. But alas, what learn we there, and against our
wills to? what reward have we of this daily and continual labor? and of
such vexation? unless peradventure they think it concerns the Commonwealth,
to have our tender wits wrapped up in these trifles, and to stick fast in
these rough thornie quidities of Grammar: For what else shall I call these
letters, syllable, nownes, verbes, inflections, coniugations, terminations,
cases, tenses, Syntaxis, exceptions, and to conclude whatsoever else is
contained in those harse rules of Grammar? Which (notwithstanding) they urge
and boast of, as a thing serious, and the hight of all learning. Must our wits
be thus miserably tormenmed, as though there were nothing, which could more
pleasantly be learned, or more profitablie be known? Is this that advantage
that I have to be borne nobly, or honestly as I am? I would to God I had
been borne in some poor cottage, in no reckoning, or account, there might I
have lived more at liberty: there every man is wife enough without a teacher:
there is no such word, as a more liberal education, which I think to be
hard servitude: there no man is kept in so straightly: neither are manners there
so carefully and exactly squared by the rules of this scrupelous and odious
civility, which destroys the manners, which men have by nature, and changes
them into feined counterfeite and composed manners, which you may better call a
counterfaiting of an ingenious disposition.

There those that are my equalles live with little respect, or reverence to
their parents and elders: there every man follows his natural liberty: at
least they are freed from this fear, which continually makes me sweat, and no
marvel, if I bring out my words slowly, and stumblingly: if (never at my
own government) I live a life unpleasant, and unsweet. But (they say) this is
the way to honesty, to honor, to dignity, whatsoever in man's life is rare, to
be wished for, to be admired, it is propounded, and allotted to no other,
then those who have their childhood and youth trained in those learnings.

These or such like every unskillful fellow urges, warranted by authority,
rather then reason; because they make a fair show, which I can never be
persuaded are truly spoken: so far do my senses not only abhor from these
things, but from the memory of them. Well, howsoever it is, I think they are
not of that value to be bought at so deire a price.

Hear I do teach the child how he may lay aside this infection, and show
himself thankful unto God, CHAP. 21
SVrely I marvel, how these ill thoughts so soon creep into so young a
mind; which being corrupted: I do less marvel, such speeches to come into a
mouth so prattling, and full of talk. Hear my son: if yet, thou art not full
of goodness (for from whence should thou have it)? yet thou ought to be
void of evil. But thou (in the very entrance) showest how ready thou art to
evil, whilst thou professest those things, from which, if modesty could not,
yet the knowledge of thy own ignorance, ought to restrain thee. But as in a
fruitful soil, poisoned weeds do grow of their own accord, when as
wholesome herbs scarce grow with out tilling, so in the mind of man, if
discipline and wholesome precepts do not first possess him, there may be
easily reaped a harvest of much ill, which I do observe in thee at this time;
Thou disdaynest that thou live at an other man's government. Here let me ask
of thee, if thou know what it is to live. I know, thou will answer me that
to live is nothing else but to be: For those that are dead are not: Consider in
this speech how much ignorance thou bewrayest, thus things without life do
live, because they are, why do thou blush? I know thou wishest it unspoken,
this wit of thine, does in this discover his ignorance; take heed therefore
that thou do not say; that thou live because thou art: I confess nothing
has life, but that which is, but to man there must something more be added to
make him live, not the life of plants, herbs, and such like, nor the life of
beasts, but of men, the life of man is the society, and union both of body
and soul. The soul is a divine breath, which infused into the body does move
it with his own and proper motion.

Therefore thou may call man a body animated, or rather a reasonable soul
composed with a body, given unto it for his governor. Therefore when weesay
man lives, we do not say man only uses the offices of the body, but of the
soul, which possesses the body as an instrument, or a se^uant, or a slave:
If then thou understand what are the offices of the soul, thou shall
observe that the same are the offices of the whole man: this does the soul, at
this it aymeth, to make it self, and the body (that is the whole man) like
unto God. So that, humanity is nothing else, but a certain divinity, expressed
in this mortal flesh: now with what steps do thou think do we ascend into
this high dignity? Surely, with piety and good manners, piety we have said
to be a true knowledge and worship of God: manners are the fruits and effects
of piety, or rather a piety, which seasons the affections, from whence it is
dispersed into the senses; then seeing to live, is nothing else but daily to be
purgd, to wax pure, to be lifted up, and more united to God; man (in his life)
ought to propound no other thing but piety and reformation of his manners: to
be endued with these not of any sort, but with the least, the most chaste, the
most severe, the most holy.

Thus thou see, that thou art not borne by chance, but of purpose and to a
great end, namely that thou may be come religious, and holy, and a renewed
Image of that Diety, that framed thee.

Now I demand of thee, if thou of thy self know what these are, which I
have named piety and manners. I think thou will answer, that thou know not
those things, which thou can not know, unless thou learn them; and now thou
confessest that thou art ignorant of virtue, which is nothing else but a Piety
working in the inward man, and showinge it self forth in his life, in one
word, virtue is nothing else, but active piety. Now thou must needs confess
that thou know not what it is to live, be not afraid to confess it, It is
an excellent thing (says Columella) and he is a wise and a skillful writer,
who understands that he is ignorant of that he knows not, and desires to
learn that, whereof he is ignorant, If thou art ignorant, thou art to be
taught, and to be instructed.

Dislike not this speech as too hard. For in the increase of years, and when
thou have more experience, thou shall find thy self full of rashness and
overmuch love; what art thou to be taught? to know to love, to follow God, and
consequently to avoid those things which God hates and abhors. These are
the true effects of that Piety, which I have spoken off; and until thou
come to this degree of knowledge and virtue (believe me) thou art not a man,
but half a wild beast; that is a man's body in shape, but inwardly full of
sauadge, and wild behavior. Therefore if thou will be wholly a man, not half a
man, and half a beast, yield thy self wholly into the gouerme^t of thy soul;
let thy soul with the bridle of reason, rule thy affections; let thy
affections command thy senses, then shall thy senses be contained within the
lymittes and bounds of chastity, holiness, Innocence; they shall be such as is
fit, for those that are servants to the soul, Thus thou shall frame Pyety unto
thy self, that most holy good, and the fountain of all good things. From
Pyety, Holiness is dispersed into the manners; both these ways directly lead
us to that most happy estate which I have spoken of before, which is a
likeness of God. Thus according to that towardness that is in thee, thou art
wholly to be stirred up, wholly to be inflamed, with an honest desire, to lay
aside whatsoever sauadge disposition is in thee; that thou may be wholly a
man, and from being a man be translated into God. I do see thy mind which out
goes thy age, I see thy sparks of gentility, which if thou follow rightly,
doubtless thou shall attain this honor. I see those branches of virtue in
thee, swelling full ready to burst forth. I do see the blossoms forerunners
of thy shining virtue; therefore proceed to lend thy mind and thy ears to my
council, thither, whither thou must go, nothing can bring thee but severity
of education. The ground (though it be fruitful) yet it is tamed with the
plough; the clods must be broken, harrowed, and the whole field duly husbanded;
in this manner there must be a violence done to thee; thy wit must be manured,
which though it be good, yet till then it is untilled and full of thorns, from
thence must be weeded whatsoever is hurtful; oftentimes must it be turned
over, and brought under, that it may be civil, soft and tender; that it may
be bettered and fit for to receive good seed; this is the digging and pruning
of it, to c^ off that which is superfluous, luxuriant, and hurtful; in the
country this is done in the earth; in the vine, in the branches, in the trees;
with thee, in the mind, in the affections, in the senses, in the words, in the
manners. This is never done, without much weariness of the husbandmen, and not
without some vexation unto thee; whilst the person is cured, they set far
from him the touch of those meats which are not only apparently hurtful, but
of those which are somewhat unwholesome; the one overthrow the strength of
medecines, the other hinder it; so, when the wit is tamed with the force of
education, with all, thou art to be drawn from thy desires, thy delights,
thy pleasures, thy insolent spirits are to be suppressed, and kept under, thy
insulting and quick wit is to be contained within the bonds of frugality and
modesty; amongst all virtues there are none fitter for that age, none fitter to
receive learning; thy opinion being at that years (if thou have any) is to be
directed by the sentence and will of an other; thou must of necessity wholly
depend upon the judgment of those, to whom thou art committed; these are
those careful workmen, of so great a task; who undertake to perfect, and
finish what nature has begun; Doubtless thou art thrice happy, if timely
thou gainest this discipline, and indeed more severe and more sincere, by the
help whereof thou shall pass those shallowes of sin, and wickedness
wherein so many men (although well instructed) unfortunately sink; whose
masters have not so much instructed their toward dispositions, as have armed
their vices; I will use the examples of great men, Alcibiades and Crycias (the
daily auditors of Zocrates) were principally instructed, who can deny it? Yet
neither of them was honest, Nay both rather the reproach and stain, not only
of their families, but of the Commonwealth. For the one assaulted his
country, and with the others riches was the liberty of it shaken. What shall I
say of Nero? was there ever any man better taught? Did ever any man live more
monstrously? I could easily remember many such out of ancient and late
stories, and I would do it, if it were not needelesse to teach a thing so
well known, that many have proved very far unlike to their beginninges and
their first education.

Now what do you think shall happen to them, which are left to themselves?
Who are left neglected, and untaught? In how dangerous, how slippery, how
headelong a place are they? Are they not withal laid open to a World of
vices, to the froth of infecting pleasures, to the dangerous tempests of sin?
Must not these expect in the end, an inevitable shiep-wracke? not to detain
thee long, it must be confessed, that without discipline, men are not made men,
but forged the unhappy and deformed brood of villainy, and so the hateful
procurers of Gods wrath. Moreover thou complainest, that thy manners are
severely corrected, and thy wits informed into wisdom with ancient rigor
and strict discipline, least they should be weakened and deformed with vices.
Surely if it be not done at this time (and with all speed) it will never be
done. It is once done, that it need not ever be done; and it is done now,
that it may not be done too late, For it is much to be accustomed to any
thing, when one is young, I do not deny but amidst the cares of manners, and the
study of learning, remission of labor, play and recreation are to be granted
to thee; so that, that whatsoever be, be done warily, moderatly, and tempred
with holiness, and modesty. Therefore the first and most laboursome work of
thy educatio^, is in sweeping, purging and preparing of thee: Next unto this,
is another care not much less, sowing, planting, ingrafting in thee, and such
like; for it is to little purpose to plough, unless thou sow; to pull up,
unless thou plant: to prune, unless thou ingraft; these offices as far forth
as they belong to thy education, are earnest and seasonable admonitions,
wholesome precepts, which are an effectual means of persuading, and of
instilling into the mind that fear and reverence of God, which is the
possessour of a pure heart, and a chaste mind, the worker of all holiness, and
to conclude the reconciler of God and man.

From hence it follows, that that which we call learning, leads him
directly unto this. Now learning no man thoroughly obtains, without the help
of severe discipline, which thou lately blamedst; one part of learning is the
knowledge of things created, and of all those things which are without us; but
there is an other part, which is more inward, true, and better, which is the
true knowledge of God, and of himself, so far as the mind of man is capable
of them, this knowledge we call true wisdom: which then truly is so, when
there cleaves to it a true strength of the mind, gathered and collected from
true precepts, and worthy and honorable examples. This is that which good
learning promises, and performs, not to every learner, but only to him,
whose good and fortunate wi^ has admitted learning, that it may be as a help
to a good mind. Now when I say learning, I mean no such thing as the vulgar
think, that is, a vain ostentation of learned schollership, that which
furthereth a man nothing to the fear of God; that learning for which so many
insolent and triuiall Saterists knit their brows, as men busied in most
weighty affairs, when indeed all that great noise they make, is nothing else,
but swelling and importunity: and no thing more unlearned then such learning.
Neither do I mean that learning, which has buried those ancient manners;
the forerunners of lust (which these effeminate half learned men, that have an
itch of Poetizing) long since, have made a band of it. Let this learning pack
hence which is nothing but a corrupter to wantonness. Neither do I mean that
learning which he uses, who at this day is a great man: Who with all care
great riches does obtain
Before learned labor, still preferring gain


Nor to conclude that dross and scum of learning, or whatsoever in learning,
profitable may be unknown. That I account learning, which so beautifieth a
man outwardly, that inwardly it does arm him, and instruct him, whether he
speak or hold his peace: silent in manners, and innocence: speaking in
wisdom and eloquence. Now to learning, there is no entrance, but by Grammar;
I confess the entrance to Grammar is so hard, so thorny, that it seems to be
without any path, there is nothing can delight him that comes to it, but
merely Hope. Hope sure and near. And as amongst thorns oftentimes are
gathered sweet roses, so by the knotty and unpleasant paths of Grammar, we
come to the sweetness of pure, and reformed speech: From hence to the
knowledge of those arts, which do carry a man to that knowledge of God,
whereof mortality is capable.

Therefore, that which now thou fear as hard, hereafter thou will embrace as
pleasant; that which is now horrid and ill sauoured; after, thou shall see the
same beautiful, that which thou call dry, and barren, thou will marvel
for the plenty of it to be so fruitful, and for the profit to be so sweet,
Doubt not but honey follows this gall; the time will come, and it is not far
of, when having power over thy self, thou shall understand these things to be
truly and holesomely spoken. Neither then will thou complain to be called to
an account, for that which thou do childishly and ignorantly; thou will not
then wish thy self borne in that estate and condition, where childishness and
all thy other time may be spent without shame of offending, without fear, and
reverence of thy betters; without teaching, without hope of any after-reward;
thou will then confess that fear to be a profitable affection, and an
ornament; not a sign of thy nobility, or a title of thy kindred, but a great
and a very honou^able token of that ingenious docility, and virtuous capacity,
that is ingrafted in thee. This respect and reverence a pledge of thy future
modesty, the embracing of these liberal arts, to be the approaching harvest
of much virtue; the hope of reward and the sure guide; that leads to reward,
what shall I use many words? That which now seems unto thee a hard servitude,
is a svveete condition; This is the hie way to true liberty. This fear
begets true joy; learn my son hereafter to be as thankful; as thou
have now showed thy self unthankful, lay quite aside this wantonness in
time; take to thy self thoughts, simple, pure, honest and upright. Humbly
worship God, to whom thou art so dear and intimate, who that thou may be
perpetually his, will have thee (being young) framed like unto himself, and by
that means (unwillingly, and striving against) yet of wit docible and capable
to bring thee unto him. Next unto God, reverence thy parents, and all those,
who are placed over thee, as domestical magistrates, who in care and good-wil
succeed in the place of parents, and bring thee up liberally and ingeniously,
that thou may one day give full assurance, that thou weart profitably borne to
thy self and the common wealth. Of these thou must confess, that thou art
beloved, and beloved again; when they do load thee (who art but half a man)
with those gifts of the mind; that thou may be a whole man, in every respect
absolute; and so wholly dedicate thy self to God, that thou may whole ly be
pyety, and holiness, which is the full perfection of all Humane felicity.

Hear I do teach that weomen are not less unthankful then those, whom I
have remembered. CHAP 22
IN this cause, and in this kind, a woman is next unto a child. Few do
co^taine their hopes, few their speeches, in the bounds of womanly modesty,
and the shamefastness of their sex, whilst they complain, that they are
unworthily used; whilst they are vnmeasurably angry at their sex, as being
weak and unequal to their great minds. In one word, whilst they (from minds
not to be comforted) complain that they are weomen, they accuse openly and
greatly God, that did thus make them. There is scarce any, who have not these
and the like thoughts in them. Oh, woe is me, why was I not borne a man, who
have a mind not unfit for any thing. Must I be tied to this sex which is a
bondslaue to idleness, and sloth? What do I (wretch that I am) follow virtue,
to whom nature has given no generous spirits? And which least they should show
themselves, they must against my will be choakt and suppressed? Why fool that I
am do I aspire to any honor, to any renown, or a reward of virtue, to whom
all the passages of virtue are shut up? O vain instinct, O noble spirits,
ingrafted in me idly, which are confinde in that short room of this obeying
sex, whereof I am grieved, ashamed, and repent.

There is great in aequallitie in a mind that is not weak, and a condition so
much to be repented of: Thus have we a perpetual conflict with our selves,
and a cruel torment wherewith we are afflicted. If I may say it, to what end
have we so much acuteness, sharpness, understanding and quickenesse
granted to us? To what purpose have we such a nimble wit, such a swift
mind? But that these things may be a torment to us, by whose means we
understand those things which we are kept from? Is it not that we may be
unprofitably angry at other men's ignorance and sloth, that we seriously may
grieve to see dull and slothful heads possess those rooms, that belong
unto us. For what profit is it to know, that which it is in vain to know? to
be able to use that which we must not touch? to strive to go thither, from
whence we are kept back? we are forbidden the knowledge and profession of
liberal arts: we^ are comm^nded to abstain from public offices: we cannot
attain to the honor due to wars, nor those valiant acts; because forsooth
in these things, there is most virtue which they say is derived from hence, in
that it belonges unto men.

Is it not plain that we are excluded from all hope of honor, and from all
those things which are greatest and most to be desired? which things being
taken from us; what is there left us for which our condition may seem (I do
not say to be wished for) but to be tolerable. We are set to trifles,
wherewith in the mean time we are delighted as children with fair speeches
and flattery; with which we are laden, whilst we are robbed of true
praise, and that which is mos^ to be lamented, we are partners in those
things, wherein men gain their most praise, and yet they ascribe it only to
themselves: where we have any thing to do, there is nothing of any moment.

And it is no maruayle, if we be admitted into no society of name and honor
with men,

The praise of whole Countries belonges unto men, only Tryumphes, victories,
all honors they are men's: and we (as all other things) are but the aditions of
those praises that are given to men. But this indignity (mark their craft)
they mitigate with the len^tie of words, whilst they call us wives, fellows,
and their co^io^s in all things; when indeed (if a man esteem it rightly)
there is no equality betwixt us and them, no communion of dignity and
authority, but that which is trifling and in name only. Whereas indeed we
are reckoned up amongst other ordinary household stuff, little better then
bondslaues, and yet for the burden and labor, we have more then the greater
part; And as we are kept from all good things, so we bear almost alone all the
burden of their ill. If men have begun any thing that they cannot go through,
we must finish it: If they offend abroad, we must smart for it at home: the
sorrow of their mad pleasures lights upon us; Men, they have the pleasurs,
the delights; but we have the sorrow, we have the tears; men, they have the
reward of their labors, we only have the necessity of it: Our frugalitie
must maintain their riot, our obedience must increase their licentiousnes, our
modesty their fear^enes: whilst every one of them pleases himself, and
takes delight in whatsoever pleases him, we (in the mean time) si^te like
lambs, cripples within our doors, not Idle, but commanded to take care of the
house, and set unto those businesses, wherein there is nothing but plain
bondage. This is that, which increases our grief: for in the house, what
tedious servitude are we tide unto? First of all, the education of our
children is referd unto us, which is some ease of the intolerable labors of
child birth; In this, our husbands do notably abuse our affections, for because
we are mothers, they say this burden belonges to the mother only, which
indeed were fit aequally to be borne of both? and as we are daughters, we are
immediately as an unprofitable burden put out of our fathers house, and sent to
live with strangers; thus we go from the government of our parents into the
hands of our husbands, new Lords, whose dispositions (how cross soever) we
must suffer even against our wills; and without any hope of a more tolerable
condition: If we be widows, then are we subject to wrongs, and laid open
without defense to all injuries, and reproaches, forsaken of all, yea,
oftentimes of those, of whom it is little fit we should: I grant, there are
some things granted unto as great favors, which indeed may be reckoned
amongst those scoffs, and derisions that are used toward us; that is our
cleanelines, and ornaments, and all those furnitures which they call the woman's
world; thus are we decked like painted birds, only to please others. And as
children have toys given to please them, so are we thus painted only to
content our husbands: May not any man see these scoffinges? Is it not enough
that we are contemned, but we must be thus made a scorn and derision? We are
forbidden to meddle with any thing; we are kept from public offices, we are
never suffered to come abroad, but as some solemn pomp which is carried to be
seen; we are forbidden to obtain those commendations which are true praises,
we are shut up in our houses as perpetual prisoners, we are by the name of
wives subject to other pleasures, brought under an unjust government. Thus do
they abuse our simplicity. In one word, if you respect either beauty, or
wit, we must confess we are placed high enough, but from thence we are
cast down, to that low estate, that we have lost all that is excellent.

Here the woman is diligently admonished that omitting all unjust complaints
against God, she acknowledges that the benefits bestowed upon her, are not
less; then those bestowed upon men. CHAP. 23.
Idoe hear this old complaint, not therefore just because it is old, but in
this the more unjust, in that it is more common, and more usual: Thou ought
long since (O woman) to have understood the dignity of thy condition; and
this knowledge long since ought to have been a bridle to thy untamed mind, to
thy foolishnes, licentiousnes, and to thy intemperate tongue.

Thou ought long since to have known, that thou art a man, the^ whom (in
that he is the second from god) there is no creature upon earth more high, more
exlent; this very name (man) ought to have taken away al emulation; seeing to
man there can be none with himself: Neither art thou only the sister of man,
but man's twinn, or rather (if thou will so have it) another man; not less in
dignity then that first, but only in the order of birth later, in sex
distinguished from him, but proceeding from the same high power, wrought by the
same hand of that great workman, made of the same beginning, both linckt to
one another, in that, neither goes contrary ways, neither aiming at
himself, but both (nature being their guide) lincked to his mate, both agree
in this neerenes, or rather unity, in wishes, intent, in love, that this
Common wealth of mankind may not be rent in factions, but in many kinds,
preserving an unity: and that, that Image of God may remain one, and the
same, not in one man, but (which is more excellent) in all.

Seeing then, from the same beginninges thou art brought by the same means, to
the same end, whereunto all mortality tends, see how far thou di^entest, not
only from man, but from humanity, when thou do so malipertly complain that
thou art endued with a soul degenerous and fit for nothing. Consider here (if
thou art not much deceived;) thou shall not degenerate, if thou d^st neither
depart nor dissent from the author, if in humility thou submittest thy neck
to that yoke thou art appointed, if constantly, thou bear this without
complaining* not to be degenerous (be not deceived) is not to meddle above
thy reach; but to contain thy self within the limits of thy duty, not to
wander from thy first beginnings, not to be unlike thy self, but firmly and
continually, to apply that, to which thou ar^ allotted. Now consider with me
what is that task that GOD has set thee unto; thou art made to this end,
that thou may be an other man, if thou art another, thou can not be the
first, therefore constantly keep that place, that is allotted to thee; that
which is another, belonges nothing to thee. For there is nothing more
acceptable to God, then for all men to act those parts, that are committed to
them: This thy sex is that great and large theator, wherein all this must be
done: Out of this, thou art out of thy part, thou art nothing, thou can not
please God: To this sex is appointed to watch; to this watch, diligence; to
both fear. What moves thee (O thou wretch) that thou art to be a r^agate
from this so profitable an affection? what looseness is this of thy weak
mind, that thou which art borne to care, and watchfulness, should serve
boldness, and ^ircenesse? Instead of a mind firm and constant, to take unto
thy self a mind degenerous? that departing from it self, taking care of
other things and forgetting her own, that thou art placed in safety go into
a place slippery, and so headlong and full of rocks. Surely one that is so
borne, nothing does so well beseem them, as a disposition quiet and modest;
whereof thou art well admonisht by thy habit, in that thou art maskt and hooded.
As soon as thou art desirous of rule, and seek to deal with those things
that are above thy strength and capacity; and as soon as by incountring
dangers thou will show how valiant and strong thou art; thou do put off that
woman, that God made thee, and putst upon thee, I know not what shape of a
mo^ster, thou can not lay aside thy womanish disposition, but thou stainest
it with manlike vices; neither is it strange, if all men abhor that kind of
women as unlikely, which laying aside their modest garments and behavior, put
themselves in armor, commanding their troops of soldiers, challenging the
enemy; which have such foreheads that they dare make long orations to the
people, to give laws; and to conclude: handle all public and civil duties;
this sex ought to be acquainted with none of these actions; these motions,
nature has denied unto them: If any Woman over impudently affect these,
ouer-uiolently be carried to this course, she is no more a Woman, but an
untamed creature, which treads under foot all Womanish ornaments. But thou
say all these praises men have. Indeed it is so, and rightly by order, for
the good of the common wealth, And as becomes men: it belongs unto a man with
valiant acts to make way to those honors, without which, their virtues are
nothing else but sloth, for every power of the mind that has not his end
propounded does wax faint, and if no man does affect praise, if no man desire
to be made Noble by dangers, If virtue have nothing to awake it, straight all
society of life is troubled and confused, the Common wealth is left to be
torn in pieces, by every base fellow. There is nothing sacred or holy, no man
shall have any substance: outrages shall possess all places: boldness shall
challenge all things to it self: to conclude, we shall never live a life safe,
and secure; but wandering and full of scarcity. Therefore God has prouidently
ingrafted in men this desire of performing hard things, and so of obtaining
praise: the worker of those things which in this mortality are greatest. I do
not think in this there is an envy that does trouble thee; for so thou
enuiest thy self, so thou should look asquint at thy own good, there is
nothing with thee severed from thy husband. No not thy being; nor any of these
things which belong unto thee, or wherein thy safety and welfare consists.
Being thus admitted to be his companion of his goods, thou art admitted into
fellowship of his good nesse, and of his praise, and art honored with that
glory which thy husband does cast upon thee: neither is it strange, if both
your wishes be contained in either, If thou pertakest with his prosperity and
adversity. For thou can not if thou would put off this mind, nor
abrogate this law of Nature; nay nor break this same league; these same
tauntes and disdainefull gaulings of the mind, which so much trouble thee,
account them no more to be the effects of true gentility then mushroomes,
burres, thistels, and such like are to be termed fruits. Take heed that thou
do not forget that modesty, which is more gracious then any favor, and
fairer then any beauty. Thou can not ascribe too much to thy self, but with
all thou must despise thy husband; and how far thou departest from fear,
shame and respect; so far thou departest from those virtues, which may truly
be called jewels, of that sex, precious without cost, and so precious, that
they ought to be esteemed as life, and ransomed with death. Therefore this
violence of mind, unprofitable and unseemly, contain within the bovndes and
limits of modesty; be not over witty to abuse those good-gifts that nature
has lent thee, make not unto thy self a needelesse business: but wholly
addict thy self to his love and obedience, to whom this sex of thine has tied
thee; especially to that divine will, wherein it is fit, all humane desires be
extinguished: if thy care be any, let it be this, to cut off all womanish
complaint, and foolish wrangling, never be puffed up with inconsiderate
violence, never trouble thy self with an needelesse labor: whatsoever likes
thy husband let it please thee: wherein he places thy name, dignity and honor
in that rest. To conclude, so resolve, that as he is born to the commonwealth,
so thou art borne to him. For God will have our whole life contained in these
limittes, Commandment and Obedience. These are those two firm bonds,
wherewith all humane society is tied. God commands and man obeieth. But
that, due obedience may be given to that wise Creator of all things, he has
given and disposed to every man his special chardge; to men, to be Gods
vicegerents; to women, to be men's helpers; thou can not inuert this order,
but thou must be equal to thy husband. For when thou ceasest to obey, thou
beginnest to be his equal; if equal, to be his superior, if his superior,
surely to be his worse, because thou will be wise otherwise then GOD has
appointed; who would have both you to live in obedience to him, and betwixt
your selves in that order which he has set down, and to those that do this,
he has submitted all this (how great soever) frame of his creatures; and has
allotted to you wisdom, and understanding fit for it; to him, what is fit for
commanding, to thee, what is for obeying; hence it is that thou ought to
permit unto thy husband all the government of thy mind, and the strength of
it; neither think that thy husband does ad more to your common good, by this
knowledge and power of commanding, but thou do as much by thy diligence of
obeying; and in that thou art not hazarded in public dangers, know that this
is for thy honor, who as a more precious vessel, art kept safer. To what end
then are so many complaints? what mean this foolish quarreling with God? How
art thou become so talkeatiue? so ingenious? so subtle, in reproach and
dishonor of that sacred power? Do thou diligently observe those virtues,
which are the ornaments of thy sex? Do thou think those small which are
reckoned amongst the greatest honors, because the greatest cannot be without
them? Do not herein shine those never enough esteemed ornaments, which have
advanced some women to the highest honor? amongst these I must account those
Women who excel in this, that they respect the bringing up of their
children; whereof that thou art made an ouerseer, believe me the greatest
business of all is committed to thee; for Education is nothing else but the
information of the whole life, which way this leans, doubtless that way does
a man bend. A diligent and innocent education usually makes men good; but a
negligent and wicked, makes them evil. Education is contained in the motherly
affection, diligence, looking to, admonitions, chastenings: all these things
(in the tenderness of age) do draw the first lines of virtue or vice, those
stains or honors that after rest upon our lives, here do first take root.
Now consider how much is committed to thee, to whom the whole man is committed.
Do thou then complain that thou art evil dealt with all, and that thy
virtues are shut up in a narrow room? Doubtless this is a place large and
conspitious, where thou may show them as thou do use thy care; this is no
servile office, all things in this are not only ingenious, but full of honor,
surely man of both kinds, when he considers his birth; rises to thee, does
reverence and does worship thee, as his parent, and a parent in a two fold
respect, both by the office of nature and the dignity of bringing up. For it
were little that hope committed to thee in thy womb, by thy husband with a
happy success to bring into the World, if this latter care also were not
added, which forms and frames the mind to all humanity. Oh honorable name
of a parent, O excellent prerogative of that mother of the family, with whose
virtues the whole house does shine: Oh happy family, wherein the sayings of a
choice and wise Woman, are so many instructions, and her deeds so many virtuous
examples of religion, chastity, and holiness, to this may be added the care
of looking to the house, which thou may perform with frugalitie and sparing.
These are those virtues, whereunto if thou apply thy whole mind, thou shall
gain unto thy self nobility, and honor; these are those things which
nature, manners, laws, impose upon women and these businesses and cares
oftentimes exclude those vices, which are usually incident to that sex; wilful
leuity, motions variable and inconstant, prattling, preposterous ambition, by
themselves, by their husbands, by their children, in their power much
weakness, impatiency of delay, sickness of hope, wantonness; ready anger,
riot, boldness, confidence an immoderate mind, and all those other monsters
that do rise from these; wherewith too many laying aside all modesty, doubt
not to stain their womanish ornaments. Besides, oftentimes this sex is lifted
up, to the noblest virtues; yea, many times the most honorable virtues are more
conspicuous and eminent in women, then in men The Greeks did fear
Pentheseleas hand,
The walls of Carthage did a Woman build:
And Babylon her hundred gates that proud do stand
Wear by a woman with that honor filled
Besides, as the examples of women are more rare, then of men; so they are more
glorious and more powerful in respect of valor. Have not those times often
fallen out, wherein the common wealth by the hand of women, from a headlong
danger, has been set in safety? peruse the ancient histories, there is nothing
so common as the great minds of women; by whom decaying armies have been
strengthened, and the wars ended; sometimes by opposing their breasts, and
sometimes by interposing their prayers, examples of valiant acts made unto
posterity, not only of modesty, and chastity, but also of an undaunted spirit,
and that which is far more admirable and of a certain rare and divine
providence; and of those admirable answers whereunto the events have given
credit and authority: These we must confess a^e not only worthy of praise but
admiration, if these things be required by the virtue of a present necessity.
For although it be true that this sex is not framed for these things, yet it is
not altogether abhorred from them, neither is virtue forbidden to choose out
several persons; and indeed it does so, for laying hand upon some weoman, and
arresting them to obey her, thus she blames men: What have I to do with you
sluggards? I will hence forth animate the hearts of these; I will inflame their
minds, arm their hands, and I will wholly fit them to deserve well of the
commonwealth, that ye being sluggish, may be twice ashamed, and these awaked
to honorable actions, may be more glorious. From hence we may gather, that
there are not fewer seeds of virtue and valor ingrafted in women, than in
men, and both of the^ (under the same yoke) must draw to the common good.
Although to men usually belong public affairs, and to women private, and as
those require strength so these require diligence. And besides, the time will
often fall out, when both these are to be mixed together, as publicly and
privately it shall be needful: Neither thus are the duties of both sexes
confounded, but the hand that is readier and better furnished for the business
in hand, whether it be of the man or the woman, ought seasonably to undertake
it: Then the strength and courage of the mind shall not be hindered either by
sex or weakness of body. And although these things thus happen
extraordinarily, yet they are done in order, because they have God for their
author: who then stirs up manlike minds, when there is need of manlike
virtues; without this warrant, it is not lawful for a woman to out pass the
limits of her sex, and to usurp the duty of man; no more then for a man to
put of all humanity and to be wise above God. But to return from whence I
began, I say (O Woman) thou art to have fetters put on thy seete; not those
wherewith that Venus Morpho was bownd amongst the Lacedemonianes; but those
which keep in the lasciuiousnes of thy mind; which restrain the immodestie
both of thy words and deeds, and thy too licentious habits; then thou art to
have a ring upon thy lips, not of brass, as was the custom of the Egyptian
women, but a bond to keep thee in silence; for nothing is fittter for thee
then humble spirits: a mean in speaking, and the wisdom in being silent. To
conclude, thou art to be guirded with the girdle of holiness, that which way
soever thou go, there may breath those sweet and divine smelles of thy
virtues, and whosoever sees thee, may not see so much a woman, as acknowledge
an excellent pattern of all virtue. Then when thou art such a one, there
remains (for thee) honorable and great rewards of fame, honor, dignity; all
which are not laid a side for men, as for the more worthy, but are
communicated with you as equal.

In the mean time, whatsoever may be given unto thee, are abundantly heapt
upon thee, those are those ensigns of honor, wherewith the ancient and
present wisdom does crown thee. From hence arises much reverence of thee,
then which no sex to sex, or humanity to humanity can perform a greater and
more honorable dignity. I need not remember examples of the present time,
because they proceed from those ancient; what is more known then those
Roman laws, and laws like the Romans? We know the Matrons were not to rise up
to the Magistrate, least they should chance to hurt them, or to use them evil
being with child; nor that their husbands going in Coaches with them should
come down: others not less then these, that men should give way to weomen
that they might wear earerings, and other differences of head-tires, that they
may use purple and gold clothes, that they may be carried through the
streets: all which things are given to women, either for a reward or a
benefitte: as GOD himself teaches in the 16, Chapter of Ezechiell. I clothed
thee also with fine broydered work, and shodd thee with badgers skins, and
girded thee about with fine linen, and covered thee with silk; I decked thee
also with ornamens; and I put bracelettes upon thy hands: and a chain upon thy
neck: and I put a frontlet upon thy face, and eare-rings in thy ears, and a
beautiful crown upon thy head: Thus weart thou decked with gold and silver,
and thy raiment was of fine linen and silk: for these and greater then these,
men bestow upon women, arguments of their love, and special affection, that it
may be understood, that no sex is either better or worse then other, but
modestly and lovingly to agree betwixt themselves; nor that women is not the
second, but another ornament of humanity: both must strive in this, which may
be more worthy of reverence, which love one another better: Therefore (O
women) repress thy unsatisfied and ambitious desires, and as one furnished with
all excellent ornaments, at length learn to worship God, and acknowledge his
benefits, lay aside all complaints, suppress thy foolish speeches, put upon
thee a thankful mind, if thou will needs complain, complain of thy self,
that being betrothed (as it were) with so many benefits of God, yet thou
withdrawest thy self as unthankful and unmindful of thy duty: remove this
infamy, blot out this stain, and place in steed thereof, an ingenious and
thankful mind liked of him, whom to please, is eternal happiness.

The number of unthankful persons, none more increases then he that is of
man's estate, as appears by his unthankful, and complaining speech in
complaining of the world. CHAP. 24.
I do not marvel that a child, and a woman, should be found unthankful;
when men that are of ripe years are infected with this poison, who is there
that modestly bears the benefits bestowed upon him? who is there that
understands, what and how great that is which he has received? who is there
that by this means is brought to the knowledge of that divine goodness? Or
rather does not the greatness and plenty of this bring a loathing, and from a
loathing do we not go directly to a forgetfullnes, and from forgetfulness to
contempt, and then having sailed thus far, we are dashed against the rock of
unthankfulness: what can thou almost see here but a deformed and a
disfigured shape of things? I see this man ouerloaden with his riches: that man
with his followers, with his authority, with his power; another to abuse the
gifts, the excellent gifts of his wit; another to grow insolent by reason of
favor; another to become intolerable with the fortunate course of honor, and
the happy success of his favors, and how great any man is in these things,
so much he swells, hops, dares, and how much he wants of these, so much
he is dismayed, cast down, deprest, scarce any man acknowledges that his
increase and grouth is from the divine shower, and heavenly deawe.

There is scarce any man who (in the midst of Gods benefits) does not carefully
vex himself, or desirously inflame himself, or foolishly and idly does not
blind, and besotte himself? All of us are carried which way blind desire, or
a crooked disposition, or unthankful mind leads us, nay, we think it not
sufficient to madd in this manner, but further we seek to warrant it with
reason; and whilst we profess the study and desire of goodness, we show how
much ill and unthankfulness proceeds from us. And in the boasting of virtues,
it is apparent with how many and how great vices, we are compassed: Oh says
every man I would to God I had been borne in that golden world void of sins,
and fruitful in all virtues: Oh, what joy it had bin to have lived then, when
me^ willingly, and of their own accord embrace honesty. That fair age our
fathers saw,
When craft remoou'd, virtue did show:
But now,
The stream of sin on us their seed does fall,
We live oppressed with pride, and vice his thrall.


Whatsoever was good either in things, or time, it is vanished long since, the
dregs only and that which is left in the bottom, are reserved for these days:
for it plainly appears: That all things wast and on that rock do perish
Which time thus wearied can no longer cherish.


We now love our vices, no less then they did then reverence their virtues:
Now it is scarce lawful for any man to be good: wickedness possesses all
rooms: honesty is every where despised, and virtue scornd, and the better any
man is, the more basely and worse he is esteemed.

This shows that there is nothing more corrupt then the manners of these
times: yet with these are we compelled to live; we that desire all things
might be well, and who (against our wills) are drawn to allow those things
which we dislike. From hence, from those ancient times proceed the precepts
of wisdom, and profitable examples, and from these days, these present
corrupt manners, which differ far from them: thus are we carried as it were
with a stream or a whirlewinde. Oh that I might live in some obscure corner,
and there pass my time, with such as are like my self, with our own
mannners, and at our own pleasure. Oh, what piety then, how much holine^ and
honesty would I then show? How would I follow all other virtues? How should I
wholly then be inflamed to allow those things which my teachers (when I was
a child) did put into me, and which I red out of grave authors? Oh, happy
antiquity which knew the best things and follows them. But in these days
and in these places who can? If I be unlike to other men what a sport and
derision they make of it? How presently do all men say, what an incurable
brain has he? For wisdom is nothing but to think as the most think. If I
had been borne in a free state, these things should not go thus. I would
wholly have endeavored my self to reform public manners; I would have been
to all others a forcible extorter to these things, and as it becomes a free
and valiant man, being author of a free and a true opinion, I fear not to find
assistance, thus, more of us would apply our selves unto it, and I doubt not,
but we should bring to pass that the best things should prevail: amongst
free men, we would deal with liberty and express our minds with free
terms. For where a free state is, there is true virtue and ingenious manners.
But here where men are governed, some one or other prescribe conditions to all the rest: The multitude follow in heaps which way any go before them, without
choice, without care of any goodness, Without any difference or respect of true
or false. Thus by degrees we become such (as we when it is too late) wonder at
our selves to see how we have lost all freedom and ingenious simplicity. But
although these things might in some sort be borne with, yet, what way shall I
say comes it to pass, that as many countries as there be, so many
differences there are, not only of language, and manners, but of rites, and
religions? So that a man may despair that in our time there shall ever be an
agreement; For what cause of evil shall I say men are set thus at discord? In
this difference there is no man that takes not himself to be very godly,
There is no man that does not either pity, deride, or hate any other that
treads a course contrary to his own; thou can scarce go out of doors, but
thou shall light upon some one which shunneth thy speech and company as a
thing most odious; why, think thou? because thou followest those rites which
he abhors: For what thou accountest holy, that he esteems profane and
wicked, Every man thinks what he list of GOD of his VVorshippe, of all
things that belong unto it. Every man wandreth what way he pleases; scarce any
man pitying him, warning him, or staying him.

And this is the general disposition of men at this day; what will thou
choose? which way will thou go? what part will thou take in these
distractions? some being violent, others being drowsy, all disagreeing: My
wish is religious, but silent: and of no force. For where should I cast anchour
in these storms? which way should I go to seek the truth? which amongst all
these is but one. I desire to have all these clouds dispersed, and directly to
go to that divine brightness, but I cannot do it. I find al ways so beset
with darkness, thorns, and infinite lets. Therefore I must lie secret and speak
low, and fold up my hands and look up and expect what good, time will bring
with it. In the mean time, I must repress my time which is no way favored; I
must cherish my sloth and sluggishnes; and this is indeed to be wise, and to
know the time. Neither is it too safe to know what is to be followed as what is
to be eschewed. To conclude, in this my condition is the harder, that I
understand those things from which I am kept, and being borne to excellent
things, yet I must follow the worst: Besides, I have chosen that course of life,
then which there could if not more honest, yet none be more unpleasant; or more
unprofitable. It is an excellent thing to be brought up in learning, to be
instructed in arts and sciences; to know the civil laws, to be chosen amongst
those that have authority and judges, to be ever co^uersant amongst the best.
But none of al these can be praised but with much exception: For if they be
compared with other courses of life, they make fair shows; but there is
little substance in them. Who sees not that all these courses of learning are
full of care, labor, and that a kind of life arises from hence, illiberally,
unpleasant, vnsecure? In one word, we are subject to the authority of our
superiors, and likewise to the speeches of the vulgar.

These will call thee a subtle and a crafty fellow, and one that what way
soever thou go will deceive; of the multitude thou are rather feared then
reverenced or loved, these will take heed of thy courses, these care not what
thou think. But how much thou can and art able, so much only they fear.
I omit that the times do often fall out, wherein we live despised whilst
gowns must, and do suffer the disgrace and the wrongs of arms, what? in these
tumultes we endure wrongs of those, who in peace durst not come into our
presence without blushing, fear, and danger, well it is much better to be one
of the common sort, then to suffer those indignities, that are incident to this
calling, neither am I ignorant that we seem happy in the eyes of many as they
seem to us. I know no man is content with his lotte, this is the infelicitie
of men. But what would thou do? We must bear our evil fortune and every
man his own. Well, all things considered, there is nothing more miserable,
then this life, which either amongst thankful or unthankful must be spent.

All the former reasons which concern man's estate are confuted and he is
seriously admonisht, to be thankful; and to acknowledge Gods benefits, CHAP.
26.
IN the very entrance to this speech: I do observe thee to be a glorious
boaster of thy virtue, and withal a disdainefull esteemer of those things,
which God has wisely done; which things (thou being more wise and more
provident then God) desire might be otherwise. Thus it is manifest how light
thou art; how disdainefull and how proud; in one word, thou art unthankful,
because those things are not builte upon any foundation of truth, which are
the ground of these words, of these words which are nothing but wicked
thoughts, forged complaints against God, for thou that speak these things,
would seem exceedingly honest and religious; and thy whole labor is in
this, that thou may rather seem then be so. Neither art thou ashamed to
sorrow that thou were borne in this age and not long since: and in some other
place. Thus the common soldier speaks evil of the Centurion, the Centurion
of the Tribune; the Tribune of the Lieftenant; or the Emperor; that he is
placed in this station and not in that, as though it were in thy power to
determine and dispose of thy self, and not in his, under whose subjection thou
art; who notwithstanding do not consider (being hindered with an inward
blindness) how irreligious thou art, for thou can not desire an other
country, nor repent thee of thine own estate, and condition, but thou must
first loath and hate thy own mark then from the beginning what assurance thou
have given of a preposterous and alienated mind.

I would to God thou could learn that all virtues of a Soldier consist
only in obedience. Obedience is to dare to do nothing but at his command at
whose cost thou fightest.

This is the law, the religion, the reverence of of the oath; this is the
whole ornament of military discipline; the strength and majesty of the whole
government is built upon this virtue; the soldier having put off obedience is
hurtful and rebellious, not to he corrected with the rod of this Captain,
but to be beaten with his truncheon or put to death, as a stain and blemish to
the whole army. Take thou heed that thou be not of this infamous mark, whilst
thou complainest that thou were not sent unto thy standing, in the first, or
second, but in the third or fourth watch, thou wishest (thou say) that thou
had been borne in that (which they call) the golden World barren of vice and
fruitful in all virtue: thus (as thou speak) thou wishest thy self that
thou had never been borne, because no momuments of antiquity to be credited
that ever I read in, taught what time there was such an age. Poets and such
idle heads might devise these things, fair in show, and pleasant to be
heard, and feine that virtue was taken out of sight that men might be less
ashamed, and acquit themselves if they followed not those virtues, whereof this
age is said to be unfruitful: But for my own part (as I do remember) (when I
have run over all that ever I either read or heard) I cannot determine the
space of that excellent world, when it was, wherein virtues reigned not mingled
with any vice, the Poet abuses men's credulity, when he says. The Latins The
World of Saturn ruled with unjust laws
Unlike the ancient God and times before
the same in other words First was that golden age, when men without all law
Did just and right vnfeard and unkept in awe,
Punishment and fear were banished both,
All lives were free from danger,
Men lawless were, and yet were safe,
None feared the Judges anger.
This I am sure of, that in man are ingrafted the seeds of virtue and vice; and
that vices do their grow luxuriously, where virtue is untilled; and
contrariwise, where virtue is seriously and painfully tilled, there vices are
kept under, worn away, and extinguished. Therefore all ages have been laid
open to virtue and vice; there was never any which brought not forth good men,
never any that brought not forth badd; nay at all times and in all places there
was ever greater plenty of evil, then of virtuous and good men. Let us not
idly therefore please our ears, with false and empty things; for those
times which we call the old World, that is furthest removed from this present,
even in those times the hatred of brethren extended unto death; the father was
driven out of his kingdom by his son; the Giants foolishly made war with
the gods.

To conclude, many other things were committed of those ancient and first men,
which feign themselves to be born of heaven and earth; by which it appears
how far this opinion of the amiable simplicity, and reverend innocence of those
times differs from truth, for surely what praises soever mortal things had,
these were not proper to those or to these times, but to those or to these men;
neither was there ever any time which in some fort evil men have not staind,
and which good men have not honored. For the praises and reproach of the times
are from hence, that virtue or vice are more followed. For it delights men
eminent in virtue to live so long, as they may be either privately or publicly
profitable. Therefore that time, wherein they chance to live, they embrace as
that station appointed to them, wherein they must stand and watch, from whence
they must encounter those enemies to this mortality; where likewise they must
show their virtue, from whence they must never depart, until this battle be
fought, and the victory obtained; therefore the world is an indifferent place,
wherein all things are indifferent to him that places his strength in virtue,
therefore thou do ridiculously lay that fault upon the time, which is thy
own: Awake thy self, whosoever thou art that outwardly art so fine and in
show so pure; straight way thou will be ashamed of thy inward deformity,
Thou shall see how that in thy manners, there is nothing pure and sincere; how
all things are counterfeite, stain, and polluted, and withal thou shall
understand, what a trister thou art, in that thou extollest with praise and
admiration that ancient sincerity, and innocence, from which thou art far^e
distant and it is no marvel, seeing thou do not labor to attain unto it:
thinking it only virtue enough to profess it with thy tongue, and not to
express it in thy manners, surely seeing there are not stronger motives to
virtue then examples, if we might wish, we ought rather to wish to be borne
late, then in these first times, and rather to look at all those times that
have been before us, then to be looked at by those that come after: it is much
safer to be taught by the examples of others, then to have none whom thou may
imitate and follow. Doubtless that learning is more true and certain, which
experience has brought forth, and collected out of many examples: Do thou
admit and allow my counsel? Then take away all those curtains drawn
before the truth, accuse not the world and the time, that is all men besides
thy self, rather look into the thing, and diligently examine thy own vices,
and if thou observe thy self thoroughly, thou will confess that thou art one
of the multitude better then none of the rest, and perhaps (which is like)
worse then a great number, and to say plainly thou that art so great a talker
of virtue, that is so great a trifler, what have thou yet furthered the common
good, whereby either the stains of this age may be wiped out, or the praise
of it increast. I see thou art but a man's shadow, one of a quick tongue, but
of a slow mind, disputing many things, but doing nothing, for the common
good; unless peradventure thou think this same unquiet and talkatiue
idleness, in which thou make a show of virtue, to be something. If all men
thus should think it sufficient to commend the times past, and no way to
further the advancement of the present, should not the commendation of this age
lie buried and forgotten? Thou say, thou art compeld to allow things not to
be allowed. What wicked humor does thus possess thee, that so foulely thou
dissemblest? that if thou see any thing to be done otherwise then well,
thou must needs be a furtherer of that, a co^mender of it either in deed,
word, gesture, allowance consent or silence? Why do thou not rather make
known to the commonwealth, that there is so much honesty in thee, that no
dishonestie whatsoever can ouerthow it? It is not virtue that which will bend
so soon, and yield to vice; or lurk near it. Virtue it is either not at al,
or wheresoever it is, it is in a high place, if in those places where thou art
there be none, show thy own virtue: If there be any, strive that thy own may
be more eminent and conspicious. To conclude, laying aside this same sluggish
and unprofitable wisdom, which thou professest, be a powerful example of true
virtue; if not to many, to a few, to thy self alone, least that any man seeing
thee exclayme: O smith thou forgest arms for one that is full of sloth: as
those that were before, gave much light unto thee, so hold thou out some light
of this divinity to those that come after. In this, never regard what the
vulgar sort either allows or disalloweth, but only what becomes thy self;
what any grave and wise man may worthily think of thee. Imitate not public
and usual manners (no not the ancient in this respect only as they are
ancient) but out of both choose that which is best, thus the age wherein thou
live shall be to thee ancient, or if any thing can be thought more holy and
more pure, then those times that are more ancient, never stand upon other men,
other times, or countries.

So make accounte that wheresoever thou art, there virtue may make her seat.
What place soever the Sun looks upon, is fit for this Lady, Sovereign of
things: who is so far from being tied unto any place, that she chooses out
sometimes a hollow age eaten rock as Lucretius calls it, to be her native
Country: she often prefers cottages and low shelters before marble
walls, and sumptuous buildinges, and corse garments before purple; wheresoever
vertueis, it is falsely termed to be a corner, it is a place eminent, and of
much celebrity: and if thou have given thy name to virtue, think not that thou
can lurk in an obscure corner. He can never be^ hid whom virtue bewrays:
For wheresoever thou art, there virtue shall accompany thee: Thou shall give
honor and nobility to that place: there thou shall live in the eyes and the
mouths of all: neither do I reprove thee that thou art a commender and an
admirour of ancient honest sincerity; this only I reprove in thee, that thou
art a commenderonly, and not a follower, whereas by this means alone thou
may gain that commendation which thou expectest, which were a thing much
better, then thus as thou do with ancient and glorious names, to cover thy
own stains, and with those evils whereof thou thy self art guilty, to
accuse and burden the time (a thing most innocent): thou will also be known
how careful and circumspect thou art, whilst thou diligently take heed,
least men should follow thee with stones like one distracted, if thou should
be seen diverse from others: Indeed I require nothing less of thee then that
thou should be diverse from the multitude: But I require that thou should
be better; not that thou should be observed in an unusual habitte, and a
singularity of life, as a contemnor of others, but that in holiness and
unaffected manners; thou should exceed others.

Thus be as an ancient example to be looked at; by this every man shall
esteem what and how great thou art, by thee every man shall be stirred up
to chastity and innocence: and as it is a proud and intolerable thing so to
deal, as though thou only, or above the rest would be accounted wise; so
there is nothing so foolish, as that understanding that exceeds not the
capacity of the Common multitude; but doubtless, that wisdom has all the
perfections of wisdom in it, which understands and follows nothing, but
that which is right; whether they be allowed or disallowed of the common
people. Furthermore not content to detract from those times, thou also
complaynest that thou art borne in a monarchy under government, as though any
man has liberty, or bondage from any other but from his own mind: be thou
thy own, not a slave of thy affections: stand firm amongst all the
darkness of vice: moderate thy senses: take thy mind into thy own power:
then thou perfectly shall see thy self in the bosom of liberty: though borne
under the Persian servitude. Besides, thou would have it known what a great
man, thou would have bin, if thou had binne borne under a free state. I
know there thou would have set up a shop of virtue; thou would have
corrected things that are amiss: that people should have had thee an
excellent reformer of manners: this indeed were credible; if in that place
where thou art, thou had given any token of it: if thou hadest made clean
thy own manners: if thou hadest excelled and gone before others in true and
virtuous examples, not in a glorious speech, but thou (whilst thou admonishest
others) differrest all to other times, and other places, as though time and
place had rule over virtue.

What? dare thou say, that thou would prescribe manners to others, which
have either none thy self or uncertain, unordered or very evil? Will thou
show the way to others which know it not thy self? Do thou think that
thou art privately discharged, because thou promisest that thou will publicly
do it? But I am afraid that amongst thy familiars, with whom thou may do
much, thou art scarce a powerful example of virtue, if thy inward life do not
first answer to these glorious admonitions: this (believe me) is the most
compendious way of informinge thy own manners to honesty, and reforming the
vices of others.

Here, if thou beginnest, there from thee virtue shall be derived unto thy
neighbors; from thence into thy whole kingedome: and so into foreign and
strange Countries. Why do thou suffer a thing so profitable, and of every
good man so much wished and desired, and looked for: so long to be expected
and desired of thee? Go no further, expect not any solitary, or priuatte
place, there were thou art, give unto thy self, give unto those, that are
about thee, give unto all, an undoubted experminent what thou would do if
thou had been borne there, where thou might have had authority, and
been a great man, and had much power over the minds of other, give assurance,
that if thou had place, nothing else were wanting to thee, it is in thy
power to perform that: and what there, would be authority, here shall be
example, and yet it is true that in good examples their is much authority.

Do not think that any place gives liberty to manners. I do not see if thou
weart one of the great states in a free Commonwealth, how thou could more
profitte thy Country then now, when thou art borne under government: and in no
great favor, unless peradventure thou art of that opinion, that there is more
virtue and generous honesty, ingrafted in those that are borne in a free
state, then under a Prince like government. If thou think thus, thou think
evil; and with all accountest nature to be a stepmother, not a mother, nor
endued with a kind of motherly affection. For surely, Necessity invented all
forms of Commonwealthes; being invented, Reason has disposed the^; and Time
and Experience has confirmed them: there are places, where public consent
require laws; other places, where they stand in need of Kings and
soueraintie: and amongst these the excellency of a King-like authority is no
less glorious, then amongst those the sweetness of liberty. Doubtless, to both
there is no other thing propounded then public security, which consists in
this that every man have his own, and that chiefly in all plases there be a
rule of aequalitie.

For the establishing of this security there is need every way of much concord
of the Citizens; to this concord, men that are willing are driven by
themselves, and by a natural instinct of goodness; those that are unwilling
are compeld by the laws, and all the guarde and strength that laws have; he
whom the condition of birth has brought under a free state is a debtor to his
virtue, and a subject to that. He that is borne under a King, it is fit for him
whatsoever he has, he employ it to the obedience of his Prince; from both
arises the commendation of a good Citizen, to enquire which place is nearer
and more open to virtue, it is rather a matter of curiosity then profit, and
not for this purpose.

And all this I have said to this end that it may appear, that in every form
of a Common wealth, there is some one mark of virtue, whereunto men must run
in all courses. It is ready and easy to every man, every where to learn
manners; If from those that are virtuous, he shall be furnished with virtuous
qualities, if from the multitude, he shall be furnished with manners variable,
and impure. This also does much trouble thee, that thou say that in these
days there is no where any certainety of religion and holy worship, that
wheresoever thou look, men go astray and er: nor that the ways and true
paths of religion are so much opened as the entrances to all impiety. From
hence all

Right and wrong are turned, and wars do still increase And face of sins in
many shapes.

For at this day there is nothing which is so fruitful a ground of all
public calamities as this variety of religion. From hence are the ruins and
falls of whole kingdoms; the workers and contriuers whereof appears to be a
number of uncertain, unconstant men, which swarm in all places, desirous not
only of nouelty, but of the overthrow of states; by whose disputations and
subtilty, the truth long since has been spoken, not perfected; For these do
rend the common wealth in sunder with an itch of contention, and a desire of
ouercomming without care of learning. With much impudency and sloth in their
evil contentions of the greatest things; to who^ as it plainly appears
their most wicked fruit is, to speak great things of God, and yet never to
reverence him nor to think there is any; much less to fear him as the just
punisher of such offenses. From hence it comes that they scarce forbear from
impyety, No not in those things which ought to be sacred and most solemn. For
what else mean these contentions, from disputations, tumults; from tumults,
wars growing from wars, one trouble and uproar from another. I do not
only sorrow for these but mourn them. For I confess in these kinds there
have more errors sprunge up within this hundred years then can be cured
either with Admonition, Authority, or Reason. But what are all these to thee?
If thou have learned in thy childhood; if in thy youth thou have been
nourished; if in thy man's estate those things were confirmed in thee, wherein
thy safety and the virtuous duties of thy life are contained? Can any storms
draw thee to a contrary course? Can the leuitie of others or their craft
mingled with fury, be strong enough, to shake thy constancy and to trouble thy
quiet resolution? Nay, rather the more the vulgar with the inconstant motions
of their mind and every tempest floate up and down, the more show thou, that
thou can not be moved. What? Do thou turn about at every noise? Is it
not a shame that in a matter of such moment, strength and constancy should be
wanting in thee. Therefore stand and remain immovable: Even as the Rock in
midst of sea does stand
Unmoved, when waves most furiously do toss:
And like those stones fast fixed as the land,
Whilst silly reeds are shaken to the less:
Why do thou desire to see how here every man delights to doubt, to float,
to perish? either thou art rightly entered into this true way and in good time,
or from thy infancy thou art of no valewe? If this be so, do not I loose my
labor, which do thus reason with thee? If otherwise, from whence is this
inconstancy of thy disposition? Why do thou not go on as thou have
begun? Those precepts of pyety that are ingrafted in thee, take heed that
thou be not a forsaker of them. Do not so much as doubt. For whosoever so
doubts that he never compose and stay his wavering mind, he is wholly drawn
in pieces, with variety of opinions. Surely such a one either erreth or is next
unto one that erreth, and thus erring, next unto him that perishes. Therefore
with this foul inconstancy ouerturne not thy bringing up, Be not willing to
be esteemed for thy idle wish, but heap thy holy wishes with study and true
Piety, which to man as the Poet speaks is safest virtue. I say true piety,
because I do warn thee to take heed of the counterfeit pyety of these days,
which professes a solitary wandering knowledge of God, without any fruit at
all, whilst it seeks to know all things lawful and unlawful of God, Open or
secret, and with a subtle mouth skilfully argues those things which their
evil minds deride and scorn.

Thus far are these sorts of men from worshipping of God: sincerely and
rightly ordering of humane duties, for it becomes men never to be more
modest, then when they have to deal with God; to be most holy, and most
reverent in those things that belong to religon, rather to profess an humble
simpli city of believing, then to boast of a sharpness of piercing into his
secrets, and knovving of his glory.

In other things I commend thy confidence, but in this thy fear. Surely in the
very entrance of that sacred power and unsearchable majesty, there is a bright
nesse and glory that opposes it self against every curious searcher, and
blinds both the eyes and the mind of him that pryeth with over much
boldness, against this usual rashness at this day, or any such that is like
unto it, set locks upon thy ears; for it is not pyety but a counterfeit
impyety, which leads men into errors; to which that old saying may be
truly spoken Which way thou please run slily, play the Fox,
Exact that true and severe pyety of thy self, which is scarce found in
conference and concourse of multitudes; seldom is clothed in precious
garments, seldom walks into the streets, scarce is seen in public, but
dwells in a true and honest breast and from thence is dispersed into his mouth
and hands; thus being affected, thou shall never be drowned in the waves of
false opinions; no tempest of error shall cast thee down; The Sea shall smile
And mildest Heavens
shall calmely smile on thee:
From these things, which thou mislikest in the common wealth, thou come to
thy own private condition, and art angry with that. Can thou endure to hear
the truth? Thou art full of disdain, this makes thee so nyce and froward;
what would thou say if thou were sent into the Country, where thou must
hold the plough and harden thy self with toyling labor; to get that thou
might eat? What if thou were set to some handy-craft, where thou might
possess no more then thou could earne with thy daily labor? What if
professing the life of a soldier, thou should have thy body hurt and mained
that thou could scarce move it? What if thou should enter any course
of life harder and more unprofitable then these? What monsters of words
could thou then utter? with how many complaints would thou fill the
skies? with how many wicked speeches, would thou then provoke that divine
goodness? who being so well dealt with all, yet dare complain of God, who
has compased thee about with so many honest favors. But as it seems, thou
art wise, thou art learned, thou art circumspect, yet for all this thou art not
ashamed to stick in those shallowes of ignorance, where every unskillful man
perishes.

Why do thou not rather use that learned oa^e to sail over these
dangerous places? from whence if thou do not speedely escape, thou shall
be like unto one that has suffered shipwreck. If thou professest thy self a
lawyer, and an obseruer of equity, if thou will be esteemed as the defense of
the people and the Oracle of the City ^ye (light and inconstant man that thou
art) why have thou not first before others supported and strengthened thy self
with wholesome Council? If thou would at least consulte with thy self, and
from thy self evil affected, appeal to thy self without perturbation or
passion, thou would be indifferent to thy Noble and excellent condition,
and that which is the chief of all take in good part, what thou art; wipe away
those stains familiar and usually to this kind of men; give faithful
council to him that asks; cut off stryfes, abstain from oppression and
exhortation: If thou art a Judge, Judge religiovsly, and fear GOD the great
Judge, and then be assured thou shall not be subject to the suspicions of the
good nor to any evil speeches, unless peradventure of those that are most
evil. Thus assure thy self thou shall be worshipful to the best, to the
meanest, to al, in all places thou shall be esteemed honest, amongst men, and
acceptable to God.

Besides if the Commonwealth be troubled, if men betake themselves to their
armor, then thou complainest that civil professions are despised, that
learning is contemned, and also that thou lie open and vnhidden to the
outrages and disorders of all men, as though thus every honest and innocent
disposition is not best seen in his adversities: If thou art wicked, this is a
scourge to beat thee: If thou art good think that a hand is reached out to thee
that thou be not idle, or forgetful, but watchful, least thou catch a
grievous and a deadly fall. Well howsoever it is, consider whether thou haste
not in the time of peace, abused thy skill and knowledge to the hurt of men
and not to defend them. Does not worthily (then which nothing can be more
just) thy own example fall upon thy own head? These cogitations will drive
out of thy mind all that unjust complaint which thou make against God:
Surely displeased with thy own vices thou should first severely blame thy
self before thou accusest any other.

Last of all, whosoever thou art learned or unlearned, whether one of the
states or a common person, whether thou art a leader, or an ordinary soldier,
whether thou art rich or poor, of what sort soever thou art (for it were
infinite to reckon up all) therefore I speak unto all that every man may take
it spoken to himself. Thou that have passed the flower of thy age; thou art he
with who^ my speech is at this time; if thou use not thy strength and health
to some good purpose; if before the powers of thy body and mind fail thee,
thou use them not for the true defenses of thy soul, and do not enrich thy
self with true riches, thou in the old age wilt in vain desire those things
wherein thou ought to be instructed. Now it were fit to arm thy self
with wisdom, and true valor: sad and loathsome old age ouertaketh men that
are inconsiderat and vnprepard: In time to come thou will be able to do
nothing but trifles, the mind will wax old in a decayed body. Thou shall be
unfit for any thing; and death at last unawares shall overtake thee, subject
to many scoffs and dangers, and in vain looking about for help, which (when
thou might) thou did not provide unto thy self. Therefore free thy self
from these delays, least thy sluggishnes bring thee into those dangers, from
whence thou can not deliver thy self, without much peril. Repentance at the
last years is late. We look for means of life then late, when we are in
the last part of it; when our burdens are to be packt up: nay, to be laid
aside. O lamentable condition of that man, who by his inconsideratnes is
brought to that, which is the beginning of eternal misery; and he that
comes to that, I confess his life so much the more hateful in that it is
ended most unfortunately. Thou whosoever thou art ascribe thy own evil to thy
self, who abusest thy own good; thy life unknowing is lent unto thee, not
short but long, and heaped with many, and great benefits of God; and thou man
the vngratfullest of all men, spendest the same in error, and vanity; thou
consumest all thy time in frosen and foolish trifles. Do thou suffer this so
great a benefitte by thy negligence to pass from thee without profit, and art
not ashamed to vpbraide God with the smalenes of the benefit, believe me, thou
wholly dependest upon a small thread: thou may immediately be cast headlong
down into a perpetual (...) of misery: if thou do not speedily lay hand upon
those means with which being supported, thou may attain to that felicity,
to which thou weart created, thou ought to contemn all other things, and to
desire this one thing and not to desire it as one Ill, slothful, and weak,
but as one strong diligent, and intent to to his greatest happiness.

Amongst unthankful persons I account the old man, whom neither the plenty
nor the greatness of Gods benefits, nor any wisdom gathered out of long
experience can reclayme from this unthankfulness. CHAP. 26.
C Considering the dispositions of men and vewing the corruptnes of them (as it
lies open) as also their cunning (as they foolishly think) wherewith all
mortality seeks to cover it self, that it may not as it is so appear unto
God; to conclude, thinking with my self, how many ways every man delights
to wrong that sacred power, which he should reverence, maddinge against his
wisdom and rising with complaints against that great power: I begin to
tremble, I say a horror possesses me, when I take but a vewe of the sharp of
this foul and deformed vice; I see nothing but a heap of unthankful persons,
amongst whom most notable is he whom it least becomes.

The old man; I am moved at none more then at him, who ought to have learned
by that great benefit of long age, how he only more then all other men of
all ages, is not only laden with benefits, but almost oppressed, whom the
satiety of living ought to have cleansed from this dross: whom the long use
of the goodness of God should have brought to that aequitie of mind which is
requisite for one, that is ready to leave the earth; yet, I see him more
froward and more afflicted with this humor of discontent, then any other. Thus
the shaken age out-goeth the most part of mortal men, and having lived a long
time, is not for all this, more skillful in this journey, nay, oftentimes is
more unprepared and more stained. In one word, these seem to have gathered up
out of every corner, and carefully to have heaped together the several vice^
of all ages, and to have laid open the blemishes and spots that are in all;
and from all this to have framed this monster, whose name is an unthankful
mind. For he does not complain of this, or that evil, as those whom I have
reckoned before, but of all things, as altogether. There is none so weak, none
so shamlesly furnished to this offense, none thinks more impurely, none
speaks evil of GOD more proudly, none turns his head more boldly against
his maker; there is no where, where all the faces of this monster are
discovered better, then here; which are as many as the corruptions that lie
hid in man, wherewith he with long living is most infected, which way soever
this old man layth open himself, he is weak; forgetful, arrogant,
unthankful; he sins not as others of ignorance, of folly, of infirmity;
inwardly and outwardly he sins: he, is wholly wicked, in word, in deed, in
thought: to conclude, what can you think of him, who for this dare not
complain that he is, and that his life is given unto him. For what (says he)
is my life given unto this end that in my life there may be nothing which is
worthy to be called a life? For what should I remember the miseries which I
had from my infancy, where of I cannot tell whether the sense or the memory be
more grievous unto me, had I ever in all my life any honnie, but it was mixed
with much gall? Had I ever any joy that was not ended with sorrow? Any
happiness that was not recounted with some evil success? Any hope whereto
despair was not a companion? in one word, what is all that I have spoken, that
I have done; that I have hoped, that I have gotten, but the matter of sorrow,
and repentance? To conclude, what shall I say, that I either am or have been,
but a perpetual motion? But a living creature, laid open to every violence?
My life was spent in learning of these miseries, and living long with these, I
am hardened. In what great dark and danger have I lived
Where day and night did witness how I greeud.


Oh how truly is it spoken, by a man of much experience, whose mind in the
constancy of death confirmed many and very wise precepts, none would accept of
life if it were not given them without their knowledge: what is our Infancy
but a dullnes and an uncertain state, betwixt life and death? more truly the
likeness of death or rather indeed a death begun and a funeral mixed to our
swaddling clothes? What is our childish estate but the show and the beginning
of misery, or rather a glass wherein a man may see all the miseries which are
to come? What our youth but a vading flower, growing to a better fruit? For
then we are green that we may now wyther, then we flowrish that we may now
wax old; what is our lusty years so^ething riper the^ our youth, but a foolish
fearcenes trouble-some to others and hurtful to it self? What is our man's
estate, but an authorized imperious madness, Whilst, it is reasons ape? What is
this last age, the wearines whereof I feel to be laid upon me, but an
ouerflowing of all pains, greefes, miseries? What is this which we call to
live, but a fearful and a continual expectation of death? yet I know these
things are hardly persuaded to young men: I know that the minds of most are
holden in this common error, and bownd as it were fast with this chain (which
is a love of life) as of that good which contains all good things in it.

Surely let the child see before him the merry and pleasant flower of youth;
youth the strong, courageous and manly age: this also let it have some comfort
left in the approaching old age: but then to this last what else is propounded
but death? For man that is full of years as I am, what is he but as they say
a picture painted on the wall, or the name of a shadow of that he was? And to
conclude, the pray of death? What further can he do or hope whose soul is
ever going out of his mouth? What am I fit for, who am unmeet for the
lightest cares? whose strength of body is weak? The age of ability and power
past? Senses dull, and the liuelines of the mind weakened? In one word, to
whom all things with my body are withered?

Life then deserves that name, when it brings to a man some joy or
pleasure: but if it bring nothing with it which is not unsweet, unpleasant,
bitter, if it be ever driven against the rocks of all evil, away with this
name of life, which is more glorious then true; I know not others, but for my
self, I am sure, of all that ever I did hear, or see, there is nothing likes
me; and as hope does more and more freese in me, so all pleasure decays;
whereof this worn and decayed body of mine is incapable. I have no healpe in
my kindred, for all slip from me by little and little, and sh^nne my
company, as an odious and troublesome old man; unless peradventure deceitfully
they hang upon me to be made the richer by my death: My friends have little
hope in me, to whom I seem not a man but a ghost. Like as the Iuie killes
the folded tree,
So with the embrace of years death kills me.
Like to the earth from whence I came
Of man I hold only the name:


My familiarity is pleasant to none; I walk as the hate of the earth; neither
am I more almost esteemed of any then a thing worn and of no value, as many
men, and many things do not please me, no more do I please any. I am
forbidden to meddle with any thing under a color of honor; to which they give
the name rest, and ceasinge from labor, that with the mildnes of the name,
they may mittigate the asperity of the thing, and the grief that I take from
it. In my sayings there is no authority, for all men say I am now past, and
brought to a doting age; the very memory of my life past wherein there was some
pleasure, daily wears away. Of one thing I have more understanding then ever
I had, namely, of this miserable estate to which I am appointed, and as it were
reserved; to this age, and to this experience rising out of these miseries I am
beholding for this one thing, that it has opened my eyes and laid before me
the whole army of those euilles wherewith this mortality is guarded, and can
neither find remedy nor means to escape them. Neither can learning (that
divine invention as they call it) mitigate this grief; I have no comfort out
of my learning how great soever it is; nay the more plentiful that is, the
more plainly do I see rather what is not true then what is; yea, it rather
brings me into the large sad fields of error, and there places me, from
whence I may see with a large prospect, ignorance that is of kindred to our
mortality; So far am I from being brought to any delights or pleasures of
knowledge.

Last of all, there remains pyety, whereof I was ever a diligent worshipper,
wherein I find no refuge. If for all this being worn with years, my last
hour must come, and that fatal necessity whereunto against my: will I must
obey and follow, not whether it leads me, but whether it draws me. For in
that my heap of miseries gives me a mind to speak freely.

From hence am I grieuiously tormented in that I see my self brought unto that
peryod of life, which is set so fast that it cannot be removed. There is
nothing that does more trouble my rest and quiet then the often thinking of
the approach of death, which the more I labor to cast from me, the more and
more violently it comes to my mind, and this is that same inward and
perpetual corrasiue: This dimmes my life which no delight can cure,
And leaves no joy that pleasant is or pure.
If I begin to talk with any; If I do any thing; If I walk; If I rise from
sleep; continually I am encountered with the ever present memory of my near
aproaching death, I have ever (as that Roman king) those two gods present with
me (dread and palenesse).

Now at the last, the conscience of my former life, which is full of trouble,
and a torment to me, gathers his forces and does show it self. Sometimes a
little hope does comfort me, sometimes despair does trouble and afflict me.
Now I float as it were betwixt life and eternal death: whether is nearer I
cannot easily tell: so am I an old and decayed man deluded by both. Farewell
all, let it go, And that humane wisdom, which is mere madness let it blind
and deceive it self, let it be insolent in this same show of persuasion, for
which it would be esteemed; let it delude it self in things accutely thought,
eloquently spoken, in these famous monuments erected for posterity; I confess
there is none of all these that I delight in, this same space that I have run
of so many years, so many experiments, so many precepts of things, so many
well taught learnings, they all renew the same scarre of my miseries that are
not yet well cured. Whatsoever the state is wherein I am, it is nothing else
but a fit place to renew my evils. Amongst which I reckon this, that my mind
does waver: I know nothing but that I am ignorant of all things: Shall I speak
it or hold my peace. To a traveler it is a hope, and an ease to think of the
place whereunto he goes, I, why I am, or what shall become of me, whether I
shall go, what is all this wherein I am, but as a drop in the sea, or a
stone upon the shore, or a spark in the fire? I am more uncertain then ever I
was, happy is he that thinks he knows this. Doubtless, at least he
inioyeth a sweet error, and perishes pleasingly. Let humane curiosity
arrogate unto himself, applaude himself, give unto himself this honor, that
he may think that he has obtained the knowledge of that which is denied to
mortality. I do not think that it is true, that he that knows not those
things, which are before his eyes, can reach to the knowledge of those things
which are hidden in the bottomless greatness of time, and the Majesty of
nature.

For if any man do consider rightly, he shall well understand that our
knowledge is nothing else but to be ignorant, to err, to be deceived. To
what end should I dissemble this, what should I wretch that I am flatter my
self; For then true voice shall say how it was
When things shall stay, and men shall pass.


The old man is blamed for his complaint, and admonisht to acknowledge Gods
benefits, even in that respect, that he is old and near unto his grave. CHAP
27
Doubtless it is true, that that disease is hardly cured, which imitateth
health; for because it is manifold, it can scarce beknown; because it is
firmly rooted, it cannot be pulled out; because it is rebellious, it can
neither be ruled nor put to silence. Of this kind (O old man) I fear me is
thy disease; who inso long a life have learned nothing but to play the fool;
For there is nothing more foolish then he, who will be wise above that he is
commanded; and more then is fit for one who is about to dye. But thou if thou
love thy self, suffer a few things, truly and simply, to be spoken to thee;
It belongs chiefly unto thee, that thou be awaked with this my admonition;
howsoever it is: Let me lead thee a long not through all the benefits of God
(which thou corruptly do interpret, for that were infinite) but through the
best and cheifest. For amongst all the complaints of men whereby they show how
they are infected, with this fault of unthankfulness toward God; there is
none more delicate, there is none worse, and more wicked, then that which is in
thy mind, and in thy mouth. This most is from hence, that thou dare object
thy reason; reason, that is the bounds betwixt God and man, the only light of
the mind increased and confirmed with use of things, that thou dare (I say)
oppose and object this reason against that divine providence; and after the
manner of the Giants with a bold attempt, provoke thy Creator to a single
combat.

Neither do thou consider that thou art most friendly, and as it were by the
hand, led even to that place where is the end of this Journey (thorny and
full of brambles) which we call life; who in this chiefly repinest that it is
given unto thee. To wit, the first in order, and in his bounds containing the
rest of Gods benefits. Here thou art to consider first of all how thou art not
agreeable to thy self, who complainest that thy life is given thee, the which
impatiently thou lamentest to be taken from thee. Thou repinest that thou
live, that thou must dye, that thou art borne, to wax old; that thou art in
this state, that either perpetually (as thou say) thou must not be at all,
or perpetually be miserable.

From hence thou gatherest, that it had been better for thee, not to have been
at all, then in that thou art, to know so much that thou may understand how
much unhappiness it is, not to be after thou have been. Thou fear death
not as the last destruction, calamity and extinguishing, but peradventure as
the beginning of some new, and unknown evil; To conclude, so frowardly, so
staggeringly, so profanely, thou think of the greatest thing of all, that
is of thy own salvation, that when thou art dead to think of thy self thou
think it belongs not to thee. Oh how am I afraid least. Thy wits do
hault, thy tongue, thy soul, thy mind,
And all these fail, and at one time be blind


First let me deal with thee by way of excursion and skirmishing, then nearer,
not a far off with the spear, but at hand with the sword; last of all more
strongly and with all my force: Thou say thou would not have had life
given unto thee.

Now in the beginning, and in one word thou showest that thou know not what
life is. For if thou did know it, doubtless thou would more considerately
esteem the greatness of this benefit. Do thou (who art so old) not
understand that life is the being of man, and the seat of all those benefits
which that divine goodness bestows upon mankind? Surely, there is the same
reason of every thing that is dead, as of that which is not; for that only is
said to be which lives in that manner as the giver of life has prescribed
unto it; therefore by the help of this only benefit, thou art all that thou
art: And when God has given thee life, he has given thee wholly as a guifte
unto thy self. Thou art his debtor for thy whole self, which gift by so much
is greater, and more to be esteemed, in that he gave it, who was not bound
unto thee, which then were not at all. Surely it is such a benefit as thou
would wish it to be; that is (if it be not long of thy self) very great.
From so great a giver there can come nothing but what is great; especially
this, which being taken away, all the other gifts of God are not only void and
frustrate, but none at all. For that thou art, it is the first of all those
steps, whereby thou ascendest into the likeness of him who truly is. For surely
there is nothing so unlike unto God, as not to be at all. But doubtless it is
a small thing for thee to be (for that is common to thee with the rest of the
creatures) unless thou be that which thou ought to be.

Therefore this thy being, thy life (I say) which God has given thee, must be
employed upon some thing, espicially upon that without which i^ deserves not
to be called by the name of life. Thou say, upon what? Upon that one thing
which may give assurance; that thou art obedient, and thankful to him that
gave it: and that thou who art taken out of that immortal and divine essence,
and desirestro return thither, from whence at the first thou b^st thy being.
This is of two kinds either placed in Contemplacion or in Action:
Contemplation respects God, to whom we must go. Action respects men,
amongst whom we (...), and with whom we go thither, that is called piety,
this du^e both conspire in one, and the self same end is propounded to both;
and both are so acceptable to God that he will not be approacht unto by any
other way. Whatsoever belongs not to this (that is all other occasions where
with men are drawn aside) are nothing else but lette^ and delays. If thou
have bestowed the time which is past (which thou thy self confessest to have
been long) upon both, or at least upon one of these, now thou suruiuest thy
glory, no^e thou beginnest to enjoy that felicity, whereunto thou have
trauailde with so great and so earnest a study: If to neither, thy age ought
to make thee ashamed, that in all that time thou have at^ained ^o nothing;
whereby thou may be much merrie^, and more firmly grounded.

For how do thou show that thou art old; by thy years and white hair? But
these are common to thee with every unhappy and unwise man. There is nothing
swifter nor more violent, then the course of time. One year goes before
another; and ages spedely do pass away. There is nothing sooner heaped
together, then the number of days, months, and years.

Therefore there must be something more, whereby thou may prove thy self to
be old, and from thence obtain the authority and reverence, which is due to
old age.

Surely as the first age of man is, such commonly is the midst, and such is
the last. The middle age does agree with the first, and the last with the
middle.

For commonly what foundation of old age is laid in our childehoode; and our
youth; such is every man's old age, that is built upon it. For to be old, is
not to live without sense, and to grow sluggish with Idleness, but in living to
be formed to that likeness of God, which I mentioned before. From hence is
gained the honor, authority, and Majesty of a man: These and no other are the
chief ornaments of old age.

There is nothing left unto an old man which he may call his own, but only
this one thing, which he obtains by spending of his life purely, religiously,
fitly.

These are the richest, and the best fruits which a man last tastes, in the
last part of his life well spent. Con^rariwise an old age, credulous, foolish,
forgetful, dissolute; to conclude, sad, despised and vexed, must needs follow
a former age spent carelessly, riotously, lasciuiously, intemperatly,
couetously, and wickedly. The^ surely it is not so much a name of age, as a
show of extreme leuitie, doting madness, and the beginning, and taste of
eternal misery: whosoever desires to have this age furnished with his own
virtues, and to be eminent in these ornaments; does so frame his life, that he
fears God, and reuerenceth man; does so compose himself wholly, that when he
must grow old, or die, men may accuse few things in his life, and he can
excuse himself.

If thou have lived thus, though thy body go away with thy years, yet thy
manners shall not wax old. Surely the mind shall be young with his virtues,
and flourish with true praise. The memory of time shall not unpleasant be,
Nor days well spent shall ever trouble thee.


Thy age shall be sweet unto thee, pleasant, honorable, and contemptible to
none, that truly esteems of this benefit, but very full of worship: but
this thou take grievously, that under show of honor (as thou say) thou
art exempted from business: that, which when thou say, thou understand
not, that this whereof thou complainest, is a benefitte of that age not to be
contemned. What can be more wished for of an old man, then after so many storms
and tempests of this life, to enter into a safe haven of rest? to give himself
to quietness and to deck and furnish himsefe? to prepare himself to that
journey, which as all men must undertake, so it is to be wished that it may be
fortunate and happi^ to him? to see others floating, and himself almost at the
shore of safety? There to think of nothing which is not acceptable and
pleasant: to wax old in body and strong in wisdom: yet to flourish in a
sound Judgment and to be eminent in all virtues: to abstain from humane
affairs, and to be busied in divine: to be amongst men, more then a man, or
rather to have put of man, and to have put on God: these are the proper and
particular happiness of an age quiet, calm, wise, and purified; which as it
ought to be slow to take pains in his own affairs: So this wisdom and
authority are necessary for the public good, for although all things quiet
and without trouble, are seemly and convenient for that age, yet in the mind
of old men, there rests a care of the public Majesty.

Therefore none less are exempted from the government of the commonwealth:
nay, that age does challenge as proper and peculiar unto it self this care of
governing of others: For very often those times do happen, wherein old men
with their wisdom, and virtue have established and strengthened the common
wealth, which the rashness of young men has almost overthrown, For they
think (indeed truly) that it does no less belong unto them to take care
what manner of Commonwealth they have received from their ancestors, then what
they have left unto their posterities; the names and memory of some old men
shall be received of all posterity as a thing (I know not how) very
honorable, sacred, and divine. Camellus was four score year old, when he
tryumphed over the Gaulles, and Quintus Fabius was not much less, when with
his patience he weakened Hanniball. Neither was the mind of Massinissa feeble
when he was eighty and eight years old, at what time befriending the Romans he
gave an overthrow in a prosperous battle to the men of Carthage; Plato (that
same pillar of wisdom) in writing attained to the age of fourscore and one
years; Isocrates wanted not scholars, no not when he had lived ninety and
eight years; but what do I go about the examples of such? old men (as are
of numbersome and virtuous years) are infinite. Whose wites have been fresh,
their minds sound, the strength of their senses perfect, their bodies able,
themselves honorable, and their graye hayres crowned with many ornaments; and
their whole bodies carrying a reverent show to increase a dignity and a
majesty in them. To conclude, such as from whom age has taken nothing but
evil desires; delights of sinning and the abuse of strength and sense, whose
gifts of their mind grow and increase: whom virtue has set for all ages to
look at, as certain lights, or rather sacred powers.

Therefore, when the laws gave rest to those, which were above threescore
years old, they exempted them from those actions, which could not be
sustained, but with bodily strength: they imposed upon them, that care which is
performed only with the strength of wisdom, for which scarce any other man is
sufficient, but only he who has his immortality almost in his sight. For
whatsoever a man (so pure, so refinde) speaks or does, he is conversant in
it, as one already received into those heavenly seats, the power of judgment
is not only not dulled in him, but rather sharpened: he cease with his hand,
not with his counsel; he seldom does any thing, but ever commands.
Therefore he erreth, and greatly erreth, whosoever thinks that old age is a
name of a fainte, sluggish, broken, slothful, and a weakened age, and so that
it is exempted from all public offices, when indeed it is rather most busy of
all: most generous, most glorious: as a most excellent worker of those things,
which long, which publicly, and to all, and which shall profit an infinite
posterity. For thou shall see that the rest of old men not only prescribes
what ought to be the businesses of others: but also goes before others, both
in quickenesse of mind, and in valiant and famous acts, as the Captains and
leaders of public Counsel. These properly are the exercises of that happy
maturitie: in these courses, chief valiant and courageous old men excel: in
these they delighte, and in these the mind that is nearest unto his eternity,
does run swifly: go to then, at length give this thanks unto God, who has
brought thee to this old age, give this thanks to old age it self: which
has freede thee from those evil affections; taken thee out of that sink of
pleasures: delivered thee from so many toys, so vain and importunat: and has
reserved thee to his own glory, that thou may will and do that only, which
only thou ought to will, which to be able to do is honorable, and to
perform, admirable: other ages must go through many difficulties: watch
amidst things hurtful, and with a doubtful hazard stand amongst things that
are most slipperie: this age only has power over it self: that which either
ages desire to obtain, this has gotten: to this age only are almost all the
wishes of humanity applied, this alone stands in the highest place: and
do thou sorrow that so profitably and so commendably thou art grown old,
that is that thou have acted thy age as a commedy.

Do thou take it evil that thou drawest near to that which is the last
part of thy life? so may the traveler be sorry that he is come to his
iourneyes end; and the husbandman to see his fields clothed with ripe Corn,
and his trees laden with ripe fruit: or lastly his vintage to be in Autum, or
the time for Olives in Winter. I demand what can be more agreeable to nature,
then that that which only spronge up should whither? that is, that it should
rest in his due season, when it can be no longer. Though death in other ages
of man's life may seem untimely and unripe, yet in old age it is seasonable.

Neither is it violence, but an end and a perfection, and finishing of our
age: therefore to moderate old men, there is a sacietie of this mortality
(which we call life) no less ingrafted in them then in young men a desire to
live; and this satietie does draw with it a contempt of all those things, which
belong not to the true, and sound felicity of man, what a man would that
happy people the Hyperborians have accounted thee to be, where the old men
having a full satieti^ of life after they had feasted and banquetted with their
friends cast themselves from the top of a rock and so ended their days. Thou
that have lived so long, have thou not found by good experience, that death
is not to be reckoned amongst those things that are fearful, but rather
amongst those things that are to be contemned? yea to be desired; For what
is it to dye? Surely, nothing else but to be releast out of this earthly
building. O happy thou (not as those whom the world admireth for riches and
honor) but as one whom the wisest account fortunate; as now having attained to
the very entrance of thy happiness. Oh lay aside at length these most foolish
complaints and compose thy self wholly to esteem thy felicity; admire the
goodness of God, who has brought thee to him self by these steps.

I proceed to show unto the old man all those several benefits which God has
heaped upon him. CHAP 27
NOw at the length, after thou have well looked about thee, and seen all those
things, wherewith man's life is compased, does it come into thy mind a little
more nearly and carefully to suruay thy self? Wholy from those things
which are about thee to enter into thy self? to be affected and amazed? and
then to fall low upon thy knees; to humble thy looks, to be holden carefully
with a diligent meditation, to be erected in thy mind, wholly to rise up in a
reverence and worship of that bounty, from which thou have received so many, so
great, so excellent things? of all which thou art a very famous example. This
properly is piety; whereof lately thou made thy self a professor; which if
it were true and sincere, it might well be assaulted, but it could not be
overthrown; nor cast down: by that thou should be taught that thou art
he whom God (though he be invisible) has vouchsafed part of himself; neither
do I think that he erreth, which calls thee half a God; in that thou art
made according to his similitude, and admitted into the fellowship of his
divinity. For as thy beginning and original is from Heaven, so immortality is
common to thee with thy Creator. A mind truly sincere and virtuous hops this;
this is the confidence of those great and holy wishes; whereof being made
partakers, we are ingrafted into the family of God and are of his house. Man
having obtained this one thing, in this excels all other creatures, and
destitute of this, he is beneath them all. If it be an error and a madness
(as some think) it is to those who are wicked, and desperate, who from hence
are to go into eternal darkness. But to those that are honest, and
religious, this immortality is their sure hope, this the comfort of their hope,
this their only defense. Therefore they wish nothing more then that being
taken speedely out of these troubles, out of the multitude, out of this filth,
and darkness, and being brought into those holy dwellings, they may enjoy
that everlasting life, purely clear, and perfectly bright; to which is added a
sound rest and perpetual security.

To conclude: that inaccessable, and vnexpugna-' ble possession of that great
good, with whose unshaken confidence, they have assuredly defended their hearts
in this life. The man that constantly endeavors to this, lays under his
feet all those things which either do not lead hither, or lead from hence.
All this sink of other things, he leaves to those that are evil, and to
wits that are in admiration with base and vile things; Of this kind, are
riches, pleasures (the nourishments of ambition) that which dazeleth every
ignorant eye, inlargeth their desires and wounds the mind. He knows that
with these things he is neither beautified nor enriched, but holden back and
hindered. He knows that with these things he is deluded and led into error,
and deceit. He knows that of these things, there is not only a satiety but
a hatred, at the only mention of this perpetual felicity, he is awaked; this
only holds him, has him, possesses him; he delights to hear, and speak
of this; this he often repeateth, and imprinteth in himself; all this time he
bestows in the meditation of this; in this he does diligently labor, here
he does more satisfy himself: and what marvel? For where else almost does he
meet with himself, here he sees his beginnings, and his nobility; from hence
he esteems himself; and would have himself esteemed; from hence he
begins to be nourished with an etheriall and divine breath, now he
begins to live with his glory, which is to come, and last of all (as now
already received into those hye and Heavenly places) he returns in his
height and perfection, and becomes an admirer and worshipper of his own
divinity.

I beseech thee, why do thou oppose against this wholesome and saving light
those mournful and sad darkenesses of impyety? Why do thou with this
dangerous accutenesse of wit foolishly feign unto thy self, and falsely
object those things which are not, rather then truly and faithfully be
instructed in those things that are? Why do thou not free thy self out of
this torment? Why do these things swim in thy mind, which if they be not
certain, sound, and stable, thou shall be drowned in the waves of Impyety?
What do thou more trouble, tear, and consume thy self (wretch that thou
art)? VVilt thou never pull up courageously these too much grown branches of
Impyety? Why do thou delay to pluck out these doubts out of thy mind?
Do thou delight to be miserable and to solicit and trouble thy old age
with this blind and unfortunate understanding? why had thou rather
dangerously floate then stay in a sure place of sail with wind and oars over
those rocks? And strive for that quiet and calm harbor, where thou thy self
wholly may be quiet? where thou may without all doubt be received into
that wished haven? Out of which whosoever is long, must needs suffer
shipwreck.

Think that thy life was given thee for this meditation; without this (as thou
say it is not life but death; whosoever is not assured of the goodness of
GOD toward him, of his Immortality, of eternal and everlasting felicity, he
is past remedy. If thou art such a one, why do I talk to thee? Why do I
strive with a shadow? Why do thou lend thy ears to those things, whose
mind is a derider and contemner of them? But consider how friendly I will deal
with thee; how I have not cast away all care of thy salvation; how much I do
give unto thee; whatsoever I have before spoken of the dignity of Man I know
that thou do believe it.

Whatsoever thou have heard concerning that; whatsoever more subtelly, more
learnedly, more largely, may be spoken of it, delivered by the ancient or
late VVriters, what more truly and more fruitefully Christian pyety does
promise, all that (howsoever thou seek to avoid it) I will have thee grant
it as most certain and most known.

With these and such like, I know thou have fully been instructed. These
once thou have let sink into thy breast; of these things once thou have
thought religiously; namely when thy mind was purer and not stained with so
much frowardness. In one word, I know thou know these things: How shall
I convince thee? Namely, if I draw thee into the law; thou say before what
Judge? Before that which thou little (esteeming, how truly and sharply it
confuteth all error and every false and truthelesse speaker) calledst the
Conscience.

Thither do I call thee; that thou may not go far from thy self. Does
not thy conscience tell thee that the presages and diuinations, not of a
drunksicke mind, but of a certain inward instinct, that those predictions the
inward and proper motions of the soul show the deuinity and immortality of it?
I say inward and propper, because the chiefest beginning of those motions is
in it self alone.

And therefore all things must first perish before it forsake it self, and
cease to move, it self being immortal: that which is immortal and being of
a simple and uncompounded substance cannot be divided; and if it be not
divided, it cannot dye; For division is the death of that which is divided.
Death is nothing else, but the division and dissolution of one particular into
two or many; not content with these, thy conscience proceeds and says, That
the mind is the glass of the soul, the seat of council, and the government
of life.

From hence proceed those gifts of the soul, which testify the deuinity of
it; as quickness, providence, prudence, and wisdom. Upon these attend
memory, understanding, knowledge, and all the rest of the faculties, that area
kin to these, and inseperable from them. To these we may ad those, which
from the euerlastingnesse of it are derived into the affections; from the
affections to the senses; In this rank first is the swiftness of our
thoughts; Next our desires, joys, hopes, fears. From hence it certainly
appears that the better part of man, is the reasonable soul, and the praises
that man has, belong not to the body, but to the soul. Likewise that
dispraise, and Infamy are not so much of the body as of the soul corrupted,
and a runnaway from his own nobility to those tents of evil affections.

It is most absurd to think that the soul which ever thinks of his
posterite, and is so careful of the long continuance of the memory of it self
should dye together with the body. Nay, rather it is careful what, and how
great it may be, in the opions of men after it is freed from the body; as
though then it thought it had gotten life, when the body had lived many
years: For there is nothing can be spoken so falsely, so foolishly, so
lyingly, and so impudently; as that the body (a thing earthly) should give life
to the soul, a thing heavenly and divine, which of necessity must be
granted: if the soul lives no longer then whilst it is in this vessel of
flesh, and that it dies as soon as it is let loose from thence.

But there is nothing which either is or can be more certain, then the
mortality of the body, because it consists of those things which have their
motion from others, namely things uncertain, fading, inconstant, waxing old,
withering, perishing, and ready to perish, whereupon it is that there is
nothing in the body, which can be said to be lively. For to live is to be
moved of it self: but the body has his motions, and agitations from the
soul: wherefore this, whether it be called mortality, or finishing of life, or
extinguishing, seeing it is a sending out, and a freeing of the soul, it is
not only not evil, but the beginning of good, and of that good which a-lone is
the chief, and perfect, and eternal good.

By which things, that may be gathered which I said before, that the
dissolution of the body which we call death, is not only not to be feared, but
(I had almost said) to be desired; doubtless merely, constantly, readily to be
desired. For this is that by which alone there is a passage made for the souls
of good men, to a true life, his own, and everlasting: the same end of life
expects all; but the effect that follows of it, is distinguished: For some
dye once, that they may dye eternally; others, that they may live for ever.

Now, thou see how foolishly this bodily mortality is either feared, or
lamented: after which immediately follows that heavenly immortality. These
and far greater then these, and by many degrees much stronger, which neither
the weakness of my mind, nor the slenderness of my wit can attain, nor my
self express, which it is fit should be taken out of the writings of holy
men, thou can not deny but they are confirmed by thy own conscience; the
sense whereof (although thy body be old) cannot be dulled. For the
conscience is the beam of Cods eye, sent to every man into the secret of his
breast, and the most inward part of his heart, this every man bears about
him; this no man can avoid, no more then himself: It is fixed in his heart
roots; It is given unto man, as an arbitrator, and ouerlooker. It can never be
shund, never extinguished, never deceived. Why, think thou? because it is
that divine force, which is present in all thy thoughts, actions, virtues,
vices; to those a favorer and a commender, to these ever present though as a
secret, yet as most severe accuser.

This thou may understand to be not one of the least arguments of Divinity.
Therefore (O thou old man) if thou leanest that way, thy soul is; if that way
thou stand firm; thou will also be more equal and indifferent, to that
which thou call death, and wise men call the end of misery? Thou will (to
conclud) so persuade thy self, that when thou shall be sent from hence, thou
shall be received there: so that thou go that way, where thou shall be
known as a Citizen, and a heavenly inhabitant.

From hence also thou may understand that mortal things do little pertain
unto thee seeing all the use of them belongs to thy body: The body serves
the mind; which uses these no further the^ is fit to keep her dwelling
vndesolued, until she be commanded to forsake it; For surely this which we
call life, is nothing else, but the way of the traveling soul that goes to
his own Country. And all these which encounter him in this life, are but as
provision for this great journey, and food to nourish the body, whilst it is
the chariot of the soul. But to covet these things too vehemently; to stay
gazing and admiring these things by the way and so to forget that place
whereunto we go, it is not the work of the soul, but of the body not of a man,
but of a beast, for it is certain that man in respect of his soul, is a God,
and in respect of his body is a wild beast. And therefore the longer the
soul dwells in the body, his work is so much the harder. And his praise
the greater, if it suffer not it self to be infected with the contagion of
it. Yet I do not say that any man uncommanded must go out of his standing, but
when he has leave and is called for.

And when he is cited and sent for to appear, then if he be slow, then if
he be unwilling to go, if he complain, if he strive against it, if he
suffer himself to be drawn, surely he is ignorant of himself, what he is
and of his own good.

What? He betrayeth himself by his own ill confession, he makes fetters to
tie himself, and for ever he is excluded from that felicity, without which a
man is nothing but a receptacle of miseries.

Now see what is thy judgment of thy self, who so much fear death: thou
can not plainly show that there is more earthly matter in thee, that is
claye, filth, impuritie, then there is man: that is then soul, then celestial
substance. The soul in the body is as a stranger in an Inn: it is the part
of an inconsiderat and unwise man to go unwillingly out of his Inn, in
respect of some object of the throat or the belly: To conclude, it is the point
of an unskillful man, and of one that thinks little of his own safety, with
the behoulding of earthly things to forgo heavenly: seeing then that in death
there is so much good, do thou blame thy old age which has brought thee to
so great a good.

Why do thou not rather lay aside this voluntary blindness, and this so
careful a frowardnes, and look at the light? why do thou not acknowledge
this same excellent gift, or rather service of this old age, which brings
thee so near so excellent a good? Oh stick no longer in these sands, pull out
thy self as speedely as thou can; shake of these lettes, break in sunder
these hindrances: call the assistance of thy ancient and former mind: stir
up thy learning: bend the force of thy wit, call upon the holy spirit, be
carried above thy senses, awake thy self, to give God hearty and immortal
thanks: esteem his so many benefits in thy mind; express them all in thy
words, in thy countenance, in thy gesture, in imitation, in example, then thou
shall learn by little and little, that thou ought seriously to rejoice,
that the time of thy human mortality is come to an end: that the time of thy
earthly abode is expired; that the end of thy sinning is at hand, that
mortal hopes are cut of, and that heavenly hopes are augmented, and increased:
surely when thou cammest from thy childhoode to be a youth, thou begannest to
scorn all those things which did please thy childhoode: then being a man I
think thy wishes were much wiser then in thy youth: to conclude, in thy old
age, thou see all the desires of the former ages to be quenched, as hot
burning iron in cold water, what do thou learn from hence? Doubtless that
there is nothing of such value, in any part of this life, wherewith thou
ought so to be delighted, that thou should wish to tarry in it; but
that there is an other life, which who so enters truly may say My wishes
end, I have attaind
All good enough, my life has gaynd
A Citizen of heaven, I am decreed,
Thus all my wishes I exceed.


For there shall thou be a possesser of thy self in security; there shall
thou be an everlasting fountain of thy own good: to thee, unto thy self,
there shall be from thy self, an ouerflowing greatness of joy (yet whereof thou
art capable) there what thou shall be, thou shall ever be, and be willing to
be; thou shall not desire the praises of men, as having exceeded human
mediocritie, and who art now heaped with heavenly felicities: for as the
shadow here follows the body, so there glory shall follow thee, there thou
shall swell with no desires, there thou shall be lean with no thoughts, there
thou shall wast and pine with no affections, thou shall not be solicited with
hope or fear; thou shall not be disquieted with any rumors; no gains can
make thee more happy, no losses can make thee less; thy immortality shall
continue in the same state; thy life shall be a perpetual tranquillity, and
that (which is the perfection of all felicity) it shall be a continual sight,
and contemplation of thy maker.

Of those that are unthankful unto men. CHAP. 29.
HItherto have I proceeded with all the diligence and care I could, to repel
those darts which the unthankful mind throws against God: to these of ours,
let any man add whatsoever, he is guilty of himself, neither can I or any
man else express those things, for they are placed in the lowest bottom of the
mind, where lies secret all that poyso^ which man's impude^cie, utters
against God, every man as he inwardly searches himself, shall find it, he
only who is the seer of hearts, and also the measurer of times, and the vmpire
of thoughts: and to whom all secrets are open; apprehe^deth the impurities of
an others breast, these which we have set down which either may be learned by
reading, or touched and known by experience; it is fit the Readers should take
in good part.

Those that are more special, and more secret are left to every man himself;
it is sufficient for me, to have showed those things, wherein men in this
kind most usually offend; furthermore least I should permit by negligence any
thing that appertains to this subject; I will in one word set down those,
which by this worst vice delude the society of man, the fault of an ungrateful
mind, although it stick fast by the roots of every vice, yet as I think it
takes chiefly his increase, and nourishment, from folly, covetousness, and
pride. For the unthankful person, neither acknowledges the benefits
received; neither regards him that gave them; but him that is ready to give,
wheresoever he is, he finds him out and hangs upon him. He gapeth after
things, soon heard, desired, hoped. He accounts him of whom he has
received a benefit, as a creditor, whose name he blotteth out as not being
minded to pay him. Surely in that he thinks, that he ought him a benefit,
which gave him one and was not in his debt, he is a fool, he that neither
repayeth nor thinks of repaying that which he has received, is the robber
of an other, and the sordide miser of his own, and in that he does not
acknowledge them, he is proudely malicious and maliciously forgetful.
Therefore an unthankful person (howsoever he wickedly dissembles) does know
that he has received a benefit, but he takes the thanks from it that is
due unto it, and either passes it all over with silence, and dawbeth over the
memory of it, or impudently denies the fact. I say, denies either by
dissembling by words or in deed; neither does the memory of an ungrateful
person so much fail him, as his unluckiness, malitiousnesse, and dissembling
ouerruleth him, which he himself denies not, by often saying, many sacrifice,
but few are heard from hence there spring many kinds of unthankful persons,
some requite a benefit as they think but secretly, and as fearing least it
should appear, so careful they are, least any man should see it, neither are
they so much ashamed to requite it, as to confess that good turn, which to
confess they ought not to be ashamed; of this kind are those for the most
part who are bound to their inferiors; to these I may join those who are
bound for those gifts, whereby they are more wise, and more learned, yet
either they return some small thing, for so great a benefit (and with much a
do) or look a squint or not at all, at those by whom they are enriched with
those benefits which cannot be requited either with gold or silver, and if
peradventure they do acknowledge the benefit, they so frame themselves, that
they seem not to repay it: But to bestow as it were some benefit upon their
inferiors: like to these are those which either contemn, or hate their
School Masters, and those whom they have had as instructers and informers of
their young years; by all these for the most part a benefit is so requited,
that a man had rather not have it requited at all. In this kind often and very
greatly Princes offend toward men painful and industrious; such as are most
obsequious unto them; thus often, Generalles, and Captains offend toward
soldiers of excellent virtue; and the less and inferior persons are not in
this kind less froward, then those great and mighty, whilst they often swell,
and are pust up more then either they know or can perform; and whilst they do
admire their own and odiously extol them, the bounty of others does grow
vile and base with them; surely though they be witty and learned, yet they are
swelling and arrogant, and indeed unthankful; and evil interpreters of an
other man's liberality. Of this kind was Lentulus, he whom Augustus had drawn
from the Courts and pleading, to great riches and honor; yet found him
unthankful, for he was not afraid to say, that the Emperor had not
bestowed so much upon him, as he lost by pleading, and the use of his
eloquence. Amongst unthankful persons I reckon him who is thankful for fear,
for he fears that in his doubtful estate, he shall be forsaken if he be not
esteemed for some recompense, and the signification of a grateful mind.
Others require a benefit in some part, but it is of an other man's, whilst in
the mean time they spare their own.

These understand not that there is scarce any requittall of thanks, but with
some cost, nay not without the help first of virtue, then of our wealth, and
our increasing happiness (others and these are men of an evil disposition)
wish evil to those, of whom they have received a benefit, that in the misery
of an other they may have occasion to be found thankful. Neither do they
this so much to help him that needs his help, as laying aside all
conscience, for a vain rumor of glory. Others (whilst they are over desirous
to seem thankful) they fall into that vice which they shun; and which
exceedingly they hate in others: they are sorry (they say) for the least thing
to be bound either to this man or to that; they are so impatient for the
receiving of a benefit, that as ouerloaden with some great burden, they are
presently desirous to lay it off, these whilst they cannot endure to sustain
the benefits of others show plainly that they will no way have other be
beholding to them: others presently return the thing they have received or the
like value, as a debtor does gold or silver, they dare bestow nothing besides
the principal. These in giving back again that, which they have received, or
some thing of the same value, do not requite a benefit; for seeing every
requital of a benefit, is rather the thanks of the mind, then of the thing,
he that requiteth not a thing given, with the same thankful mind that it is
given, does not requite a benefit.

From hence it follows, that he which does not requite a benefit, because
when he would, he cannot, is often thankful; whereas he that requiteth it
not with thy mind, is ever unthankful. Others slowly and sluggishly
requiting a benefit, requite it not at all; for with these a benefit does so
wither, that by degrees it vanishes away; these Saint Ambrose pronounces to
be unthankful, as all those who expect to be called upon to requite a
benefit received; others in requiting an old benefit, expect a new, neither
do they know how to give any thanks, but such as have hooks in them; which
what way soever they are applied, they ever eatch something. This is the
Courtiers manner to ensnare the liberality of others, in this deceitful kind
of thanks; and with this mind, speak of the old benefits, to gain new and
much greater by it. Thus they banish benefits out of the society of men, and
instead of benefits, bring in a deceitful gaining kind of traffic, and
plain filthy baseness, wherewith the honesty of all benefits is blemished. He
also is unthankful whom thou have not tied unto thee with thy benefits, nor
gives thee no thanks for them, but requiteth them with evil words, and to
these adds also evil deeds.

Thus he hates him to whom he owes mo of a debtor, and one that is bound,
he becomes an enemy, ever quarreling, injurious, full of brawling,
threatening, and revenging. This worst kind of men (from whom there is nothing
to be reaped but a harvest of much evil) one resembles to a ram which often
butteth with his horns at him that is higher; I should rather think such a
one to be that Woulse, of which was made the Greek Epigram, which I have
assailed to translate word for word: Ifeede the wolf, with milk (against my
will)
But so my shepherd needs will me command,
Fed with my milk, he fearcely does me kill:
For kind no kindness is able to withstand.


This kind of unthankful persons, the wise man notes in these words; he that
rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house. Like unto
these are they to whom we must give thanks (and against our wills) for miuries
and reproaches that are done unto us; Of this kind are these cruel heads,
tyrants, diffemblers, framed to arrogance, cruelty, and impyety, who in the
midst of sacreledge and flaughter, according to their clemency and good nature
bestow wicked and cruel fanours; at the envy whereof they blush not, but
amongst their sighs and groans, are content to suffer flattering thanks to be
bestowed upon the^, and find praise in heinous offenses. To conclude they
think it meet not only to have thanks but to receive gifts from those whom
they have spoiled. Neither have Princes only this great and heavy hand, but
others also, such a one did Marcus Caelius describe Appius Claudius to be,
writing to Marcus Tullius, in these words. I am ashamed to confess unto thee,
and to complain of the injuries of the most ungrateful man Appius, who
began to hate me because he ought me many good turns, and when that
miserable man could not command himself to pay them, he made open war with
me: wisely and after his manner (says Tacitus) benefits are so long
acceptable, as that there is hope they may berequited; but when they begin to
exceed for thanks, they reap hatred; These are the ways so far as I know
whereby men are for the most part unthankful; that is evil deceivers of
benefits received; In which vice (as Cicero says) there is no vice wanting;
Doubtless there is none a greater enemy to humane society. By this means
mutual charity is extinguished, the hope of mutual help is cut off, and all
the traffic of humanity and kindness is stopped. For the going and coming of
thanks being taken away, those whom thou see, are no more men, but wild
beasts in the shape of men, ever ravening that which is nearest unto them. The
unthankful person is an enemy of all men; nay of all humanity it self: he is
a gulf that draws all things unto him, without respect of any but of
himself, It may wholly be dispaired that there should be any intercourse of
humanity with him, who admits no interchange either of things, or words:
For as their is no greater argument of love and courtesy then ingeniously to
receive, and to give thanks: so there is no surer sign of a very crooked
nature, then to be unthankful: those that have called an unthankful person,
a tun that is bored through, because it holds nothing, but all is lost that
is put into it, In my opinion they have said little what he is: He is I know
not what worse thing, a plague, a poison, those are more significant in my
opinion which have given to the unthankful person, the ewe tree for his
badge, a tree sad and unlucky, full of hurtful fruit (if those poisoned
berries may be called fruit) and a deadly shadow, nay antiquity did account
this vice so odious that the Latins did not think it worthy to have a name,
besides what marvel is it, if as there is no man so hurtful to all, so there
be no man so hated of all as he that is infected with this vice.

There is nothing says Plautus more burdensome then an unthankful person. It
is much better that thou should be ever bountfiull, then unthankful; For
the good will commend him, but this even the badde themselves will dispraise.
We have that same excellent speech of ENNIVS to AUGUSTUS, taking it
impatiently that it was not in his own power, not to be unthankful.

This one injury (says he) O Caesar thou have done unto me, that I live and
die unthankful. All which things though they be very true, and that it is
certain that there is nothing a greater enemy or more odious then an
unthankful person, yet we must not hate them, but blame them, and amend
them, least peradventure we hate our selves. For who is there if he look more
truly, and more severely into himself, that is not prone unto this vice? who
is there that loves not himself, so much that almost he despises all others?
Who is there so upright, that leans not this way? The greatest men
oftentimes, and such as were the conquerors of other vices (if this were not
wanting unto them) are triumphed over, of this fault only; neither is this the
stain and blemish of particular persons, and men unlearned, but of the most
and most skillful: yea (which is more strange) of all, and often of those who
are much esteemed for their excellent wisdom. The Senate of Rome is said
unthankfully to have requited the first builder of their City: nay, Rome it
self was held most unthankful to Camillus and Scipio Africanus, the two
greatest and worthyest pillars of that Empire. Surely these are said to be the
words of Africanus: O ungrateful Country, thou shall not inioye so much as my
bones. He might truly exclame: Punishment is all that triumph gains,
And does our Conquests merit only stains?


The Carthagians were not free from this fault, when as they gave Zantippus the
Lacedemonian captain, for taking of Regulus, an honorable reward, but secretly
to the ma^riners to be drowned. An ungrateful mind in the men of Carthage,
could not endure that the Lacedaemonians should gain the honor of this taken
enemy. The Prophet Esaias that severe rooter up of impiety, in the very
beginning of his Prophecy, in plain terms vpbraydeth the Jews with their
great unthankfulness; the ox know eth his owner, and the Ass his masters
cribbe, but Israel has not known, my people has not understood. Thus God by
Ezechiell reprooueth the great unthankfulness of Jerusalem, Ezech. 16. Wisely
says Si^maclius, it is never fittenor safe for a Commonwealth to be
unthankful. It is truly also said of Marcus Aurelius (that wise and most
experienced Prince) that two things especially are to be observed of a Prince,
not to revenge his enemies, nor to be unthankful toward his friends. As it
is true in private persons, so that common saying is most true in Princes: The
earth yields not any thing worse, then an unthankful person. Here it is fit
to admonish all not to detract from their bounty, by reason of the ingratitude
of any, nay rather let him desire to be esteemed a man beneficial, because
this virtue lies contemned; especially in this age which has scarce left any
place either for benefits or thanks. Let him think that the greatest reward
of this virtue, is in the virtue it self. Therefore let him not require thanks
for a pleasure done: For thanks perish as soon as they are required; nay the
only remembrance of a benefitte, is an vpbray ding, no less hateful in the
giver, then forget fullness in the receiver. It is a ridiculous leuitie to
suffer the occeasions, and matters of well doing to perish; because the
benefitte with some one man has perished: Nay, if any where, then here we must
be constant; For the first virtue continues not unless thou add a second to
it: For thou can scarce defend former benefits; but with following benefits,
In giving and receiving of benefits, we must not ever follow which way things
lead us, but what way reason counsels. It is of so much value says
(Seneca) to find one thankful, that thou must prove even those that are
unthankful. Therefore let every one do this, whilst he gives former
benefits, to think of those which must be given after;

Of the punishment of unthankful persons. CHAP 27
THe greatest punishment of an unthankful person is in the fault it self. No
infamy may be compared with that which springs from this stain. Neither is
there any punishment so cruel as to be called, and to be accounted unthankful;
this, though it be true, yet Seneca says that amongst the Macedonians there
lay an action of plea against unthankful persons: and other grave writers
affirm that there have been Judgments given against this kind of men.
Others prosecute this fault with the most grievous kind of punishment: killing
the unthankful person by nayling him through the neck to the earth with a
stake. Surely Amianus Marcellus reports, that the Persians had most severe
laws, amongst which the cruellest were against those who were unthankful, or
had failed their friends.

Thus amongst the Hebrews: sons that were unthankful to their parents were
stoned to death: Phillip, King of Macedon branded with a mark that soldier
that was unthankful; amongst the Athenians the bondsman convicted of his
patron, was deprihed of the right of freedom. By the civil law, Donations
bestowed upon unthankful persons, were reuersed. Sons for this fault were
disinherited. he that was at liberty, was called into the government of his
father: the vassal loses his free farm: Amongst other nations (I know not
whether more wisely) there was no law (at all) made against unthankful
persons:

For seeing the value of a benefitte can scarsely be esteemed, and of an
uncertain thing the valuation is uncertain, it is thought sufficient to
punish him that is unthankful with the hatred of men, and to refer him unto
God the severe revenger. Let this action cease says Seneca, because a good
turn must be done without hope of recompense, for it is the debt of honesty.
Which if it be true (as it is) if any man be called into judgment for a
benefit received, and not requited, it cease to be a benefit, and the thing
is made a debt. For all thanks of a benefitie as soon as there is mention of
paying, utterly perishes: for the reason is far unlike (says Tully) betwixt
a debt of money, and a debt of thanks.

Every benefit received ought to be requited, and how it may be. CHAP, 31,
HItherto we have labored to make plain what impiety against God, what
wickedness against man, and how much inhumanitie is in an unthankful mind: I
have also taught that those acceptable and fruitful thanks which only God
accepts of us, is a sincere and a religious mind, namely that mortality
should (at least) reverently worship that sacred power which it cannot
recompense with any benefit, and whose benefittes he cannot value how great
they are, that him he should reverence with all duty and honor: not in unlike
manner are men to be requited. First I say, that whatsoever the state is
wherein we are, in that we are never deprived of the ability of thankefulnes;
if with all our understanding be not taken from us: for the first step of a
thankful mind, is no such thing as there need much labor to perform it,
for it is nothing else, but presently to acknowledge the benefit, presently to
be bound by it, to profess the thing not dissemblingly, but as it is indeed,
to confess how much thou have received, of what kind, and of what kind of
giver, by what occasion, how fit for thy affairs; in how fit a time and place,
how bountifully, with what facility in the giver, and with what profit to the
receiver, neither otherwise can they be both made alike. To conclude, so to
think, and thus or in the like manner to speak to him, of whom we have
received a benefit: as long as I live, I shall never think that I have
returned thanks: no not though I try all means, neither I beseech you do
you thinkeso: Your benefitte shall ever remain firm in my mind: that which
you have given, you account a small thing, but I find that to be great which
I have received: besides how great must I needs think it bestowed, without my
desert; to obtain which, I used no begging, no cost, no labor, no flattery,
no boldness: besides you used no art, to make me entreat more earnestly,
you^ cut of all those things which might hinder or weaken my hope: of your
own accord you have ever bestowed that excellent benefit upon me; you turned
the modesty of my wishes into confidence, my confidence into effect; and having
yet received nothing, yet you expect nothing; so that I cannot tell whether
your bounty were greter in giving, or your modesty in expecting: surely if I
can perform nothing else, yet I will do this, that the benefit which exceeds
my ability to requite, by my thankfulness you shall ever have cause to
remember: although I know that I am more bound unto you then I can speak; and
because I have nothing wherewith to give thanks, I will only wish and desire
God to perform it for me. Doubtless he that speaks thus, although he has
not given any thing, yet he has requited the benefit, when as often times he
that has given much, yet has done nothing, and is unthankful. For all the
estimation of a benefit (as we have spoken before) is referred unto the mind:
not unto that which is either given or received, not to the vulgar estimation
of men, which oftentimes misconstrueth things, nor to the profit either reaped
or hoped for from the benefit: and as we have said that a benefit is one thing,
and a debt an other, so here we must distinguish the matter of thanks and
reward, benefit and debt: of him who is a debtor for a good turn, and of him
who is debtor for money lent, hereupon it follows, that it is in every man's
own power, how unthankful he is, for as soon as thou show that thou
have gratefully received a benefit, thou have requited it; study to be
thankful and thou art thankful. For as soon as sincerely thou have but
thought of requiting a benefit, thou have requited it. Look at that which he
looked at that gave it, he that has given a benefit has filled both the sides
of the lease; both of the layings out, and the receipts. If thou returnest a
benefit with the same mind that thou have received it, thou art thankful, if
thou need none to put thee in mind, if thou be admonisht of thy own
conscience; thou have obtained the praise of a thankful person; thou have
adorned thy thanks with all the ornaments of beauty; last of all, thou show
that thou art brought up in the company of those most thankful graces; whose
Trinity wise antiquity made to be the badge of a thankful mind. The next step
of a thankful mind, is, that he which is so affected perform indeed that which
he thus thinks: to this purpose, that he ad all the means and the endeavors
that he can, and the greater and more acceptable that the benefit is which thou
have received, so much the more soon and more cheerfully seek occasion, and
being offered take occasion to requite it; leave nothing unattempted to show
thy self thankful, so let every man persuade himself, that as it was
needful to receive the benefit, so it is no less needful to requite it. In
one word, whosoever thou art, fear God, reverence the judgments of men, free
thy self from those punishments which remain for unthankful persons, know that
humanity is contained in the intercourse of benefits, this being taken away, al
right and honesty is utterly ouerthrown, as much as in thee lies (whosoever
thou art) defend and maintain this whereof God, nature, and necessity is an
author to thee.

These pains Right Honorable I will enlarge no further, although I am not
ignorant that much more might be spoken of it, which I know is performed of
most learned and most eloquent men, who before me have travailed with
co^mendations in this argument, but as every man follows his own spirit, so I
doubt not but I shall obtain pardon of you, and of all those into whose hands
this labor shall come, if being content with these few things I cut of all
other superfluous, intricate and by ways; I know that those delight more, but
in these which I have used, there is more strength; peradventure more authority
and credit, and if any thing in this be pretermitted by me, it is fit that
he that observes so much, should supply himself, out of those everlasting
fountains both old and new, whilst we in the mean time do meditate something
of more worth.

Laus Deo FINIS.

