A MANIFESTATION OF THE GREAT FOLLY AND BAD SPIRIT OF certain in England
calling themselves secular priests.

Who set forth daily most infamous and contumelious libels against worthy men
of their own religion, and diverse of them their lawful Superiors, of which
libels sundry are here examined and refuted.

By priests living in obedience.

2. Tim. 3.

Their folly, shall be manifest to all men.

Luc ^^.

The unclean spirit went forth and took seven other spirits, more wicked
then himself, and all entering dwelt there, and the ending of those men was
worse then the beginning.

Superiorum Permissu. 1602.

Of the contradiction of fond men.
PRoficit semper contradictio stultorum ad stultitiae demonstrationem; quia
quae ingenio insipientis aut peruersae intelligentiae aduersus veritatem
coaptantur, dum and in concussa and immobilis est, necesse est, vt quae e
diuerso sunt, and fals^ intelligantur and stulta.

Hilar. lib. 8. de Trinit. THe more that unwise men do contend and contradict
others, the more they make manifest their own indiscretion and folly: for that
such arguments as are framed either by their own fond inventions or perverse
misconstructions against truth (that remains ever immovable and not to be
shaken) must needs be found to be false and foolish.

THE PREFACE to the Catholic Reader.
MVCH against our wills were we forced these days past (dear Catholic reader)
to interrupt the course of our peaceable priestly labors, and to enter into a
certain contention and war of writing, not so much against the common enemy
of our religion (for that had been comfortable) as against our own tumultuous
brethren, in defense of order, justice, and innocence, and of the lawful
authority of our Superiors intemperatly impugned by them, which defense we
called, an Apology of the English Catholic Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, etc.
endeavoring therein so to temper the style of our writing, as might be somewhat
answerable to the gravity of the subject, and yet exasperate no further the
impugner^ then the necessary opening of the truth of matters should merely
force us unto; and this we hope that every indifferent Reader will have
considered, and be ready to bear us witness.

And this office being once performed for the true information of those that
desire to know how matters had passed, our meaning was to go no further in
this contention but to return to our reposed life again, and so our hope was,
that we might, but alas we^ prove the contrary, Plut. i^ Sy^pos.
and that as a grave author says: facilior est ortus, quam exitus rix^rum, the
beginning of braulings is easyer then the ending, especially when the passions
whereon they are grounded, be inward and permanent, as in our case it seems to
stand, the ground of al these contentions appearing evidently, to be envy and
emulation, fostered by ambition, anger, revenge and other such Assistants,
which how perilous and pernicious counselors they be to continue debate,
rancor, and malice, and to bring all to perdition that harken unto them, were
ouerlong to recyte out of holy men's wrytings, yet can I not omit the saying of
an old Saint, Pi^mmo^, the Anachorite recounted by (...) Cassia^us almost
twelve hundred years pas^; his speech is this:

Sciendum sane est i^^idiae morbu^ difficilius ad medel^m qu^m ^^tera vitia
perduci, Cassian. col. 18 Cap. 17.
nam eum, quem semel veneni sui peste corruperit, pene dixerim carere remedio:
ipsa namque est lues de qua figuraliter dicitur per prophetam: Ecce ego mittam
vobis serpents regulos quibus non est incantatio, and mordeb^nt vos, etc.
Hier. 2.
You must know that the sickness of envy is cured more hardly then other
vices, in so much that when any man is infected with this venom, I may almost
say, that he is irremediable, seeing this infectio^ is that whereof God speaks
of by Hieromie the prophet figuratively: Behold I vvil send upon you deadly
serpents, against whom no inchauntment shall prevail, and they shall byte
you, etc. Thus begins he his treatese of this matter, wherein for that
diverse things are most excellently spoken by him fit to our purpose, and easy
to be applied to the present state of our affayers, we think it not amiss to
recyte some part thereof more at large: hear then his discourse:

Rightly (says he) is the biting of envy compared by the prophet to the
venomous stinging of a deadly basiliske serpent, whereby the first poisoned
serpent of all others, yea the author and inuentor of all poison (the devil)
was both slain and slew. For first by envy he slew himself, and afterward him
whom he enuyed, to wit our first parent, (...). 2.
according to the saying of the scripture: By envy of the devil death entered
into the world, etc. And as he being once deadly infected with this poison of
envy could never after be cured, either by the wholesome medicine of penance or
otherwise, but perished eternally: so men that suffer themselves to be
corrupted with the same poison, and bytings of envy; do become incurable,
excluding all helps of wholesome inchauntements of the holy Ghost against the
same.

The reason whereof is, for that the envious are not styrred up to hate others
for any true fault, which they see in them, but rather for their good parts,
virtues and gifts of God, and so being ashamed to utter the true causes in deed
of their auersion, they pretend other idle and superfluous external reasons,
which being no true causes indeed, but only feigned, it is but time lost to go
about to remove them: the true causes indeed lying hidden in the bottom of
their entralles, etc. Nay further this pestilence of envy when it once enters
ma^s heart it becomes so incurable, as it is exasperated by fair speech,
puffed up by humble offices, and styrred to wrath by gyfts and good turns;
Pro^. 22. Secundum 70. Into.
in so much as Solomon says, nihil sustinet zelus, nothing can content or
satisfy emulation; for by how much the party enuyed is eminent either in
humility, patience, munificence, or other virtues; the more potent pricks of
envy has the enuyer to be styrred up against him, nor is he satisfied with any
thing but with his death or ruin, etc.

Wherefore so much the more pernicious and incureable is envy above all other
vices, by how much more it is increased, and nourished by those very remedies
whereby other sins are cured and extinguished; as for example: he that is
angry with you for some hurt received, if you recompense him liberally he is
content and satisfied: He that complayneth of an injury received, if you give
him humble satisfaction he is pleased again: But what will you do to him who
the more humble and benign he sees you, the more is he offended to see those
virtues in you? And what servant of God to satisfy an envious man will leave of
virtue and other good things, wherewith God has endewed him? etc.

Thus writes that blessed man, and how fully this falls out in our affayre,
where Gods holy gyfts and virtues themselves are enuyed at, by them that will
not immitate the same, is easy to discern. And if no other proof were extant,
yet their own books set forth in such number and with such passion to
discredit their adversaries are sufficient witnesses, wherein they set down so
many high praises given by other men to their said adversaries, as albeit the
parties themselves, do nether challenge nor acknowledge them, yet is it evident,
that the envy of these and other like praises has put these men's mynds quite
out of joint. Neither remains there any way (as it seems) for the enuyed in
this case to discharge them^selues of this raging tempest raised against them,
but either to change their laudable course of life, whereby they have gotten
that esteem which these men envy at: (and this is not tolerable) or for these
men to alter their judgments, and se their own follyes and passions herin,
which we shall endeavor to lay before them in this our treatese, and that out
of their own books and wrytings.

And albeit we had fully purposed (as before is said) to write no more about
this argument, yer seeing so many libels to come our daily so false and
slanderous, and so pernicious, not only to Christian unity but also to the
integrity of Catholic faith and verity, and those under the names of priests,
the very honor of priesthood it self has forced us to take pen in hand again
(contrary to our former determination) thereby to wipe away (if it be possible)
some part of that notorious discredit, and slander which justly otherwise may
fall upon our whole order if such intemperate proceedings published in priests
names, should pass uncontrolled by all kind of priests.

Wherefore, our intent in this treatese is, to show that either these infamous
libels set forth in priests names are not indeed of priests, but of some other
that play their parts, or if they come from priests indeed, then must we needs
run, in this matter, to the words of our Savior touching sal infatuatum
infatuated priests, Math. 5.
such as have lost not only all savor of priestly wisdom, Luc. 14.
and shining light of true understanding, but all true spirit also of Christian
priests and priesthood, which we shall declare by diverse proofs and
considerations, taken out of their own books, for which cause we have
entitled this treatese. A manifestation of the great folly and bad spirit of
some in England that call themselves secular priests. Luc. 11.
Whereunto we were induced the rather as well by those words of S. Paul.
alleged in our first page, insipientia little manifesta erit omnibus: 2. Tim.
3.
their folly shall be made manifest to all (speaking of such as made division) as
also by that dreadful parable of our Savior, concerning the wicked unclean
spirit, that leaving men for a time, and finding no rest abroad returned, and
perceauing the habitation left by him to be well cleansed, but not well fenced,
entered again with seven worse spirits then himself, and so made the ending of
those men worse then their beginning.

It were over long, and exceeding the measure of a preface, to set down here,
the interpretations and godly considerations of old ancient Saints about this
parable of our Savior, especially seeing that for so much as appertains to
this our affayre, it is not hard for any man to see the coherence and
application thereof for that when these libellers were first made priests (if
they be priests) and took that most sacred order of clergy upon them, whereby
they wear adopted into the peculiar choice and severed portion of almighty God
(for so much imports Clergy) they did not only renounce the spirit of
Satan in general, as men do in baptism by those words: ab renuncio diabolo
and omnibus operibus eius, etc. but particularly also the profane and secular
spirit of the world, and all corruption and uncleanness thereof appertayning to
libetty of the flesh, by their strait obligation of chastity devotion and piety
annexed to that holy calling above other men, which profane and unclean
spirit being once excluded, by the holy character and unction of priesthood,
and the house made clean by the broom of holy penance, adorned also with
graces and gyfts of the holy Ghost, if after the same spirit return again,
and find the guard and defense thereof weak by negligence of the keeper, or the
doors broken open by the violence of passions (as in our case, alas, it seems
to stand) he presumes (says our Savior) not only to enter again himself,
but to take bad company also with him, to wit seven other spirits nequiores
se, more wicked then himself, that is to say more spiritual malicious, more
covert and hidden, more obstinate and self willed, more opposite to charity,
and more like to the devil himself, that is a mere spirit, and the head patron
and fountain of all wicked wilful spirits.

For albeit the gross spirit of wordly sensuality be a foul and unclean
spirit (especially in a priest) and be also from the devil, yet as Cassianus in
the former place does note, and all other Fathers do observe in like manner, it
is no way so dangerous or wicked as are the spirits of more spiritual sins,
to wit envy, pride, ambition, hatred, revenge and other like, which are so
counterset and covered poisons, as often times they are not known nor held for
vices, and consequently neither cured nor cared for; nay they pass for
virtues, and so are often times taken by the possessors themselves, as for
example; envy for zeal in Gods cause, pride for courage, ambition for desire of
ability to do much good, and so in the rest; whereby it comes to pass that he
whose house is possessed with these most pernicious guests does think himself
well furnished, and in good case, and consequently neither endeauoreth to expel
them out, nor confesses his fault or negligence therein, nor seeks remedy by
the holy refuge of penance, good counsel or other spiritual helps, and herby
comes it to pass that which our Savior says: fiunt nouissim^ hominis
istiu^, peioraprioribus, the ending of this man is worse then his beginning.
Whereunto that dreadful commination of the holy Apostle S. Paul. does well agree
also, who says: (writing to the Hebrews) Impossible est ^os, qui semel sunt
illuminati, etc. and prolapsi, rursus renouari ad poenitentiam. It is
impossible for them that are once lightened by Gods grace, and fall back again,
to be renewed by penance.

Which words howsoever we understand them, either that the grace of baptism is
here meant, or the word impossible, Hebr.^
taken for hard and rare, every way, and in all senses, it is a most terrible
sentence, and ought to move men greatly, that do see themselves fallen from a
better state to a worse, and from a quiet, calm, sweet, humble and modest
spirit, to a proud, turbulent, ireful, impudent or contemptuous behavior
toward their brethren or equals, and much more to their betters and superiors.
And this shall be sufficient by way of Preface. The rest you shall discern by
that which is treated in the Chapters following.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
THe Preface to the Catholic Reader. The manifest folly and apparent bad
spirit of the writers of these libels, in choosing the subject and argument of
such late books as they have set forth. CAP. I. Their folly and passionate
spirit declared in the manner of handling ^he said Arguments. CAP. II. Their
folly and presumptuous spirit, in making to themselves such adversaries as they
do. CAP. III. Their folly and vnsh^mfast spirit in uttering so open and
manifest untruths, and contradictions to their own discredit. CAP. IIII.
Their folly and malignant spirit in obiecting certain books to F. Persons,
which if they be his, cannot but give him much credit and commendatio^: with a
brief confutation of a fond paniphlet set forth in answer to the book of
succession. CAP. V. Their folly and deceived spirit in persuading themselves to
get credit or recover that which is lost with any ^^^t of men (be they friends
or enemies) by this manner of proceeding with clamors and libels. CAP. VI. Of
five other books or rather absurd and scandalous libels come forth since the
Answering of the former two; and of ten more promised. CAP. VII. Certain
directions unto Catholics h^w to discern the truth, and how to bear
themselves in this time of contention: with an examination of diverse notorious
and infamous lies of VV. VV. in his book of Quod^^bets. CAP. VIII.
THERE MANIFEST FOLLY AND APPARENT BAD SPIRIT IN CHOOSING the argument and
subject of these their books.
CAP. I.
FIRST then to begin with the argument and subject of these our discontented
priests late books, it shall not be needful for proving our purpose to run
them over all which hitherto are six that have come to our hands, the first in
latin, entitled: The first book.
Declaratio mo^uum and turbationum, etc. A declaration of styrres and troubles,
etc. which co^teyning nothing else indeed, but a certain intemperate inuectyue
against many good and worthy men, well deserving both of them, and of our
country, and replenished with innumerable slanders most manifestly false, and
proved by no other reasons, authorityes or restimonies, but the words of the
passionate writers, has made all strangers that have read the same to have a
strange opinion of english men's humors, when they are in passion; about which
point see the table of deceits falsehoods and slanders set before our Apology,
and the Apology it self. Cap. II.

The second book The second book.
is entitled: The Copies of discourses, etc. whereof the first part being
contrary to the second, does easily both answer and confound it selfe^ For
that in the foremost discourses all these men's oppositio^s and impugnations of
the Archpriest do stand upon the want of the Popes own letters to confirm
those of the Card. Protector, whereby the Archpriest was appointed, assuring us,
that whenever any such confirmation should come from his Hol. there would be
no more controversy: and yet the very next ensuyng discourses in the same book
(his Hol. Breue of Approbation being now published) do show that they were much
farther of from obaying the Archpriest, then before.

And this was the first childbirth after their long and troublesome trayuayling
thrust out to the world very unexpectedly to move new troubles at that time
when they made profession to have appealed to his Hol. and would attend his
auswere and resolution therein; which resolution, as since we have seen, came
forth soon after against them, though his Hol. at that time knew nothing of
these seditious books; the iniquity whereof was and is such, as if they had been
seen, it seems impossible that his Hol. His Hol. second Breue 17. Ang. 1601
would have answered so myldly as he does, though we know his nature and
disposition, wholly bent to myldnes, and according to the same disposition, we
have also endeauored in our Apology or answer to these two libels, to lay open
the injurious proceeding of our tempted Brethren in those books, and to
mitigate their distempered humors the best we could. The Apology.
And for that this Apology is now in the hands of the Readers to peruse, we
will say no more thereof, but remyt it, and our selves to their discreet
judgments.

After this came out two other twynnes at one time the one in English, Two
others libels.
the other in latin; the first is entitled: the hope of peace by laying open
the Archpriests untruths, etc. The second conteyneth the copies as well of the
Card. Protectors letters for the institution of the Archpriest, by his Hol.
authority, as also the Popes own Breue for confirmation thereof: The letter
also of Card, Burghesi^s Viceprotector in reprehe^sion of M. Charnock^ for
disobaying of the sentence given by the two Card^ in Rome against them and
other such like wrytings. Which two books coming to our hands after our
foresaid Apology was ended induced^ us to make a certain Appendix The Appe^dix
to the Apology.
for unfolding their contents; the one having nothing but some few handfuls of
vanity and scurrility laid to geather, unfit to be further treated by modest
men, and the second representing nothing else, but the reproof and condemnation
of their own contentious proceedings.

And thus much concerning the four former books whose arguments being as we
have rehearsed, we remit our selves, how great a manifestation it has been of
their own folly, passion and imprudence to take this course of clamorous
libelling and defaming their own friends, and thereby also obliging them for
defense of their innocence to return auswere which they were most loath and
unwilling to do.

But if there were but an inch of folly in writing and publishing the former 4
books, A third pay^e of libels.
there is an ell in these last two, that now are come forth: the one bringing
us a new relation of the sedition and contention passed in Wisbech: the other:
Important considerations to move all vniesuited Catholics (as their phrase
is) to acknowledge the myld and merciful procedings of the State of England
toward them for matters of religion, since the beginning of her Majesty's
raygne, etc. These two books we say, and the subject thereof together with the
manner of handling, and other circumstances before mentioned are sufficient, if
nothing else were, to overthrow the whole credit of our discontented brethren,
with all sorts of discreet and modest men, not only Catholics, but also
Protestants, as by ripping up some parts thereof shall easily appear.

For first concerning the relation of matters fallen out in Wisbech, The
relation of Wisbech.
he that shall have read the sixth chapter of our Apology about these affairs
where matters are set down plainly and sincerely with order and perspicuity,
without either amplifications or exaggerations (as here is used in this new
Rhetorical narration) authentically also under men's hands and letters, and not
in words alone, scoffs and jests, as these men do; whosoever we say, shall
read that, and confer it with this, and consider the different manner of our
wrytings and proofs from theirs, will easily (we doubt not) see where truth
goes as also the discreed it which these men do run into by ripping up that
matter again: yet shall we in this place lay before you some other
considerations also to the same effect.

And first we would have you to weigh attentively that if all were true which
these accusers pretend in this their narratio^ of Wisbech (for of this vvil
we treat first) about F. VVesto^s, desire to have that Agency in Wisbech
Castle for directing of some in that prison toward a more retired life, which
these men contemptuously call Donatisme, Regular and retired life called
donatisme.
or that he had taken the foresaid office willingly upon him when he was
elected by the company, or permitted by his Superior to take it, if all this we
say had been true (as we shall show after the most points to be false) yet how
may that odious consequence be drawn from hence, which these men every where
do infer, that all the rest of the Jesuits throughout England, if they could
have prevailed in this one thing, would by this platform and president have
gotten the government over all secular priests within the whole Realm; how we
say and by what reason does this follow, or what cohere^ce has the government
over secular priests abroad with the private direction of a few particular men
in Wisbech Castle? does not every man discover great folly here in this
forced inference? But now to the antecedent:

What likelihood is there that Father Weston being a man of those parts and
qualityes as he is; and having been Prouincial (as these men say) of all the
Jesuits in England, would seek so greedyly for so poorea preferment as is to
be Agent, Most Improbable infere^ces and asser^^^^^.
and servant (for Superior they confess he refused to be) to a few of his
fellow prisoners in that Castle or that F. VValley Prouincial for the present
(as by these men he is called (and F. Persons his Superior again in Rome
(which two they call afterward most scornefully the one knig, the other
Emperor) should so bestyrre themselves and weary all their friends to get F.
Weston, (looking every day rather for martyrdom, then otherwise) such an
advancement, with so great trouble and offense in the prison, where he was? And
is this credible in men of wit, or to men of reason?

Here then is discovered extreme passion and perturbation of mind in these
relators and in nothing more, then that they make it a matter so exorbyta^t,
and indecent for a religions man to have the direction of secular priests in
matters of spirit and devotion by way of companyes and congregations, whereas
themselves cannot be ignorant, that in all Catholic contreys throughout the
world where Jesuits live, it is very ordinary among other means which they
use, The use and vtility of spiritual co^gregations.
for assisting men in spiritual affairs to institute several congregations and
confraternityes of all sorts of people, themselves being Prefects and directors
thereof for exercise of all pious works and godlynes, and this was in Paris and
other cittyes of France, while they remained there, and is at this day in Rome,
Naples, Civil, Toledo, Valencia, Salamanca, and other towns of Italy and
Spain and other places, and the fruit of these congregations is infinite for
all kind of piety, and in Rome it self it cannot be denied, but that great
prelates noble men and Cardinals themselves are of these congregations, wherein
private religious men of this order, be ever the heads and prefects for
direction and execution of the rules, yet do not those Cardinals or Prelates,
think themselves disgraced by this, or account Jesuits ambitious, proud or
arrogant for taking the same upon the^, as these our haughty minded brethren
do; neither do they doubt, or fear least by this act the Jesuits pretend
afterward a government over all Cardinals as these men seem to fear over all
secular priests, though the matter in it self be ridiculous.

Moreover whereas the principal butt of these me^ is throughout this book (a
grave argument or subject no doubt) to show that F. Weston aspired to this
office of Ageny in the prison among those priests that desired to live more
retired and to have rules of pious conversation appointed them, they do first
confess and set down the quite contrary out of his own words and doings,
(which ought to be the best trials with indifferen men) and then do seek to
prove their purpose by interpreting his meaning to be different from his words
and deeds, so as where all spiritual authors do teach us, that according to
charity we ought to follow this rule that then when men's words or actions of
themselves cannot well be defended, we should interpret well at leastwise their
intention, these men will needs follow the contrary rule against F. Weston
condemning his intention when his words and actions are outwardly good,
Galumniating of inte^tion when words and works cannot be touched.
and cannot be condemned as you may see page 8. 9. and 10. of this their
narration, where they confessing that he refused the office of Prefect laid
upon him, yet do say, that he was desirous the thing should be obtruded unto
him, etc. By which rule of sinister interpretation, what man is there living
that may not be calumniated, and the devil himself is called a calumniator
especially for this kind of inference, as you may note in his proceeding
against Job, Job. 1. and 2.
and it is most detestable to all good men.

But that which, most of all lays open the folly of this whole subject and
relation of Wisbech is that our discontented brethren so tell their tale, as
whosoever shall read the same with any attention, may clearly perceive of the
one side to stand not only the far greater part of the more ancient company,
but that which more imports, desire of order, discipline, recollection,
obedience modesty and temperate behavior, and on the other side all the
contrary, to wit, not only the far less number, but freer also in speech
and conversation more given to liberty, refusing all rules and order, but only,
the common Canons of the Church and Sacrament of penance as they profess,
Ibid.
condemning for noueltyes and innouations all other helps to spirit and
devotion. This we say and many other things tending to this purpose, are as
clearly to be seen in this their own narration (if the Reader stand attent)
as they are touched by us breefly in our foresaid Cap. 6.
Apology.

And to this effect it is said of F. Weston: Vertuo^s speches reproach fully
alleged.
He took upon him to control and find fault with this and that, as the coming
into the Hal of a hobby horse in Christmas, affirming that he would no longer
tolerate these and these so gross abuses, which his pride and vanity, etc. At
which his pride and vanity we greatly maruayled, etc. And a little after
bringing in the said fathers speech with D. Bagshaw, they report him to say
thus: Page 9.
There are some enormityes which we would be glad to avoid, and do therefore
purpose to impose upon our selves a more strict order leaving you and others to
follow such courses as you shall think good.

And to the same effect do these men recite in like manner M. South worthes
speech to M. Bluet: Page Ibid.
We are determined (says he) twenty of us, to draw our selves into a more
strict order of life, etc. thereby the better to avoid such sins as
Whoredom, drunkenness and diceing, the same being too ordinary with some in
this house. Thus they write and publish without shame to have these things
ru^ne in print, the particularyties whereof we of purpose avoided in our
Apology, and this is their first folly and the second is that they report such
manner of speches tending all as you see, to virtue, reformation and reproof of
dissolute and disordered life, whereas on their own side, there is not so much
as any such matter pretented. For proof whereof let us hear a piece of M.
Bluets speech of reproof to F. Weston brought in by these men as a matter of
great commendation for spiritual feeling: Gross speches on the contrary side.
M. Bluet (say they) proceeded further in effect as follows: Is not the
Sacrament of healthful penance, a sufficient remedy for men in our cases to
keep us from such enormityes? if the means appointed by Christ have not
sufficient force to remedy these evils, what extraordinary grace or power can
we expect from your s^pposed authority and laws? Thus they say, co^temning
hereby (as you see) all particular rules, directions, helps, and orders, for
co^seruation or increase of spirit used by vertuous^ men, who will not laugh at
this doctrine that the Sacrament of healthful penance is sufficient to remedy
all enormities? why then are there so many Canons, co^stitutions, laws, and
new ordinances appointed daily for restrayning of enormities as well in
Colleges, Cloisters, Churches and congregatio^s as other where, to prevent such
inconuenie^ces, if only the Sacrament of healthful penance be sufficient? nay
why are there prisons chains, gallyes, or gallouses, if only the Sacrame^tal
penance be sufficient and nothing else required, do you see how these good
people are de larga manica? as the proverb is.

Well then, this being the subject and argument of this their whole narration
to declare what the one side (being far the greater part) labored to have,
to wit rules order and discipline observed in their conversation, as became
priests and confessors in such a place and time, The true state of the
controversy in VVisbic^.
complaining also of great and foul enormyties already committed, and worse
feared among them: and then how mightily the other side (being far the fewer)
stryued against this, and would have no special orders, but such as were common
to all men, yea to the loosest sort of Christians in the world, nor any other
peculiar help or remedy but only the Sacrament of penance to be used, when,
where, and so often as every man pleased and no otherwise: This, we say being
the strife and contention, clear it is, on which side virtue, holiness and
perfection stood. And albeit this side should have been ouerstrict and committed
tomuch rigor in retyring themselves from the scandalous conversation of the
rest: Yet was their fault (as you see) of zeal and love of virtue, and
consequently much more perdonable then the turbulent resistance and impugnation
of the other side, that stood in defense of disorder, liberty and dissolution.

And thus much for the first part of the argument or subject of this former
book intytuled: The Relation of VVisbiche: which having been handled by them
with great untruth and partiality in their first books both in latin and
English as we have showed in our Apology, is brought in again now with great
indiscretion and folly, renewing the memory of such their disorders in that
place as we desired might be suppressed with silence, and that which is worse,
they descend to diverse particulars, which we for modestyes sake passed over in
general terms and so should they also have done according to the rule of
prude^cy: for to what end have they printed the former objection and complaint
of M. South worth (so grave and Reverend a man) about whordome, drunkenness
and diceing, etc. which we had omitted: the story also of pewter stolen, of
Mary the maid found in one of there cha^bers, to what end is it published by
them, or with what wisdom or discretion? And moreover, they do so wisely
handle these matters in their defense (as you shall see in the next Chapter of
this book) that they leave things more suspicious a great deal to the Reader
then he found the^ in the accusations: so as in this also they fulfill the
Apostles prophesy Insipientia eorum manifesta erit omnibus, etc. 2. Tim. 3.


But besides this subject of the excesses and scandalous conversation of some
in Wisbech there insueth also toward the end of this book another argument
of far worse nature then the former: for which respect it may be they
abstayned to make mention thereof in the title or first front of their book,
doubting perhaps least all good and modest men would be auerted with the very
sight and mention thereof as proceeding of an extreme surfeit of unchristian
malice.

The matter is, The second argument of their relation, containing intolerable
slanders against Jesuits.
that whereas in time of the tumultuous proceedings of these men and their
fellows both in Rome, Flanders, and England, many things were spoken, done,
and written against the fathers of the Society by their ungrateful scholars of
our nation, without all ground of truth, but only through passion, leuity,
anger, and incitation of others, as appears not only by the examination of
the things themselves, but by the confessions also of the parties that did
accuse, when they were out of passion, and by the sentence of all judges
appointed in these causes (all which we have showed largely and particularly in
the 3. 4. 5. and 6. Chapters of our Apology) yet these men knowing in their
consciences, Conscienceles dealing.
and in the sight of all the world this to be true, and that those
calumniations objected (or the most part of them) were merely false and devised
upon the causes aforesaid, and denied afterward by those that objected them, do
notwithstanding set them down now again as points justified or justifiable,
and have put them also in print for the further infamation of Jesuits, and
their whole order, which is a practice of so high and odious malice as we are
wonderfully ashamed to mention the same, (but that they have printed it) as
coming from any of our nation, and much more from men, of our order and
function. But now let us take a view of the things themselves. The first branch
or head of this calumniation has this title.

An abstract of the memorial sent by certain Englishmen out of the low
countries to the Popes Hol. Relat. page 68.
Clement the 8. against the Jesuits laboring in the English vineyard: September
1597.

And here you must note, that in reporting this only title, our brethren do so
behave themselves, as you may easily discover their entention to be only to
defame; for so much as they know well enough what Englishmen they wear that
devised and cast abroad this memorial, About R. Fishers memorial.
to wit, Robert Fisher sent over into Flanders by the seditious of Wisbech to
that effect, as has been showed at large in the 7. Chapter of our Apology;
where we have set down the examination of the said Robert upon his oath before
his Hol. Fiscal in Rome, and how he misliked his own doings therein, bewrayed
the falsehood, detected his accomplices, and confessed all to be devised upon
malice and stomach, which our brethren knowing sufficiently by the authentical
copy of the said deposition sent into England, and having seen also the
public testimony of six very reverend and grave Priests Assistants to the
Archpriest against that memorial, as also the letters of many other priests
which we have there cyted, it is strange that perturbation of mind should so
much prevail with our brethren, and the remorse of conscience be so little, as
to revive the same now again, and being only in latin before, to print it now
in English to the view of all men. And do they not know or remember that the
publishers of infamous libels and defamations are as deeply both in the sin
it self, as also in Church censures; as are the makers and writers thereof?
Who can doubt of this? But now to the contents of the libel.

The first paragraphe after many falsityes alleged against Jesuits, Ibid.
page 69
concludes thus: They hold no doctrine Catholic and sound that comes not
from themselves, no dispensation auayl^able, that is not granted by them (and
which is worse) they have beat into the heads of most, that the mass is not
rightly celebrated of any, but of a Jesuit. Thus they write. And do our
brethren believe this to be true? Again in the fourth paragraph, besides many
calumniations they say thus: Ibidem. Foolish ex^ggerations.
No Jesuit goes to visit any one (in England) or trauayleth from one place to
another, but he is richly apparaylled and attended on with a great train of
servants, as if he were a Baron or an Earl? Is this true also in the
consciences of our brethren? Again in the fifth paragraph: They never send one
scholar out of England to the College of Doway to study there, etc. nay they
have labored by all means vtterl^ to dissolve it. Is this true also? Let the
President and books of that College testify?

In the seventh paragraphe they say: Women also are induced by them to become
Nuns, and to leave such goods, as they have, to them, etc. And is there any
one example (think you) to be given of this? Or is it any way probable, seeing
that Nuns have such need of their dowries for their own maintenance if they
will be received into any monasteryes beyond the seas? The eight paragraph
begins thus: All university men, and such as have taken any degree in
schools, the (Jesuits) hate, despise, contemn and reproach. And is this
verifiable think you, or likely to be true? Their conclusion is this. To
conclude (say they) Catholics stand in more ^eare of the Jesuits then of the
heretics, etc. and that indirectly they cause priests to be apprehended by the
enemy, etc. The censure of which conclusion, as also of the spirit and pious
disposition of these our brethren which do publish these things in print and in
vulgar tongues against the whole order of religious men we remit to all good
Catholics judgment. And so much of this first memorial.

The second and third Catalogue of slanders which they put down, as well
against the whole Society of Jesuits, as also against those that labor in
England, are much more deceytfully (though yet childishly) handled by our
brethren, then the former. For whereas they well know that these points of
defamation by them published, Most injurious calumniations uttered by Chapter P.
and VV. G. revived and published by these me^.
were written by some of their own friends, and this very secretly and covertly
underhand, and by them sent to Rome thereby to incense the flame of the Roman
Sedition when it was on fire, with order to spread the said slanders abroad,
but in no wise to discover the authors thereof; these our men without either
scruple of conscience, (for the things themselves being notoriously false) or
respect of their said friends credit, have divulged them now in print under this
title. Certain chief points of accusations wherewith many Englishmen have
justly charged the Jesuits, etc.

But mark here their manifold falsehood: for first no man hitherto to our
knowledge either English or other in the world has offered to come forth and
accuse or prove lawfully these points against the Jesuits, and much less
these many Englishmen that here are insinuated, who writ their calumniations
in corners, as has been said, and sent them to Rome to be spread in secret for
so one of them writes in the Art. 22.
article here set down: use my letters secretly but effectualy, etc.
And-further where here it is said, that many Englishmen gave up these false
accusations, we find but two named in the latin original copy to wit Chapter P. and
VV. G. who by these men are guilfully omitted, in the English and by us also
should not be mentioned but that we are forced in some sort to figure their
names by the first letters for testimony of the truth: for seeing they denied
the same afterward by many protestations to many, and one of them before a
public magistrate; and the matters objected being so absurd impious and
apparently false in themselves we would willingly have held silence therein, and
cannot but wonder at the folly of these shameless libellers that repeat them
here again, and moreover to auerre (as they do) that the Fathers were justly
charged with them. And we doubt not but that every modest man of what religion
or profession soever he be, will wonder also with us when they shall hear and
consider both the absurdity of the things objected, and the open apparent
malice in setting them forth to the world, with such approbation as here they
do.

For better understanding whereof, we must note that these calumniations which
here they set abroad were certain brief articles collected by some of the
Fathers in Rome out of a great mass of seditious letters, which at the making
up of the peace and ending of the stryfes in that city, were partly discovered
and exhibited voluntarily upon scruple of conscience by those that had been
troblesome, and partly found by chance, or rather perhaps by Gods providence,
the better to confirm the said peace within the college, which letters had
been written and sent thither by the foresaid two friends C. P. and VV. G. out of
Flanders for the intent before mentioned. of increasing those troubles.

And for so much as the said parties during the styrres protested every where
that they had no part therein, but rather were sorry for them, these letters
being found to the contrary were put together in a good large book yet
extant, and out of that book of larger relations were gathered certain brief
articles (yet in the very words so near as might be of the writers
themselves) which articles had this title: See the treatese entitled Act a
sedit^osa C. P. and. G. G. etc. Roma, ann^ 1596. and 97. contra Patres
Societat^s.
Capita quaedam, etc Certain heads of Calumniations, etc. containing as has
been said a brief some of the cheifest slanders which the forsaid two men, and
some few more of their correspondents had written to the scholars at Rome, and
by them divulged abroad against the fathers of the Society both in Rome,
England, and else where, for their defamation, and thereupon it was thought best
that the said Collection of Articles should be sent unto them, or at least unto
one of them to be considered of; if by that means perhaps, they entering into
the consideration of so great iniuryes offered, where they professed and owed
friendship, might be moved to cease from this course; and to that effect were
they sent unto the later to wit VV. G. with a letter written in very friendly
manner, laying down unto him plainly and sincerely both the iniquity of the
things themselves, as also the bad manner of proceeding therein, and after all,
the writer says thus:

And now Sir, Out of a letter of F. P. to VV. G. 20. of Dece^b. 1597.
as still a friend that wishes you well, and would gladly have you make up these
foul matters as cleanly as may be, I am sorry they have fallen out so much
against your credit as they have done, and are like to do, if they pass
further; and if you would have followed any part of your old and true friends
counsel you should never have waded so far in them. But a little anger
oftentimes or emulation, or incitation of others with a free nature, does draw
a man by little and little to many inco^ueniences. And now I see but two ways
for you to choose, the one to set your self to prove these things that you
have avouched of our fathers if you can, or else to give some manner of
satisfaction to them, laying the fault upon mistaking, misinformation, or the
like. But the best satisfaction of all would be to leave of this course of
contradiction, and to attend to peace and union in our nation for the time to
come, for that our divisions are odious both to God and man, and none can abide
now in this place to hear of them, or of any that will foster them, etc.

This was then written, and you may easily discern herby the spirit of peace
and quietness in the writer, and how s^al an appetite he and his had of
revenge, seeing that for so intolerable iniuryes and infamations offered them
(which after you shall hear) they were content with so simple a satisfaction as
to have peace for the time to come. Desire of peace and qui^tnes in the Fathers.
And truly these things being now past, and well near dead, we are exceeding
sorry to be enforced by the petulancy of our indiscreet brethren to repeat or
renew the memory of them again, for which cause we passed them over in our
Apology, either in silence or generalityes, and here we endeavor (as you
see) to cover men's names as much as may be without prejudice of the known
truth, and very loath (truly) we shall be, to be constrained in our larger
promised Apology to set down these things at length, with the persons, places
and other circumstances. Yet must you here note by the way that in the
foresaid collectio^ of calumniations sent to VV. G. in Flanders, there was
adjoined in the latin copy to every article the author also or writer together
with the quotation of the place. A manifest falsehood and deceit.
or writing wherein it was to be found, which thing our brethren to make the
matter more obscure and intricate, have purposely omitted in their English
traduction; to the end it might be thought, that many Englishmen had agreed
among themselves (as they affirm) to justify these false and infamous
accusations, devised by some one only of his own malicious head, which
accusations and slanders we shall now repeat unto you, at least wise some of
them, for all were ouerlong, and the foul quality of a few will easily glut
your appetite (if we be not deceived) from desyring the rest.

First then the very first article concerning the whole Society or body of
Jesuits (for into two branches you remember they were divided) is uttered by
them in these words: Relat. page 76
The Jesuits are so ambitious, as not content with the bounds which their
Fathers placed, they have in their insatiable desire already swallowed up
kingdoms and monarchies: An absurd co^^umelious speech.
And then was added in the latin copy where you should find this wise
asser^ion to wit VV. G. epistola ad Temp. 13. April 1596. which quotation our
brethren thought good to leave out as well in this as in all the other articles,
partly not to discover their friends, the authors of these calumniations, partly
also (as has been said) to have them thought to come from the consent of many
together. But letting pass this fraud we would ask them sadly and seriously
with what conscience can they publish this slander to the world of all
Jesuits, or of their Society and body as the title ^aith? What kingdom or
monarchy have they already swallowed up or de^owred (as the latin words
import) is not this exceeding madness to proceed with so impote^t blyndnes of
passion? But let us hear further.

It follows in the sixth article; Art. 6.
that if this ambition (of the Jesuits) do remain unpunished, the age that is
to come shall see, that it will bring in bondage not only prelates, but the very
princes and monarchs themselves, whon ^yet she flattereth in her infancy.
Thus they report this article, leaving out the citation as before VV. G
epistolam eadem. And upon this they infer for remedy another article
immediately following in these words: Art. 7.
They beseech the Pope (in latin rogat VV. G. Pontificem) that he will lay the
axe to the r^ote of the tree, and cut of this pride of the Society spreading it
self far and near, least if it once arm it self with the authority of his
Hol it power out a full revenge upon all others to their destruction, and make
an infinite slaughter and massaker of souls, as already they have begone in
wretc^ed England, etc. ibid. VV. G.

And furthermore to in^yte his Hol. (if they had been able) to cut down this
religious tree of the Society, they tell him of diverse most grievous crimes and
faults of Jesuits without proving any one, or showing them at least to be
probable, as for example: Art. 9. page 77
That the Pope can comound nothing in all his mandats but the Jesuits find
means to frustrate i^ by secular power. And can this be true or probable? And
again: Art. 20.
that the Jesuits do eagerly wait for the death of the Pope, and of the
renowned Cardinal^ Toled, that they may bring upon all, slaughter and
bloudsheed, as they have long assayed, etc. VV. G. altaep. ad T^p. 29. Sept.
1596. The quotation is left out. But is the matter likely? or was it christian
charity in the writer to cause such things to be put into his Hol. head? The
one of the two is now dead, and his soul (we trust) with God: and at his death
he left great signs of his love and reverence toward his mother the Society,
as he was bound, and as we have showed in our Cap. 4.
Apology: neither has any slaughter or bloodshed followed from the Jesuits by
his death, nor is like to do, by the grace of God, whenever it shall please
him to call unto him his Hol. whom we desire and pray for daily, that he may
liuelong, and so we do assure our selves the Jesuits do also, whatsoever this
unchristian calumniation does cast out to the contrary, which how well grounded
it is, may appear by two other that ensue, Art. 23.
the one: that the Jesuits seek the government of the College of Doway, Art.
24
and the other immediately following; Art. 25.
that the Jesuits by their Machauillian practices go about to procure the
dissolution of the same College. But of these matters the President, Doctors
and Ancients of Doway College together with the facts and effects themselves
will testify against this slanderous tongue, as also against that impious
objection, whereby they say in another Article: Art. 13.
That it is a known positio^ or maxim among the Jesuits: Divide and impera:
set in division and then shall you govern at your pleasure. Which is so
malicious a conceyt against so religious men, that we blush to relate it,
albeit they blush not to affirm it; as neither another crime more improbable
then this, Art. 10.
saying, That the Jesuits in Rome do use to intercept all manner of letters of
all men what soever, not forbearing the packets of Cardinals nor Princes, etc.
What forehead would affirm this, and put it in print? could never yet any one
be taken with this, seeing it is said to be used to so many, and so punished for
the same?

But that you may better see their good consciences hear (we pray you) what
true and pious protestations they make of English affairs, Art. 12.
and Catholics there: N. calls God and his angels to witness (in latin Deum
testatur VV. G. and angelus eius) that the greatest part of the Nobility and
Clergy in England both at home and abroad do be wayle with sighs and tears
their most miserable estate, in that they suffer more grievous things under
these new tyrants (the Jesuits) then by all their other grievous daily
persecutions. Intemperate scolding against good men.
VV. G. ep ad Marc. Now whether this be true or no, that the far greater part
(maxima pars) of the Nobility, and the English Clergy both at home and abroad
(wherein no doubt must enter all the Seminaryes also) do thus weep and bewayl^
their miseryes and calamityes received by Jesuits, and whether this be so
certain a truth, as VV. G. may call God and his Angels to witness thereof, and
whether these men with a good conscience could publish the same in print, we
leave to any Catholic man or civil Protestant to judge. And yet they repeat
the very same again as most true and notorious in the article following
saying: Art. 1^.
That the persecution of the Jesuits is more grievous to the Catholics then that
of the heretics in England: And all this you must note was written in the
year 1596. When these later broyl^s and reuolts of these our mutined brethren
were not yes fallen out.

Further also they tell his Hol. for his better information in English affairs;
Very seditious informations. Art. 19.
that nothing does so vex the English Catholics as the contempt and hatred (in
the Jesuits) of the President that now is (in latin praesentis Pontificis) and
the slanderous reproaches imputed by them to the renowned Cardinals Toled and
Alexandrinus. VV. G. epist. ad Temp. 19^ September. 1596. And could envy her
self (think you) invent more odious and malicious stuff? But yet harken
further: Of three hundred priests (say they) which have entered into England
scarce six or seven have fallen away, Art. 17.
but of twenty Jesuits, eight have revolted: And is this justifiable? Nay is
there any one of them that was sent to England hitherto by obedience of his
superiors, revolted or fallen? If there be not, what impudensie is it, so
boldly to avouch it? what folly also to name so many of their fellow priests
whose number we pray God that some of these men do not increase.

But yet let us hearefurther of English matters and English Jesuits set down
under another general head or branch entitled: The second general bra^d of
calumniacions. Art. 1.
Touching the Jesuits in England, whereof the first is: The Fathers of the
Society (in England) do descent amongst themselves F. Henry the Superior, and
F. Edmund in the prison at Wisbech, and there are 26. articles of their
dissension. Thus says this article, and then is quoted, Chapter P. in colloq. cum
P. Bonard^vt patet ex eiusdem literis 27. Sept. 1597. Which quotation our
brethren for sparing of their friends do omit though in all their later books
they do contradict the whole substance of this article also by complaining that
F. Garnet F. Edmund, and F. Persons with the rest are too much united, the one
obaying the others beck, etc.

After this they lay on load, Art. ^.
saying: that the Jesuits are the firebrands of all sedition: Art. 5.
enemies to all secular priests: such notable ly^rs, as none will belee^e them,
Art. 7.
no not when they swear: That by the schismatiks in England, they are called
horseliches and blood suckers. And thus they go on railing and reuiling without
stop or stay either of shame fastnes or conscience, ^. Cor. 6.
as though it were not written neque ebriosi, neque maledici regnum Dei
possidebunt. both which sins these men hear do notably express by their
intemperancy of tongue, and yet for very shame they leave out ^6. whole
articles, which are in the latin, albeit these which they set down here in
English are so slanderous and malicious, as we are ashamed to wade further
therein. Yet will we end with one that will make you laugh, or rather pity the
blyndnes of their folly, Art. 11.
for thus they write: that F. Holt and his companions had gathered such an
infinite mass of money (in Flanders) of the Catholics in England, A notable
ridiculous exaggeration.
for dispensations, or under the color of expending it to their uses, as many
credibly affirmed it to exceed the some of fifty thousand pounds English which
make two hundred millio^s of Italian scudes. VV. G. ^p. ad Marc. 8. August.
1596. The quotation they omit according to their fashion for covering their
friends credit, that wrote this notable excess, but yet do overthrow their own
credit in this ridiculous multiplication of two hundred millio^s of Italian
scudes, which is more money perhaps then all the princes in Italy orels where
in Christendom can lay togeather^ In the latin copy, taken out of VV. G. his
letters it is ducenta millia two hundred thousand, which these men either by
ignorance or malice would needs increase to the number of two hundred millions.
And we have been credibly informed that when F. Persons came to Rome in the
year 1597. Cardinal ^urghe^ius, (who at that time was employed by his Hol. as
Viceprotector in compounding the styrres of the tumul^uous scholars) told the
said Father, that no one thing had made his Hol. more clearly to discover, and
see the passion both of the ^^rbulent in the College, and of their setters on
from Fla^ders, then this particular accusation written from thence F. Holt of
two hundred thousand crowns gotten by him to the Society out of England; for
(said he) if it had been some moderate sum, it might have borne some
probability of suspision, but now it cannot be thought true by any man.
Whereunto F. Persons answered, that if it could be proved, that the body of the
Society or any man thereof to their use had received out of England from their
first entrance unto that day, not two hundred thousand crowns, but two hundred
pens to be bestowed in benifite of the said Society, and not on English men or
the English cause, that then he was content that all the rest objected by the
slanderers should be granted for true; which he confirmed by diverse examples
of English gentlemen dying beyond the seas, as M. Charles Basse^, M. George,
Gilbert and others, who left diverse good somnes of money freely given to the
said society, or to be disposed by them at their pleasure, and namely the later
of the two, left by testament yet extant 800. Crowns in gift to the house of
probation of S. Andrews in Rome; Legacies of Englishmen refused by Jesuits.
VVherof, or of any other such gift, the General that now is Claudius Aquauius
would never suffer any one penny to be admitted, either to the use of the
Society or to any friend of theirs, but only to be left and distributed to
Englishmen in necessity, and to the use of the English cause, as it was. And
the college of Rhemes had of this and other money left by the same gentleman
when he died to the arbitrament of the said Jesuits, two thousand crowns in
gold, and the body of the Society never a penny, as to this day appears by
manifest records.

And thus much by occasion we have been forced to utter in this behalf, having
thoroughly informed our selves of the truth; and we could say much more in this
matter of the exceeding charity and charges also of those good men bestowed
upon us and our cause, if the shortness of this treatise did not prohibit to
enlarge our selves in such matters. Yet can we not pretermit, but to advertise
the Reader, that our brethren in the beginning of this their treatise of
accusations against Jesuits do remit us to the 52. Page of their book where
they write thus: Relat. page ^
We will put you in mind that after Cardinal Allens death, the students in the
English college at Rome ^elt no less oppression by the Jesuits their
ty^^m^ysing governors, The sedition of the English college defended.
then we did at home,etc. It may be that he^rafter some of our brethren will set
out those tragedyes at large, which (...) long, and will appear to all men of
indifferency to have been very intolerable; in the mean while you shall
understand that two or three did write a teat^se of the Jesuits dealing and
naming it a memorial dedicated the same in latin to his Holiness in the year
1597. etc. The imputations whereof were so very sharp and touched their
freehould so nerely as no marvel if F. Garnet bestyrred his stumpes to save
their credits by all the means and ways he could devise, etc.

Thus they write, and by their very style you may learn their spirit, and what
manner of imputations were objected you have partly now heard before; and for
the story of the Roman styrres here threatened we suppose they will not be so
fo^d as to set it forth, especially having read what we have authe^tically
written thereof in the 5. Ch^p. of our Apology, which these men shall in vain go
about to dif^redit by bare scorneful words without proofs. And whereas they
here jest at that reverend man F. Garnet, for besty^^ing his st^mpes (as their
phrase is) for saving the Jesuits credits, he did no other than any injured or
oppressed innocent man could do in such a case against so false and malicious
slanders published against religious men, which was to require the testimonies
of all the good priests in England for reproof thereof. And to the end no man
should say or testify more then he knew (whereof it seems these men have
little care, who affirm every thing absolutely) he suggested unto them a tryple
way of writing: the one, for them that knew all to be false (as indeed it was,
and may be proved) so to affirm in their letters: the other for such as could
not say so much of their certain knowledge, Great modesty in the request of F.
Garnet.
that the whole accusation was false, but only that they knew not the things to
be true, nor had themselves any such opinion or matter to accuse the fathers
of; and consequently must needs suspect these things to be false, these (we
say) to write so much and no more: And the third way was, that such as could
not or would not intermedle in the articles or matters themselves objected, yet
to testify that they were no authors thereof, nor knew any thing of the said
Memorial.

Thus scrupulously,and with so great modesty wrote F. Garnet to the priests of
England for their testimonies of only truth in this behalf, for which these
gybers say here now; that he bestyrred his stumpes, Page 23.
and was content to play small game before he would sit out, and that he swore
by more then his little honesty, there was not a true word in the said Memorial,
etc. And that they sildome fall out to be the honestest men who are driven to
seek testimonials for their behavior, etc. which is a style fitter for
Ru^^ians and souldiars, then for sacred and anointed priests, if they were
priests that write this, or had so much inward light of reason or conscience as
to consider the absurdity of this base kind of comical writing against such men
of their own religion. And as for the testimonies themselves required by F.
Garnet, we would ask our people what other way could there be taken by any
honest and modest men, for their defense in so public an infama^io^, then to
remit themselves with such indifferency as they do to the report of their
fellow priests, and Catholic brethren? did not the Apostles also do the like
when need required, and all good men after them, etc.

Wherefore to end this matter, we say that the good fathers both in Rome and
here having been more ungratefully and unworthily, The great patience of the
Fathers in beating so intolerable iniures.
and more opprobriously slaundered by the intemperate tongues of some of our
country me^, then ever perhaps men of such quality were by Cath. people so much
obliged to them for their labors and other benefits, as our men are: they have
always hitherto taken and borne the same with the greatest patience that men
could expect, and have never fought any other revenge or satisfaction at their
hands that most have injured th^^, but their true reconciliation and
amendment, nor any further justification of themselves then only to satisfy
the bare truth in matters objected. And this is most apparent besides other
arguments by the end of the forsaid Roman sedition, where such of the
troublesome as remained after quietness restored, were as tenderly soued
cherished and made of by the fathers, as if never any such matter had fallen
out. By which notorious charity, diverse of them that had been of those styrs
were moved afterward to exceeding great internal sorrow for their former
proceedings and some of them also resolving for better satisfaction to enter
into the said Society it self. And the like effects of better consideration will
ensue also here after in England, we doubt not, in those that be of good
consciences, when this tempest of passion shall be past, and reason restored to
her place, The da^ngerous and lamentable case of them that slander others.
for which we shall pray.

And in the mean space for that the pitiful state of our passionate brethrens
souls doth^ly continually before our eyes, if they should die before they
enter into due consideration of penance and satisfaction, we cannot but warn
them, especially those that have either written or published or imparted from
hand to hand the foresaid infamations against the fathers of the Society or
other men, or have consented, thereunto that according to all Catholic
divinity, conscience, and reason they are in a damnable state of mortal sin,
and subject also to the censures and punishments appointed thereunto, and that
they, are bound to restitution in the best manner they can, though it were with
the loss of their own good names by recalling the said reproaches and that no
ghostly father with safe conscience can absolve them (being in this state)
except they promise effectually to make this restitution, or rather do really
and actually preforme the same.

And this not to be any exaggeration of ours, but rather the common and known
sense and doctrine of all learned Catholics, is evident by their wrytings about
this matter of infamation, the penaltyes whereof are expressed by both Civil and
Cannon laws. Cod. lib. 9. tit. de ^am. l^bell. lege Vnica.
The civil says thus: Si quis famosum libellum domi, vel in publico, etc. If
any d^find any infamons libel (though unwittingly) at home or in public or any
other place (and much more if he should compose it) if he do not tear and
burn the same but manifest it to others, he must die for it, as if he had been
the author thereof.

The Canon law says: Decret. causa 5. q. 1. cap. 1. Qui in alterius.
Qui in alterius famam, etc. He that shall devise and publish either by word or
writing any contumelious thing whereby another is infamed, and being found, is
not able to prove it, flagelle^ur, let him be whipped, and he that first
finds the said contumelious writing, let him tear it under pain to incur
the same penalty with the author. Thus they say; and much more to this effect
might be alleged as well for other punishments, as also their obligation to
restitution, if this place did bear it, or the thing it self were obsecure,
only we shall in the name of the rest, set down some few words of that most
learned and pious writer (...), and the rather fot that he seems to speak in
the same sense, and feeling compassion which we do of our brethren: for having
first defined the case and quality of the sin in his Summarie writing upon
the decretalles in these words: In decres. de paint. d^st. ^. Cap. Sacerd^s.
number. 5. and deinceps.
Libellum famosum componere, aut repertum palam facere, grave peceatum est, and
grauius. famam ^aesam non restituere. To compose any famous libel, or to
publish the same being made by another is a greeuons sin, but much more
grievous, not to restore the same of them that are injured. Thus he says, and
then he makes his further consideration upon the same: The speech of Navarre
to be marked.
Quod multi parum anim^^duertentes, etc. Which thing many not weighing well, do
grievously offend both divine and humane may. and do most miserably clog
their own souls with the obligation of restoring the same of those whom they
have stan^dered, and which is to be bewailed with ^eares, they scarce ever
disburden their said souls in this behalf.

Thus says he, which in our opinion, ought much to be considered and
remembered by our brethren especially seeing that both Nauar. in s^m cap. 27.
number. 109.
this man and S. Antonin. 3. part. tit. 2^ c. 7^.
other writers do record, that for ^nfaming a whole order of religion, their is
a special excommunication, the absolution whereof is reserved to the Pope
himself. And whether the fore-related slanders uttered with such a tooth
against the Jesuits (who by the Sea Apostolic are made partakers of that and
other like privileges) may bring our brethren within that case, Caet. in s^^m.
v^^^. excomm^^^^^^
we leave to them and their ghostly fathers to consider and weigh for their
own security, Jacob. de Gr^^^is lib. 2. cay. 137. number. 1^.
which we admonish them sincerely, and as in the fight of God almighty,
considering that the foresaid obligation of restitution byndeth not only in the
case of true libels (if any would so fondly flatter themselves, as to think
these not to be such) but also in every false or unjust infamation whatsoener.

And this shall be sufficient for the present about this matter, except we be
forced to ad any thing hereafter when the said story of the Roman styrres shall
come forth. And hitherto the discreet Reader will easily consider what manner of
subjects and arguments these two are of the proceedings of Wisbech, and of the
accusations laid against Jesuits brought in by our brethren in this former
book, which they call A Relation.

But the other arguments which follows in the book entitled: The book of
important co^sideratio^s, and argument thereof.
Important Considerations, etc. surpasses all the rest in folly and phrensy,
containing not only a furious in^ectiue against particular men, whereunto our
Country, and the writers themselves are most bound and behoulden, as the
forenamed Fathers of the Society, Doctor Sanders, Card. Alle^ and others by
name, but all the rest also of the learned Catholic men of our nation, D.
Stapleton, D. Bristow, M. Gregory Martyn M. William Raynolds, yea those of
other countries also, and the very Popes themselves and their doyngs, as also
the holy martyrs in like manner, of our nation, that have suffered and all other
good and godly men are injured in this most odious book as by the sequel of
this our narration shall appear.

For first these men to grace themselves with my L. of London, and other higher
Magistrates by his means and mediation, and to wreake their spite upon others
of their own coat, calling and religion, whose virtues they can neither bear
nor immitate, and whose other gifts and graces they do highly envy; are come at
length not only to be privy mutiners against their Superiors, and conspirers
with the common adversary (as hitherto) but openly also as public enemies to
impugn their own cause, bydding war and defiance, to all those that have or
do defend the same contrary to their appetite and fancy, which point of
madness, they do prosecute in this whole book by six or seven most absurd
positions or paradoxes, justifying first, the proceeding of heretics and
persecutors against Catholics for cause of religion: then excluding all
spiritual authority and Jurisdiction of the Sea Apostolic from England, as
forrayne and subject to the law of Praemunire: to turn over the leaf, and with
such resolution as if they should know any disignments or treatese of his Hol.
or other Catholics for reformation or restraynt of heresy by way of force in
England they would reveal the same to the persecutors. The 7. and last point
is, that they condemn the Semynaries and education of our youth therein beyond
the seas, wherein themselves or the most part of them have been brought up, and
made that they are now (excepting their sedition) and they dehort all
Catholics

These are the wise and wholesome: positions which these men have in this book
set down, and do handle as the subject and argument thereof, which you see of
what quality and consideration they are; to wit, the first full of adulation,
and merely parasitical, the second third and fourth pernicious erroneous, and
heretical; the fifth wicked and reprochful; the sixth traiterous, and the last
ridiculous or rather impious, which in part shall appear by these few words
which in this place we are to say of each of them in order.

The first point of this argument is set down in the title it self of the
book, The first point of the argument.
which they call: Important considerations to move all true Catholics that are
not wholly Iesuited (to wit not so base or wickedly minded as themselves to
flatter and fawn upon temporal favor) to acknowledge all the proceedinges of
the state of England against Catholics (since it excluded the Roman faith and
fell to heresy) to have been not only just, but also myld and merciful, etc. Thus
they say, adding further another piece of the said title in these words:
Published by sundry of us the secular priests in dislike of many treateses,
letters, and reports, which have been written and made in diverse places to the
contrary, with our opinions of a better course hereafter, for the promoting of
the Catholic faith in England.

Thus they frame their title: whereby (as you see) they first make themselves
public proctors for the heretics and presecutors, and then open accusers
against the presecuted Catholics on their own side. That which they add of
the publication of this book, by sundry of them secular priests, we easily
believe that they were rather sundy and sundered also, then many united in so
wicked an attempt, and that they were not only secular in order and degree, but
in mind also heart and desires which S. Paul conioyneth with impiety, when he
says: abnegantes impietatem, and saecularia desideria. As for the treateses,
Tit. 2.
letters, and reports which have been written and made in diverse parts of the
world, against the persecution used upon Catholics in England, which our new
doctors here do protest to mislike; they having been written and made by the
grauest and most learnedest D Sand. de visib. mon. l. 7. and de schismate. D.
Al^e^ Card.
men of our nation, and others; and upon the grounds and proofs which in their
books they have set down, little imports, what these men may like or dislike
thereof now, being unworthy to be admitted for judges or ce^surers of their
Masters doings and wrytings, In Apol and cont. Iustit. Britan.
especially seeing them so transformed by the passion of envy and malice, as
they seem to have sold their tongues to the common enemy, D. Bristovv in his
motives.
to contradict whatsoever others have done before them; for which cause also
their offered opinions of a new and better course hereafter, D. Staplet. in
Didimo verid. and alibi.
for turning over the leaf (as after they call it) is ridiculous and
contemptible to all Catholics of discretion, Philopat. against the
Proclamation. Pernius against ^^e same.
considering the learning, virtue, gravity, severity, constancy, wisdom and
other commendations of these that went before, and the very effects and fruits
themselves of their labors hitherto, and comparing the^with the contrary in
firmityes and imperfections of these men, and that they set up nothing but
seek to pull down. And when they come to the end of their book, and should
show us what this new course of theirs is, which they call, better for promoting
of Catholic Religion herafter in England, you shall find no other thing
prescribed by them but only a flattering persuasion to stick to the State
against the Pope and Sea Apostolic (wherein we persuade our selves that the
adversaries themselves do not believe them) and then a vehement exhortation to
Catholics to send their children no more to the Seminaryes beyond the seas
least they be infected with the contrary doctrine, which is so foolish and
absurd as we are ashamed to mention or relate it.

And thus much touching the first point. The second chief point of the subject.
The second is about the law of Praemunire many times mentioned before by them,
and now again greatly urged in the preface of this book, where having rayled
without all modesty or measure against F. Persons and all other Catholics and
priests united with him in admitting his Hol. ordinance about the Archpriest,
they say thus: Epist. page 14
As by this means (to wit by admitting the Archpriest) he and his confederates
have incurred a double praemunire as in another place (siz in the book of
Quodlibets. I mean God willing to declare) so entendeth he thereby to draw you
all (good Catholics) into the same predicament premunireal and of treason with
him.

Touching this book of Quodlibets here mentioned, if these men do mean
thereby that they may say or unsay therein what they list without controlment,
then may all the other books also hitherto set forth be called Quodlibets The
book of Quodlibets.
no less then this, having tied themselves therein to no law either of truth,
probability, proof or modesty. Neither can we immagine what occasion this book
of Quodlibets may bring to handle more at large this matter of Praemunire, then
here, and in other their wrytings has been expressed, seeing that applying that
law as they do, to overthrow thereby the Popes institution of the Archpriest,
their intention must needs be consequently to exclude all Papal authority and
jurisdiction from the kingdom of England, except the prince of what religion
soever, agree thereunto. Which doctrine of what quality it is, no man can but
see.

And for better explication thereof we are in this place to advertise the
Reader, that albeit we have said so much already in our Cap. 2.
Apology about this matter as was needful for that place, About the law of
Praemunire.
and the objections made by these people did require; yet having both thought
and sought more of that point since, by occasion of the often urging it, we
find somewhat to be added here, to wit, that the Appellation to Rome in the
first instance which there we mentioned was rather an antecedent or preamble to
the law it self of Praemunire then the chief substance thereof, which preamble
was begone specially under K. Henry the second in the cause of S. Thomas of
Canterbury about the year 1170. and continued on until toward the later end
of the reign of K. Edward the 3. to wit about the year 1375. which was but a
year before the said Kings death, when VVickclif now had begone to stir
against Clergy men, and the king being impotent permitted the government most
to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster his fourth some, at great variance in those
days with the bishops, namely VVickam and Courtney, the first of Winchester,
the second of London, and himself not a little incensed with John VVickcliffes
new devilish persuasions against the clergy and religious men.

Wherefore a contention being in those days about the collation of benefices
and bishoprics in England, whereof the Popes were wont to dispose for the most
part, they concluded in England after many contentions and disputes and many
sendings forth and back to Auinion in France where the Popes at that time
resided, that such provisions of benefices should not be sought nor made from
the Pope immediately for the time to come, but only in England by consent of
the prince and confirmation afterward of the Pope for the most principal
benefices and dignityes; and whosoever should contrary to this procure
provisions immediately from the Pope or any other power or jurisdiction
contrary to this law, should incur the penaltyes thereof. And this to have
been the only true meaning and intent of the said law and lawmakers, that were
Catholics, Policron. lib. 7. c. 44. Tho. VValsingh ab an 1343. vsque ad an.
1376. ex ar^hiuis Reg. and stat. impressis.
is evident by all authors that have written thereof. And in this sense there is
no controversy among us, for that later Popes have either agreed thereunto or
permitted the same; and we see the like in ure also in other Catholic
countries at this day by agreement and composition between the Sea Apostolic,
Princes, and Catholic Clergy.

But besides this sense and meaning of the law there has been another invented
by heretics and enemies since that time, Registrum Symonis Islepij.
as though by this law all external jurisdiction of the bishop of Rome should
be utterly excluded from England not only in providing of benefices whereunto
are annexed temporalityes, Nicol Harpes feld in hist. Eccles. Angl. saeculo 14.
Cap. 5.
but even in matters also mere spiritual. In which sense K. Henry the eight
Father of her Majesty was persuaded by some of his Counsel infected with
Luthers Doctrine at that time, to condemn the Card. of York, and all his
English Clergy, Sander de Schisma^e li. 1.
in the loss of all their temporalityes by pretense of this law, John Stow
anno 1530.
for admitting the authority and jurisdiction of the Popes legates Campegius and
the said Cardinal without the kings express license.

And in this sense also has the Popes authority been called forrayne and
external and utterly excluded from England by diverse laws statutes and oaths
set forth by Protestants against the same, since that time. And in the same
sense and signification (being plainly false and heretical as you see) do these
libellers urge it now against the Archpriest and others that admit and approve
his authority, though merely spiritual, as all the world sees, as having nor
benefice nor temporality annexed to it or joined with it. And so we see with
what kind of people these men are drawn by passion to conspire and iump.

The third point of their argument in this book is to show that nether the Pope
nor any other ecclesiastical power what soever has any authority to restrayn,
The ^ point of the argument.
punish, or press by way of force or arms immediately or by others any
Christian temporal prince whatsoever, for any delict of heresy, Apostasy,
impugnation of Christian faith, extirpation of religion or other crime
whatsoever, though never so much danger or damage should e^s^e by his default
to the commouwealth or to the rest of Christendom.

And this irreligious paradox they go about to maintain throughout their whole
book, alleging fond and childish arguments for the same: Page 19.
as that the word of the spirit and not the swords of the flesh or any arm of
man, is that which gives life, and beauty to the Catholic Church and that
the promise made to S. Peter is a sure and sufficient ground to defend
Catholic religion without arms: And other such fa^cies which the Anabaptists
do use to prove that there should be no external force or civil magistrate used
by Christians; and as Martyn Luther disputed, when he would prove that war
was not to be waged against the Turk for religion, especially at the Popes
direction. And yet are our men so confident in these their follies as they are
not ashamed to say in the same place to Catholics: Ibidem.
Give no ear (dear Catholics) to any private VVhisperings or Iesuitical
persuasions; to the contrary; all arguments that can be brought assure your
selves are false and unlearned sophistifications.

Thus they say, and thus they assure Catholics, but much more sure are we,
that this is pride, ignorance, ^olly, and falsehood in them; for that they
cannot but know, that all the Catholic learned men of Christendom are against
them in this position: and that the proofs and reasons, which they allege
for the same (called by these men here private VVhisperings, Iesuitical
persuasions, and unlearned sophistications) are so learned and weighty, as they
are not able to answer one of them; and if we should here set down the rank
of authors that have written of this point within these 400. years, as also in
our days against heretics and atheists, and convinced the same by most
learned demonstrations both out of scriptures, councelles fathers and
theological reasons, to wit, that albeit directly the supreme pastor of Christ's
Church (according to the common opinion of diuynes) have not temporal dominion
or jurisdiction over christian temporal princes that are supreme in their own
states, yet indirectly for conservation and defense of religion when it is
impugned or put in hazard by them, he may also use the sword or help of
temporal forces for his restraint, either immediately from himself or by other
princes at his direction; if (we say) we should cite here all the learned
Catholic authors of all nations that have written and affirmed this against
our men's new flattering paradox, we should fill up this whole Chapter with
quotations of authors and books; which esteeming to be needless and
inconvenient, we have thought better to pass them over, cyting only some
Deuines. D. Th. 22. qu. 40. artic. 2. and q. 12 art. 2. Caetan. in Apol. ^om.
1. Op^se. tract. 2. l. 13. ad ^, and 22. qu 43. Th. VValde^sis l. 2. doct.
fidei artic. 3. cap. 67. 77. 78. Franc. de Victor ^elect. 1. de pie^ate Eccles.
q. penultima, cum relect. de Indis Insulanis p. 1. Paludanus l. de pietate
Eccles. So^. i^ 4. sent. did. 25. q. 2. art. 1. Dominic. Baunes in comme^t.
22. q. 12. artic. 2.
few in the margent for the Readers direction, if it please him to peruse.

And as for reasons, one or two only may suffice for reasonable men in this so
clear a matter; whereof the first and ground of all other is, the subordination
that is and ought to be beweene the temporal and spiritual ends of civil and
ecclesiastical Magistrates, and their powers; which subordination according to
the most excellent declaration of S. Gregory Nazianzen, and other fathers is,
and ought to be as the body to the soul, the flesh to the spirit, and earthly
things to heavenly things. And as the body is subject to the soul, the flesh
to the spirit, and earthly and temporal affairs to those that are heavenly and
eternal; so is the end of the civil commonwealth subject and subordinate to
the end of the spiritual common wealth, to wit the Church of Christ. And as the
soul may and does restrain or correct oftentimes the body, and the spirit the
flesh when they go out of order, so may the spiritual gouuernour do the same to
the temporal, when he breaks this subordination and goes about to impugn
the same and overthrow religion, Molina 22. tract. 2. disput. 29. art. 3.
Bellarm. Car. to 1. co^t^ou. Ibi. 5. ca 6. 7. and 8.
whereunto he and his power ought to be subject and subordinate, etc.

The second reason proceeding of this first, may be, that if some such supreme
superiority for restrayning of particular princes were not left in gods
Church, Greg de Valent. 22. disp. 1. qu. 12. puncto 2.
then had not his divine providence left sufficient remedy in the Christian
common wealth for conservation and co^tinuation thereof (which notwith-standing
he has promised shall endure to the end of the world) seeing that every temporal
prince without subordinatio^ to any on head, Canonists. S. Anton. 3. p. tit. 22
l. 5.. 2.
may believe, teach, change, or alter religion at his pleasure, Siluester de
verbo Papa. q. 7. and a qu. 10. vsque ad 14. and verbo legitimus: q. 4.
without any remedy or redress, which were contrary to the high wisdom of
almighty God, showed in all other things to which he has left sufficient
power and provision to defend and conserve themselves and their own being.

And this is so plain and euidenta truth even by the light of nature her self
(where any soul or spirit, Joan Paris de pietate regla and papali in principio
etc. 11.
or higher end then earth or earthly things is acknowledged) as not only all
sectaryes of our time whatsoever do confess the same, Nauar. I nono de
indicijs notab. 3. and alij.
or substance thereof, but Jews also and Turks will not deny, but that for
defense and conservation of religion any prince may be restrained that goes
about to ouerthrow^the same; Greg. Nazia^z. in orat. ad populum trepidatem and
Imper. comotu^.
which we see in like mauer practiced by innumerable examples recounted both in
scriptures ecclesiastical and profane historyes, as also by experience of our
own days. And this base flattery of these our new fawning brethren to the
contrary, is not only fond but also impious.

There follows the fourth part of their argument in this book which
conteyneth a brave and resolute protestation against the Pope, The 4 point of
their argument.
to wit: that if the Pope should come in person with an army where they are,
under pretense to establish Catholic religion by force, they would oppose
themselves against him, and spend the best blood in their bodies (if any be
good) in that quarrel, etc. Behold valiant Soldiers brought up in the Popes
seminaryes brauing against him: who would beleene this to be spoken by preests,
except they auowed themselves to be authors of the book? And how are these men
(think you) so soon of priests made souldiars? A little before they talked much
of the word, and now upon the suddayne they have taken up the sword, to fight
against their chief pastor and bringer up, and this also in defense of heresy.
Whence (think you) is this mutation? We are thoroughly presuaded (say they)
that priests of what order soever ought not by force of arms to plant, water,
Ibid.
or defend religion. But we would ask them what good arguments have persuaded
them herin, or what learned master has taught them this new lesson, so
contrary to their old? Surely we can immagine none, but my L. of London, nor
other arguments then anger, envy and other like passions.

The fifth point of their subject is to cast upon Catholics (as has been said)
yea upon the best and most zealous sort, The fifth point of their argument.
and upon the martyrs themselves all the fault, hatred and envy of the long and
grievous persecutions and sufferings for religion in England, and to drown
them (as men are wont to say) in their own blood and (which is more impious)
to defame them with all sorts of people both at home and abroad, as traitors,
conspirers, and practisioners against the State, and as men of maleuolent mynds
toward both their prince and country: And is this priestlike? is this piety?
nay they lay the fault upon the Popes themselves (as before has been showed)
and is this tolerable?

But yet they go further, and say that some of themselves, if they had been of
her Ma. counsel, and knowing what they now know, Page 17.
would have given their consents to that which has been done against Catholics
Lo here, they give their consent a posteriori to participate the spilling of
so much blood, and the guylt of so many spoilings and vexations of Catholics as
hitherto have been used, and great probability there is that the justice of
almighty God may admit them to that participatio^ at the day of judgment, seeing
they desire it so earnestly, and so importunatly thrust themselves in now, by
offering their postconsent. But would any man believe this of Catholic
preeists that are in their right wits?

If a man should pose them about the proceedings in England for above twenty
years before the coming of the Jesuits thither (whom now they make the
authors of al persecution and sufferings) as of the change of religion it
self the deposing and imprisoning of all the Cath. Aposing of the iumultuons.
Bishops, the abolishing of the mass, with the grievous punishment appointed
for hearing it, the ministering of the oath about the supremacy and other
articles of faith, the enforcing to heretical service, sermons and communion,
the expulsing from colleges, benefices and dignityes, the imprisoning of
diverse presons, the putting to death of diverse as well priests as others. M.
VVoodhouse, M. Main, D. Story, M. Shirwood, etc. if all these proceedings and
persecutions were used before the Jesuits came into England, or that Catholics
styrred, how do these accusers of their brethren lay all the fault of rigor
and persecution upon Jesuits and other Catholics of their side? How will they
answer or defend this?

The sixth point of their book, The sixth point of their argument. Page 5.
is an intimation of their intention and resolute purpose to change their
former course for the time to come: Better late them never (say they) we have
thought it our parts, being her highness natural borne subjects to acknowledge
the truth of the carriage of matters against us, and the apparent causes of it
that the blame, may in deed from point to point light and ly where it ought to
do, etc. This is their flattering and perfidious preface, and the persons
whereon this blame and blood of martyrs must light and ly are not only the
Jesuits and true zealous priests and Catholics joined with them; but the Popes
also themselves to wit Pius 5. Gregor. xiij. Syxtus 5. named by them, Card.
Allen also, D. Saunders, and others called here their instruments. And then
they proceed in their forsaid intimation and denuntiation in these words: Page
Ibid.
If the State hereby, may in any sort be satisfied, our own former courses
bettered and the realm secured (we promise) that the like shall never her after
be attempted or sauored by any of us, but be revealed, if we know them, and
withstood if they be enterprised, withal our goods, and our lives, to our
uttermost ability, be their pretenses never so fair for religion or what else
can be devised.

Lo here new Champions that will fight even with God himself if he should come
with force to root out heresy. But will any prorestant living believe them,
seeing them so notoriously perfidious to their own people, or rather mere
sicophants in seeking to accuse all other Catholics, but themselves, of
treasons and machinations against the prince and state? what spirit of the
former wicked seven may we hold this to be? Wherefore seeing they do affirm so
plainly here that better late then never and that they mean to turn over the
leaf (which God of his mercy grant it be not to open heresy and apostasy) it
is better also for Catholics that they know these men rather late then never.
And this is all the aduertisment we will give them in this behalf.

But not to enlarge our selves any further, The 7 poy^^^ of the subject.
there remains the last part of this subject or argument, wherein they beseech
all Catholics to pleasure them so much, as not to send their children any more
to the Seminaries beyond the seas: Page 4^.
It remains then (say they) that you would be pleased to be entreated by us
not to send or suffer your children or friends to go beyond the seas to them
that so they may be driven if needs they will train up youths, to make them
traitors, to gather them up in other contreys, whereby they shall not be able so
much to infect or endanger us, etc. This is their request, where at we doubt
not, but you will laugh; especially considering that if Jesuits had not gathered
op diverse of them in other contreyes, they had yet layen on the ground as
contemptible things both their and here, but hear the reason of their request
and you will laugh more. Ibid. 4^.
For God (say they) is able to raise up priests out of our own universities
and from among the ministers themselves.

Lo here a new generation of masters made of ministers instead of Jesuits. For
bringing up Catholics children, but besides teachers they must offer us
colleges and mayntenance, also or else they bid us to our loss. And so with
this as they do end their book, so shall we end this first Chapter, remytting
it to the judgment of the discreet Reader, concerning both the wit and spirit
wherewith it is written, which yet will more perhaps appear in the others
chapters following.

OF THEIR FOLLY AND passionate spirit declared in the manner of handling the
former arguments.
CAP. II.
IF you have taken pity (good Readers, as truly we have) of our discontented
and distempered brethren their indiscreti^on and demonstration of bad spirit in
taking upon them to handle and defend so odious arguments, as before have been
related out of their two last books, the one treating a defense and patronage
of disorder and liberty against virtuous, regular, and retired life, the other
two (for now they are three in number as you have seen) of far worse quality
tending to open railing and rebellion against Superiors, with manifest errors
also in doctrine: much more (no doubt) will you do the same, or rather feel a
far deeper sense of compassion in you toward them by vewing over their manner
of handling these subjects, which is commonly every where with such extreme
passion, lack of judgment, modesty, and moderation, as truly in men of their
coat and vocation is most lamentable.

For whereas an evil argument may somtymes by cunning and smoth handling, The
extreme passionate proceeding of the seditious.
or by showing wit and learning of zeal, or modesty be made plausible to the
vulgar reader, these men do so treat the argument or subject of these two
books, as if they were good and tolerable of them selves, yet could they not
but become contemptible and odious by their manner of treating, seeing they
manifestly declare therein, that no reason, desire of truth, zeal of
reformation, love of union, or any other good cause or motive induced them to
take this enterprise in hand, but spite and rancor only, envy and malice desire
of revenge and other such pernicious inductions; and in the manner of handling
their pretentions, they so bear themselves, as every child may discover not
only great insufficiency in wisdom and learning, but in all other virtues
besides belonging to men of there profession, and that only they are carried
away with the fury of passion and rage of revenge, not caring what or how or of
whom they say any thing, so they may utter their gaul and disgorge their
choler upon the^, whom they envy, fear or hate. Some few examples we shall
here set down, whereby you may easily make a guess at the rest.

And first of all we shall note one that might seem only to comprehe^d folly
and lack of discretion, if other things uttered by the same party afterward in
his discourse did not bring also suspicion or rather demo^stration of venom
and malice. For thus he begins his Preface to the book entitled, Important
considerations, etc.

Right honorable, A ridiculous beginning or entrance.
Worshipful, well-beloved, Lords,
Ladies, Earls, Contesses, Vicounts, Vicountesses, Barons,
Baronesses, Knights Ladies, Gentlemen, gentlewomen,
Batchelers, virgins, Married, Single.
All dearly affected of both sexes of all three ages in every degree, Epistle
to Important Considerations, etc.
state and condition of life, as well for the gyfts of graces given you, as you
are Catholic (which to God, to our holy mother the Catholic Roman Church, and
to the Sea Apostolic does make you grateful) as also for the gifts of nature
given you as you are English (which to your prince and country make you loyal,
serviceable and faithful, and of both myneful) give me leave by an epistle
pathetical in one general passage to speak unto you all alike, in two adoptiue
surnames, Catholic and English: with sentences Apostrophal of as great weight
and warynes, as the worth of the matter exacteth at my worthless hands: by so
much the more made worthier, by how much I might be worthied with a favorable
conceyt had of you all, not for my unworthy sake, but for your own indemnity
for hope of leaving a posterity: for your dear souls health, dear Catholics
dearly affected English, deeply affied, voluntary religious, it is for you, and
to you I speak.

Thus he writes, and were it not that the gauling and spiteful speech which
after he uses against diverse men of great worth, do argue the writer of
somewhat more then simplicity and folly, this might pass with laughter as you
see, but hearing him say afterward; Page 1^.
We do disdain and renounce from our hearts both Archpriests and Jesuits as
arrant traitors, etc. And again in the very next page thus to glory and
profess: Disobedient We are to the Archpriest as an usurper on the ^ehalfe of
the Cath. Sea of Rome. Page 19.
And then again for further explication of his meaning: Disobedient we are to
the devil, and all his instrumental usurped authorityes. Malitions speeches of
VV. VV.
And yet further: Never shall the Cath. Church or commonwealth of England find
so wicked a member as a Wolsey, a Persons, a Creswel, a Garnet, a Blackwel,
etc. These we say, and many other like speches being found every where in this
preface, do manifestly show, that not only wisdom wants in the writer, but
some other more necessary virtues also to a Christian Catholic, and much more
a priest as he professes himself to be.

But now will we show you another example of folly and malice joined to geather
out of the beginning of their second books preface to the end you may see that
both were written by one spirit, An example of folly and malice joined to
geather.
their words are these, yiedling a reason of publishing thersaid book against
the Archpriest. And at this time (say they) we are the rather moved so to do
(to set forth this narration of matters passed in Wisbech) because it has
pleased M. Blackwel our said Archpriest very lately to send to his twelve
Assistants to be diuulged a certain censure, Praef Relat. Wisbech Page 1.
or (we know not what to term it) a sheet of paper fraught nether with wit,
honest dealing, discretion or learning, but in effect with as many shifts and
lies almost as lines in derogation not only of some of the said books set out
by our brethren, tearming the same (as if either he himself or some of his
commanders the Jesuits had made them) to be seditious books: but likewise
takes upon him to touch the said contention, not in many words, but with much
folly and great vntru^h, we will be bold by way of Preface a little to touch
them, etc.

By these words the reader may take a scantling of their co^temptuous spirit,
who speak so disorderly of their lawful Superior, a man of known virtue and
learning, for so myld and modest an admonition upon their first two libels, as
you shall now hear by their own relation. For thus they write.

These are (say they) his words, The Archpriests mild and fatherly speech
proudly censured by his subjects.
(to wit the Archpriests in his admonition:) The first point of your books
(says he) (meaning the division at Wisbech) was a thing long since ended with
great edification, and by the means principally of those which are most
condemned by you; It touches the greater and better part of that company; it
nothing concerns our authority, it being more ancient and having orders taken
at the atonement by their own consent. It is well known at Rome, by whose
means they were disanulted, nether is it more unsitting for those which lived
in one house to institute rules for such as voluntarily demanded and accepted
them, then to procure a sodality abroad.

Thus wrote our Reverend Father the good Archpriest and as these men do
confess, it is all he wrote of this point of Wisbech and let the Reader be
judge whether any Superior in the world could write more myldly and more
humbly, especialy if he consider the outrageous iniuryes done him in these two
first books or libels set out by his Rebellious subjects against him, and
notwithstanding all this his patience and modesty, consider we pray you with
what intemperance they do canuase these few words of his here set down. For
having recyted his words they say.

Thus far our Archpriest. and it is all he writes to his Assistants of this
matter which we the rather note to show the extremity of his pride in supposing
by such an answer to the said books concerning that division to w^pe away
those imputations and matters wherewith both F. Garnet and F. Weston, and he
himself in some sort are charged.

Thus write these men, being angry (as it seems) that their patient Superior
vouch-safed not them more words of contention about this matter of Wisbech in
his admonition to his Assistants, which how just a quarrel it is let wiser men
judge, but much more, whether so few, so modest and so fatherly words uttered
by a Superior without naming any, do merit so contumelious a censure from
subjects, as to accuse him of extremity of pride lack of wit and honesty,
discretion, learning, truth and humility in writing them. Is it possible that
so high pride as here is objected can be gathered out of so lowly words
without high folly and higher maleuolence?

But we shall aleadge you another example in a different kind of folly, or rather
frenzy, used by these passionate people which is to grace and praise indeed
their adversaries whom they seek most to disgrace, by telling good things of
them, and deprauing them only by their own comentaryes, as in this example
last alleged of M. Blackwel, Another kind of stra^g folly and medres.
whose words recited by them selves being most commendable as you have seen
they endeavor by fond and childish in^^rpretations of their own to make them
reprochful. And the like they do oftentimes concerning F. Weston, alleging
both his words and deeds worthy of praise in themselves, and then seking to
discredit the same by their wresting comentaryes, whereof we have given some
examples in the former chapter, and we may ad thereunto now this, which they
relate of him, his behavior and speech when M. Dolman one of their own side
came unto F. Weston to request him and the residue (who made the greater part
of the company) to return to the common conversation of the troublesome and
dissolute again, whose answer to their demand they set down thus.

Would God (said F. Weston with most earnest affection, Page 17. F. West.
religious words maliciously interpreted.
as it seemed) that you M. Doleman were as able to persuade the rest, as you
have done me; for my own part I mind to give over and meddle no further, but
to commend the cause to God, assuring you, if I could do the least of this
house good for his souls health, by laying my head under his feet, I would
most willingly do it, etc. And thus far this dissembling Jesuit.

Let any true Christian man judge now of this unchristian censure of so myld,
godly and Christian words; let our brethren but aleadge us truly some such of
any of their side, and we shall both believe them and praise them; But they can
bring nothing of like quality from theirs, and you have heard the quite
contrary by their own letters and subscriptions alleged by us in our Cap. 6.
Apology, and here in these books you may read them in every line showing a
plain opposite spirit both of speaking and doing. For within a few pages after
this again they show their said spirit in scoffing at this blessed man's
recollecting himself to prayer, when he was to treat any matter of moment (a
thing as all godly men know most laudable, and used by all old saints, as also
by the best religious men of our days) for when the foresaid M. Dolman (and as
these men say also M. D. Bauyn with him) enduced by them and their clamors to
desire some final end whatsoever of so odious braules, came to the forsaid
Father to treat about the leaving of, for peace sake, that fraternity or
spiritual congregation, which the bigger and better part of the prisoners had
made to themselves, for orderly life and avoiding the disorders comytted by
others; these men relate the matter thus.

But M. Weston after the new fashion, Page 23.
desired them first to fall down and pray with him, which done he arose, and
framing his countenance as though he would have wept said unto them, etc. Lo
thus with contempt they relate as you see the good man's recollection of
himself by prayer, before he would treat so weighty an affayre, which custom
of prayer, these men call the new fashion, for that it is like they use it not,
and yet they confess the argument of his speech to have been such, as it caused
M. D. Bauyn a wise and learned man to shed tears which these pleasant men also
turn to a jest: Page Ibid.
Then D. Bauyn (say they) to pay M. Weston with his own coin, pretended to
be so moved with his words, as if he likewise could scarsely have refrayned
from tears, which we observing doubted to find him but an halting arbitrator,
Note this observation.
etc. Here you see nothing but scoffing at all piety and godlynes, condemning
so grave and learned a man, as M. D. Bauyn is known to be, of halting, for
that he was so easily moved to tears, wherewith their hearts and eyes are little
acquainted.

The like course they take with that Reverend and learned man F. Garnet,
setting down most godly words of his, in his letters unto them, and then
condemning his intention (a thing proper to the devil as before we showed out
of Job) calling him also a devilish politician for the same, Job. 1. and ^.
Page 44.
transforming himself into an angel of light; and then for that the said Father
wrote to them for their comfort, that not only he, but certain gentlemen also,
that had been with him at Wisbech remained much edified of their reunion and
peaceable conversation, adding also those words of S. Paul. Testis enim est
mihi Deus, quomodo cupiam omnes vos in visceribus Jesus Christi: for God is my
witness how much good I wish you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ; and then of
his companions: I assure you that their being with you has wrought such effect
in the hearts of all that were with me that they never saw place or persons
which more delighted them, etc.

To which words our brethren do adioyne this scoff: In deed (say they) these
were three or four gentlemen, Ibid.
whom we afterward termed his deacons and subdeacons: Lo their good
interpretations; who can deal with such kind of spirits? i^rrisores (as the
Apostle calls them) scoffers and scorners, but as another Apostle says: ^al
6.
Deus non irridctur, God will not be scorned; and so to him we leave them,
though we cannot leave of yet to prosecute this vain of foolish cauilling and
calumniation in them, even against very good things, as appears by this other
example, about the same F. Weston his sitting at table, whereof they relate,
that he would not keep any certain place at the upper table as other ancients
did, but only took his place as he came, they endeavor to turn all against
him by malicious interpretation of his meaning: Page 46.
M. Weston (say they) did not long sit at the upper table with us, and below
M. Bluet and M. Bagshaw, where his due place was, but that he desired, and had
it easily granted unto him, that he might leave his said place, and sit in
some other as he thought good, wher-vpon as disdayning to sit where he did
before, be bound himself afterward to no certain place but sat (you must
think for humilityes sake) now here, now there as he list, etc.

Lo here a grievous accusation of disdain to sit at the upper table, and
together you may note, the great humility and ciuility of these two their
friends here named that took place always as due unto them above F. Weston,
whom yet in this book they say to, have been the Prouincial of Jesuits before
he came into the prison, which if it be so, what the place of a religious
prouincial is throughout the Christian world in respect of M. Bluet and M.
Bagshaw all men know that are of experience. but F. Weston, was as forward to
contend in humility, and seek alower place as the other were in striving for
a higher, and yet this humility also they condemn in him, for that he would
not strive with them, nor yet accept any place at the higher table, but sit as
he came: which promiscual sitting used by religious men and others living in
community we have showed (if you remember) in our Apology out of M. Bagshaws
own letters, that he condemns, as fit for Anabaptists revived Arrians and
those of the Cynedrical congregations of, Geneuae, etc. Apol. cap. ^. and 9.
and what stir there is amongst them for sitting and keeping places even unto
the fifteenth difference and degree; appears by the form of their new common
wealth set down by watson their Secretary (who now is said to have gotten a
place also at the Bishop of Londons table) cited by us in our Apology.

We might here allege many other examples in this kind of folly and
passionate proceeding, whereby our brethren, not seeing what makes for them or
what against them, do go about to discredit others by such means, as do give
greatest credit and honor unto them, as for example when desyring by all
means possible to bring in contempt and discredit the venerable, godly and
learned Society of religious men called the Jesuits, they tell us every where
how strong and powerable they be in all countries, how greatly in credit
throughout all Christendom calling also the most famous men of our age secular
and religious, priests and lay men, Jesuits or Iesuited, when they make against
them though they neither are nor ever were of that order, and so they call M. D.
Sanders, D. Bristow, Card. Allen and others of our own nation, Jesuits,
though they were never so; but only friends unto them. And the like also they do
with many principal men of other nations yea though they be lay men; as Don
Bernardino de Mendoca late Ambassador for the Catholic king in France, and
diverse principal gentlemen in England, which is rather to commend and grace
the Society then otherwise.

And the very same course they hold with F. Persons, whom to disgrace they
affirm to have led our late Card. Allen at his pleasure, made his books for
him, induced him to this, and to that, as he listed; and the like authority
they attribute unto him with the late K. of Spain, and this that now is,
saying that he did and does with them what he pleases; sending men into
Ireland, making armadas and the like. Great folly and passion not to see what
makes for the^ or against them.
The same authority also they affirm him to have with this Pope and with the
Card. Protectors getting forth Breues and other orders at his appointment,
co^playning moreover, that he has been able to make so many new Seminaryes in
Spain and Flanders, and to send so many priests into England, and to have so
many under him at his commandment: all which things and other the like which
they aleadge against him tending rather to his credit if they be true then any
ways to his discomendation do argue great folly and simplicity, and great
blyndnes of passion in our brethren, that bring them in against him, seeing they
do plainly demonstrate, that either F. Persons is a man of more wisdom,
religion, and better parts then they would have him seem to be, or that the
Popes and princes which esteem him so much, are very silly and simple people,
both they and their counselors, to be every where so much ouerruled by him.

To this kind also of folly and passion not to see what helps or hurts
their own cause, appartayneth that which they aleadge in their Relation of
Wisbech of the contentions between the bigger and lesser part of the
Catholic prisoners about certain disorders and enormous crimes in life and
conversation objected by the mayor part to have been comytted by the fewer, and
was the cause of their separation and making rules whereof we have treated
somewhat in the former chapter of this book, but much more largely in our
Apology: Apol. c. 6.
which crimes and accusations (say these men) being gathered together in
writing contained three whole sheets of paper (so simple and passionate they
are as to put this in print) the arbitrament whereof was comytted the first time
to the forsaid M. D. Bauyn and M. Dolman who meeting to geather to hear that
matter, Seven articles given up by the quiet part for reformation of the rest.
the bigger part which stood with F. Weston gave up for better decision of the
matter seven Articles to be considered by the arbitrators, which were these,
as these men themselves relate them.

First whether (say they to the arbitrators) will you stay the Page 25.


Whether you think it secure for us that live and meet together Care of
keepinge peace and charity.
and whether you can compass our quiet?

That whosoever does come to declare any matter, shall submit Lo these men also
admit not equivocation incase of lavvful trial.
equivocation or lying, any thing which you think necessary to the
manifestation of the verity.

That you do take the promise of every one that is called before you Care of
modesty.


This supposed: we are all for our parts contented, that they object Great
confidence.


We require also that they shall give their consent, that they are all Ponder
this.
to hear what may be laid out against them.

Every thing being heard, that you pronounce sentence against

By these articles it is evident what the quiet part meant, to wit, to have the
matter decyded privately and secretly, and the defects and disorders that had
been cause of separation between them, to be uttered modestly by common consent,
but yet so as both parties should be contented therewith, and no man's ^ame
publicly hurt.

And truly we do not see, neither can well imagine what better aduertisments
might have been given to the arbitrators and judges for upright, indifferent,
secret and quiet decyding of al matters then these; yet shall you hear what
censure our wrangling brethren do give of them, and what quarrels they pick
against them; and let the prudent reader be judge between both parties. We
shall relate their own words as themselves have set them down: When our said
arbitrators (say they) had perused these interrogatoryes, Page 26.
no maruayle though they troubled them heing so coutrary to their expectation
and devised of purpose to break of all hope of reconciliation by their means,
and such likewise, as by Iesuitical shifts might have been prolonged, if they
had list for (we know not) how many years, etc.

This is their comentary upon the former articles, but why the Arbitrators
should be so troubled with them as these men affirm, or how they might seem
so contrary to their expectation, and devised of purpose to break of all hope
of reconciliation by prolonging matters for many years; no man (we think) but
these, can gather out of the Articles themselves, seeing they all tend directly
both to clearnes, breuity, peaceable and modest treating of all things among
themselves, secresy, indifferency and final friendly and brotherly determination
of all matters in strife. And the reader that sees our brethren to cauil and
calumniate so manifestly in this point, will discern their humor also (if he be
wise) in all the rest, which yet will be more evidently discovered in the
opposite articles which themselves gave up to contradict these, and to
overthrow in deed all hope of true, sincere, and brotherly trial in the crimes
objected. They are but 4. in number but yet of much substance to shift their
necks out of the collar; we shall set them down in their own words as here
they have printed them.

With these 7. Page Ibid.
Articles (say they) we were no sooner acquaynted but presently we set down
these sour, in some sort to answer them.

Page 26 Satisfaction required formatters past.
and defamation of us by their breach and letter, if sufficient causes cannot
be proved for their so doing.

A threat to all accusers.
be set down in writing under the accusers hands sub poena talionis, if it be
not proved.

A mere e^asion.


We will sustain any censure, A confession with a Prouiso.
with this condition that being censured by these men, we may be secured thereby
from all other censures concerning the matter.

These are their articles which (as you see) are no answers but plain
exceptions, cautions, and cauillations to avoid judgment and to procure a
worse breach then before, seeing in the first they require peremptorily
satisfaction for things already past, and in the second the name of him that
shall utter their defects with obligation to be punished with the same
punishment which the syn in it self by law deserves if he should not be able
to prove it Canonicially, which Canonical proof required by them in the third
article, is a thing of such length and difficulty for cityng and bringing forth
witnesses, Shifts and cautions to ^ anoyd all co^petent way of ending matters.
and for the multitude of judicial exceptions and delays permitted therein, as
it was not possible to use it in a prison: and yet besides all this they ad
moreover for more security these cautelous words, supposing these men to be our
judges, whereby they reserve to them selves a refuge to deny their authority of
being judges, whenever they should judge against them. And finally the last
article requiring, that in case they were condemned and censured by those
judges, they might thereby be secured from all other censures concerning that
matter, shows well how gilty consciences they had, and how gross disorders
they had comytted that needed this assecuration.

And now whether this were not as gross folly in these men to bring forth
these matters again upon the stage of the world let every wise man consider,
and much more to run to the publication of particular faults objected there
privately against themselves, and tending all to dissolution, as whoredom,
diceng, playing, and dronkennes, bringing in of hobby horses into the hall, the
mention of Mary the kepers maid, embeseling of pewter, and other such base
things which howsoever they confess, Very gross folly in relatinge their
own perticulies abuses.
that their adverse part had three sheets of paper of like faults ready to lay
against them; and to stand to the lawful proof thereof in particular (as between
brethren only for reformation, and not iudicially and canonically to their
infamation in public judgment) yet nether they in those private informations
nor we in our public Apology thought it ever expedient to name the same with
the circumstances and parties accused, as these men do here, who seem so much
to be ouergone in blind passion, as that they nether would conceal such
matters nor could probably defend them, and do leave themselves either convicted
or suspected of all the particulars mentioned and brought in here by
themselves, and of many more in that kind, which is a point of egregious folly
in our opinion.

But now follows the highest folly of all, which is most to discredit them,
Their highest folly.
(if we be not deceived) with all civil and discreet men of what sort, sect, or
religion soever, who shall hear or read their books, and this is their
immodest, scoffing and railing speech. which does so set out the spirits of
them, from whom they come, especially in this our case (the matter, the
causes, the writers, and those against whom they are written being considered)
as truly the consideration thereof does deeply grieve us; and first letting
pass those things which you have hard before in the precedent Chapter,
concerning the whole religious order of the Fathers of the Society, let us
here begin with their speches to M. Blackwel their lawful Superior, confirmed
now after his first institution by two Apostolical Breues commanding them
dutifully to obey and reverence him in the place of almighty God, how do they
use him think you? how do they treat with him?

First you have hard before how they take him up, Most intolerable railing
sueches of these distracted priests against their Superior. Pref. to relat.
for half adozen lines most fatherly and modestly written by him, exhorting
them to peace in the matter of Wisbech as a thing already ended with
edification, but they tell him that there are as many lies almost as lines in
his words; that their is nether wit, honest, dealing discretion or learning in
them but extremiti^ of pride, etc. You have hard also before their open
Appellation from him; Epist. before Impert. Consid.
as an arrant Tray^or, usurper from the Sea of Rome, forcibly, violently and
most unjustly foisted in upon them. And in this manner of myld spirit, they go
forward calling him every where, traiterous Archpriest, unlearned, without wit,
Iesuited, and vassal of the Jesuits: Ibid.
and comparing him to John of Leyden king of Anabaptists, and to Donatus and
Arrius Archeretiks of Asrick and Egypt, Epist. Ibid.
etc. And then further calling him a puppy, dancing after the Jesuits pipe;
Ibid. page 49.
a Iesuitical idol without conscience or common honesty, borrowing discretion
of others, and his credit gotten by falsehood, a man of a quicker pen then
either of wisdom or sincerity, a false brother. And yet further: An Archpriest
of clouts, Relat. pa 57. 5^. 65.and^.
sunburut with Iesuitisme, a che^fe parasite of the Jesuits; writing false
letters against his own conscience; taken with manifest forgery about his
authority, a beggar on horsbacke; and other such like suitable terms: And when
they come; to reason with him as good children and obedient priests they say:
Your mastership was f^^re to blame, etc. Speak truly man, for in a right good
sense we are your good masters, and so you ought to esteem us. And then
again: Epist. relat. page 5.
We are every man as honest as your self at least. And then further waxing
angry with him, they say: In good faith we are sorry that we are compelled to
disclose this fellows falsehood, etc.

Lo here how they scarce account him for their fellow, whom the Sea Apostolic
has appointed for their Prelate and Superior. And whereas the said Sea and
authority had made them his subjects, they by pride call themselves his good
Masters, and can we doubt of what spirit this comes? But hear what follows
of the same spirit against other men.

The whole religious Society of Jesus, they call, the Society of the Devil,
Against Jesuits relat. page 42.
and the schole of Macheuillisme. Mark these modest good men, and their whole
doctrine and doings wherein themselves have any mislike, they call by a special
contempti^^^ name of Iesuitisme, Epist. relat. page ^^.
and phanscisme though yet they confess the whole body of Catholic learned
men to agree with them therein, and consequently for this cause, they call them
as occasion is offered either Jesuits or Iesuited, and so they call by name
their old masters and teachers Card. Allen D. Saunders and others, and this is
the fancy or rather phre^sy of these our distracted brethren.

But harken yet further and be ashamed with us in their behalf when they talk
of the first mission of the Fathers of the Society into England procured by the
earnest suit of D. Allen in the name of the Catholics (without which it is
likely the most part of themselves had not been Catholics at this day, and much
less priests:) These good, Fathers (say they) as the devil would have it came
into England, Import. Considerat pa. 14.
and intruded themselves into our harvest, etc. whereby as you see they affirm
the work it self to be of the devil and Cardinal Allen the devils instrument
in procuring the same, And then talking of F. Persons in particular, Epist.
page 9.
they say: he did as much as art, wit or malice of man or devil could affourd
him. And further speaking of M^ South worth a worshipful reuerond priest, and
knights son, Epist. relat. page 10.
friend to the Jesuits, they say; that he was an Italianated companion, and a
devil incarnate: which often naming of the devil in such sense as this is, was
much noted in Martyn Luther at the beginning (if you remember) of his Apostasy
and objected to him by. B. Fisher and S. Tho. More, and other the first
Catholic writers against him; and is much to be remembered by these our
brethren, so long as they remain our brethren, which we wish may be ever, but
following this spirit is not like to be long.

Besides this they call generally thesaid Jesuits, Ibid. page 34. 35. etc.
Epist. Import. page 4 and 5.
proud Ne^rods, boisterous hunters, Ies^nical hu^^erists, m^^a^^ill ian
practisers, furious spirits m^n without consere^^e (...) companions, ambitious
hipoerits, and the like, yea they go so far in rancor and malice against
these men, as they do allow by name Thomas Bell the heretical Apostata, and
relapsed priest his shameless slanders and raylings against them. And further
they term all Catholics that are conjoined with the Archp^^eist and the said
fathers infected with (...), gallants, abroad, they of the new guyse^ fanciful,
etc. Ibid. page 3^.
And as for the 19. or 20. grave men that were of contrary opinion, and
conversation to the (...) same prison, of wisbieh they call them cuery where,
Relat. page 3. 4. 7. and 23.
the (...) often separation, and themselves the priests of the unity. They (...)
so, poor fools, conspiring companions, and that the ve^yer (...) this better
luck, ^. VVesto^ they call yoncker dissembling (...) of the Hall, (...) his cook
M. Bra^ston (a reverend ancient priest) an hipocritical parasyte, Ibid page 22.
23. 30. etc.
procuring his Agenage amongst the rest with machauillian practices, etc. Of M.
D. Bauyn their judge, they say, that he was stesse lyned with Iesuitisme, and a
halting arburator, etc.

Of three Reverend priests, that were procurators of the Archp. in Rome, the
one a deane and Doctor of divinity, the other a provost, and the third now an
Assistant to the said Archp. they write thus: Standish that honest man must
have access to the Popes Hol. with two runagate priests D. I^addock and M.
Martyn Array, etc. Import. Consid page 55.
who like very lying wretches, dishonest companions, etc. Of Father Garnet they
say: he was a diuelis^^ politician transformed into an Angel of light, abase
^assal of F. Persons that be, Ibid. page 36. 43 53.
sw^^teth by his little honesty, etc.

And as for F. Persons himself, whom they make the special object, as it
seems of all their malice, it would require half a book to set down what
they ^could against him, and we doubt not but that it will be no small part of his
great merits in setting forward gods cause, to bear with patience (as we hear
he does) such insolent and intemperate raylings at these men's hands, who have
been so greatly many ways beholding unto him, and diverse of them brought up by
him, whereby their notorious ingratitude is so much the more hateful both to God
and man.

Now then we would end this Chapter of their folly (in handling their affayre)
but that we think good to end with some more pleasant phrases of theirs (as we
began) then are these bitter gauling and venomous speches now last rehearsed.
Hear then how they protest and conclude: Never shall any royal lady of the
court, maid of honor, Epist. Important page 20. 22. 23. Extreme foolish
vvanton speech.
or da^^sel of rare aspect, qualities indowments or graces, distill the accents
of their sorrows in the heceades of cares, carks, and greeses, be led away as
wives or concubynes to base villaynes swaggering, misshapen, s^addes, etc. Never
shall the angels faces the flower of Englands youth, the beauty of Britaynes
ocean be appald, empared, ouer-clowded with a steep down shower of stormy
sorrows, etc. Never shall the vermillian ^iush of English virgins, the womanly
modest look of married wives, or the ancient matronlike countenance, of any
widow with in the Isle of Albion, be made common to the abortiues of the hot
Spanish Clime, by our doyngs, etc. Never shall any tender mother nourse, or
sweet babe weep, or any hand wring or heart hurl out volleyes of sighs and
tears, etc. Never shall any man's or woman's angel be offended or Saint grieved,
nor soul punished or pass to purgatory, much less to hell by our means, etc.

Here now may we see and note diverse extreemes of the self same spirit, as
first in bitterness of railing, spiteful, and venomous slaundering and defaming,
and then soft and delicate niceness in words for women, and if those of their
party in the Castle of Wisbech were of this later spirit, no marvel though
those of the other side were forced to seek for rules, and no maruayle though
their last judges and arbitrators in that contention (who yet were known to be
their friends and fauorits M. Mush we mean and M. Dudley having brought both
sides to live together again (as in our Apology we have showed) did yet
ordain and leave in writing also under their hands (as in this relation is
confessed) with the quiet party, Relat pa. 46.
that they might separate themselves again afterward if they should think it
convenient, that is to say, if these other amended not their former life and
conversation, but should fall to the same scandalous behavior again, which is
likely they would never have done except they had seen in their consciences
the great causes of the former separation and some Fear also and likelihood
that the same enormytes and disorders might come in ure again, A great
prejudice against the contentious part in V Visbich.
by which writing in deed they justified the former separation to have been made
upon just and urgent causes, and do give testimony of great disorders on the
other side, etc. consequently, this also was not a point of wisdom in our
discontented brethren to publish the same in print.

And (...) now or the most part is about the matters of Wisbech as you have
seen, and little has been spoken about the second book (their sixth in order)
entitled Important Considerations, etc. The argument of the sixth book inti
ruled Import. (...)
whose argument you have heard in the former Chap. to have been the justifying
of the proceeding and persecution of hereti^s, and other adversaries against
us, and the whole Cath. cause, laying the fault where it is, and ought to be
(as they say) to wit on Catholics themselves, which subject or argument being
such as it is, you must imagine is handled by them with no less passion, and
consequently with no more wisdom reason or temperance the^ the former seeing
that whereas passion enters reason flies, as every man knows whereof also
insueth, that whereas the Philosopher says: Prudentia consistie maxim in
eligendis medijs, wisdom consists most in choosing fit and apt means to
bring our ends to pass. These men being al-togeather in the fury of passion,
no marvel though they do err, in choosing those means both of words and
deeds whereby they should effectuate well their designments if they were good.

And this we have ashewed swel in our Apology upon every occasion offered as
also much more in our little Appendix to their other two books, The Appe^dis of
the Apology in answer of the 3. and. 4. libels.
The hope of peace, and Relatio Turbarum, etc. wherein they growing more into
passion then before (for that this tempest always grows when the door is
once opened unto it) they took to themselves quyte opposite means to their
own ends; as there we have showed, nothing being more contrary to peace with
their Superior, which in the title of the former book tbey precend, then the
words themselves of the same title, to wit that this hope of peace was by
laying open manifest untruths against their said Superior the Archpriest, the^
which attempt nothing could be more effectual to continue war, as every one
will confess; and in the second book of pretending to relate compendiously the
troubles and contentions past in England and to justify themselves therein,
they take the means which are quite contrary thereunto, which is to set down
both the Card. Protectors letters and viceprotectors against them, with the
Popes Breue also and other authentical wrytings of most authority to condemn
them; and what blyndnes or obscurity of passion this was, all men that are out
of passion may easily descerne; and this is their wisdom in eligendis medijs.

Moreover their principal end being in that book which they call the pope of
peace to excuse themselves from dealing with my L. of London and other
adversaries in religion against their own brethren, both in Wisbech and
abroad, and against the Fathers of the Society and other Reverend priests
united with their Superior the Archpriest, they take this medium to do it by
authority of scripture, telling the Reade^, that whereas Christ's disciples, saw
at a certain ryme one casting out devils in his name, who yet did not follow
on with them, they forbad him, but Christ willed them to let him allone,
saying. Luc 9.
He that is not against you, is with you wherewith they seem to persuade
themselves, to have defended well their own fact by this example, A fond
application of scripture to defend their dealing with the adversary.
imagining my L. of London his pursuiuants and others persecutors to represent
that man that did cast out devils, themselves to be the Apostles and disciples
following Christ, that looked on misliked the same until Christ said unto them,
let them alone. The devils cast out must needs be here the Archpriest and all
other good priests joined with him to geather with the Fathers of the society.

And thus far the comparison seems, to ru^ne with them roundly; but now
with what piety these men may be accounted devils by them that are their
brethren and of the same religion; and how they may be said to be cast out in
the name of Jesus by protestants that persecute them; and how my L. of London
his casting the^ out, may further or advance the cause of Christ (as the other
did in casting out devils in Christ's name, though perhaps he was no Christian)
all these points we say our men must accomodate themselves, for we cannot ty
them to-geather with any conuenience of reason, wit, religion or piety and yet
notwithstanding we see them so delighted with this proof of theirs and so
resolute in the matter it self, as they dare avouch a little after, that if any
of their ecclesiastical Catholic superiors should stand against them in this,
Hope of peace. page 13. and 14. Appendix fol. 14.
they would hold them for Principes tenebrarum Princes of darkness, etc.

Thus they proceed in that book, and do think this their dealing with the
heretics a good meaues to pacific matters; and the very like, or rather worse
course do they hold in this book of Important Considerations by excepting first
against the Popes authority spiritual, under the pretense of the law of
Premunue, and then by protesting to oppose themselves openly in the field
against him, if he should use any power temporal, and thirdly by condemning
whatsoever has been said or done hitherto in that affayre by Catholics to the
contrary, bringing their blood upon their own heads (such as have been put to
death) and finally defaming them with all the world for practisioners, unquiet
people, unfaithful, and traitors indeed to their prince and country, joining
heerin with the greatest and most bloody enemies, that ever our cause or
brethren had in our Country. And is this also a good means, think you to make
themselves grateful to Catholics either at home or abroad? And will they go to
Rome (as they pretend) with this good cause of pacification in their hands?
Who does not see the folly of this proceeding?

But yet ere we leave this matter we would have you consider, what a kind of
Preface these people do make to there treatese, wherein they mean to accuse and
make odious all Catholics that are against them to the state and government and
they speak it by way of interrogation to the Catholics themselves, making them
their own judges and condemners for thus they say: Epi. Import. Con^id.
Is there any sin (dear catholics) rising upon in f^rmyrie and frailty of
man, committed by an Apostat^, an infidel, an heretic, a schisama^ke, an
Atheist cast out of the savor of God and accussed out of his church, but a
catholic may and often has fallen into the same and yes remained constant in
his religion to death? Questionles there is nor.

Thus they say and we say the contrary, questionles there are many things: A
most absurd a^^ertio^ about the sins of a Cath. man.
for that an infidel denies God; an heretik contemns his Church, a
so^ismatike seperareth himself from his head; a^ Atheist bele^ueth nothing^
all which sins Catholic remaining constant in his religion can do. But we do
guess at the fond which the writer may have in this place, though his intent
be impious to lay this absurd foundation to all that they are to say afterward
against any sort of Catholics, especially the Fathers of the Society against
who ^e they are to rail their fill, and do not dissemble it eue^ at the first
entrance, Ibid. page 3.
for thus they write: The intent of this discourse is in the name of secular
priests in general not to impeach any one particular person of the cath^laity
of matter of treason and state, etc. nor yet to accuse, excuse, nor any way
call in question our common adsuersary. together with the present state, as a
point very impertinent to the purpose, etc. for that to meddle with such
edge-tooles, as the very bandling of them roughly would rent us quite in pieces
(our frownd on state considered) were a very preposterous course for men in
afflaction, etc.

This they say of that they will not do; A (...) catio^ (...)
and then after a long treatese of this negative they signify to the reader
what they mean to do, which is to join with the said common adversary in
defacing of Jesuits and their friends and by name with Thomas Bell the heretical
and relapsed Apostata, who they say has touched the Jesuits with pride,
Intolerable spyte and malice against Jesuits
ambition, intrusion, vsurpatton, incrochment over the secular priests,
affectation of soueraygnty and the like, which they well allow of, and approve
his spirit therein, and then they make a certain objection to themselves as
coming from some Catholics, how it can stand that Catholic priests may join
with heretics to lay open the defects (if any such were) of their own
brethren, or rather to lay the faults of heretics upon them, as the persecution
of protestants upon Jesuits their most opposite adversaries; and for the first
part of the objection they answer it easily, affirming that (in their
divinity) it is not only lawful to join with heretics in defaming of Jesuits,
Ibid. page 5.
but needful and necessary also, for that the contrary (say they) should quite
cut of the order of justice stop the course of fraternal correption, hinder the
effects of Christian Charity, violate the laws of God and man^ etc.

The second part of the objection and answer to it was forgotten or left out
in the text, and therefore having considered better of the matter, they have put
it in afterward, in a long marginal note or commentary in these words: The
objection of many that are of the spanish faction is very friu^lons (if (...)
malicious) when they say; why do the priests lay the faults upon Jesuits, (...)
cause of the cath. persecution seeing it is welknowne, that the aduer saryes to
both priests and Jesuits and all Catholics are cause thereof, etc. VVbich
admit it were true, yet the Jesuits being equally guilty with them it
belongs to priests to clear the innocent Catholics and leave the Jesuits iu
the suddes, and our adversaries to those that have to do with them, etc.

Lo here the answer or resolution of this objection, that though it were
true, that as well protestants as Jesuits were the cause of persecution in
England (which point notwithstanding it seems they would have held for
doubtful and only Jesuits to be the cause) yet do they think it reason to
leave of the protestants, and to attend only to accuse Jesuits and to leave
them in the suddes. And is not this plain malice and passion confessed by
themselves? what wit, what spirit is there in this handling of their affairs?
who will believe them, what they say or do hereafter? having already so far
discovered, their meanings actions, and endeavors? Wherefore here also we
must conclude, as in the former, and all the rest of the Chapters that ensue,
2. Tim. 3.
In^ipientia eorum manifesta fit omnibus: there folly is evident to all men,
and their passionate spirit is hidden to none.

THERE FOLLY AND presumptious spirit in making to them selves such adversaries,
as they do.
CAP. III.
AS wisdom does consist in considering well first before a man make breaches or
enter into war, what manner of adversaries they are with whom he has to
fight; so is there no point of folly greater then not to forethinke of this, as
it seems these our angry men, have not done, but only for satisfying of their
present passion have lauished out, and bid bataile to as many, as ever stood in
their way: among which though there be many personages of great consideration
and respect, yet none (in our opinion) ought to have been of so great in this
affayre as the man most contemned, injured, and impugned by them (as in the
former Chapter has been seen) we meaue their prelate and lawful imediate
Superior M Blackwel not so much in respect of his own person and gifts of God
annexed thereunto, which are known to be both many and great, but of his place
and authority given him by Christ and his substitute over the whole body of
English Catholics both priests and laymen, which make at this day our true
Cath. Church of England.

For albeit some others here injured also may for other considerations, and
ought to be more regarded by them, yet he in that he is Gods substitute among
them, ordained confirmed and reconfirmed by the Sea Apostolic, and
consequently in the place of Christ to guide and govern them (of which kind of
men Christ himself expressly says qui v^s spernit, Luc. 10.
me spernit, and qui spernit me, spernit eum qui misit me. He that contemns
you, co^temneth me, and he that contemns me, Romans 13.
contemns, him that sent me, and S. Paul said, qui potestati resistit,
damnationem sibi acquirit he that resists, power appointed over him does draw
damnation upon himself) for these causes we say all holy Fathers and spiritual
writers do agree that our spiritual superiors are most of all other men to be
respected by us, Their war with M. Blackvvel the Archpriest.
yea before angels themselves, if they should converse with us upon the earth,
for that these men's authority is known evidently to be from God, which in
angels is not, except by revelation, and consequently that the greatest sin
of all other, yea the highest point of spiritual sin, pride, and presumption
is, to molest, and make war against them, but much more to despise and abuse
them.

And albeit our discontented people may have this conceyte for their refuge,
and seek also to persuade others the same (as they do) that having appealed
from him and his jurisdiction they are free and not bound to any obedience, or
respective behavior toward him, yet to all men of any capacity and learning
this is known to be otherwise, both in reason, conscience and constitution of
Ecclesiastical canons. For albeit a man may appeal from one Superior to
another in certain cases, About their appeal from the Archpriest.
yet that does not take away the said Superiors authority, but restrayneth him
only (when the Appeal is lawful and upon good grounds) not to proced in that
particular case until the higher Superior have given his decision. And if he
admit not the Appeal, but do remit the Appellantes back again to obey the
said immediate superior (as his Hol. has done in this our case by his breue of
the 17. of August last past) then is their case as it was before, and they more
obliged to obey then before. But howsoever any Appeal succedeth, most clear
it is that the parties appealing are bound to obey and show themselves dutiful
in all other things while the Appeal depends before the higher judge, no
less then if any such Appeal had never been made; and much more after the
controversy ended and decyded, as ours now is, and the Authority of our
Archpriest both established and reestablished, and therefore for our disordinate
brethren to use him contumeliously togeaher with all those of their own coat
or others lawfully joined with him in due subordination, Se the Apology cap^^.
as they do in these their books, cannot but be a most presumptious and heinous
sin in the sight of God, and infinite discredit unto them in the eyes and
judgments of all good and godly men to have such a one, and so many dependent
of him for their open adversaries, as they are not ashamed to confess and
profess in these their books,

This then in our opinion cannot be but a great point of folly, Their abusing
of the Jesuits.
as was also that to take so universally and generally against the whole order
of Jesuits using so opprobrious names against the whole body, as in the former
Chapters you have heard, for by so doing they can gain no credit but with the
heretics that hate the whole order for religions sake; and every Catholic will
easily see and consider, that a whole body or society cannot have offended our
brethren in any particular matters, and consequently seeing that they concur
with Protestants in deprauing the whole order it must needs be either of great
passion and folly in hating the whole for a part, or for that in judgment and
affection they concur heerin with Protestants, and hate them even for
religions sake, that is for their eminent zeal in Catholic religion. And what
credit this may be to them throughout the world with all good Catholics,
themselves may easily consider; as also what wisdom it is to exasperate
without cause so great a multitude of men dispersed over all Christendom, who
have done them every where much good, and may do, and both they and theirs have
need of them in diverse places of our banishment abroad, and persecution here at
home, being subject to so many necessityes both spiritual and temporal, wherein
these men's help unto us has and may be very beneficial.

And in this kind also is the inconsideration of our said brethren,
Inconsiderate exasperating the K. of Spain
notorious, that having received for so many years, and receiving daily in
foreign contreys most principal relief from the kings of Spain both the
father now dead, and the son reigning, and our Cathol. English men's affairs
beyond the Seas and namely our Seminaryes depending in such sort of their good
likings and liberalityes, as if they should fail us the greatest part of all
our stay must fall therewith: these men not-withstanding, as though they had been
hired by the common enemy to overthrow our own cause, seek occasion in these
books to alienate them both, and the whole nation together by contumelious
iniuryes laid upon them with so intemperate a tongue as no mouth of heretic or
other enemy, could utter worse. Let us hear if you please some of their
speches touching both the one and the other king.

The K. of Spain (say they) aiming at the crown of England with the death of
her Ma. Epist. p 67.
and subversion of the whole state, together with the utter ruin desolasion
and destruction of the whole Isle and the ancient inhabitants thereof, never
once showed any care or respect he or his had, to the restoring of the
Catholic R^mish faith amongst the English, nay his direct course was taken
quite contrary, scilicet, to extirpate the name of all Catholics that were
English out from the face of the earth.

Thus they write of his Cath. Ma. And further they are not ashamed in the same
place to assure the reader, out of the Duke of Medina his own confession, that
he had order rather to spare protestants if he had peruayled in war then
Catholics. And what heretic was yet ever so impudent as to affirm this?
seeing that both the kings own Edict published in Spain concerning that
enterprise, as also the declaration of the late Cardinal from his Hol. do
testify and protest the quite contrary, namely that the old good kings
intention was principally for the aduanceme^t of Catholic religion and relief
of poor afflicted Catholics, himself often protesting as most certainly we
are informed that he never meant or pretented in his life any temporal interest
for himself to the crown of England, and that if he might have had any
reasonable hope or satisfaction in the other two points by any competent
moderation or toleration he was desirous to have held peace and good friendship
with her Majesty and the crown of England above all other princes and
kingdoms in Europe and the self same disposition we persuade ourselves by
many and great arguments to be in his son the king catholic present, of
whom notwithstanding our men that spare none do ad also diverse contumelious
speches saying; Ibid.
that it is not religion which the king present does care for, more then his
Father did before him, but makes that only a pretense to seduce all Catholics,
etc. Making them and you all (dear Catholics) to cut one another throat etc.
thus they say of him. And as for his nation and people the Spaniards, they
rail at them most impudently, Epist. page 2. Ibid. 41.
calling them base villaynes, swaggering misshapen swads and known to be the
cruellest tyrants that live upon the earth, etc. which intolerable spiteful
insolency coming to their ears, as it cannot choose but do, let us imagine
what that bountiful king and his people, that have so many of our brethren and
children in their hands and dominions, and do cherish them most tenderly, may
or will think of this barbarous ingratitude not only in heretics which were
more tolerable, but also in Catholics yea priests and most of them maintained
and brought to that they are, either in Doway, Rhemes or Spain, by the said
king and nations liberality.

And this is the deep wound indeed which these inconsiderate and passionate
people (not to use more grievous terms) have given and do give unto their
nation and to the public cause of religion, A deep vvou^d given to the public
cause by these passionate people.
which they will never be able to cure wholly, nor scarce perhaps any other for
them. But passing forward from the kings of Spain, they go to the Popes
themselves according to that saying in the psalm: Psalm 73.
superbia little ascendit semper, their pride mounteth higher and higher, and
truly a man would not easily believe that priests professing themselves
Catholics and to have been brought up in the Seminaryes, and that they would
have no other judge of their cause but his Hol. himself would presume to be so
audatious, Insolent dealing against his Hol. and diverse his Predecessors.
as to call in question and condemn the actions of so many Popes together noe
less contemptiously then those of the K. of Spain before mentioned, whom
commonly they do conioyne with the Popes and Sea Apostolic affirming that both
Pius 5. Gregory the xiij. and Sixtus 5. did conspire with him, yea thrust him
into the invasion of England: Against Pius quintus. Page 9. ibid.
Did not Pius 5. (say they by way of a feigned objection) practice her Ma.
subversion she (good lady) never dreaming of any such mischief? etc. Did not
Pius 5. move the K. of Spain to join in this exployte, etc. Had not the Pope
and K. of Spain designed the duke of Norfolk to be the head of this
rebellion? Did not k. Philip at the Popes instance determyne to send the duke
of Alua into England with all his forces, etc.

Thus and much more they complain of that holy Pope, Against Gregory the xiij.
and the like of his successor in these words: Now whilst these practices were
in band in Ireland, Gregory the xiij. renews the said^ Bull of Pius 5. and
denounces her Ma. to be excommunicated, Page 14.
with intimation of all other particulars in the former Bull mentioned. And of
the same Pope Gregory they ad further thus: The attempts both of the Popes and
Spaniard failing in England, his Hol as a temporal prince displayed his banner
in Ireland, etc.

Of Sixtus 5. also his successor, Against Syxtus quintus. Page 27.
they complain in like manner speaking of the armada in the year 1588. We
doubt not but that the Pope as a temporal prince, did join and contribute
toward this intended invasion, etc. And mark that always they ad as a
temporal Prince, for that as a spiritual and Ecclesiastical Magistrate they
hold throughout the whole book, that he has no power at all to concur or
appoint any such action, protesting their upon (as Supra ca 1.
before you have heard) that if he should attempt any such thing they would
resist him.

And finally laying the greatest part and occasion of all our English
persecutions upon these Popes inconsiderate and unlawful actions, Page 39.
they say: If the Pope and K. of Spain had never platted with the duke of
Norfolk; if the Bull of Pius 5. had never been known; if never Stukely nor the
Pope had attempted any thing against Ireland; if Gregory the xiij. had not
renewed the said excommunication: if the Pope and the k. of Spain had uot
practiced with the duke of Guise: Page 40.
if the pope had not thrust the k. of Spain into the barbarous action against
the Realm, etc. Then ( say they) we are fully persuaded in our consciences,
and as men (besides our learning) that have some experience, where there is one
Catholic now, there would have been ten, etc. VVherby you see that the Popes
and Sea Apostolic are judged by these learned and well experienced men to have
been the hinderers of the increase of Cath. religion in England, and the
original cause of afflictions and persecutions.

We leave out of purpose, how they deal with this Pope, There dealinge with
Clem. viij.
condemning his action every where in instituting the Archpriest by the Card.
Protectors letters, telling, us that he could not do it; Se the Apologic cap.
3. 4. and 11.
that it was not lawful, convenient, decent, or profitable; that he appointed
him without their consent, against the prescript of Church Cannons; intruded
him upon, them, gave him authority without limitation and greater, in some
respects, then ever creature had, which is as much, to say, that it was more
then the Pope had himself to give. His Breue also for the confirmation of his
office is contemned by them, and that both in words, saying: that they know
not out of what office it was gotten; and that is was lawful for them to
demurre upon it, (as in the Apology and Appendix has been showed) as also much
more in fact and deed, Apol. cap. 11. Appe^d. Pa. 10.
obeying nothing therein contained.

And further more reproving and condemnig the whole course of his Hol.
proceeding with their two messengers Bishop and Charnocke affirming among
other things his Hol. to have showed so great inconstancy in that affayre about
their audience, as to have said and unsaid 4. several times that he would hear
and not hear them, Epist. to Import. Consid. page 15.
at the instance of two opposite Ambassadors, which beside the falsehood thereof
(no such thing having ever been) is as great a contumely as to so high a
personage (his great gravity considered) can be ascribed. All which besides
many other things declared in the first and sixth Chapter of this book, touching
their intemperate behavior to-wards his Hol. his predecessors and the Sea
Apostolic do evidently declare, that they make war also where the commodity
of their cause requires, against this supreme and highest authority, howsoever
now and than they cast out some words of submission for a show, and to delude
such Catholics as will believe them.

And these now are 4. general heads or bodies of adversaries which these men
have taken to fight against; there remain some other though more private and
particular, yet very important to be considered by us, and by them also, if
force of passion did not transport them from all due consideration. And first
of all offers it self their adverse part in the castle and controversy of
Wisbech Where their part (as we understand) especially these later times being
not above 7. or 8. Their adversaries in VV isbich.
and the other side well near 30. it ought greatly to have moved them in all
reason wisdom and humility of spirit, to have either yielded or compounded
those matters with less noise, or at least ways being once compounded and
ended by others, not to have brought them in disputation and breach again,
especially with such intemperate speches as before you have heard, Sc Apol. ca.
6.
calling them ^naues, conspiring companions, authors if separation, Donatists,
revived Arrians, a Cynaedrical congregation, and the like: For whatsoever man
of judgment and indifferency shall consider the odds and differences of these
two parts, to wit the number and quality of each side, will easily enclyne to
give sentence against them.

And first the very circumstance of F. VVestons person, his learning, wisdom,
moderation, religion, mortification, and other rare virtues related and admyred
even by heretics themselves must needs make a great prejudice against them.
And then if we go forward to consider the persons also of many of the rest, as
of M. Barlow the first Seminary priest of all the rest (if we be not deceived)
a man of approved virtue and co^stancy; M. Barlovv.
M. Thomas Pond the most ancientest confessor which now perhaps lives of lay
gentlemen, M. Pond.
and ever accounted a most zealous constant Catholic; If we consider these (we
say) and many other of that company; and on the other part, besides the fewnes,
compare the men themselves with these, to wit the two of the oldest and authors
of all the contention, what men they are, the M. Bagshavv
one a doctor of his own procuring without license or order of superiors, and
dismissed out of Rome by public authority for his unquiet behavior; the M.
Bluet.
other first a minister, and then so unquiet a priest, as appears both by his
ordinary intemperate words, and his violent laying hands upon others of the
same order; Se the Apology cap. 6.
and two other young men of the same company whom now they carry with them out
of England Champney and Barnaby lately come from the sedition at Rome, M.
Cha^pney and M. Barnaby.
wherein they had been actors; these circumstances we say considered and wayed,
though otherwise the cause it self were not known, which we have handled at
large as well in our Apology, Apol. ca. 6.
as in the first chapter of this book, these were sufficient to make a man of
judgment and indifferency to resolve on which side truth and virtue stands,
and consequently it was great indescretion in these our brethren to publish the
forsaid men for there enemies as they do.

There follow in the same rank of their adversaries, Cardinal Allen and Doctor
sanders there adversaries.
concerning the argument of their book of Important Considerations, two
special men of worthy memory of our own nation, and so called by them in all
other points, Wherein they are not against them, and their designments, to wit
D. Saunders, and D. Allen late Card. we shall show in few words how unworthily
they handle them both, and thereby do you judge of their spirit, how desperately
they are set to defend their own fancies, seeing that what they reprehend in
these men was not only their own judgments but of all other ^earned Catholics
also of our nation, D. Stapleton, D. Bristow, M. Gregory Martyn, M. William
Reynolds, yea of all learned Catholic men in like manner of Catholic
contreys, as before we have showed: against all which these new petty doctors,
to flatter the State and my L. of London will needs oppose themselves, as if
they knew more than the forsaid learned men of our nation, whose books they are
not worthy to bear. But let us see some what of their dealing with D. Sanders
and the Card. in particular.

It little became either M Saunders (Say they) otherwise an excellent man or
M. Persons or any other of our nation to have intermedied with these matters,
Page 7.
and to write as they have very offensiuely done in diverse of their books and
treateses, etc. Lo here their censure and reprehension. Page 12.
But let us hear further: In the year 1572. (say they) out comes M. Sanders
Against M. D. Sanders.
book de visibili monarchia, wherein he takes upon him to set down how the
Pope had sent M. Morton and M. VVebbe two priests before the Rebellion of the
North to excite the Lords and gentlemen to take arms. And the rather to
persuade them thereunto they signified unto them by the Popes commandment that
her Ma. was excommunicated, etc. Behold here the condemnation of three ancient
Doctors joined by these our young masters with that of the Pope himself, and
then they go forward.

Then M. Sanders building castles in the air amongst his books does magnify
the said Rebels to the great discredit of the Church of Rome, Page 13.
and his Hol actions in such matters, etc. And from this passing to his going
into Ireland, they say thus: Page 14.
The Pope himself in the year 1579. abused still by false pretenses, did set
forward that course, and sending thither certain forces M. Saunders too much
Iesuited did thrust himself in person into that action as a chief ringleader,
etc.

But here we would ask these men how they do know that D. Saunders did thrust
himself into that action, wherein all good men do wish that he had never been,
considering the great good he might have done to all Christendom by his most
learned books, if his life had not been shortened that way? But these yonkers
his scholars, or rather not worthy to be his scholars that so resolutely do
accuse him here of voluntary putting himself in that peril how can they prove
it? and much les that he was a chief ringleader in that war? or what sure
ground have they of this malicious imputation? For sure we are, that we have
both heard and seen by letters, that he was not only induced, but also
commanded in his Hol. name by Bishop Sega then Nuntius Apostolicus in Spain
and afterward Card. to go in that voyage, not to be ringleader in matters of
war, as these men do odiously object, but rather to be a moderator and vmpire
in Ecclesiastical affairs for direction to that people as occasion should fall
out. But howsoever that was, those things being now past, and the man dead, and
with almighty God, as we hope and persuade our selves, for these men now to
revive the same again with so great hatred and envy as they do for flattering
of the present state (which yet we persuade our selves believes, them little)
shows with what spirit they are replenished, and we fear we shall daily more
and more see the fruits thereof. And this of him.

But now let us hear a little how they handle their old good master and
foster father and late Superior Card. Allen, Their speches against D. Allen
Card.
of whom in their first two books both in latin and English they glory
greatly, that he was their common father and founder that begone the Seminaryes
and brought them all up therein, taught and directed them most prudently and
kept all in right good order while he was alive, and that he misliked on the
other side the Jesuits education and government of our youth, and that he was
disunited with F. Persons as misliking his nature and manner of proceeding,
himself giving contentment to all, beloved and approved of all, etc.

These things and diverse others were in their first two books often incultated,
which now are contradicted in these later according to the growth of their
spirit in passion malice and folly and according to the necessity they have put
themselves in upon these motives to bid war not only to D. Sanders Card.
Allen and all the good and learned men of our nation besides, but to all Cath.
writers of other Nations also as before has been said about their fond and
foolish assertion set down in these their absurd libels; But yet especially
and abo^e all others to Card. Allen, who having seen a false and pestiferous
libel of the very same argument with this of Important Consideratio^s, cast
abroad in the years 1583. made by some malicious heretics in defama^ion of
Catholics and their sufferings who^e little was: D. Alle^s answer to iustit.
Britannica.
The execution of justice in England, the said learned man made an answer
thereunto, intituling it: A true, sincere, and modest defense of English
Catholics that suffer for their faith both at home and abroad, etc. And then
is added another paragraphe wherein is declared, how unjustly Catholics are
charged with treason, how untruly their persecution is denied to be for
religion, and how deceytfully heretics seek to abuse strangers about the
cause, grearnes and manner of their sufferings, etc. And finally is added: vt
obstr^atur ^s loquentium imqua, all this is done to stoop the mouths of such
as speak unjustly. Which these our priests may take now also to themselves as
all the rest in like manner which in that learned book of the Cardinal
(containing nine large chapters) is uttered against slanderous heretics, and
that lying libeller that set forth the said Execution of justice seeing these
men have adventured to take their parts and persons upon them and to rail, ly
and defame the actions and intentions of the best Catholics no less then the
other did.

Which things being so, and the said late good Card. being indeed the most
opposite and earnest enemy which they have or many have in this their last
argument of Important Considerations, having shaken in pieces by his former
book, all the fond reasons and flaunderous calumniations which they allege,
before they came forth, no marvel though they do handle him conte^ptuously,
and most spitefully in this book, though tempering the matter somtymes in
respect of their former praises given him with saying that the good man was
abused, that whatsoever he did or wrote to their dislike was by F. Persons
induction, Reproaches against the Card.
help and persuasion, which in a man of his wisdom and authority is the
greatest reproach that can be objected, as though he had been able to have done
nothing of himself, but that all he did, camefrom F. Persons, so they say of
him concerning his book or epistle vvrytten in the year 1587. about the
lawfulnes of the fact of Sr. William Stanley his giving up Dauentry to the
true owner, whereof we shall have occasion to speak afterward in this book; now
we shall add a word or two of their reprehension or rather calumniation in that
behalf. Page 24.
The defense of that disloyal^y (say they) made by a worther man, but by the
persuasions as we think of Persons, was greatly disliked by many, both myse
and learned, especially that he laid this for a ground in justifying the said
Stanely, that in all wars which may happen for religion, every Catholic man
is bound in conscience to employ his forces by the Popes direction, etc.

Lo what they mislike both in his ground and action. And after this mentioning
again an other book of his which they call; a Treatese penned altogether by
the advice of F. Persons in the year 1588. they rail and jest at him
extremely, saying; page 25.
that he labored with all his Rhetorike to persuade us to join with him to
all our destructions, telling us many fair tales, and alluring us with sundry
great promises all being meereillusions. falsehoods, an^ mast traiterous
instigations and iuglings, etc. And then yet further they write thus of him:
Page. 26. and 27.
This Jesuit also tells all Catholics (lo now he is made a Jesuit, who was
said by them to have been an enemy to Jesuits before) the better to comfort
them, but in deed to the great scandal for ever of all priesthood, that there
was diverse priests in the k. of Spaines army ready to serve every man's
spiritual necessity by confession, counsel, and all consolation in Christ
Jesus, Page^.
etc. Which kind of persuasions (say they) some being ridiculous, the most very
traterous and these last most blasphemous, as tending so greatly to dishonor
of religion we detest and abhor, etc.

Moreover they writing of the said Card. speech used at that time about the
sentence of Sixtus 5. abuse him exceedingly by contemptuons words, affirming
first that he was not to be believed, showing nether B^eue nor any other
public instrument; and that his own testimony and book written was of so small
trust or authority as by VVarrant thereof (Say they) we are persuaded it was not
lawful for us to hane killed a goose, if her Ma. had forbidden us so to do. And
a little after speaking of the said book, they call it a scurrilous and unmanly
admonition, or rather most profane libel.

And thus you see how they pay home their so much praised father and master
when he comes in their way. And if there were so great disunion and mislike of
nature and conditions betwixt him and F. Persons (as these men have given out
in their other books) how is it probable now that he wrote all these things by
F. Persons persuasions as now they say; yea that the Card. set his name to some
books that F. Persons, and not himself, had made and compounded; these things
(we say) do not stand to-geather, and the very truth is that these men in the
humor that now they be in, are as great enemies in heart; hatred, and Faction
to the Card. as to F. Persons, and so would show themselves if he were alive to
contradict or resist them in these their follyes and madness, as F. Persons (God
be thanked) is.

And now by this occasion we are moved in this place to say somewhat also
(which otherwise we had purposed not to have done) of this their enmity and
principal hatred against F. Persons uttered so intemperatly throughout all
their libells, Their war against F. Persons.
as they may seem especially to have been written against him and against
others only or chiefly for his sake. The reason whereof notwithstanding the more
we seek, the less we find, excepting only that general reason which we have
touched before in our Apology, that he being the man that has most benifited
them, and above others by way of the Seminaryes, and after the said good Card.
decease, by reason of his place and office (being Prefect of the English
mission for those of his Society) may seem cheifely to hold together that
cause which these men would divide and dissipate. For this reason (if it be a
reason) they being angry with him by the very imagination of his being in
place and credit to hinder their designments, they turn all their obligation
of gratitude into the passion of hatred, conspiring, and coniuring against him,
as the only imagined obstacle of all their factious attempts and desires,
though hithertoo we do not see, that they have alleged many opposite acts of
his part, but only by their own apprehension or interpretation, or suspicions
for the time to come.

For proof whereof, if we run over all their clamorous books hitherto come
forth, what one thing of substance do they allege against, the said father,
Apol. ca. 12.
if we set aparte, slanders, scoffs and contumelious speeches? and for as for
his going and coming out of England it is so justified by us in our Apology,
and so many vtilityes shown to have ensued thereby to our common cause, as they
may be ashamed ever to make that objection again, his joining afterward with
Card. Allen, and his proceeding jointly with him both in Flaunders, and Rome
for advancing our common Catholic cause and the Card. perferment it self, are
such things as they must needs be ashamed to seem to mislike: his founding of
Seminaryes afterward both in Spain and Flaunders whereby diverse of themselves
have been made scholars and priests, though with much malignity they do carp at
the same, in these libels, yet is it shameful to them in the eyes of all civil
men be they Catholics or Protestants: His coming back to Rome again
afterward in the year 1597. we see by experience was the saving of that
College, and the present fruits and effects of peace, virtue, and learning
there, do reject all slanders that in this point can be objected; his
concurring afterward to procure us a Superior of our own order, upon our
own petition, and letters, as in the Cap 6.
Apology we have showed is no ways subject to any just obloquie.

His proceeding after that again with the two messengers sent to Rome to
contradict, was such as their own letters yet extant did commend the same; The
end also taken by his Hol. was then approved and praised by the chief of the
adverse part, Apol. ca. 9.
and all that followed afterward from F. Persons as appears by his letters
set down in our Apology, tends to nothing else but to conserve that end,
peace and union which his Hol. and his high Comissioners the Card. Protectors
had made, and to this end had he continually written to the Archpriest and
Fathers of the Society as well, as to the other side, and that most earnestly
and effectually, as his letters do yet testify. And if any new breach or
exasperation have been made or given here in England by any, it has been
without his consent, and contrary to his desire and indeauoures, as by infinite
ways appears, and not only private men but the said Card. Protectors and his
Hol. himself are witnesses thereof in Rome as we are most certainly informed;
and all this being so; how and with what conscience, credit, or wisdom can our
passionate brethren make him their public enemy, as they do, raging and rauing
against him as though he were the woorst man living, and the greatest enemy
that our public cause of the Catholics has, laying all the faults of other
men also, either true or imagined upon him: surely this cannot but come from
wonderful extreme passion of our brethren, and incitation of the heretics as
also from some high prouidente or sec^ete permission of almighty God for the
greater merit of that man, who is so injuriously handled for so many and
singular good deeds done.

And this shall suffice for him in this place, whom if religious modesty and
humility did not restrain from just defense of himself, we see not why he
might not use the very same that Cicero does in a certain place against his
detractors and enuiers, An example of defense out of Cicero Orat. Pro Milone.
obiecting (as it were) the self same or very like matter against him, which
these men do here and else where against F. Persons, which was his power in the
Senate: quotidie (says he) meam potentiam inuidiose criminabantur, cum
dicerent senatum, non quod sentiret, sed quod ego vellem, decernere: They
complained daily (to bring me into envy) that my power was such in the Senate,
as they determined not that which they themselves thought best, but that which
I would have them, this was their complaint of him, and the same is now of F.
Persons by these men, to wit that he can do all with his Holiness and with the
K. of Spain, and with the Archduke, and with the Card. Protectors in Rome, and
with the rest every where. But what answered Cicero. Thus: Quae quidem
sipotentia est appellanda potius, quam propter magna in Remp. merita, mediocris
in bonis causis, authoritas, aut propter officiosos labores men's, nonnulla apud
bonos gratia: appelletur it a sane dummodo ea nos vtamur pro salute bonorum,
covtra amen^^am perditorum. Which kind of credit (says he) if you will needs
call power, rather then a mean kind of authority in good causes gotten by my
merits toward the common wealth or a certain grace or favor which the better
in respect of my dutiful labors to profit al men do bear me, I am content you
call it power in this sense, so we use the same for the health and defense of
good men, against the fury and madness of the wicked. Thus said he and whether
F. Persons may say the same in his defense, if he would, we leave it to your
consideration, having thought good only to cite the place.

There remains yet another sort of adversaries which these men make to
themselves whom we are sorry to name, considering what they brag of themselves
in these their books, saying, Ca page 6.
that they are the designed martyrs of our country, the worthy confessors of
this age, etc. yet are they not ashamed with open mouth and most violent spirit
to impugn the true martyrs of our country that have gone before them in a
far different spirit, Their war with the martyrs of England.
whom God knows, whether ever these men will be worthy to follow; and in the
course which now they take of flattering the state and betraying their
companions there is small likelihood thereof, but rather of the contrary, least
they make other men martyrs by bringing them into trouble. And if ^hese blessed
men whom we hold for true martyrs already were alive again, and their
opinions and cogitations known to these men, they were obliged according to
their protestation made in this book to reveal them to the persecutors, and
then think you what goodly designed martyrs and worthy confessors these men
are, that do willyngly put themselves in this obligation, but let us hear
what these designed martyrs do write of actual martyrs.

First speaking of these twelve whereof D. Allen wrote the history in the year
1582. they write thus: Page 16. and 17.
From the time of the said Rebellion (in the North) there were few about 12^
that in ten years had been executed for their consciences as we hold, though
our adversaries say for treason. And of those twelve some perhaps can hardly be
drawn within our account having been taynted with matters of rebellion: the
most of the said number were Seminary priests, who if they had come over into
England with the like intents that some others have done, might very worthily
have been used as they wear but in our consciences nay some of us do know it,
that they were far from these seditious humors, etc. Thus they say, going
about, as appears by their whole discourse to make difference in the cause of
secular priests from Jesuits that were condemned with them, and for the self
same devised crimes of treason; which crimes these good men would have thought
to be true in F. Campion and those of the society, Co^tradicting them selves.
but not in the secular priests. And yet in the very next page going before
talking of the said crimes, Page 15.
they say thus: In all these plats none were more forward then many of us that
were priests, etc. And when they begin their narration or rather accusation of
the said twelve martyrs, the first which they name of that rank as guilty of
treason is M. Sherwyn a secular priest: for thus they write.

The calousy of the state was much increased by M. Sherwins answer upon his
examination above 8. Page 1^.
months before the apprehension of M. Campion: For being asked whether the
Queen was his lawful souei^igne notwithstanding any sentence of the Pope, he
prayed that no such question might he demanded of him, and would not further
ther^^to answer. Calu^niatio^s against M. Shervrin.
Two or three other questions much to the same effect were likewise propounded
unto him, which he also refused to answer unto. Thus they say of M Sherwyn to
discredi^ him and his suffering merely for religion, which is as false and
malicious a calumniation as possible could be devised by any enemy. For he that
shall read the whole story of his apprehension, imprisonment, araignme^t and
execution written by the said D. Allen upon relation of eye witnesses shall not
find that any such questions were ever proposed or so answered by him. For if
they had but the least show of any such answer of of his, they would have
urged it at the bar, or at leastwise at his death, where S. Francis Knowles
having hard his protestation, confessed that he thought him not guilty of the
fact, for which they all were condemned, but yet that he was a traitor by a
certain consequence. And as for his acknowledging the Q. Ma. to be true
Queen, he showed it openly at his death praying for her by name.

But let us hear how they go forward upon this false ground. For in the very
next leaf after they say as followith: This summer in July M. Campion and
other priests were apprehended, Page 20.
whose answers upon their examinations agreeing in effect with M. Sherwyns
before mentioned did greatly incense the State, etc. For among other questions
that were propounded to them this being one; If the Pope do by his Bull or
sentence pronounce her Ma. to be deprived and after the Pope or any other by
his appointment and authority do invade this realiue which part would you take,
etc. some answered that when the ca^e should happen they would then take
counsel, Calumniario^ against F. Campion and his fellow Martyrs grounded upon
ignorance.
another, that when that case should happen he would then answer and not
before; another, that for the present he was not resolved; another, that if
such deprivation and invasion should be for faith and religion, he were than
bound to take part with the Pope, etc.

Thus they relate the case and do condemn all their answers for traiterous,
yelding this most fond reason for the same: The duty (say they) which we owe to
our Sovereign does not consist in taciturnity or keeping close within our
selves such alleagance as we think sufficient, Page 27.
to offourd them: But we are (especially when we are required thereunto) to make
open profession of it, that we may appear unto them to be such subjects as we
ought to be, etc. Lo here these martyrs cause decided against them very
learnedly, as you se, by these our new designed Martyrs. And a little after
rendering their principal reason for justifying of the state in putting so many
to death they say: Page 28.
We find her Ma. to be excommunicated by Gregory the xiij. M. Sherwyn and the
rest of our brethren too much I^suited refuse to answer whether they will take
the Q. part, or the Popes, if he should come by force of arms, etc.

Here you se M. Sherwyn again injured, and all the fault is laid upon the Pope
and priests put to death, yea the secular priests also, so as now by their
account, nether secular nor religious of the forsaid number were true martyrs:
And yet (if you remember) they make a great complaint in their first latin
book against F. Heywood as though he had prohibited the reading of these
martyrs lives which was most false. Quin (say they) and act a martyrum
nostrorum duodecim ab ipso Alane approbatorum, Declaratio Motuum. Page ^.
and eiusdem iussu editorum promulgationem eidem placuit prohibere. It pleased
him to forbid also the promulgation of the acts of 12. Amere calu^niation.
martyrs approved and set forth by D. Allen. Which accusation as we have said
being notoriously false and invented only by themselves, for that never any
such thing fell out, yet here now themselves do deny them to be martyrs, and so
contradict both D. Allen and themselves. And to this absurdity does passion
bring men, in whom it bears rule and excludes reason. And thus much for
their hostility which our designed Martyrs have with our true and actual
martyrs.

But surely if it were not over redious we would ask them by whom they were
designed to be martyrs, for if it be by themselves, Cypr. de mortalitate versus
finem.
S. Cyprian that had the true spirit of martyr do me (as by the eue^t
appears) says it is vanity and presumption for any man to brag of that, or
think himself fit or worthy or designed to any such high matter; Bragging
designed martyrs.
And some of these men can remember the saying of a learned godly man in Rome
now a Cardinal, who hearing them brag so much every where of their purpose to
be martyrs when they were most troublesome and seditious against their
superiors in the college, said: Ego nunquam vidi martyrs superbos neque
refractarios. ^. Baronius.
I never yet saw proud or disobedient martyrs: And another hearing them often
say Nos volumus mori pro fide Catholica, answered pious^y those words of S.
Paul: Romans 9.
Non est valentis neque currentis, sed miseventis Dei, it is not in the will of
him that runs, but in the mercy of God. And truly we would ask these
designed Martyrs, how many of them have come hitherto to be martyrs indeed? We
know some that were opposite to their faction to have been martyred not long
since, as may appear by the letter of M. Bensteed set down in the Apology;
but of these designed martyrs we know none, nor any like to be by all
probability except they change their course. And finally we shall conclude with
those holy words of S. Cyprian, Cyprian. Ibi.
speaking of this very matter: Nihil prodest verbis praeferre virtutem, factis
destruere veritatem. Yt profits little to prefer virtue in words and to
overthrow truth in deeds. And how this agrees to our brethren, let their own
consciences and other men's wisdom consider.

And with this we mean to end this Chapter or consideration of the adversaries
which they make to themselves; for to higher adversaries than martyrs reigning
with God, it is hard for pride to ascend or oppose it self, yet may their folly
and lack of discretion be noted, in that they stick not every where to
exasperate all sorts of people against them, as in mentioning the Duke of
Norfolk, the Earl of Northumberland and many other of great houses and
familyes with reproach and many principal men yet living of our nation with
contempt. They say also of all priests beyond the seas at this day in the
Seminaryes. What will the State here think of the priests that shall come from
any of those seminaryes hearafter, Pag^ 35.
where they must be brought up according to the Iesuitical humor, and be sent
hither with such direction as shall be thereunto agreeable?

Note the word herafter, as who would say that these men have so done their
errands and so belyed the Seminaryes and the manner of education therein, as
whosoever shall come herafter from thence shall be accounted traitors though they
were not before. And these be the good offices that these false brethren have
done and seek to do not only against all priests, but against themselves also,
and those of their crew, though in very deed their woorst offices of all are
against themselves. For we are so well persuaded both of the great wisdom and
most honorable disposition of the Lords of her M^. Counsel, that seeing these
people to proceed in passion, as they do, and there upon betray their own side,
they will little esteem or believe wha^ they say or do on any side, but rather
take compassion on them, as of men enraged by force of choler and impotent
appetite of revenge, and so do we, and pray for their recovery.

OF THEIR FOLLY AND unshamefast spirit in uttering open and manifest untruths
and contradictions to their own discredit.
CAP. IIII.
AMong all other follyes that may be devised none ca^ be greater in the sight
of wise and modest men, then for one that desires to be believed, and
creedited to utter such improbabilityes, yea manifest open untruths in the
spech or writing as may be discovered by every child, and thereby work his
utter discredit, by which means it comes to pass that he is not only
esteemed false but foolish also, and not only distrusted when he anoucheth
lies, but not believed even when he tells truth. In which kind we fear the
like effect will ensue to these our passionate brethren, who having little care
(as it seems) what they say or write, so they say much and utter ugly things
against those, whom they mislike and would discredit, and affirming the same
with great vehemence, yea upon solemn protestation of their soul and
consciences, it follows we say) that when the matters afterward come to be
examyned and are found false and without foundation (as every where lightly
they are, and here also are like to be in diverse particulars declared by us)
the conclusion must needs be with the discreet and indifferent Reader, that
either these men have very bad, or no conscience at all; or else so little
discretion and such a wonted custom of telling untruths, as they reflect not
upon either conscience or credit, when they tell them; and consequently that
both truth and falsehood is all one with them, and both uttered with like
facility, and therefore the same credit to be given to the one as to the other.

For proof of this you have heard and seen (if you have read our former
Apology) how notorious falsehoods and untruths these men have uttered and
printed in their libels about every one of the cheifest points and matters
handled by them and refuted by us in thirtene chapters set down by order, but
especially in the 2. 3. 4. 11. and 12. Untruths before detected and refuted.
And if you will see a great company bound up together in few words, you may
read the little brief Catalogue set before the preface to the Catholics which
is entitled. A table of certain principal deceyts falsehoods and slanders
contained in the two libels, etc. Some other also you shall see noted and laid
forth in our Appendix to the said Apology for answering the second coople of
books set forth by them afterward in the same kind; Now we are to consider of a
third pair (for by cooples and payres they come forth as twynnes in birth) and
for more breuity and perspicuity we shall lay together a whole fardel of them
(we mean manifest and open untruths) in this one Chapter, whereby the reader
having taken a view of there spirit may trust them afterward as he shall se
occasion.

And first we may begin with the cheifest point of their purpose through out
all their books, Import. consid.
and especially these last two, Page 14.
which is to discredit (if they might) and make odious the Fathers of the
Society by laying load of slanders and calumniations upon them, as you have
heard a^ large in the first Chapter of this book, which being not any way able
to prove or make probable (as there we have showed) here they take another way
(we mean^ in their sixth book called Important considerations) which is to
swear, protest and pawn their consciences for the truth of what they say. But
with what conscience they do this you shall see by the event, for thus they
write:

These good Fathers (say they) as the devil would have it came into England in
the year 1580. Ibid. page 24.
being the men in our consciences who have been the chief instruments of all
the mischeefes that have been intended against her Majesty since the beginning
of her reign, and of the miseryes, which we or any other Catholics have upon
these occasions ^usteyned. And again in another place: The Jesuits, as we
still think in our consciences and before God, have been from time to time the
very causes of all the calamityes which any of us have endured in England since
her Majesty's reign.

Thus they protest and swear; and by this let every man judge of these good
consciences, it being an easy matter to guess how true this assertion may be,
seeing the Jesuits came not into England in xxj. years and more after her
Majesty's reign, neither was there any English Jesuit abroad all that time of
such state or condition or in such place as he might be so much as suspected to
deal in any such English affairs, and yet in this time were there many,
great, and grievous attempts against her Majesty as these men now affirm,
whereby the state was exasperated and the persecution of Catholics both begone
and increased; as the rising of the northern. Earls, the matter of the Duke
of Norfolk, the excommunication of Pius 5. the setting up of the bull. by
(...). Folton, the dealing of D. Story in Flaunders; the attempt of Sr. Thomas
Steukley for Ireland, the going thither of D. Sanders and other such offensive
things as these men have gathered together to make Catholics odious therewith,
Their slanders convinced to be false by many particulers.
all which were done before any English Jesuit set foot in England or had any
doings abroad; and how then in these men's good consciences could Jesuits be the
cheef instruments of these mischeefes, and of the calamityes thereon ensuing, as
here is protected, sworno, and forsworn by them?

Besides this were not the two doctors named here by them, to wit D. Morton,
and D. VVebbe whom they affirm to have been the chief dealers with the Earle^
of the North, were they not secular priests and no Jesuits? Was Pi^^ 5. a
Jesuit? Was not D. Story a secular doctor and no Jesuit Was not D. Jews in
Rome a secular priest, who principally (if not only of our nation) is known to
have assisted the action of Sr. Thomas Steukley for Ireland, and ye^ is not so
much as named here by these true men, for that they would have, us think he
was of their faction against D. Allen? And finally was not D. Sanders a secular
priest also and no Jesuit? how then do these men swear so solemnly upon
their conscience, that Jesuits were the very causes and principal instruments
of all the mischeefes and calamityes ensued in England from the beginning of
her Majesty's reign? Do not these men condemn themselves here of so many
lies and false calumniations as there be matters by themselves mentioned? For
seeing they avouch that every one of the things before touched exas perated the
state and consequently were causes of the mischeefs and calamityes ensued
against Catholics, and that jointly they do or must confess that no Jesuit
was then in England or had to do therein; it follows that to lay all upon
Jesuits with such asseueration of conscience, as here they do, argues little
conscience, and gayneth them little credit with men of good consciences.

And this is now concerning Jesuits before their entrance into England in the
year 1580. Slanders against Jesuits after their coming int England.
wherein all men will grant them to be most fondly slaundered; it remains that
we prosecute the time that ensued since, which may be some other 21. years,
wherein you shall find the like or worse; for that the poison of malice being
once admitted and fostered in men's breasts without resistance, buddeth forth
daily more malignant fruits, as you shall see by this examination: and you must
note that the end and principal purpose of these men being to show that all the
attempts in this space both against her Ma. person and the state came
originally from the Jesuits, (a fit argument no doubt for such as profess
themselves Catholic priests) they do not prove any one or half one to have
proceeded from them, especially from him whom they would make the author of
all, which is F. Persons, against whom if they had any one scrowle or script,
memory or witness, or any auth^ntical testimony in this kind there is no doubt
but they would here have alleged it, seeing their malice against him is so
rank, as every way appears; and for so much as they allege none at all nor
any other enemy of his, heretic, politic or Atheist has hitherto done, to
our knowledge you may be well assured, there is nothing extant, and so these
good fellows do supply with cries and clamors, oaths, and protestations that
which they cannot show by any sufficient proof or substantial argument, as you
shall better perceive by the examples that ensue, brought in and handled by
themselves against Catholics, and Iesuytes and especially against the said
father.

And first we shall begin with that they mention of M. Francis Throgmorton his
attempt for which he died (if any such were at all as he was charged with, we
would ask, was this by Jesuits counsel and incitation or not? no man we think
can say yea; for that it is too much known, how that poor gentleman not long
before by his brother Thomas his journey into England was drawn into that new
crew and vnluckly association which was lately begone in Paris by M. Paget, The
over throvv of M. Fr. Throgmorton by the factious.
Morgan, and himself as adherent against D. Allen F. Persons, and their
friends, as in the first and fourth chapters of our Apology is touched. And if
any man will doubt of this, let him read but the pamphlet set out by the state
at that time an. 1584. entitled: A discovery of the treasons of Francis
Throgmorion, etc. where they write: Item he confessed that he was made
acquainted by his brother Thomas Throgmorton by letters and conference, and by
Thomas Morgan his letters, (two of the principal confederats and workers of
these treasons residing in France) with a resolute determination agreed on by
the Scottish Queen and her confederats, etc.

We would ask further of D. Parry About D. Parry.
his sending into England a little after that time to kill the Queen, (as he
told her Ma.) was this also by any English Jesuits plotting? No truly, for that
it is notoriously known and can be proved by witness that D. Allen and F.
Persons being at that very time in Paris when he was there, and whence he took
his journey into England would not so much as talk with him, or hear his plots,
as the two forenamed gentlemen of the contrary part entreated them; whereupon he
being offended protested to M. Watts an English priest in Roan (his country
man) at his passing that way, that he would be their enemy in England; and if
all other proofs failed, yet his own confession exta^t in print does clear by
name the said D. and Father from all dealing with him or consenting to his
attempts. For thus he writes in his own confession set forth after in print.

In October I came to Paris, In the book entitled a true and ^layne
declaration of william
where I found my credit well settled, and being one day at the chamber of Thomas
Morgan a Catholic gentleman, greatly beloved and trusted on that side, etc. I
was (after other talk) desired by Morgan to go up with him to another Chamber
where he brake with me etc. Parry his treasons at London by C. B. 1584 page ^3.
and 14.
I told him it were soon done if it might be lawfully done and warranted by
the opinion of some learned divines, etc. diverse divines were named, D. Allen I
desired, Persons I refused by chance came M. Watts a learned priest with whom
I conferred, and was oueruled, etc. that it was utterly unlawful, etc. And by
this we see not only D Allen and F. Persons delivered from all counsel and
participation of this matter but Parry also by his manner of speech to show
himself no friend to F. Persons, nether to have durst to comyt his plots to
his judgment: and yet hear what these our charitable brethren do write of
this and another case.

Two gentlemen (say they) about that time an. Import. Consid. Page 23.
1583. M. Arden and M. Someruile were convicted by the laws of the Realm to
have purposed and contryued how they might have laid violent hands upon her Ma.
sacred preson, etc. And D. Parry the very same year was plotting with Jesuits
beyond the seas how he might have effected the like villainy. About M. Arden and
M. Someruile.
Thus they say and would lay this villainy as you see upon the Jesuits, as also
the other of Someruile and Arden, if any such wear, wherein yet never Jesuit
(we think) was so much as named in there process or otherwise hitherto so as
the malice of these men seems to exceed that of the heretics against Jesuits
by many degrees, as it does also in another point following touching the
overthrow of the Earl of Northumberland M. Shelley, The Earl of
Northumberland M. Shelley.
and others, by the going of one Mope into England, whereof these men write in
these words: Ibid.
How the worthy Earl of Northumberland was about this time brought into the
said plot of the Duke of Guise, we will pretermit, M. Persons that was an actor
in it could tell the story very roundly, etc. it wrought the noble Earls
overthrow 1585. Which may justly be ascribed to Iesuitical practices of the
Jesuit Mendoza and others of that crewe.

Mark here gentle Reader the malignant proceeding of these men: first they
say they will pretermit how it was done, and yet they name F. Persons wherein are
two malignityes; Very great falsehood and malignity in these factious priests.
first in pretermitting Mope known to be the actor, for that he was and is a
chief pillar of their faction; the other in naming F. Persons, who in all that
affayre was never so much as mentioned hitherto to our knowledge, the third
malignity also is in naming for a Jesuit Don Bernardino Mendoza, the K. of
Spain his Ambassador in England a lay gentleman yet alive and no Jesuit nor
ever was. And whether he had any thing to do in those actions or no we know
not, but su^e we are that this is a great malignity to call them Iesuitical
practices as these men do, Discovery of the treasons etc. by Francis
Throgmorto^ etc. 1584.
seeing that in the forsaid book set forth by the heretics against M.
Throgmorton is set down among his confessions that the forsaid Mope alias
Spring that came over and dealt with the said Earl and M. Shelley was
otherwise called Charles Paget, and that Thomas Morgan residing in France
having brought the said Francis Throgmorton into dealings of state matter with
the Q. of Scots and forsaid Ambassador, he and Mope sent M. Thom. Throgmorton
to his said brother in England to advertise him by word of mouth of those
attempts here objected, all which three actors how they were affected to
Jesuits and how little union they had with them in their plots and actions all
Englishmen know beyond the seas, and may easily be gathered by that we have
written in the first and fourth chapter of our Apology, whereby may appear to
whom the overthrow of this good Earl (ascribed by these men to Iesuitical
practices) may truly be attributed and besides is to be remembered that in M.
Shelley his araignme^t certain co^fessio^s of D. Bagshaw highly commended by
the Q. solliciter were alleged against the said Earl.

After this there follows in these men's narration: Import. Consid. Page 23.
Hitherto (say they) we might add the notable treasons of M. Anthony Babingto^
and his compl^ces, About the matter of. Babington and his fellows.
in the year 1586. which were so apparent as we were greatly abashed at the
shamelles boldness of a young F. Southvvel.
Jesuit, who to excuse the said traitors and qualify their offenses presumed
in a kind of supplication to her Majesty to ascribe the plotting of all that
mischeef to M. Secretary VValsingam, etc.

Mark here the exceeding malice of these men, who to excuse the persecutors,
(though never so eager enemies and heretics) seek to lay all hurts upon
Catholics, and for that (if you remember) these particular examples are brought
in, to prove not only that Catholics are culpable and guilty of their own
afflictions, but also to confirm their former general proposition, that all
mischeefes since her Majesty's reign have been wrought principally by Jesuits.
And not finding in this fact of M. Babington, not so much as any one Jesuit to
have been accused or named as participant or consenting to this action, they
take occasion to name one at least, that sought afterward to qualify their
offenses in a supplication to her Majesty. But what is that to the point it
self that any Jesuit was actor, counselour, consenting, or privy thereunto? If
that blessed man whom they insinuate (now a martyr) did go about to mittigate
the matter to her Majesty (they being all Catholic ge^tlemen that died for
the same) and did also signify that M. Walsingham had entertained for diverse
months the knowledge and notice of that association as it is most certainly
known that he did, Ant. Ty. G. G. etc.
by the confession of diverse that dealt with him therein, and thereby also most
probable that the poor gentlemen were drawn thereunto by his malice and craft,
what is this, we say, to prove that Jesuits were any dealers, attempters, or
counselers thereof? Was there any Jesuit so much as named in all the process
against them at the bar or otherwise? Were not D. Allen, and F. Persons, F.
Holt and F. Creswel all at Rome or Naples at that time, and no one English
Jesuit remaining either in France or Flaunders to treat with any in that
affayre? Were not all the consultations about that matter made in Paris with
those that were of the opposite faction? Were not the three priests Ballard,
Gyfford, Evident reproof of th^^ falsehood.
and Gratley that dealt therein secular priests and divided from the Jesuits as
by their own confessions appears, which we have cyted in our Apology? nay
did not Tyrel the priest being made acquaynted therewith, and opening the same
in general terms to another priest in London being asked that point confessed
plainly, that Ballard had told him that neither D. Allen nor F. Persons were
privy thereunto, whereupon the said priest disclaymed from it, and refused to
hear any further therein; which act of the said priest (soon after taken by
the detection of Tyrel and charged with that conference) was cleared for that
he had refused to hear thereof; And this to be so appears by the register and
examinations taken at that time. And so by this you may see the upright dealing
of these our brethren if any way they may be called brethren:

It follows in their Catalogue of accusations against Catholics and their
doyngs: Import. Co^siderat. Page 24.
The treachery (say they) of Sr William Stanley the year following 1587. in
falsifying his faith to her Majesty and in betraying the trust comytted to him
by the Earl of Leicester who had given him the honorable title of knighthood,
as it was greaty prejudicial to us that were Catholics at home, so was the
defense of that disloyalty made by a worthy man, but by the persuasion (as we
think) of Persons, grratly misliked of many both wise and learned.

Here mark (good Reader) first the odious manner of speech of these priests
(if they be priests) against so worthy a man of their nation and religion as is
Sr William Stanley, About Sir VVillia^ Stanleyes re^dring of Dauentry.
calling his rendering of the city of Dauentry to the King of Spain; treachery
and falsifying of his faith to her Majesty, and betraying the trust committed
unto him, etc. which is both malignant and false, for that the place which Sr
William gave up was not under her Majesty's obedience at that time nor Sr
William or this soldiars that held the same, were in her pay, but in the pay
of the rebelled states, unto whom (those of Daue^trie being free before and
without any garrison) the Earl of Leicester by deceit and force made them
subject, by drawing in an English garrison against their wills.

It is manifestly false also that Sr William was made knight by the Earl of
Leicester as these men here most fondly affirm, for that he had his
knighthood by Sr William Drury deputy of Ireland long before the Earl of
Leicester had charge in Holland; neither can he be said to have falsified his
faith to her Majesty as these calu^niators object, for so much as he was not
sworn to her Majesty in that government, as has been showed, holding not the
town for her, but for the States whom knowing in his conscience to be rebels,
and most wrongfully to detayne from there true Lord and lawful king that and
other towns, the good religious knight thought himself bound under pain of
grievous sin (as indeed he was by all true divinity) to make restitution
thereof to the true owner when it lay in his hand, no less then when a thief
having robbed or spoiled any honest man, and put the booty in pawn or
deposition in another man's hand he is bound (knowing the truth) not to keep it
for the thief, nor to restore it to him again, but to the true owner, and
this we think our brethren in their divinity will not dare to deny, as nether
this case following: An example clearly conuincing the calu^niators.
suppose any Spaniard, Italian or other subject of the King of Spain should
hold any town at this day in Ireland of the Earl of Tyron, and under his pay,
and becoming a Protestant should therewith think it just and reason and himself
bound in conscience to yield the same freely and frankely without reward or
covenant to her Majesty as to the true owner, would our men (trow you) cry out
here of treachery and breach of faith against the King of Spain? And yet if
they be Catholics, (as they pretend) they must needs confess the case to be no
less favorable on Sr Williams side, if not much more, both in respect of his
great zeal in Catholic religion, and rare piety of life, showed ever since
(wherein would God the writers of these books, being priests (as they say) had
any resemblance or would follow him) as also for that (as we are certainly
informed) besides the former warrant of conscience and justice, he had also for
safeguard of his honor a particular Patent from his General the Earl of
Leicester when he returned into England, with express license therein contained
to leave the service of the States at his pleasure, which Patent we understand
he caused to be showed to her Majesty's Commissioners at Bullen in the late
treaty there, about peace with Spain and Flanders which no man more than he
and other Catholics desired to have been effectuated. And he being of that
renowned virtue and valor that all men know, we doubt not, but he would spend
the last drop of his blood in her Majesty's service, setting the only cause of
religion and his conscience a side; so as every way these honest men to flatter
the State, and gain some crummes of grace to themselves, do iniure this
worthy knight, but hurt him little.

And this now were sufficient in our opinion to clear this case, both for the
actor himself, the virtuous knight, as also the defender our late good Cardinal
and F. Persons the counselor (as these men say) but yet for that the fact is
notorious, The fact of Sr. VVillem Stanley examined by Cath. divinity. Ep. to
Import. Consid. Page 1.
and has been twice now impugned by some seditious of our side joining heerin
with enemies and heretics first in the year 1588. by G. G. and E. G. as in our
Apology we have showed, and now by these pathetical people (as they term
themselves) but indeed cynical rather or sycophantical calling themselves
Catholic priests and so Catholic as none in the world (if we will believe
them) shall go before them in that point; we think it not amiss to ad a word
or two more in this place about Catholic doctrine and divinity what it is
herin for better justifying of the forsaid honorable gentleman his noble and
most Christian fact and resolution.

First then the case being proposed, as before we have set down, The first
point about restitution.
the resolution of Catholic doctrine and schools is this: that if a man have
in his hand or custody by what means from whom or with what conditions
soever, the goods of another wrongfully taken from him, either by theft,
violence, or other unlawful means whatsoever, yea though he were possessor
bonae fidei; that is to say, that he neither knew when he took them, that they
were other men's goods, nor did consent help or aid the same wrong done; yet if
afterward he should come to know the injustice thereof and that it lay in his
hands to restore the same, to the true owner it were ever lawful for him so to
do, yea he were bound in conscience thereunto under pain of restitution of his
own part, except only in two cases, to wit when either he could not restore
them of himself to the owner, but with his great loss and danger, or that he
had hope that restoring them to the usurper he would make restitution thereof
himself, and so save his own credit therein; and this first point is clear
and without all doubt amongst all learned Catholics, as may appear first by
the law it self: l. officium, F. de rei vendicatione, and l. si bonae fidei
possessor, ff. de petitione haereditatis. L. in Causa 1.. vlt. ff. de
minuribus, and ibid. l. plane, and l. sed vbi. And then secondly by all the
most learned and approved writers that treat thereof as a thing whereof there
is no controversy at all.

The 2. point The 2. point about restitution of goods vvro^gfully beteyned.
of Catholic doctrine is in this case (which comprehends the fact and state
of Sir William Stanley more fully and properly) that if he which received
another man's goods to keep from him, be malae fideif possessor, that is if he
know indeed the goods to be another man's, and that he did consent or cooperate
to the taking or detayning thereof, as Sir William cannot be excused (as it
seems) but that he did, then is there likewisse no question among divines or
Canonists, but that he is absolutely bound by all means possible that he can
to restore the same to the true owner, and not to the usurper from whence he
had them, notwithstanding any oath or any pretended obligation whatsoever made
to the contrary: yea he is bound to this by two bands, the one in that he not
only knows certainly now that they are the goods of another, but did also
know the same when he took them: and secondly that he did and does cooperate
and consent to the unjust usurpation so long as he withholdeth them from their
rightful owner, which two bands are so great, as they do not only oblige him to
deliver his hands with all speed possible from this unjust detention of the
said goods, but further also, that if he should restore them to him of whom he
received them, he should sin damnably, and moreover be bound to restitution of
the whole to the true owner, out of his own, in case the Usurper otherwise
should not restore the same. Which point you may see handled and determined
most learnedly and piously as well by divinity as law, by S. Thomas 22. q. 62.
art. 7. and Caet. ibidem in Commentaris, and other writers upon that place; And
for Canonists Navarre in Manuali: Cap. 17. n. 18. and 19. Siluest. verb. Bellum
1.. 3. and verb. Restitutio 3. q. 8.. 7. Fumus verb. restitutio. 16. and verb.
Bellum. 11. Caet. in sum. verb. restitutio. cap. 4. and c.

The 3. point The 3. point about him that svveareth not to restore.
is more in particular touching the forsaid oath pretended to be made by Sir
William for keeping the town of Daeuentry, for the use of the States against
the king of Spain the true and lawful owner, which oath by the doctrine of all
Catholic deuynes though it were a sin in him if he did take it, yet being
taken it byndeth not at all, being made against justice and right and
consequently of no force. Yea the said divines do ad further that it wear an
increase of sin to keep such an oath. And consequently each man is bound to
break the same. Thus do teach. S. Thomas 22. qu. 89. act. 7. in crop and ad 2.
and ibid. Caet. in Comment. siluest. verb Iuramentum 5. q. 1. Nauar. cap. 12.
number. 15. Toletl. Instruct. sacerd. cap. 22. Primus est. etc. Fumus verb.
Iurament.. 9. and 10. and 17. Condition 4. and. 38, etc. and besides these and
the rest of this kind may be alleged all the fathers and Interpreters of
scriptures treating of the unlawful oath of Herod for the killing of S. John
Baptist.

And this may suffice for Catholic men and all other also that are of good
conscience and lovers of justice for the clearing of S. William Stanleys fact
concerning lawfulnes and obligation of conscience. S. William incurred no
dishonor by restoring, but rather the contrary.
There remains to say a word or two concerning his honor as a soldier and
subject of her Ma. wherein albeit his cheef defense and justification be indeed
the forsaid obligation of equity, right and conscience toward almighty God
which is to be preferred before all other obligation to temporal princes, yet
the points before specified or insinuated by us, are sufficient also, though
this so strict divine obligation had not been, to excuse him from the
opprobrious and contumelious calumniatio^s of treachery and faith-breaking
wherewith these seditious people so injuriously do charge him. For if he held
not the said city of Dauentry of her Ma. as before has been said, but for the
Hollanders, Known subjects at that time of the K. of Spain and that he was
not only privy but also present and consenting to the usurpation of that City
by the Earl of Leicester against the wills of the citizens bringing in a
garrison upon them by sleight; if afterward becoming more Catholic and better
instructed in religion, he came to know (as he did) a christian man's obligation
in this behalf. And that besides all this he had a patent of his General (to
whom he made his oath) to depart from that service when he should think good:
the motive of which grant was (as we have heard) not to be under the obedience
of S. John Norrice left chiefly in the Earls place. If furthermore S. William
did not sell or make any temporal advantage of that place as souldiars are wont
to do, but only as a most christian knight adventured for mere conscience and
love of justice to restore the same to the true owner with his own great
danger, and with the loss of his father, wife, and children, inheritance,
offices, grace of her Ma. and all the rest that his country did, or could yield
unto him, only for the same effect and end: If all this be so, and diverse
other circumstances concurring in his favor, then is there no least spot of
dishonor to be laid upon him for this fact, but rathe^ great honor has he
gotten thereby both before God and man: and most barbarous is the insolency of
these slanderous companions that go about to dishonor him thereby as they do.

And the like course they hold with our late good Card. their father and
master, Card. Allen greatly abused by them.
whom Ironice they call worthy man (as before you have heard) but do handle him
so unworthily, as all men may see their contempt and hollow hearts toward him,
their desire being indeed utterly to discredit him especially about this act of
S. William Stanley; in proof and justification whereof the Card. wrote a very
christian and learned epistle, which these men do calumniate, condemn and
scofat saying among other things that it was made by F. Persons help and
counsel, which they say as well to discredit the Card^ for making his books by
other men's help and counsel, as also to bring in the mention of F. Persons or
some other Jesuit in every act which they desire to make odious, as though the
only naming of a Jesuit, (though they had no part at all therein nor were pryuy
or consenting to it (as in this of S. William Stanleys they were not, nor
could he) were sufficient to condemn both the act and them, and to justify
their former oath and consciencelesse protestation, that in their consciences
Jesuits hunc been the cause of all mischeefes and calamityes from the beginning
of (...). And this much of this matter.

Now let us go: forward and follow them in their most spiteful and injurious
arraignment of Catholics by succession and dissent of by^^^^. Page 25.
Now we are come (say they) to the year 1588. and to that most (bloo^^) (...)
not only against her Ma. and our common enemies; but against ourselves, and all
Catholics, etc. The memory of which attempt will be (as we trust) an everlasting
monument of Iesuitical treason and cruelty, etc.

Note that they trust it will be so, which argues their charitable meaning. But
what if it prove that no one English Jesuit either was in that Armada or in
Spain at that time to give counsel or consent thereunto? will not this assertion
then be a perpetual monument of their perfidious and unchristian malice?
Remember then what passed at that time, and confess with us that they are no
priests, but rather lost lads that avouch, so apparent false calumniations.
For, as before we have touched most true it is, that both F. Persons, F. Holt
and F. Creswel being at Rome with Cardinal Allen and no English Jesuit at all
residing either in Spain or Flaunders when this enterprice was resolved; not
only they went not in this. Armada from Spain, but were never so much as asked
their opinion or conferred with about that matter as we have often hard them
affirm, and is evident to this day by a letter of S. Frauncis Inglefield
written into France at that very time to a certain confident friend wherein he
greatly complayneth, The letter of S. Frauncis Inglefeld to M. Hopkins in Paris
anno 1588.
that whereas all the world talked that the said armada went for England, yet
that neither he nor any other English was admitted to know any thing therein.
But let us hear the proof of these men against themselves.

It is apparent (say they) in a treatese penned by F. Persons advise
altogether as we do verily think that the K. of Spain was especially moved
and drawn to that intended mischeefes against us by the long and daily
solicitation of the Jesuits, etc. Import. Consid. Page 25.
This is somewhat if it were true, but if there be no such thing in that whole
treatese, as we most certainly affirm not to be (having read over the whole
for examination of the matter) then judge you with us, what manner of men these
be, that against their own consciences do ly so notoriously. For if the Card.
in that book have these words, or do ever name Jesuits or any of their order to
this effect or this sense, then never believe us more: and if he do not, then
good reason it is, that they hold them for such as they are, whereby also you
will se how little they are to be credited in the rest which they say in this
place, that this treatese of the Card. was penned altogether by the advice of
F. persons which if it had been so it is likely he would not have laid the
matter upon the Iesuytes? but hear as true an assertion as this; for it
follows presently after: About this point they belly M. VVinstade.
The Duke of Medina Sidonia had given it out directly, that if once he might
land in England both Catholics and heretics should be all one to him, his sword
could not discern them, etc.

Thus they say: But how directly or indirectly these men might come to know any
such thing if it had been spoken; or how likely it is, that the Duke would say
so, the discreet reader may imagine. And a little before in the same book they
say (as you have heard) out of the same duke of Medina his mouth also; Epist.
Page 7.
that he would rather spare Protestants then Catholics. All which put together
shows evidently out of what forge all these devises do proceed, to wit, of
blind rancor, wilful malice, lack of conscience, and the like.

Well; this Chapter of untruths grows somewhat long, and yet remain there a
huge heap sufficient for many books if we would prosecute all, yea those only
which are about F. Persons would make up a volume so fraught or rather
ouercharged with malignant passion against him, who of all other seeks most
to do them good, if they had unpassionate eyes to see it; Wherefore we shall
run over breefly some few more that concern him especially, and so make an
end, having received from him and others particular information of the truth
and falsehood of the matters objected.

Wherefore to touch them briefly as they^ly in this their book of Important
Considerations (for we will omit either all or the most part of those that are
in their other libel termed their Relation of wisbich) wherein there are so
many heaped together in a certain mad and furious innectiue of VV. VV.
prefixed in name of the rest before the said book^ as these only with the
spiteful manner of uttering the same are sufficient to make them known, and to
discreedit not only the writer, but all his ayders and approuers with all
honest and sober men of what religion soever.

For first they affirm here, Untruths uttered against F Persons Se the 12
Chap. of the Apol.
that F. Persons has sent sundry of his subjects into Ireland already in the
behalf of the Spaniard, and that that war was plotted and solicited by him
and his: that he has entitled the K. of Spain to all the 3. kingdoms of
England, Scotland and France, Epist. to Import. Consid. Page 7. 8. 9. 10. etc.
and the lady Infanta to the same kingdoms; that he did constrayne the
students of the Semynaryes in Spain to subscribe to her interest, forcing them
to promise that when they should return into England they would advance her
title to their uttermost abillity, power and poyse of words; that for not
applauding to this Spanish pretense of the Infanta, the L. Dacres was driven
out of Spain, and all other Spanish dominions, being slaundered to be a spy
for England, and to have intended to have set the Spanish fleet on fire: That
F. Persons has caused diverse of our country to be utterly disgraced,
discredited, yea and to leese their lives in Spain, for not yiedling to his
desire therein: That after he came in post to Rome and would needs have the book
of Tytles read in the Refectory of the College if it had not been resysted, and
that for hatred to the secular Seminary priests he gave out, that book of
Tytles to have been made by M. Dolman a secular priest, etc.

These and a great multitude more of like accusations and calumniations, which
for breuity and lothsomnesse we omit, are heaped together in this place, and
sprinkeled again throughout the whole book as occasion is offered. And albeit
the most of these are so evidently false and ridiculous, as theyneed no
answer, yet will we say somewhat to each of them in order: and first of that of
having sent diverse of his subjects already into Ireland to set forward that
war, all men know that F. Persons has authority over none, About the late
attempt in Ireland.
but only English Jesuits: whereof if any one can be proved to have been sent
hitherto into Ireland or any one to be there at this day or any one priest of
those Seminaryes to have been directed by him that way for diverse years then
may these slanders have some show or pretense of this their malicious
sycophancy but none being at all it makes them more in excusable.

Moreover we^ ad^ that we have seen a letter lately written out of Spay ne by
a man o credit, The Protestation of Sr. VV. Stanley and M. Th. Fitzherbert
about the protestation of two worshipful and honorable gentlemen, Sir William
Stanley and M. Thomas Fitzherbert concerning this affair of Ireland, wherein
they both affirm and protest upon their souls and consciences, about the
affayre of Irla^d
that to their knowledge neither they nor any one Englishman else was ever so
much as asked his opinion in this late affayre of Ireland, nor any one hitherto
of our nation employed or sent in that action. And M. Thomas Fitzherbert names
in that letter one Hewghe Boy an Irishman Agent for the Earl of Tyron in the
court of Spain, who residing there many months to deal in this matter, and
seeing M. Fitzherbert every day, as lying in the same court, never yet broke the
matter with him, nor was willing that any Englishman at all should be privy
thereunto, as whom both he and other Irishmen treating therabout, The like
protestation for dealing with the K of Spain.
presumed to be contrary to their desires and designments therein. And this can
and will the said Boy testify, seeing since that time he is passed from the
said Earl of Tyrone to her Majesty's service.

And further more the said two gentlemen do protest in like manner (upon
occasion offered) that both they, F. Persons and F. Creswel, who have had
hitherto most dealings with the spanish King and counsel did never treat in
their lives, nor consent that the said king should have any temporal interest
in the crown of England, for himself, and much less that any such conquest
of our country should be made or attempted, as these folish malicious people
do faygne and give out. And further they protest by the same asseueration, that
neither the old king now dead, nor his son now reigning, did ever pretend the
same, in word or deed, but always assured the contrary to wit that their only
meaning and desire was, and is by their wars against England, that the
Catholics might be relieved from their most grievous pressures and oppressions
for religion, and themselves delivered from continual molestations which in
Flanders, Indies and other places they received from England, having a desire
in themselves to live in peace and love with that crown above all other
foreign nations, as in former times they did when the State was Catholic.
This and diverse other such points do the foresaid two worthy gentlemen auow in
manner aforesaid, and is testified by the foresaid letter which we have seen
dated in Madrid the first of October last past 1601.

By this then most of the foresaid calumniations against F. Persons are
discovered concerning his dealing with and for the king of Spain, About a
letter of F. Persons intercepted.
which is greatly confirmed and made evident by a certain letter written by
the said Father himself in great confidence and cyphar also (as his
adversaries say) to F. Holt in Flaunders from Genua upon the 15. of March 1597.
when the said father arrived there toward Rome, which letter or the copy
thereof being stolen afterward (as it seems) from F. Holt and given to his
adversaries, which in some places they have showed, and is like to be that
which here they brag of, saying; that his own books and handwrytings will be
brought out as witnesses against him. But hitherto they are not brought or
alleged, and it seems that this in particular whereof we have the copy
serves not their turns so much, as they dare to allege it, finding more
sincerity, religion, wisdom and gravity contained therein (though written in
secret and confidence) where he might utter himself boldly) than their
malignant envy will suffer them to be glad to see, which yet we be enforced in
this place through their malignity, not to think amiss to acquaint somewhat
the Reader therewith.

The superscription was thus: To the Reverend Father, F. William Holt, etc.
And then within was written this in cyphar, as the rest of the letter also is
said to have been: A note for F. Holt and such other confident friends as he shall
think good to communicate the same withal: A lettere of F. P. to F. holt 15.
of March 1597.
And then began the letter thus: The principal causes of this my journey are to
setle with his Holiness and F. General all such points as shall seem necessary
for the upholding of the Seminaries of Spain, Flaunders, Italy, and of the
mission of the society to England, and therefore whatsoever shall offer it self
unto you about any of these points (to wit) for facultyes, government,
privileges, maintenance, or the like, I pray you and other friends to advise me
with the best speed that may be, for I mean to procure that my abode in Italy
be as little as may be, and so I have promised in Spain and for diverse reasons
it will be necessary.

If I can do any good also in compounding or ending the troubles of the English
Roman Seminary, and of our controuersyes between those of our nation else
where; I shall do my best, at least I hope I shall make his Hol. and other
principal persons understand the true causes and grounds thereof.

By these two first points we may see that F. Persons journey to Rome was
neither in post (as these men say, being 5. or 6. months in coming) nor to
cause the book of English titles to be read in the Refectory (as fondly here
is devised) about which whole matter of succession, he speaks in his letter
so temperatly and indifferently, as may shame his adversaries to allege it,
for he says in substance. That he means to proceed therein very softly and
coldly, letting his Hol. only to know how matters do stand, and that English
Catholics do only desire (after her Majesty) some sincere Catholic Prince, F.
Persons dealing with the Pope about the succession of England.
without respect of English, Scottish, Spanish, or other nation in respect of
religion, that F. Persons is not an enemy, to the king of Scotland nor Agent
for king Philip, as some have informed showing in the first what good offices
he has done for the king of Scotland for many years, whilst their was hope
that he would be a Catholic, and in the second showing by testimony of the
Nuntio of Madrid, Patriarch Caetan (who has written effectually in that
behalf) that F. Persons has always persuaded the king and his counsel, that
it will not stand well for his Majesty to pretend England for himself, and that
he has obtained of the king full promise thereof, about which point the Nuntio
has seen the papers, and been privy to the speches which F. Persons from time
to time has had unto that effect.

These are the words of this secret letter, and finally he concludes; that the
best of all would be, if to avoid contention, opposition and garboyles after
her Majesty, such a person might be thought of as would be fit, and stand well
both for his Hol. and Majesty Catholic, Inglish and Scottish Catholics, the
kings of France, Denmark, and all the rest, but who that person or persons be
he means to suffer his Hol. to think upon, etc.

Thus he writes (as you see) in great confidence and secresy to his dearest
friend, and was to treat to the same effect with the Pope by the commission (as
here is insinuated) of the king of Spain himself; And his Hol. can be
witness whether he did so or no, and whether he has changed his course or no
until this day. And then let the discreet reader judge whether these
cogitations and endeavors of F. Persons do not tend more to peace, union,
composition, saving of his country from wars, and garboyles, pacifying of
Princes round about, and furthering the Catholic religion, which principally
is sought by him as the first and cheef means of all joy and felicity, both in
this life and the next, then the distracted passionate clamors of these few
discontented people that cry out to pull down; but set up nothing, that
calumniate other men's actions, but can do nothing themselves, being only fit to
undo, discompose, wrangle, trouble, cry and curse: but let us see yet a little
further.

They object, A vain ^^aunder.
that F. Persons has entitled the king of Spain to all the 3. kingdoms of
England, Scotland and France, and the Lady Infanta to the said three kingdoms,
Let them show this out of any writing of his; and if they cannot (as is most
certain) let them be ashamed of this their shameless calumniation. For in the
book of succession, which they attribute unto him, is no such matter, either
about the kingdom of France or Scotland for either of those two persons, but
rather the quite contrary, which proves these men not to speak by line or
measure or regard of verity, but only what they imagine may sound odiously. And
is this fit for priests? yea Catholic priests?

The tale of the students subscribing, A ^ond tale of the scholars swearing
in the Spanish Semi^^^^yes.
swearing and promising in Spain to promote with main and might, poyse of
words dentibus and ^nsibus (as our Orators say) the Infanta her title is much
like poetical comentaryes and fictions upon some little ground of truth: For all
are lies but only this; that our late good Cardinal thinking seriously toward
the later end of his days of the perilous state of our country if her Ma.
should fail, and what great contention and wars were like to ensue about the
succession of a new prince, he was greatly troubled and afflicted in mind, and
casting diverse ways about how these mischeefes might best be prevented and
matters wrought to some moderation and composition both to the contentment of
forrayne princes and probability to reduce the Cath. faith again into England,
he took his pen in hand, and set down a very wise, moderate and pious
discourse of his opinion and judgment therein sending the same into Spain with
desire to hear the opinions of his friends about the same, who liking it very
well and being desirous to have the same continued and set forward, diverse of
the cheef English there, as well lay men as Ecclesiastical, as namely Sr.
Frauncis Inglefield, M. D. Stillington, and others, wrote their likings and
approbation thereof and requested that the like might be performed from the
Semynaryes for encouraging the good Card. to go forward in that pious
cogitatio^. And this is all that in that matter was done or attempted without
any promise, oath or obligation at all, so as all the rest which these men ad
is either poetical fictions or exaggerations, as we have said.

The calumniation about the L. Dacres is most false and slanderous, About the
L. Dacres.
and has many malignant untruths; That which passed between him and F.
Persons is this, as we are certainly informed by them that know it: He went out
of England to Vallidolid in Spain about the year 1590. where finding F.
Persons beginning his new Seminary, he was most courteously received and treated
by him therein, and after some days recommended by his letters very effectually
to the court at Madrid where also he was honorably used, from whence he passed
to Rome, and there had 60. Crowns a month in gold, paid him by the Spanish
Ambassador, which after some time misliking his abode there he left; to return
into Flaunders, where it may be that he fell into some discontentements as
banished men are wont to do, but this could not be by any reason or probability
with F. Persons, seeing he never dealt with him after his departure from Spain,
and is presumed to have had the forsaid provision in Rome by his special
come^dation. Wherefore to say here as these men do that he was held for a spy
and suspected that he would burn the K. fleet (whereof we never heard before)
is open calumniation laid upon the good noble man himself, toward whom we
understand by very certain and sure means that the said Father is and always
was very well affected in respect both of his religion and house, whatsoever
this seditious writer and makebate goes about to persuade to the contrary.

As for the other, Another impudent calumniation.
that F. Persons has caused diverse of our nation to be utterly disgraced,
discredited, yea and to leese their lives in Spain for being contrary to his
designs, is so manifest a slander as we are ashamed to repeat: For what one
example can these men allege for saving their credit and honesty heerin? It
is well known that he has saved the lives of diverse, both by delivering them
out of the gallyes as also out of the inquisition, as diverse can bear witness
that are now in England delivered by him. And more it is to be noted, that from
the time of F. Persons coming into Spain in the year 1588. until his
departure from thence in the year 1596. no one Englishma^ in any of the
Tribunals of all those kingdoms was publicly punished or put to death during
those 8. years, whereas before many had accustomed to be. And this change is
known to have come principally by the information and entreaty of F. Persons
with those Ecclesiastical Judges, letting them understand first and above all
other things, the true state of men in England, touching religion at this time,
to wit, that very few especially of the younger sort (how earnest protestants
soever they show themselves) are to be accounted heretics properly and in
rigor of the Canons, Qentle proceeding with english heretics in Spain by F.
Persons means.
as they appoint punishments unto them, for that they lack sufficient knowledge
of the Cath. faith, or at leastwise instructions, having never been actually
Catholics. And albeit this were not so, yet other circumstances there are of
great moment to mitigate the ordinary proceeding of Canonical laws and
punishment toward them seeing that by experience it was found, that the most
part of such m^n being pressed upon the suddayne or at their first apprehension
were ordinarily so proud and wilful as they would rather burn or abide any
other punishment then leave or renounce their fancyes, but giving them time and
instructing them by reason and good arguments they were easily converted, and
so it was seen by experience, that in all the foresaid time, and ever since
there have not been found perhaps two Englishmen, which being taken or otherwise
coming to conference have not been turned and made Catholics, albeit some of
them afterward again for ^emporal respects may have perhaps relented at there
arriual in England, whereof also many have stood constant. And this is and has
been the manner of F. Persons proceeding with Englishmen in Spain while he was
there, quite contrary to the malicious fictions and lying detractions used
here against him, for procuring the ruin and death of his country men, etc.

And finally where these accusants object against F. Persons that he caused the
book of succession to be set forth in the name of one Dolman a secular priest,
Why the Author of the book of succession was called Doleman.
and this for hatred of that order, we are informed that it is no less false
then a malicious cauillation, and that the author of the book neither knew any
priest to be named Dolman when he wrote that book, nor so much as thought on
him, but alluding to the word of the scripture vir dolorum he called himself
Dole-man in respect of the grief and sorrow he bore in his heart for the
affliction and calamity of his Country. Ezai. 5^.
Afterward it fell out that there was a priest in England called Dolman who
being drawn by these men to favor their faction as it seems, was persuaded
also to complain that he was made to be the author of the book, which no man
yet we think that knows him and has read the book, will easily believe or
accuse him of, his talent being known to be far inferior to such a labor,
and consequently their complaint in this is both fond and ridiculous.

There ensues in the said Epistle, that F. Persons in Greenewat made the case
clear; Page ^.
that difference in religion or matters of faith neither ought nor could by the
law of God, A notoriously of F. P. speech in Greenevvat.
of nature, of nations, or custom ever hard of in any nation deprive any one
inferior subject (much less said he in the same place any Sovereign) from the
right of inheritance or lawful succession by birth or blood to any thing they
had right unto otherwise, etc.

Here now hearing them to name a particular place and to auow a matter so
stoutly, you may perchance think with your self (gentle Reader) whether all
or some part of this may be true or no, but doubt not thereof; For we assure you
upon most certain information had from the originalles themselves, that all is
most false; F. Persons protesting by his letters that he remembers not any
such place called Greenewat that ever he was in in his life, L Manichaeus. l.
Arian. l. quicunque Cap. ad aboendam Cap. excommunicamus extra. de haereticis
andin 6. de haeret. cap. super leo. Consil la tera. cap 3. de. haereticis.
nor knows what, nor where it is. And for the doctrine here ascribed to him
he detesteth it, as fond, absurd, and tasting both of heresy and atheism
(though allowed here as it seems by our people) he being not ignorant that
both civil laws and Church Canons do deprive heretics of inheritances, as our
men ought to know also. And if the foresaid book of Titles or succession
alleged by them were written by F. Persons (as they affirm) then is there
proof enough therein to show him to be contrary to this doctrine, seeing that
the whole drift of the first book (especially the 6. 7. 8. and 9. Chapters) is
principally directed against this doctrine taught (as there is said) by one
Belloy a French man, and whom the said first book of titles re^uteth by many
arguments: so as these men by running headlong upon F. Persons do break their
own horns, and see not their folly.

But hear yet another calumniation more absurd then this against the same man.
Ibid. Page 14.
There is (say they) a letter of F. Persons own writing wherein is set down
in plain terms to this effect scilicet. How the Jesuits are the most infest
enemies both to the Cath. Church and commonwealth, that are this day in the
world to be found, etc.

But here again we require the letter, and ask why it is not alleged with
the date and place, and then consider moreover, good Reader, how likely it is
that F. Persons (except he were mad) should write these words of himself and of
his whole order and whethet these men may be judged to be in their right
senses, and five wits that write and put such things in print; though we have
heard of a certain letter devised amongst some of them to be printed as written
by him which yet others of the said company not so mad as the rest dissuaded
them from as a thing that would easily be discovered, yet have they here
another assertion within a few leaves after as bold and ridiculous as this,
Import. Consid Page 15.
saying: F. Persons so labored himself and others in England about matters of
state how he might set her Ma. crown upon another head (as appeared by a
letter of his own to a certain Earl) that the Catholics themselves threatened
to deliver him into the hands of the civil magistrate except he desisted from
such kind of practices, etc.

And here also we would ask why they do not express this letter more
particularly, and set down the words thereof. For if they mean a letter of his
written to the Earl of Anguise in Scotland and intercepted here in England
concerning his dutiful affection and good merits toward the K. of Scotland;
The letter of F. P. to the Earl of Anguise Ian. 24. 1600.
there is no such word there in sense nor meaning; if they have any other
(which we assure our selves they have not) why do they not cite it, as plain
dealing men ought to do, and as we have done toward them and theirs in our
Apology? Why also do they slander the Catholics of England with so base
and absurd a cogitation, as to deliver up F. Persons to the civil magistrate,
which we assure ourselves never passed through their imaginations, esteeming
his discret and fervent labors for them, and their common cause a hundred
times more then all these unprofitable wrangling people joined together.

And now having been much more longer in this matter then we purposed at the
beginning, we would gladly end, pretermitting infinite other such like stuff
of the same kind, as in these books are every wheare found, yet must we not
pass over one narration of theirs, for that it touches great personages. The
story is this; Epist. to Import. consid. Page 15.
that when their two legates M. Bishop and M. Charnock came to Rome in the end
of the year 1598. they went (as here is said) first to the french Embasador
residing there, requesting his help to procure the^ audience of the Pope, A
notorious fiction and contumely to his Hol.
who enquiring if they had brought the K. his masters letter in their favor,
and perceauing they had not, told the^ that albeit he would with the said
letter, if they had brought it, more willingly enter into the said action with
them, yet without it also would he speak to his Hol. in their favor, and so
he did, making a speech which here in their book they take upon them to set
down, and the very words he used whereby he obtained full promise of their
audience, with favor at his Hol. hands. Which the Spanish Ambassador
understanding of, went presently to the Pope, and made another speech in the
behalf of his master, to whom the Pope promised that they should not have
audience, which being understood by the french Ambassador, he returned to his
Hol. again and renewed his oration and petition for their audience more
earnestly then before, and it was resolutely granted him; which being brought
to the Spanish Ambassador he went to the Pope with great vehemence the second
time, and as it were threatening him from his king made him recall the second
time his former promise.

Lo here a sharp combat framed in the air, never thought of by the parties as
we are informed from Rome it self. And first it is to be considered, how bold
a devise this is, and how injurious to his Hol. himself, who is made here
like a door, opened by one and shut by another, and giving a creake to each
one that moves it, which contumely how far it is from the wisdom, maturity
and known constancy of his Hol. in his resolutions all men do know who have
dealt with him, and it is extreme audacity for these to devise such absurd and
ridiculous matters of him as to say and unsay four times one thing to so great
personages. And thus much of his Holiness person.

But now for the matter it self concerning the narration, Great probabilityes
that the whole is feigned.
how or whether the two messengers went to the French Ambassador in Rome;
whether the matter be wholly feigned or no, we cannot precisely affirm, but
great probability there is that they were never with him, seeing that their
arriual in Rome being about the 11. of December (as in our Apology we have
declared) at what time the said Ambassador was not there, but in Ferrara with
the Pope, or in his way toward Rome, his Holiness entered not the city, but
some 2. or 3. days before the flood, which happened on Christmas eve, and so
empestred the city, as there was no going up and down, and much less
negotiating, from that time to S. Thomas of Canterbury his day December. 29. when
they were restrained and committed to ward by his Holiness order, and thereby had
no time afterward to go to the said Ambassador.

But howsoever this was, we are acertayned by due information taken at Rome
both from Cardinal Burghesius Vice-protector of England privy to all the whole
negotiation, and of the Duke of Sessa and Vayena, the King of Spaynes
Ambassador, whom our brethren appoint for cheef actor and orator of pleading
this cause (for of the other two Cardinal Caetan the Protector and Monsieur
Syllarie the king of France his Ambassador, the one is dead, and the other gone
from Rome) these two great men (we say) do affirm that all this matter to
their knowledge is a mere fiction, and that his Hol. when he shall know it (as
before this it is likely he has done) cannot but laugh, and yet be much
offended with such audacity to be published in print.

And of the said Duke of Sessa Ambassador of Spain they write from Rome that
he laughed heartily when he heard the Story, The speech of the Duke of Sessa
about these priests auducity.
saying: well then they make me at least the better orator of the two who
finally prevailed with his Hol. But after his laughter past, he asked
seriously. But is it possible that English Catholic priests should have so
little shame and conscience as to utter such devises of their own in print, and
father them upon us here who never thought nor dreamed thereof what may be
expected of them for the time to come? These men (said he) will not stick to
feign letters, wrytings and speeches to wreake their wrath against any man. To
whom it was answered, that this indeed was doubted against some, and F.
Persons by name, whose letters they threaten in many places to bring forth, and
yet allege none hitherto, for that perhaps they are not yet made, or devised.

Well then there were no end if we should prosecute all they say and rail
against F. Persons as before we have noted, but especially about the restraynt
of their forsaid two Ambassadors (a pitiful case) of whom they conclude their
former narration thus: Imp. Consid. Page 16. Ep.
By this means (say they) they were excluded from doing their message, cast
into prison, cruelly handled, justice violated, all laws broken of God and
man, the Popes Holiness nor any other competent judge under him never as yet
hearing of the matter nor of the egregious coggery, A heap of folyes.
prejudice and blasphemy against the Sea Apostolic and the sacred Majesty of
our Sovereign and all other Princes and Prelates abused by these men.

Here now you may see as many impertinent follyes and open falsityes as almost
there are words for we may go back again, denying truly every part and percel
as they are here set down. For how were they excluded from doing their
message, who were heard for 3. months space together both by word, and
writing? How can they be said to have been cast into prison and cruelly handled,
that were retired only unto two good chambers of the college, and as tenderly
cared for and treated as the best in the house? With what probability can they
say that justice was violated and all laws both of God and man broken, by this
their restraint, seeing it is an ordinary thing daily used upon less occasions
then this, to far better and greater men then they? with what shame can they
avouch, that nether his Hol. nor any compete^t judge under him hard their
cause, seeing two principal Cardinals and his Hol. Fiscal, both heard, examined
and determined the same after three months hearing, conferring all first with
the Pope himself, as appears by public records?

We let pass their immodesty in calling this act of so temperate justice,
coggery, prejudice and blasphemy against the Sea Apostolic, and the sacred Ma.
of our Sovereign; And we would only ask them how they join these two
together, and how the self same thing of restrayning a coople of priests may
be blasphemy both to the Sea Apostolic and to her Man and wherein this
blasphemy consists?

We might follow this vain of our passionate and inconsiderate brethren their
folly and falsehood (if we would) to the making up of a whole volume, but we
find ourselves so wearyed and glutted with these (being so gross as they are)
as we are ashamed further to discover their infirmityes in this behalf for
there is nether end nor measure in their fond railing against F. Persons, yea
though they be forced to say things to his praise and comendations as before
has been noted: But let us hear one example more if you please.

When they speak of his journey into Spain in the year 1588. and his doyngs
there, they write thus: He departed from Rome, Page 28. Ibid.
went into Spain and became a courteour to attend K. Philippe where by Mendoza
his fellow Jesuits means he grew shortly into so great estimation (not for any
goodness in him toward this Realm you may be sure, but rather in respect of
his deadly hatred against it) that he procured a Seminary to be erected in
Vallidolid. 1589.

Consider these words (gentle Reader) and weigh the exceeding folly and malice
of the writers; He went to Spain to be a courteour, got great estimation, and
yet has gotten nothing for himself in all these dozen years, by all his favor
and estimation, but only to erect some Semynaries for our nation, what courting
is this? or what courteour follows this course to get nothing for himself but
for others? yea for those that profess themselves his enemies as secular
priests do; if we may believe these men affirming it every wheare. These are
mere insulsityes.

Again they say; About Don Bernardino de mendoza and his friendship with F. P.
that he got his credit in Spain by Mendoza his fellow Jesuits means, etc.
But we have showed before that Don Bernardino de mendoza was never Jesuit but
a lay nobleman. He was not in Spain when F. Persons went thither, nor for
diverse years after, for that he resided in Paris as Ambassador for his king,
where he had much more friendship and correspondence with M. Charles Paget and
M. Tho. Morgan men of the opposite party (as is known) then with F. Persons
between whom and him we have understood for certain that no one letter or
message passed for many years together, to wit after the most disastrous
affayre of Ballard, Babington, etc. whereunto he being drawn perhaps to
intermedle more then was expedient by the forsaid men and others (though we
cannot accuse him therein) and perceauing both Card. Allen and F. Persons then
in Rome greatly to have misliked and complained thereof as a matter so highly
prejudicial to the life and states of many good Catholics in England and of the
Q. of Scotland her self, he never had any great confidence afterward with the
said two men, and when he returned after some years to Madrid, where F.
Persons was, we understand that there passed great expostulations between them
two about that and some other such matters, wherein the said Ambassador had been
thought to have been overmuch misled by the foresaid men and their mates.

By this then you may see in part how likely it is that F. Persons should get
his estimation and credit in Spain by Don Bernardino de Mendoza his means,
and much more how probable it is that the said Father procured a Seminary for
English priests and students in Vallidolid not for any goodness in him toward
this realm, but for his deadly hatred against it, etc. who could imagine such
fond malice to be in men? And yet if we would enlarge our selves upon this
point, we should never make an end; for against this man it seems their whole
conspiracy lights; And he may well say out of the psalm opprobria,
exprobrantium ceciderunt super me, read the Catalogue of slanders set before
the preface of our Apology and the 12. Chapter of our said book that treats
of this man in particular, and then lay them with these which we say here and
that we have related in the first Chapter of this book and you will see
sufficient store, and yet more will ensue after, for that no one part can be
touched by them without his particular impugnation, whom they imagine to stand
more in their way (for letting their seditious designments) then many others
joined together. And so consequently they are forced by their own folly and
passion to assail him every where, and this we fear to their own confusion
in the end, God grant it be not. And so enough of this.

OF THEIR GREAT FOLLY and malignant spirit in obiecting certain books to F.
Persons, which if they be his, cannot but give him much credit and
commendation, with a brief confutation of a fond pamphlet set forth in answer
to the book of succession.
CAP. V.
TRuly it is said that envy and emulation are two blind guides, and that anger
and passion do oftentimes wound more deeply the assaylant, then the assailed.
You have heard how boysterously (not to say furiously) these passionate people
have run every where upon F. Persons dentibus and ensibus, (to use their own
phrase) and surely if we did not know F. Persons and his merits toward our
common cause and them, in particular as we do, yet knowing them, as we may by
these their books and libels, and beholding their outrageous dealing with him,
we must needs think the better of him for it, and that there is some great good
thing in him, for which they envy him so exceedingly, and discover such rancor
and malice against him, as they seem to be content (we mean of the principal
that write these books) to put out both their own eyes according to the
proverb so they might put out one of his. But this is the nature of envy. Let
us now examine some more particulars of their proceedings with him.

Besides all their former railing and calumniation against F. Persons, 4 books
specially objected to F. Persons.
whereof we have treated hitherto, they object now further (to leave nothing
untouched) the writing of certain books four in number, whereof 3. are extant
in print, and one only in written hand. The first is in latin under the name of
Philopater containing an answer to the English Edict, and most rigorous law
set forth against Catholics in the year 1591. The second is in English named a
VVardword to the VVatchword of Sir F. Hastings by N. D. which two books these
men do inueigh against by name, Philopater contra^ Edictum 1591.
and yet in the first of them their own cause (if they be Catholic priests)
as also the Seminaries and English martirs are so diligently de^ended
(especially in the 3. 4. and 5. sections) as if envy had not utterly
extinguished in these people the sense and feeling not only of virtue and
gratitude, but of humanity also and ciuility, they would never so enueigh
against this book written in their behalfes, as neither against the second, to
wit the VVardword, VVardvvord An. 15^8.
which is wholly to the same effect, and to defend the most innocent Catholic
recusants of our country against the bloody slanders and imputations of that
cruel minded knight.

The 3. and fourth books objected by them are the conference about Succession
or Titles as they call it, and the high counsel of Reformation, (for so they
fondly term it) of which two books we shall speak somewhat more in this place,
but most of the last, for that it is not in print, as all the other three are,
and so may be vewed and examined by the Reader himself, to whom we give only
this aduertisment, that none of the forsaid three have F. Persons name unto it,
and consequently are no otherwise known to be of his making but only by their
own conjectures, albeit all three are such, as be they his or no, they yield
little matter of advantage to these poor men but much rather of greef and envy,
as by reading them will appear. And as for the third of Succession we shall
discuss some points thereof afterward being urged thereunto by their often
carping thereat and a childish answer set forth against it in print. Now we will
begin with the fourth, whereof they write thus.

This Polypragman Persons (say they) set out a book entitled: Epist page 12.
to Import. consid.
The high counsel of Reformation of England, etc. wherein he will have the old
Roman Agrarian law, so firmly established in this land, and no fee simple of
inheritance shall be left for any English from the Prince to the freeholder to
possess, enjoy, and leave by succession of birth, and blood to his posterity,
as to his next heirs, further then as the Spanish Iesuitical court, counsel
and governors shall appoint for them.

Lo here a great and heinous charge, and if any one sentence thereof be true or
sincerely set down then shall we be content to believe them in all the rest,
and if we prove them to be all and every one of them merely false, then you
know what to think of them.

First then we grant, The Treatese entitled: A memorial for Reformation when
time shall serte.
that upon search made we have found that the said Father (not altogether
untruly called here Polypragmon, for the multitude of his cares and labors in
our public cause) having had occasion above others for more then xx. years,
not only to know the State of matters in England, but also of many foreign
nations and Catholic kingdoms abroad, has used like diligence from time to
time to observe and note to himself certain excellent things found in other
places, which are not so much in use among us in England nor were when it was
Catholic: Which observations he having imparted somtymes with certain
confident friends, they seemed to them of so great importance for the time to
come, as they entreated him earnestly to put them at least in writing for
himself and for others after him; to public good; when time might serve to
use them, if now he would not make them common, as he signified in no wi^e he
would.

Hereupon he then being at Siuil in the year 1596. and receiving letters from
his Superiors to return to Rome for appeasing the tumults there he was more
earnestly entreated, that before his departure he would perform the same, and
so he did, calling it, A memorial or Remembrance for them that shall live when
Catholic religion shall be restored into England, wherein he proposes with all
indifferency such matters as he has observed and noted to be thought and
considered of at that time, and either to be taken, or rejected limited,
changed or altered as they should think best, all which appears by his own
Preface to that treatese, which for more satisfaction of the Reader and fuller
declaration of his intent and purpose, we shall here set down word for word as
we find it in the said book, whereof we have procured a true copy out of the
original, though with great difficulty, for that no copyes are given abroad but
only to some few confident friends to have a sight thereof, and give their
judgment of the matter.

But yet before we set down the said Preface we may note the falsity of these
first words of our brethren, affirming the book to be entitled: The high
counsel of Reformation for England, etc. whereas it is only entitled; A
memorial for Reformation, etc. containing certain notes and aduertisments,
etc. gathered, and set down by R P. 1596. Secondly it is not nor ever was set
out or published (as these men falsely affirm) but is kept in secret to the
author and his nearest friends only, to the end aforesaid. Many foul falsities
and calumniatio^s uttered together.
Thirdly the whole calumniation that follovveth of the old Roman Agrarian
laws pretended thereby to be so firmly established, as no fee simple of
Inheritance shall be left for any English, etc. All this (we say) is so
notoriously false, as the plain contrary is therein to be found. First for that
nothing proposed in this Memorial is firmly established or set down by way of
resolution but only suggested to be considered of, Memorial part. 3. C. 4.
secondly it is both often and expressly provided in this book, that the old
ancient laws customs and uses of England, how so ever some of them may seem
incommodious, and different from other nations in diverse points, yet are they
not easily to be changed or altered, but rather conserved and persited, by
other good things to be added unto them, which being considered, and the
peevish and malign calumniation of these men thereby understood, we shall leave
them to their wrangling and lying humor and so pass to set down the said
promised preface of the memorial whose title is this. The Preface of the author
showing how and why these notes were gathered, and the principal parts to be
treated, etc. 1596.
The notes and observations of this memorial following, The preface of the
Memorial of Reformation.
were gathered and laid together in time of persecution, when there was no
place to execute or put them in ure, and it is now more then 17. or 18. years
past, that the gatherer began first to put some of them in writing, and having
had the experience of the years which have insued since, and his part also of
travel in the Cath. affayre of his country, and seen the practice of diverse
other Cath. nations abroad, he was desirous (in case that himself should not
live to see the desired day of the reduction of England) yet that some of his
cogitations and intentions for the public good thereof might work some effect
after his death, and that thereby other men might be the sooner moved to enter
into more mature consideration of these, and such other like points, yea and to
descend also unto many more particulars then here are set down, for that the
gatherers meaning was only to open the way, The motives and meaning of
gathering these notes of the Memorial.
and to insinuate certain general and principal heads that might serve for an
awaking and remembrance at that happy day of the conversion of our country
unto such persons as shall be then able and desirous to further the common good,
and to advance almighty Gods glory with an holy zeal of perfect reformation,
who yet perhaps may be so entangled with multitude of other business and
cogitations at that time as they will not so easily enter into these, except
they be put in mind thereof by some such memorial, and aduertisments as here
are touched. And what is said in this Treatise for the kingdom of England is
meant also for Ireland so far forth as it may do good, seeing the author
desires as much benefit for Gods service and good of the nation to the one
country, as to the other.

And for that the principal members and branches whom this memorial may
concern are three, Three parts of this Memorial according to the 3. cheef
members of our comm^^vvelth.
to wit, the whole body of the realm jointly, and then the Clergy, and
temporalty apart: therefore the same order shall be observed for more
perspicuityes sake in treating the matters, that are to be handled, according
to these three parts: First of things that appertain to the whole body of the
Realm in general, and then to the Clergy and Laytie in particular, dividing
each one of these two later members into his particular branches also, as
namely the Clergy and spiritualty into Bishops, priests and religious men,
and the laytie or temporality into the Prince with his counsel, the nobility
and commons, making of every one of these chief members their particular
Chapters also a part, as in prosecution of this Treatese shall appear.

And to the performance of this, Two point^ of encoragment to the gatherer.
the author was encoraged especially by two points, which for diverse years he
has been persuaded in; the first that God will most certainly at his time
appointed restore the realm of England to the Catholic faith again, as may
appear by the evident hand he holds now in the work: the other that England
being once converted may be made the spectacle of all the world, and an example
of perfection to all other Catholic countries and churches round about it, if
want of zeal and good will do not hinder it, in those that God shall bring to
see that blessed day, which the gatherer of this memorial hops will not. And
with this hope he sets down the notes and aduertisments ensuing.



This is the Preface verbatim, and by this you may in part conceive of the
Authors whole drift and meaning, which he prosecuteth afterward according to
the former three parts, to wit of the whole body jointly, and then of the
Clergy, Churches, schools and universities particularly, and lastly of the
laity or temporalty, making 10. Chapters of the first part, 7. of the second,
and 5. of the third, proposing diverse and sundry most excellent observations
concerning each one, quite contrary to all that, which his detractors, do here
or else where set down or insinuate upon mere suspicion, conjectures and upon
the very name or hearing of this book without reading or seeing it, only to
contradict his endeavors, whom they have neither virtue nor ability to imitate.

It were over long and not standing with our purpose of breuity in this place
to allege (as we might) many excellent places out of this memorial for our
comfort, yet some few pieces shall we touch as it were for a taste, and to
discover these men's malicious envying humor. The first Chapter of the first
part has this inscription. Some special reasons why England above all other
Realms ought to procure a perfect reformation when time shall serve, etc. And
then it follows in the Chapter thus:

If ever nation under heaven were bound to show themselves grateful to almighty
God, The first chapter of the first part of the Memorial.
and turn heartily and zealously unto him, and to seek his highest glory by a
perfect reformation of their country, when his divine Ma. shall open the way,
it is the English nation for these reasons following.

First for that no other nation in the world, Favors of God.
on whom God has laid the scourge of heresy has received so many helps and
graces to resist the same, as England has done, which is evident by the
multitude and valor of English Martyrs, by the fortirude and zeal of so many
and such confessors, by the constancy, patience, and fervor at home, by the
store of Seminaryes abroad, and by the seruent spirit of priests brought up in
them and by many other favors and privileges used toward the English nation
in these our days. All which do require an extraordinary demonstration of
forwardnes in English Catholics when the time shall serve, to be answerable in
some sort to these extraordinary benefits.

This is his first reason, whereunto he adds 4. more of no less moment, which
we notwithstanding are forced for brenityes sake to pretermit, our intention
being only to give a taste, both of the argument handled in this book, and of
the manner how it is handled, yet for that the fourth reason being further
considered by us, seems to bear with it an evident demostration as well of F.
Persons sincere and plain meaning as also of his good opinion of these priests
that now make so many clamors against him, we are induced to set it down also,
being written, as is evident, before these broils fell out. Wherefore let us
hear if you please his words.

Fourthly (says he) the facility and commodity that there is and will be in
England to make this perfect reformation, whenever God shall reduce that
country does greatly conuite and oblige us to the same, for we shall not find
that difficulty and resistance by the grace of God in England, F. Persons hope
of English priests.
which good men do find in diverse other Cath. Countries,for bringing in of any
reformation that is attempted, and that which the very Prophets found ever
among the Jews, and that Christ himself did find among the scribes and
pharasyes, to wit, the repugnance, of corrupt, perverse and stubborn people
that will contradict and resist their own benefit; we are not like to find (I
say the infinite mercy of our Savior be blessed for it) either backward bishop
or dissolute priests, or licentious religious men or women, to oppose
themselves against so holy a designment, as this our reformation is; or if any
one such should creep in among the rest, he would not dare to show himself,
nor should he find followers: all is now zeal and integrity in our new
Clergy: (almighty God be thanked for it) and no less in our laity and
Catholic gentlemen of England, that have borne the brunt of persecution for so
many years; so as if we should want the effects of a true and sound
reformation at the next change again, it would be for want of some zealous men
to solicit and procure the same. For on the behalf of the Realm and
Country I persuade my self most certainly, that there will be no difficulty
which ought to animate such as feel the zeal of gods glory within their
breasts to join hands together (as S. Luke says all Apostolic men did in
the primative Church) and each one to seek above other to have a part in the
happy procuration of so holy and important a work.

These are his words. And by this now may any man consider what evil mind F.
Persons had in gathering these notes of Reformation, and whether he were
deceived or no in his opinion and hope of these priests good concurrance therein
that impugn so fearsely now the very name of Reformation, saying that it was
made to put Jesuits in government, whereas throughout the book we find not so
much as once any mention to be made of them, but all the high Counsel of
Reformation (as scoffingly they call it) to be comytted by name to Bishops and
Noble men to be appointed by the Prince and parliament, etc.

The second chapter is entitled thus, The second third and 4. chapter of the
1. part of the Memorial.
what manner of Reformation is needful in England, etc. And the third: How this
Reformation may best be procured, and what disposition of mynds is needful for
it in all parties, etc. And the fourth: How all sorts of people, to wit
Catholics, Schismatiks and heretics may be charitably dealt withal at the next
change of Religion: Which fourth Chapter begins thus, being forced for
brevity to pretermit the other wholly.

After union and good disposition of mind in all, and a hearty reconciliation to
almighty God, will be necessary a sweet, pious, and prudent manner of dealing and
proceeding as well with such as have been friends as enemies, as well Catholics, as
Schismatiks, protestants and persecutors. How constant Catholics are to be
dealt with all Luc. 17.
And as for known Catholics which have been constant and borne the brunt in
time of persecution though for their own parts they ought to follow the most
holy and secure counsel of our Savior: Cum omnia feceritis, dicite quia serui
inutiles sumus, quod debuimus facere fecimus; nothing presuming of themselves
or vaunting over others, but expecting their reward with humility at Gods
hands; yet is it evident, that in all reason and justice and law of gratitude,
they are to be chiefly respected, etc.

Thus he writes with much more of this first sort of men, which we are forced
to pass over for avoiding prolixitie; and no less charitably writes he of
the second sort called commonly Schismatikes, of whom he says thus:

As for Schismatikes or close or weak Catholics that have fallen, Schismatikes
denied, or dissembled their religion, if they have done it of frailty, and
have not been persecutors the more compassion is to be had of their estate, and
the more sweetness to be used in raising and restoring them to the unity of Gods
Church again, etc.

Thus he writes and then shows the best and most pious manner of reconciling
them, and from thence passes to the third point which concerns heretics, as
well such as easily will return, whom he judges most courteously to be dealt
with all, as with those that are obstinate, toward whom, and their reduction
he persuadeth most charity, labor, and patience to be used, standing longest
upon this point of all other. And surely to show the charitable disposition of
this man, most contrary to that which the envy of his emulators do point out
and ascribe unto him we are resolved in this place contrary to our former
purpose to set down some good part of his speech in this behalf which is this
ensuing.

And this (says he) for them that will return, Heretics how to be dealt^
with.
but as for enemies and obstinate heretics, whether they be of malice or of
ignorance, another course seems necessary to be taken for their reduction and
satisfaction, MemorCa.^. Page 37.
which is to endeavor by all ways to convince them if it be possible of their
errors, and this by reason and sweet means, as far as may be, whereof I shall
touch some particulars in this place.

And first of all perchance it would be good considering the present state of
the Realm, and how generally and deeply it is, and has been plunged in all
kind of heresies not to press, any man's conscience at the beginning for
matters of religion for some few years, to the end that every man may more
boldly and co^fide^ntly show his wounds, and be cured thereof, which otherwise
he would either cover, deny or dissemble to his greater hurt and more
dangerous corruption of the whole body. But yet it may be provided jointly
that this toleration be only with such as live quietly and are desirous to be
informed of the truth, and do not preach or teach, or seek to infect others And
by experience it has been seen that this kind of suffering and bearing for a
time has done great good and eased many difficultyes in diverse towns rendered
up in the low countries, which being mitigated at the beginning with this
entrance of clemency never greatly cared for heresies afterward.

This is the beginning of his discourse, whereof he adds afterward many
reasons, and sets down also diverse means and ways in particular, how
heretics might best be persuaded or convinced, whereof one is, free, public
and in different disputation to be granted them, with most equal and sure
Laws and conditions, whereof he says thus.

But for conuincing their understanding in matters of controversy, A public
disputation with the heretics.
I could wish that a plain contrary course were taken by us toward them, from
that which they have used toward us, seeing that our cause does bear it, which
is of contrary state and condition to theirs, for whereas their cause being
false and infirm, they would never consent to come to any indifferent trial or
disputation with the Catholics, I would wish, that seeing our cause is true and
substantial, and the more it is tried, the more it will appear, that once at
least at the beginning full satisfaction were given by all English Catholics to
them, and all other heretics of the world, by as full free, equal and liberal
disputations as possibly could be devised within our Realm, etc.

Thus he writes, and then sets down diverse particulars about the means,
laws and conditions that might be prescribed for the good preformance of this
affayre, co^cluding in these words.

And thus much for gayning of those, Page 51.
that have been deceived by error, and are of good nature, and think they do
well, and do hold a desire to know the truth and follow the same, and finally do
hope to be saved as good Christians, and do make account of an honest and true
conscience, though they be in heresy, etc.

So says he, and much more which we omit; and by this we may see in part this
man's disposition, and that he resolves nothing of himself, but only
propounds to be taken or left in part or in whole, as shall be thought best.
And thus much for a taste of the first part of this Memorial.

The second part of this work concerns the Clergy, The second part of the
Memorial.
containing Bishops, Priests, Churches, universities, and religious orders both
men and women; and has this title to the first Chapter thereof: Of the Clergy
in general, Page 1^6.
what they are, and ought to do at the next change, and how soundly to be
united with the laytie, etc. which Chapter begins thus.

Having to speak of the Clergy in general which God from the beginning of his
Church vouchsafed to name his own portion, for that they were dedicated more
peculiarly then other men to his divine service, and our Savior to call them by
the most honorable name of the light of the world and sale of the earth, The
name of^ Clergy.
the first point of all to be remembered unto them, seems to be, that if ever
there were a time wherein the effect of these names were needful to be showed,
and put in execution, it will be now at the beginning of our countries next
conversion, whose fall and affliction may perhaps in great part be ascribed to
the want of these effects in former times past, etc.

And furthermore it may be considered, that the State of the Clergy in
England after our long desired reduction and happy entrance of some Cath.
Prince over us, and after so long and bitter storm of cruel persecution, will be
much like unto that which was of the general Church of Christendom in time of
the first good Christian Emperor Constantine the great, The state of the
church in Constantines days.
after the bloody persecutions of so many infidel Tyrants that went before him
for three hundred year together, at what time as God on the one side provided
so many notable, zealous and learned men for the establishing of his Church as
appears by the three hundred and eightene most worthy Bishops gathered
together in the first general counsel of Nice, so on the other side the devil
ceased not to stir up amongst the Clergy of that time diverse and sundry
divisions, emulations, contentions, some of indiscreet zeal against such as
had fallen and offended in time of persecution, and some other grounded upon
worse causes of malice, emulation and ambition, tending to particular interest,
whereby both that good Emperor in particular and all the Church of God in
general were much troubled and afflicted, and many good men scandalized, and
God almighties service greatly hindered, and the common enemy comforted.

And considering that the times, men, matters and occasions may chance to fall
out very like or the same in England whenever it shall be reduced to the
Catholic faith again, great and special care is to be had, least semblable
effects should also follow to the universal prejudice of our common cause.

Wherefore this ought to serve as a preparatiue both for our Prince and people,
to put on the same pious and generous mind that Constantyne did, A
consideration for the prince and people.
to bear patiently with the infirmityes of men, and remedy all matters the
best he may, and the people, but especially priests to beware of like deceyt of
the devil, and among other things if perchance in time of persecution cause
has been given or taken of offense or disgust between any persons whatsoever,
that have labored in Gods service and do tend al to one end, to procure
effectualy now, that it be altogether cut of, and put in oblivion, and this
especially amongst the Clergy, and by their means also amongst others. And
if there should be any unquiet or troublesome spirit found, that under any
pretense would sow, or reap, or maytaine division, that the holy Apostles
counsel be followed with him, which is to note and eschew him to the end that
all may join cheerfully and zealously to the setting up of this great and
important work of reformation. And thus much for concord.

This is his beginning of the second part, and conform thereunto is the
prosecution thereof, showing in the second and third chapters how bishoprics,
deanryes, and other chief prelatyes ought to be provided with the first and
what manner of men are to be procured for them. And whereas some of these
calumniators, have given out and written also in books, that this father would
first destroy the ancient subordination and hierarchy of the english Church
this is refuted by the very titles of these chapters and much more by his whole
discourse therein, and secondly have affirmed that he would have no clergy man
to have any propriety in any ecclesiastical living, but only to be put to
pensions, this also is evidently false, in Bishoprics, deanryes, Archdeanryes
Canonryes and the like, as may appear in the chapter here mentioned; for that
he persuadeth these first of all to be provided of incumbents and thirdly it is
no less false in particular cures and common benefices, as is clear by that
he suggesteth Cap. 2. for their furnishing with fit men by way of opposition
and trial both for learning and manners. And whereof then think you arose the
calumniations of putting priests to pensions? you shall hear it out of the
fathers own words:

I have spoken before (says he) of English preachers to be sent over into the
realm with diligence at the beginning, Cap 3. part. 2. Page 1^7.
allotting to every bishop so many as may be had for that purpose, and that he
deuyde them as he shall think most needful, and that for some years it will be
more commodious perhaps for the public and more liberty for the preachers and
priests themselves to have no appropriation or obligation to any particular
benefices, but ample commission rather for all parts, with a sufficient stipend
to live upon, until things be better settled.

Lo here that which is spoken to great good purpose for some few preachers
only to be free from any particular charge, and this for a while, to the end,
they may attend to all places, is turned odiously by these men to all priests
in general. What will you say of this malicious kind of dealing? but the
narrowness of this place suffers us not to pass herein any further.

There remains then the third part of this book concerning the laytie, The
third perte of the Memorial.
containing the Prince with his counsel, the nobility and communalty, and has
this title in the first chapter thereof: Of the laity and temporalty in general,
and of their agreement, and concurrance with the Clergy most needful for both
their good, the difference also of both their states. And then the Chapter
begins thus:

By that which I have spoken in the first Chapter and second part of this
memorial about Cleargymen, Cap. 1. 3. part.
the difference and distinction may appear, that is betwixt these two
principal branches of a Christian and Catholic comon-wealth, to wit the
Clergy and layty, which is a distinction observed from the very beginning of
Christian religion, The distinction of Clergy and laity.
and the primative Church, as may appear by the first, second, third, eight,
seauenty, and diverse other cannons of the first general Counsel of Nice where
often mention is made of this distinction. Tertul l. de Monog.
And before that again Tertullian a most learned and ancient writer not only
sets down the same distinction of clergy and laymen as received generally
in his time; but shows also, and reprehendeth earnestly the emulation and
envy that even then begone by art of the devil to be in diverse of the laity
against the Clergy, etc.

We cannot prosecute the rest at large but only give you a guess what manner
of matter it is, which ensues by the first entrance; and so the next chapter
being of the Prince and the counsel, begins thus:

As the Prince in every commonwealth is the head and heart, About the Prince
and his Counsel. Mem page ^ 227.
from whence all life and vigor principally comes unto the same, so above all
other things is it of importance, that he be well affected and disposed, and so
much the more in England above other countries, by how much greater, and
eminent his authority is, and power with the people, more then in diverse other
places, by which means it has common to pass, that England having had more
store of holy kings in ancient times then many other contreys together, came
to have also religion and piety more abounda^tly settled by their means then
diverse realms about them, etc. Thus there.

The 3. Chapter is of the nobility and gentry beginning in these words: Page
247. Nobility and ge^try. Mem. Page 247.
By the nobility of England, we do understand according to the fashion of other
countries, not only noble men of title but gentlemen, esquyres, knights and
other degrees, that be above yeomen, husband men, and the communalty; in which
inferior sort of nobility beneath Barons (I mean of knights esquyres and
gentlemen) there is not that distinction observed betwixt their degrees in
foreign countries, as in ours, and I take ours far the better, and more
laudable order.

This nobility then and gentry being the cheef members of our Realm, are
carefully to be preserved by our Catholic Prince in their ancient honors,
dignityes, and privileges, and whatsoever injury or disestimation has been
laid upon them these later years by occasion of heresy, it is to be removed,
and particular inquiry is to be made by commissioners appointed by the
parliament, For this purpose, wherein and in what points the nobility of England
has been injured, dishonored or oppressed to the end that supplication may be
made to the Catholic Prince for remedy thereof.

And as the ancient nobility of England in times past came to that dignity in
the commonwealth, and to their credit and estimation, both with Prince and
people, first for their piety and zeal in Christian religion, and secondly for
their fidelity and valor in service of their prince and country, so their
heirs and posterity must conserve the same, by the self same means, etc. And
so he follows on with many other considerations which we pretermit.

The 4. Chapter of this part is entitled; Of the Innes of Court and study of
the common laws, The Innes of Court and study of laws.
with diverse considerations also about the laws themselves, etc. About which
subject diverse important points are suggested for making that study to flourish
with more honor and profit of the weale-publike and the students good.

The 5. Chapter is; The communalty Mem. Page 283.
Of the common people of England, and how greatly they are to be cherished and
made of: which Chapter begins thus: The communalty being the body and bulk
of the Realm, and those that sustain the poyse and labor of the same, they
are greatly to be cherished, nowrished, esteemed and conserved; and next after
the planting of true religion and knowledge of God, great care is to be had of
their en^itching, for that as Constantius the Emperor was wont to say, the
princes true treasure, are the coffers of his subjects, and especially of the
communalty, who if they be poor, and needy can neither pay their landlords
nortil or mannure their ground, nor help the Prince in his necessityes.

And by the communalty in this place I understand laboring nun, seruingmen,
husbandmen, yeomen, aertificers, citizens, and merchants, all which labor and
^oyle to the end that others may live in rest. And in England their condition
(as before I have touched) was wont to be more prosperous and happy, then in
any country else of the world besides, and may be again by the grace of God,
with the restoring of true religion, the loss whereof brought not only
spiritual, but also temporal misery upon us all and our Realm, etc.

Thus writes he there, laying down many excellent means for comfort of this
communalty, which we will not prosecute in this place for breuityes sake, nor
say any more at all of this whole book or Treatese, but only remit our selves
to the judgment of the indifferent Reader to guess by this little he has seen
what manner of matter, and with what piety, moderation, and tender love of our
country the whole is written; which these men so spitefully do malign and
cauil at. And this shall be sufficient for a taste of this fourth book.

Touching the third entitled: About the book of Succession.
A conference, about the next succession to the Crown of England, had in the
year 1593. for that it is in printe, and in the hands of many, and the
contents thereof sufficiently known, we shall need to say less, but only to
note unto the Reader, the like great passion and intemperate folly of these our
brethren, in exclaming now so eagerly against it, which not long ago when they
were in good tune they liked well and highly commended, and whereas it is known
that it came forth with the consent, liking and approbation at least of our
late Cardinal Allen, Sir Francis Englefield and others, the most principal
Catholics of our nation beyond the seas, as by their own hands is yet extant,
what malepert sauciness is this of a few yonglings so bitterly now to inueigh
against it?

And if we will consider the contents thereof we shall more marvel at so
insolent dealing of these indiscreet and rash green heads, Rash ^aucines in
green heads.
deuowed wholly (as it seems) to carp at other other men's actions, though they
understand them not. For what argument (we pray you) could there be more
important, grave, serious, and necessary to be handled at that time when this
book was written (English affairs standing as they did, and do) then the
matter of succession to our crown, whereof both religion and Realm,
spirituality and temporality for the most part depends, especially the
subject of the former book, (for two they are in number) is of such weight and
consideration, and so ought to be with Catholics, as it were irreligious to be
ignorant or careless therein, to wit, that in all pretense and pretenders to
reign over Christians and succession to crowns, The first book of succession.
the consideration of true Cath. religion is the principal point to be
respected, and that this is conform to all laws both divine and humane but
especially to the ancient accustomed laws of our land, and that no good
Catholic may or can dispense with himself or others in this point for any
human respect or consideration whatsoever, which point is so substantially
proved by all variety of learning both ecclesiastical and profane, and by so
many examples and customs of all nations in 9. seue^al chapters, as our
envious brethren cannot turn their hands to answer any one thing therein
contained, though never so much they malign both the matter and the writer.
And this of the first book handling matters in general against heretics and
Atheists.

But the second book of this conference containing ten Chapters passes further
on from generalityes to particularityes setting down all the particular
titles, The 2. book of Succession.
prete^ces, and pretenders which are or may be probably of the blood royal of
our land with an open protestation of all indifferency therein used, without
hurt, hinderance, or prejudice to any, which Protestation for that it wypeth of
all the cauillations which these men or others of their humor do endeavor to
lay against the writer, as though he had penned the same partially in favor of
some particular prince, we have thought good to set his own words down in
this place, which ate these.

Having to speak (says the common lawyer) in this discourse of many princes, A
protestation of the Au^hor.
peers and nobles of the royal blood of England (to all which by law of
nature, equity and reason he affirmed that he bare reverent honor and respect)
and to discuss their several pretentions, rights, interests, and titles to the
crown, he said, that his meaning was, to offend, hurt or prejudice none; nor
to determine any thing resolutely in favor or hinderance of any of their
pretenses or claymes, of what side, family, faction, religion or other party
soever he or she were, but rather plainly and indifferently wihout hatred or
partial affection to or against any, to lay down syncerely what he had heard
or read or of himself conceived, that might justly be alleged in favor or
disfavor of every ^iteler.

Thus writes and protests he, and seeing that whatsoever he puts down in
this affayre, is registered in our own chronicles, and both the authors and
places always cyted by him for his defense, and for the descent of blood and
genealogy in every preson named, and that the objections and arguments to and
fro in every pretense and pretenders are laid forth clearly without partiality,
we do not see what reason or probability in the world our discontented priests
can have (if they be Catholics) so intemperatly to exclayme against this book,
which in the judgment of far wyser Catholics and more disappassionate then
themselves was most needful at that time, when it was written, and is greatly
profitable now and will be most of all hereafter for so much as the first part
thereof opens men's eyes to se their due obligation to religion above all other
respects and considerations, The effects of the two books of succession.
and the second showing the variety of pretenders together with their reasons
and propinquityes of blood and other pretenses, and gives more scope to the^
that shall have to do therein, that if the said due circumstance of Cath.
religion be not found in one, it may be sought and preferred in another, which
is no small help and comodity to right meaning consciences.

And thus much now being opened and declared, we would ask of these our out
cryars, what they have in reason to say or reply in this case? They tell us in
diverse places of this last libel of Important Considerations, and other where,
that the writing of this work is greatly misliked and thought prejudicial; and
that for this cause that one M. Paget (a cheef man of their crew) has answered
the same, About M. Pagets answer to the conference about succession.
which makes us somewhat to marvel. For albeit we have seen a certain vain
pamphlet set forth about this matter, and said to be printed at Colen 1600.
(others think rather at Paris) Entitled: A discovery of a conterfes
Conference, etc. And though we doubt not much of M. Pagets affection in these
affairs, neither of his desire to contradict the supposed author of the said
book of succession (as you may well perceive) by that we have alleged more
largely in our Apology:) and albeit on the other side we easily persuade our
selves that the writers of this last railing and heretical libel of important
considerations do know sufficiently who was the true author of the forsaid
foolish pamphlet for the good intelligence they have one with another of that
contradicting company, yet hardly can we yield to think so basely of M. Pagets
wit (howsoever his will be) that so contemptible a thing should come from him
and his pen: we would rather think it to be of a certain neighbor of his, of
greater title in learning, but of less discretion and capacity in wit or
reason, whereunto if nothing else yet the very fond and ridiculous title would
induce us which if you will hear it all, A fond title of co^terfeits.
is this: A discovery of a counterfeit Conference, held at a counterfeit place,
by counterfeit Travelers, for the advancement of a conterfet Title etc.
Whereunto if he had added By a counterfeite Catholic or companion, all had been
full of counterfets, and it had fitted both the known vanity of the counterfeit
doctors style, and the quality of his person.

There follows the Preface or Epistle to the author of the Conference, A
foolish preface.
wherein no one thing of moment is handled, but a quarrel picked against him for
not putting down his name, whereunto we may answer with those words of S.
Paul: Romans 2.
Inexcusabilis es o homo, qui iudicas, in quo enim iudicas alterum teipsum
condemnas, cadem enim agis q^ae iudicas. Thou art inexcusable that iudgest
another condemning thy self by judging him, seeing thou do the self same
things wherewith thou find fault in him. The writer of the Conference
puts down his name R. Doleman and whether it be his true name or no, it
little imports, the reason thereof is before by us declared in the next
precedent Chapter. This other pamphleter comes forth without any name at all,
and yet quarreleth with the other, for not putting a name; is not here more
then S. Paul's condemnation against so impudent a cauiller?

But let us pass from a vain and idle Preface to the barren bulk of the
work it self, which is more ridiculous and absurd then the preamble; what do
you think that this discouerer has performed in his whole little barking
pamphlet against the forsaid book? Has he answered (think you) any one reason,
argument, example or discourse therein set down throughout those nynteene large
Chapters contained in the conference? No truly, nor has so much as gone about
to do it. And wherein then does he spend his time and paper in this discovery?
you shall hear breefely, and thereby know the man.

epistle to the Important Considerations:) The author (says he) is so extolled
for sharpnes of wit, Discovery ^ol. 1. Envy against the author of the book of
Succession.
plenty of much reading, cunning in conueyance, abundance of eloquence, and
other graces, as none can find any want or default, etc. Do you not see here
envy accuse and condemn her self?

Secondly he takes in hand, and this in diverse parts of his Discovery to show
that the setting forth of this book could not be with the priuity of the K. of
Spain that is now dead, or he that now reigns, nor pleasing to either of
them, for that it hurts his cause (a very wise and pertinent argument) and
that other betrer means might have been devised (if he forsooth, and his
fellows had been called to counsel) for the aduauncment of the K. honorable
designs, Folly and flattery.
services and offices (for so are his words ( Marry (says he) in ordine ad
Deum and vsque ad aras, and more then this I am sure (quoth he) so good a king
will not require, etc. Do you se how careful this discouerer is to hold good
opinion with the K. of Spain? how desirous to further his honorable designs
and services? in ordine ad Deum and vsque ad aras? shall we think this to come
from M. Paget? We can hardly believe it.

Thirdly he takes in hand to give many grave notes upon Conference, and first
of all he complains that the speakers in the dialogue or conference about
succession, as also the place named by the author are counterfeit as in the
title of his answer you have heard him avouch, which is so egregious a foolery
as nothing can be more, for with this substantial reason he may refute every
thing wherein feigned persons are brought in to speak; and consequently condemn
and reject for counterfeit things, all Plato and Tullyes works written in
dialogue manner, affirming that those their conferences and persons therein named
were for the most part feigned and counterfetted. And is not this also a point
of great wisdom?

Fourthly he finds great fault with this book for that law is not best
uttered by lawyers? or as though to determine weighty controuersyes, the
rediest way were to bring many law books into the place without lawyers to
expound them? Who sees not the cauilling vanity of this man?

Conference whereof he infers; that the intention of the writer is (when time
shall serve in England) to have the civil law of Caesar (for so his words are)
preferred before the ancient municipal laws of our Country; which municipal
laws he affirms Pope Eleutherius to have appointed to Lucius king (says he)
of all the great Britany and to have commanded this at the request of the
Brytish nob^lity and people (above 1400. years past) that Caesar's civil laws
should be Abolished, etc.

Mark here (we beseech you) the learned discourse of our wise Doctor, because
the ciuilian speaks first and more largely in the first book of the
Conference, and contrary wise in the second; and for that the said first book
is before the second book therefore he infers, that the writer had a purpose
to prefer the civil law before the temporal. Many ridiculio^s ab i^dityes of
the disco^erer.
Is he, not worthy a doctorship (trow you) that so reasons? As for the
second point about Eleutherius the Pope that he appointed K. Lucius to banish
Caesar's civil laws and to plant municipal laws, or that these municipal laws
that now are in England (brought in principally by the Conque^oun and increased
since by acts of Parliament, as all men know) were in Britany in Pope
Eleutherius his time; or that K. Lucius, was king of all the great Britany as
here is a^ouched unto us; or that the said K. Lucius or his nobility did
demand these municipal laws at the Popes hand, as this wise discouerer
affirms, these things (we say) being such strange noueltyes as they are,
required some proof, at least at the Doctors hand, if he will not be held
ridiculous, as most of these things are alleged by him: but citing none at
all, every man will judge of him accordingly.

Discou. Page 10.
The temporal lawyer for his part must follow an echo, not between two hills
upon stoppage of breath for modesty and fear but in plain fields not subject
to rebounds boldly without blushing to correspond, Most fond complaints.
etc. Consider here a very grave complaint for that the temporal lawyer is
made to answer and allow the Ciuilians speech. But hear yet a much grauer and
earnest against the travelers which being present at the speech do speak also
themselves sometimes for varietyes sake telling the lawyers what seems best
to them; which thing greatly misliketh this wise discouerer, for which cause he
writes thus against it.

Furthermore (says he) the trauailers for their parts must help the credit of
these lawyers, lbid. Page 1^.
by a coople of od shifts, else all wilnot go straight, for by the means of
their ranging throughout diverse countries we must have a common opinion settled
eurey where, that all is true which these two have said, and agreeable to the
laws of nature; and consequently the common ^ame of their horrible blasts
must^course both air and earth, etc. This is his complanit for that point.

In the seventh place you are to ponder certain notes of That the Queen must
seem to be put in security for her time (for these are the words of his
marginal note) and from that he passes to other matters of like substance and
quality, as may appear by these other marginal notes following, to wit, first,
Discou. Page 20.
that the writer of this conference, neither profits the king nor the common
cause by discourse of succession. And then again to the same effect he makes
this other annotation: The disseruice done to the king by this Conference. And
yet further in another margent: Ibid. Page 22.
The book of Conference was not printed with the late Kings priu^^y or liking:
And yet againe^ This author and lawyer do mock and abuse the K. of Spain. By
all which you may see how dutiful a servant to the K. of Spain this discouerer
would make himself, Great profession toward the K. of Spain his s^ruice.
which yet lying in Paris, we marvel much that he would profess so openly,
as also how he will like of these confederates of his faction now gone thither
out of England (we mean the revolted priests) who in all their late books and
libels do band against the said king and show egregious hatred and enmity
toward him.

But each one of these good fellows speaks for himself and for the time
present, and as it stands best for him at that instant, having no other union
or agreement with his follows but to impugn a third: and all their barking
is, but as of little whelps, against them that pass athwart them; and when
all is done they may be gotten again with a bit of bread. And we have seen a
letter of one of them written from Paris to Spain not long since, wherein he
offers that if he might have but 4. or 5. Crowns the month from that king,
he would be content as before. And we have the original letter to show if need
be, though for this time we will conceal his name.

And the like may you presume of this eager discouerer, that if any least
commodity might be had from Spain or else where he would quickly bite at it
(as he did while it was to be had) though for the present, they say he is most
busy and earnest in Paris to set forward the seditious that seek to lay the
foundation of their favor and credit, as well in England, as with the K. most
Christian by professing auersion from Spain; and this is thought a wise
politic course by them, but the end will prove all. And so we return to the
treatese of our counterfeit discouerer again.

succession. For to speak nothing of the second book wherein matters are treated
historically for the most part what more weighty or important matters can be
handled about the right and interest, of the succession of any crown then is
treated in the first book by the author of the conference, Great and importa^t
points handled in first book of succession.
as for example, whether government ^e by law of nature, divine, or humane? how
monarchies and kingdoms were begone and continued, and by what right? how great
and high reverence is due unto Princes? and yet how in some cases they may be
restrained or chasisted by the common wealth? what interest Princes have in
their subjects, goods, lands and lives? How oaths made unto them do bynd, and
what oaths princes themselves (as namely those of England) do make in their
coronation to the common wealth and how far they bynd? What is due to only
succession by birth or propinquity of blood without other needful circumstances
concurring therewith? what are the principal points which a Catholic and godly
commonwealth ought to respect in admitting or excluding any pretender to a
crown or Principality, and how grievously they do sin that neglect these
considerations, for interest fear negligence, or other humane respects, etc.

All these and diverse other most worthy and weighty points are handled in the
first book only of the conference (to say nothing of the second, which is yet
of more variety) with great abundance and store of proofs, arguments, and
demonstrations, whereof no one at all is answered, or so much as touched by this
discouerer, but only certain impertinent trifles, as has been said, and thereby
is discovered his own weakness, and his folly displayed. And yet to the end not
to seem wholly to say nothing he stands finally upon two fond calumniations:
the first: that the conference conteyneth popular Ibid. Page 18.
And hereof he gives certain vain and foolish examples of Antonio Perez, Two
ridiculo^s cauils.
that raised some trouble against the K. of Spain in Aragon, and of George
Buchanan in Scotland, and of the Prince of Ore^ge in Flanders, etc. But this
cauil is answered at large in the third Chapter of the said first book of
Conference and others that ensue, showing that there is no reason why the
lawful, grave just, and orderly proceeding of true subjects and moderate common
wealths against pernicious or unlawful princes should be stained or their just
authority left them by all law both divine, and humane, should be denied, for
that some wicked and trooble some subjects have against law and order
misbehaued themselves against their lawful princes.

The other cauil is, that this conference is injurious to the king of Scotland,
The 2. cauil more malicious about the K of Scotland.
with whom the discouerer would gladly get some credit by malicious impeaching
of others, and to this end he notes in his margent these words: The authors
extreme malice against the king of Scotland. Ibid. Page 14.
But whether this lightheaded discouerer does show himself more malicious in
setting down so malignant a marginal note, or the author of the conference in
writing so tempera^ly and reverently, as he does, as well of the king of
Scotlands pretense to England, as of all other princes and pretenders to that
crown besides, let the indifferent reader be judge. Sure we are that in
reading over that part which touches his Majesty of Scotland, we never
discovered any the least malice at all in the writer, but rather a very
indifferent mind to have the uttermost right of every man known without
offering wrong or injury to any; according to which indifferency the said king
of Scotlands title is set down in the very first place in that book as first
and cheef pretender among the rest, neither is there any one thing emitted (to
our knowledge) that truly and rightly may be said or added in setting out of
the same title. And when the exceptions made by the opposite pretenders against
him are declared, nothing is avouched, which is not openly known to be true
neither any thing urged or exaggerated more, then against the rest: neither
does this flattering malignant discouerer so much as object any such thing done
or attempted by the author of this conference, nor can he with any show of
truth so do. And if the said author any where does show less desire of the
advancement of the King of Scots his title toward England (which yet in words
we find not expressed) while he is of different religion from him, and no
Catholic, his Majesty is wise enough to consider that he could not do
otherwise according to the cheef and main principle set down throughout that
book about the necessity of true religion (that is to say Catholic) required
in all pretenders that must or may be admitted by Catholic subjects. Which
principle being granted (as in the Conference it is proved and demonstrated by
all arguments both humayne and divine) to be a most true, Christian, religions,
and necessary principle, it follows (we say) that the author being a
Catholic could not possibly according to the sincerity of that religion
(though otherwise he loving and reuerencing the K. of Scotland never so much)
wish or desire his preferment over Catholics whilst he remains of the
opposite Religion.

Nether can this flattering discouerer, or his mutinous parteners (how desirous
soever of gayning favor) say or do the contrary, if they be Catholics (as
they profess) and have Catholic consciences, and will conform their actions
thereunto, for that all true Catholic doctrine and piety is against them in
this behalf.

And finally whatsoever this maleuolous calumniator does prattle in this place
of the Authors evil affection toward the king of Scotland to grace himself by
another man's injury, yet if he be the man that he is taken for, and that the
author of the Conference be the party, whom the other and his consorts (...)
give out; it is easily seen and discryed by their former doyngs, who do bear
most true good will to that king the one being constant in desyring his
conversion to Catholic religion, and thereby all true advancement, both in
this life, and the next; the other variable up and down, here and there, and
after many windings and turnings and castings about, as offering their services
now to one, and now to another, do now at length fawn upon him for private
interest whom before they most impugned, and this upon bare need, being broken
of, where once they hanged on. And this is sufficient for the present argument
in hand, and for confutation of so fond an answer to the book of Succession.

THEIR FOLLY AND Deceived spirit in persuading themselves to get credit, or
recover that which is lost, with any sort of men, be they friends or enemies
by this their manner of proceeding with clamors and libels.
CAP. VI.
IT is said by a certain spiritual wise man of some others that in their own
sight seemed far more learned and wise then he: obscuratum est insipiens cor
eorum: ^om. 1.
their foolish heart was blinded, not to see and consider (though they were
learned philosophers) that which every simple man of mean understanding being
lightened with Gods grace may see and behold, to wit, that they ran to their
own perdition; which folly also and blyndnes, we fear has so possessed the
deceived spirits of these our passionate (if not possessed) brethren, as we may
say the same words of them: Obscuratum est insipiens cor eorum: for that having
suffered their hearts, to be obscured, and overwhelmed with the perturbation of
envy, emulation malice, revenge, anger, and other like inchauntments and
sorceryes of their souls, yea rather ^uryes (as we may say) of spiritual
madness do rage and run a desperate course of railing and rauing against all
that stand in their way without any respect of persons, state, degree or merit,
or of their own condition, calling, or function, or credit thereof, and have
not so much inward light of understanding or consideration as once to ponder or
weigh with themselves (as it seems) what other men will think of them, or
wether it will turn to their credit or discredit, help or hurt, releef or
ruin, thus to proceed, wherefore to assist them somewhat in this consideration
and to the end that we may lay before their eyes some few points of that which
is most probable to ensue in this behalf, and thereby to stir up their memory
and help their judgment in this contemplation. We shall run over breefly the
cheef parties or persons with whom they may persuade themselves by this their
manner of outeryes and printing libels to gain or loose credit, and to repair
or utterly overthrow their own reputation.

And first of all we may consider of forrayne Catholics in all countries
Christian, The con^ideration of forrayne Catholics what they vvil think and
say.
what they will think of them, when hearing (as they have and do) of the tumults
raised by them here in England, and before in Rome, and other places, which
are now renewed again and more published then ever in other nations, sending
abroad lately their cheef Captains to diuulge the same by their journey through
Flanders, France and other kingdoms and provinces toward Rome as they pretend
and give out, but as we persuade our selves they mean not to go thither
(having done, said and written as they have) no more then they went or sent
thither for prosecuting of their Appeal, when lawfully they might, and should
have done, before his Hol. determination made thereon, but they (as now for
certain we understand) never so much as caused the same to be exhibited in
Rome from them or in their names, and much less prosecuted or proved
according to law, notwithstanding all their clamors and vaunts in the mean
space made here in England as though they had made the same appeal lawfully
and with true intention to follow it, which was not meant in deed, but only to
gain time and liberty, and to persuade simple men that they were out of all
obligation of obedience to their Superiors, whilst that controversy lasted,
and to make a plain delusion of themselves and others.

Well then this is their manner of proceeding hitherto (which is of all
mutinous and seditious people) to make outcryes and great noyses that they have
received great iniuryes and intolerable oppressions, and other like greuances,
and that they will both say do and prove, and yet do mean nothing less, but
only as cursed children to vex their mother and trouble the whole house where
they are, by crying without cause only of stomach and stubbernesse and the more
they are sought to be quieted and appeased by reason, the more they cry and
skrich.

We have hard of their late journey from Dover to Calis, from Calis to Newport
in Flanders The late ^orney of the seditious by Flanders.
where the Popes Nuntio was, sending first a messenger or two before like great
men that dout of their own estate to ask a pasport or safe conduct (consider
how confident these men are in Cath. Countries, that they need such protections
of his Hol. ministers) which being granted, they went thither. And it is to be
noted, that one of their precursors sent before, and falling into the company
of a certain Irishman in the way that went to the Camp., he told him, and by
him others, that he was a Jesuit, thereby to get the greater favor at Cath.
men's ha^ds^ so as you see, that when they are among good Catholics they say
they are Jesuits, and when they are among heretics and other of that humor
they say they are enemies to Jesuits. But now to their dealing at Newport.

First they showed there diverse pasports, Two kind of pasports from England.
the first as of banished men (and this you must think was to serve for
deceauing some good Catholics, and to move them to compassion of their state)
but after being urged they plucked out another much more general and ample full
of favor and privilege to pass how, when and where, and with what they
would; and this was as well for their safty and protection at the ports as also
to grace themselves with all sorts of protestants or other adversaries of
Jesuits or catholic religion beyond the seas, seeing that in Genena also this
pasport would make them very grateful.

Having showed their pasports, they began to deal with the Nuntio of their
affairs, telling him first a notorious^ly, to wit, that the cause why they
durst not come unto him^ without a pasport, nor had dealt with him before, was
for that they had heard him painted our unto them (by some of the otherside you
must imagine) for a severe, inhumane, bitter and tetrical nature (for these are
the words of the Nuntio reporting them afterward) and that now finding the
contrary by experience, they would deal confidently with him: and then
conform to this principle of flattery and false preoccupation they related
unto him many other untruths in like manner no less gross and odious as
this; as for example that many priests in England being of their side and
faction durst not write their mynds freely unto him for fear and terror of the
Archpriest and Jesuits, in which kind of false detraction against those men
they ^o enlarged themselves as though they were the greatest tyrants in the
world, and themselves full innocent, myld and meck creatures not offering but
receiving wrongs and iniuryes, and that for their own parts they were most
ready to conform themselves to his Hol. will and his L. in all points; which
when we saw written these days we remember the lowly answers given by Luther
and his friends at Augusta to Card. Cae^an the Popes legate, registered both by
Coclaeus Surius and others in the year 1520. and what insued after, we will not
forbode in matter of religion (God forbid) but in sedition we see it already,
and God grant the other do not follow also in some of them at length. But let
us return to their dealing with the Nuntio at Newport.

After many complaints the Nuntio at length as a wise man passing over their
clamors, The causes uttered of their tumults
and pressing near the point it self, he urged them to utter the principal
causes of this their so scandalous tumultuation, they resolved all upon two
principally. The first that the Archpriest had taken away some of their
facultyes for small and light causes; the other that he had not given them and
theirs, part of certain alms sent unto him to distribute. The Nuntio
maruayled to hear no greater causes of so great motions, and offerred if this
were all, he would take upon him himself to end the matter, writing back first
to the Archpriest to require his answer, which they accepted of, offering
moreover that two of theirs should go back into England to carry the said
letters, whilst the rest, to wit M. Bagshaw and Bluet passed further to Paris
to confer with certain of their companions there about this matter, and so
the Nuntio accepted all for that time, not being acquaynted with their
deceytful manner of speaking and dealing, nor having understood of their
malicious books printed against Catholics, and the Popes Hol. himself, whereof
soon after their departure he had notice, and consequently he wrote into
England in another style concerning their being with him, then he would have
done (as after he said) if he had been so far privy to their doings and
meanings before. He showed them also an authentical copy of his Hol. Breue of
the 17. of A^gust last past, wherein their whole cause of Appellation is
rejected and decided against them, and they commanded most severely to obey
and to be quiet. And the like also did show to them or their fellows, the
Nuntio in Paris, but all was not sufficient to quiet them or bring them into
order again, having promised (as is likely) to their true patrons in England
to pass further in this stryf.

Wherefore they departing from Newport toward Paris they past by Lisle and
Doway, D. Giff.
and as in the former place they received (you must imagine) no small good
cheer and incoragement from one of their chief Captains residing there,
whose hand and heart is known to be deeply in these broils for many years; so
in the second, to wit, in the College of Doway, Their being at Lile and Doway.
though for treaty, they received all competent curtesy, and were conuited
twice or thrice by the President, Doctors, and other grave men of that house,
yet were they dealt withal notwithstanding plainly, touching their negotiation
and told the truth, and the greeuousnes of that scandalous and sinful action
was laid open unto them, but in vain as it seems, for they uttered by words
no less folly and fury in diverse points, then in their shameful libels is
contained, which being testified by the witness of them that heard them
proves the said libels to be theirs, or at least to be written and set forth
by their consents; From which notwith-standing some of their crew have seemed
of late to disclayme, but these men showing to disauouch nothing we shall attend
to hear what they will do in Rome.

And thus now have we brought our Appellants so far as Paris (for thither
they went from Doway where they are further to demurre upon that they have to
do or how to proceed in their interprise, being cried out of in the mean space
by all principal English Catholics beyond the Sea^ (as we are certainly
informed) for this so horrible a scandal given by them. And if Englishmen do
so, then much more would we have you consider what Catholic men of other
nations abroad in the world (^^^ve began to say) will think and speak of these
men, that have set such a fire and made such a division in our own little
afflicted Church at home, such a one and with so great and dangerous damage
of the public cause of religion, as never they will be able to recompense or
satisfy.

And truly it is strange to hear what is already written up and down through
other contreys about this their affayre and manner of proceeding: For we have
seen letters both from Germany, Flanders, Venice, Rome, Paris, Speches and
reports in other countries of these men's negotiation.
and other places every one telling diverse particulars of them, their journey,
and message: but the common agreeing in this, that they are messengers sent by
the Queen and Counsel of England to the Pope to offer liberty of conscience
upon condition, that the Jesuits with the Archpriest and his friends may be
recalled out of England: others go further (for suspicion you know has no end,
affirming that they are hired to make debate and set sedition, and to divide
Catholics one against another, and finally to be spies against them, both at
home and abroad, and that they are in the way also to be heretics themselves or
worse, etc.

These things are written, related and easily believed by many: and now
consider you, whether this be a good way for our brethren to recover their same
again, which they fondly say was taken from them by Jesuits and the Archpriest
before, while they were quiet, which yet we cannot see how it can be veryfied
in the sight of any wise man, seeing that the little pamphlet of schism (whereof
they most complain as calling them schismatikes, A vain quarrel about the
pamphlet of Schism.
for their first rebellion) though it were somewhat sharp yet was it nether
printed nor published to the world nor did it name any one man in particular,
and was soon after recalled again by the Archpriest upon the first
atonement, and consequently could not be said truly to infame any man, but he
that would name himself to be within the compass of those censures and hard
speeches used therein and cyted by the author out of Church Cannons (for they
are not his words but of the said sacred Canons) against Schism and ^^^^atikes.

But suppose there had been just offense given by that treatese, was this other
a good means (^ow you) to remedy their fame? Was not this according to the
fable of Esope of the fish that leapt out of the frying pan into the fire? But
let us pass from these other countries to Rome it self, and to the censure of
men there, where their cause is like to be tried and ended (and so we wish
withal our hearts) what (think you) will men judge and speak of them there, even
upon the first rumor of these their new styrres? so many having ben made by
them and their fellows there before, and so obstinately maintained by the
chief of these that are tumultuous here now? VVil not his Hol. remember what
passed for three years together almost in that most scandalous tumultuation
of turbulent students in the College? What men vvil think and s^y in Rome.
VVil he not remember the end that ensued, the means that were used, the
manners of the men, and the effects that they brought forth? VVil not the Card.
Protectors, Visitors, and other officers employed by his Hol. in appeasing
those tumults (such we mean as yet are living, and knew how these matters
past) think well of our nation and tell a good tale for these people there, when
they shall hear of their new attempts? VVil not Baronius, Bellarmine, Boscius,
and other learned men, that have written so high praises of our English priests
hertofore, be more then half ashamed now when they shall understand of these
men's wrytings and doyngs to the contrary?

And as for the Roman broils and seditions and other raised afterward else
where by the same men and their consorts there are extant diverse letters, and
wrytings of three principal Card. Ca^tan, Burghesius and Sega the first two
being Protector and viceprotector, whose latin letters these men of mere folly
and vainty have printed of late as testimonies against themselves in their book
entitled Relatio compendiosa turbarum, etc. The third was appointed Visitour
of the said College and tumultuous people by his Hol. that now is. So as all
thre^ being lawful superiors and judges in this preiudicated naughty cause,
their comdemnation against them must needs be of undoubted credit and authority
with all wise and indifferent men.

And for that of the four priests which are said to be in Paris for the
present of these tumultuous, we find two by name in the Catalogue of the said
Card. Sega prefixed before his visitation and entitled Catalogus eorum
alumnorum, qui in Collegi^ Anglicano tumulinantur ann^ Domini 1596. The
troublesome now were tumultuous before in Rome.
A list of the students that are tumultuous in the English College, which are.
Anthony Champney and Francis Barnby, and that a third is found in the register
of the same College to have been expelled by the Protector Card. Boncompagno
nephew to Pope Gregory the xiij. in the year 1585. under the name of
Christophor Bagshaw and that we understand further that many of their other
chief companions remaining in England are contained also in the same catalogue
or list of the Card. Visitour (which list has 38. names) and furthermore for
that moreover the true causes of that tumultuation were the very same which
have been since and are for the present of these of England, to wit, liberty and
freedom from all subjection with hatred of order discipline and superiority,
and that the same men were principally impugned there which are now, to wit the
fathers of the society that held them in order: and besides all this that the
very self same points were pretended then by the tumultuous which are now, to
wit, that the fathers of the Society should be called forth out of England and
be put from the government of the Seminaryes: for these causes and
considerations (we say) though in our Apology Apol. cap. 5.
we have set down some points of this wise and learned Card. Sega his
judgment in this matter so long and diligently handled by him, as well about the
spirit of these our tumultuous people, as also, of their manners and merits, we
think good in this place to ad somewhat more of his deliberation and grave
resolution in this affayre taken out of his formentioned book of visitatio^ of
the College dedicated to his Hol. upon the 14. of March 1596. especially we
shall let you hear what he writes about the two foresaid demaund^ and
petitions made by the troublesome of that time, and renewed now again by these
of ours, to wit the removing of the fathers out of England, and from the
government of the Seminaryes, of which matter he writes to his Hol. thus, in
the 25. Chapter of his book, the title of which Chapter is this: Petitiones
alumnorum tumultuantium, etc. The petitions of the troublesome scholars
together with the breef answers of the fathers, etc.

And here you must note that he had in four and twenty former Chapters set
down all the complaints and accusations of the said tumultuous with the
fathers answers and reproof anexed to every thing objected: and now here in
the 25. Chapter he sets down the exorbitant demands of the said tumultuous
for redress of all of which demands the first is this that follows: An
insolent demand.
Vt amoueantur Patres Soc. non tantum ab Anglia, verum etiam a regimine huius
Collegij Romani: that the Fathers of the Society be removed not only from
England, but also from the government of the Roman College.

This they demanded then, being two cheef points (as you see) in one demand,
though they moderated the second by naming only the Roman College where they
resided: but our tumultuous now not contented with that, go further, and do
demand to have them removed from all the Seminaryes, yea from those also that
were erected by them and their peculiar labors. But what answer does the said
Card. Visitour set down of the Fathers made to this demand, you shall here it
in his own words and we shall recite them first in latin to the end the Reader
may see the pure and elegant style also of that learned man besides his
wisdom, piety and experience. Thus then he puts down the fathers answer.

Ad hanc petitionem nihil aliud respondent Patris, Card. Seg a invisitat.
Colleg. Angl. Anno. 1596. ^ Cap. 25.
quam vt sua S. prosua prudentia ac voluntate statuat, quod maxim ad
Deigloriam expedire iudicauerit: Societatem enim non sponte sua, sed nonnulla
etiam reluctatione, iubente sede Apostolica, vtramque hanc prouinciam ab ^nitio
suscepisse, maximisque deinde laboribus, molestijs, periculis, and sanguinis
etiam profusione per viginti fere annos administrasse, cofruct^^, quem omnes
vident; non deesse alia quoque alibi loca vbi suam operam S^c. homines vtiliter
etiam ad ^andem diuinam gloriam, eodem Domino cooperante impendant, se nullam
difficuliatem, in vtraque Prouincia di^^^^enda habere; im^ Collegij dimissionem
R. Patrem Generalem aliquoties iam precibus apud S. S. instanter v^sisse ne
tantis molestijs ab ingratissimis his tumultuantibus perpetuo afflictet^r.

These are the very words of that good Cardinal as they ly in the book of his
Visitation; and for more perspicuity to the vulgar reader we have thought good
to put them down also in English thus:

To this petition (says he) the Fathers of the Society answered no other
thing, but that his Hol. might determine according to his wisdom and will, what
he should think most expedient for the glory of God, A modest answer of the
Fathers.
seeing that the Society had not taken upon them from the beginning any of these
two chardges or burdens (to wit, the government of the college and mission of
England) of their own choice or election, but by commandment of the Sea
Apostolic, with some difficulty or resistance of their parts, and that since
that time they have borne and prosecuted the same with great labors,
molestatio^s, dangers, and with effusion of some of their bloods for the space
of almost xx. years together, whereof have ensued these fruits which all men
see by increase of Catholic religion in that realm, and that there want not
other places also in the world where the men of this Society may employ their
labors profitably to the same glory of almighty God by the help of his holy
grace, and that they for their parts have no difficulty at all in leaving both
these charges (if his Holiness will) and that the reverend F. General of their
order had already diverse times most instantly beseeched his Holiness that they
might give over the government of the Roman College, thereby once to be
delivered from so great molestations as he was continually afflicted with by
these most in grateful tumultuous people.

Thus he wrote in this Chapter, Cap. 25.
and then in four other that do ensue he sets down first what the speech
and reasons of the quiet scholars were against these tumu^^ous, Cap. 26.
and then in the next: Cap 27.
what their petitions were for restoring of discipline and good order to the
College overthrown by these men. Cap. ^8.
To which end also follows another Chapter, containing: The petitions of the
Fathers to the same effect. And after that again a distinct Chapter entitled:
Cap. 29.
A catalogue of abuses brought in by these tumults and seditions to the manners
and conversation of the scholars against both study and piety, which of
necessity are to be reformed. Al which Chapter and discourses being ended he
sets down in the 30. Chapter this title:

Quid de tota remihi videatur: Cap. 30.
what is my judgment of all this affair. And then begins he the Chapter
thus: Iam ex ijs quae ab vtraque part prolata hic exhibui no^ solum videt
Sanctitas vestra, in quo statu, res huius, Collegij sint, sed etiam pro sua
singulari sapientia intelligit, quid de tota re statuendum sic, vt me de eadem
pluribus disserere iam non magnopere necessarium videatur, praesertim cum adsit
Illustriss. Card. Caetanus Anglicanae nationis Protector, cuius consilio atque
prudentea facilius, and commodius quaecunque huc pertinent transigi,
explicarique possint. Vetunt amen vt vel aliquam villicationis meae rationem
reddam, cum bona S. vostrae venia, meam de praecipuis huius negotij capitibus
sententiam hoc loco paucis aperiam.

Now (says he) your Hol. does see by those things which I have here laid forth
from both parties not only in what state the affairs of this College do
stand, but moreover by your singular wisdom you will easily consider what is to
be resolved of all, so as it shall not be much necessary that I should use many
words more about this matter especially seeing that the most honorable Card.
Caetan Protector of the English nation is present, by whose counsel and wisdom
all things belonging to English affairs may better and more commodiously be
determined and declared. The judgment and resolution of Card. Sega Visitor.
But yet to the end I may yield some account of my labors in this visitation. I
shall with the good leave of your Hol. lay open also mine opinion about the
principal points of this busynes.

Thus writes he, Cap. ^1.
and then to the next Chapter he makes this title for the beginning of his
resolution: Patris Societatis ex Anglia nullo modo esse reuocandes, vt
tumultuantes censent. That the Fathers of the Society are no ways to be
recalled out of England, as the tumultuous do think expedient. And this point
he proves by many reasons and prudent considerations which we for breuityes
sake cannot allege at length as they ly in his book, Why the Jesuits are not
to be recalled out of England.
but in effect, these are the principal, to wit, that the said Fathers being of
a spiritual body which besides the ordinary helps of secular priests, for
spirit, discipline and

Moreover he adds that the said Fathers being men of learned and virtuous,
who do also the same good offices as occasion is offered, yet are they
principally assisted and helped therein by the said Fathers good correspondence,
etc.

After this the Card: alleges the known fruits of the Jesuits labors,
industry, and piety every where not only in other countries, but also in
England, and in this mission it self and that this demand of the troublesome
comes but of envy, emulation and malice and so concludes: Quis sanus vnquam
dixerit magis indulgendum esse paucorum quorundam improbitati and inuidiae,
quam multorum pietati and industriae? Certe quisquis infoeslicissimo illi regno
Soc. operam aufert, ille plane totius illius terrae salem, imo and
afflictissimae illius Ecc. solemn tollere videtur. What man that is in his
right wits will ever say, that we ought rather to attribute more to the
naughtiness and envy of a few; (troublesome) then to the piety and industry of
so many good men? Truly whosoever goes about to take from that unfortunate
kingdom of England (...) labors of the Society in these days he seems to me
to take away not only the salt of that land, but even the Sun also of that
afflicted Church, etc. Thus wrote he, and this was his judgment both of the
matter and men.

And having thus determined their first demand, he comes to treat the second
in the Chapter following making this title thereunto: Cap. 32.
Patres a regimine Collegij non esse remouendos, vt alumni inquietiores
postulant. Why the fathers ought not to be removed from the gournme^t of the
College.
That the fathers of the society are not to be removed from the government of
the College, as the unquiet students do demand. And then he begins thus:
Quot autem ijdem ^lumni a^rius urgent, vt videlicet a regimine Collegij Patres
amoueantur in eo etiam iuunilis animi impetus, atque vt lenissime dicam
imprudens eorum Consilium agnosco. That which the selfsame troublesome
scholars do urge most eagerly to have the Fathers removed from the government
of the College, in this point also I do discover both the rashness of their
young mynds (and to speak most temperatly) their imprude^t counsel, etc. Thus
says he for which he alleges many particular reasons and testimonies also
of principal English men that are no Jesuits whose judgments and opinions about
this point of the fathers government he had required by letters as well from
England, as Flanders Spain and other places, who all agreed, that it was
neither convenient nor possible (without overthrowing all) to deprive the
Seminaryes of the Fathers government and assistance. And as for reasons he
alleges diverse, saying among the rest, thus:

Si impotenti and lubricae isti aetati fraena laxentur, vt in sua manu positum
esse sentiant a quibus velint ipsi gubernari, quorsum res tandem euasura sit,
quis non videt? If the bridle of matters should so be let loose unto this
impotent and britkle youth, so as they should understand that it lay in their
hands to be governed of whom it pleases them; who does not see whether the
matter would come at length? to wit, every day to change their Superiors, and
demand new masters, teachers, and the like. And then he demands them where
they would find so many sufficient and expert priests both able and willing to
take the labor to govern so many Seminaryes, both in Rome, Spain and
Flanders? Diverse other reasons and considerations he alleges which we are
forced for breuityes sake to omit; But thus you see their two principal
demands decyded negatiuely.

But yet he rests not here, but goes further to treat of the remedy and
reformation of the troubles raised by those seditious, and so frames his
sequent Chapter thereof under this title: Quaenam remediae praesentibus his
tumultibus videantur, adhibendae; nimirum vt seditiosi dimittantur, caeteri
recte instituantur. Cap. 33. what remedies were best to be used for pacyfying
these present tumults, to wit, that the seditious he sent away, and the rest
that remain be well instructed in good order and discipline. Here you see both
the question propounded and answered also in the very title; yet about this
matter he disputes at large with ^n ample discourse putting down first this
ground: praestat proculdubio paucos habere modestes, A ground of the Card for
Reformation.
and docilet quam multos per^icaces and dyscolos, praestat habere nullos, quam
omnino pra^uos. It is better to have a few modest and tractable stude^ts then
many disobedient and dissolute, yea it were better to have none, then
altogether evil.

And the^ passing a step further, he shows that the way to tame these
troublesome is not to grant them what they desire, or to remit any thing in
discipline for their outcryes: nisi forte dicamus (says he) equi faerociter
lae^ciuientes impetus, detractis penitus frenis facilius atque commodius posse
cohiber^. Except perhaps any man would say, that the most easiest and
commodious way to tame the fury of violent wanton colts, were to take quite
away their bridles and let them run and do what they list. Lo his opinion
being a stranger unto us; and what coltish behavior he saw in some of our
troublesome at that day to make him have this conceyt is easy to guess.

But what would he say now, if he were alive to see some elderly horses also
become col^s again, and ferociter lafciuientes, fearcely wanton? would he not
give counsel (think you) not only to put on bridles and sadles, but also good
spurs for their better taming?

And this if we respect their merits and deserts, but as the same good
Cardinal notwithstanding all this, when he comes to put down his judgment in
particular how the said tumultuous should be dismissed and sent away, he
persuadeth it to be done with all sweetness and gentle usage; so would he do no
doubt in this other case of our new turbulet crew, if he were in Rome at their
arriual these. And the like course by all probability will his Hol. according
to his accustomed clemency take with them, According to his accustomed clemency
if they go thither; and so we all do most earnestly desire and that all may be
well and soundly examined and ended.

And yet to prosecute the argument of this Chapter somewhat further, to the
effect we have begone, we cannot but advertise our said brethren of their great
folly and indiscretion in taking this course of clamors in their way toward
Rome for ^ecouering as they pretend their same, nothing being more opposite and
contrary theirunto then to profess a cause so many ways rejected, and
condemned there already as partly by his Hol. own Breues, partly by this Card.
sentence of visitation, you have already heard, especially they adding
publicly two circumstances, which must needs with his Hol. make their matter
far worse.

The first, that whoras in the former styrres of Rome, 1. Naughty circumstance.
it was but suspected that heretics and the common enemy had secretly their
hand therein, and were either ayders or abetterers to make those demands of
removing Jesuits from England and from the Colleges, now it is openly known
and confessed, that they are the cheef dealers and styrrers thereunto.

The second not much unlike to this, is, 2. Wicked circumsta^c^.
that whereas in the former broils of Rome, some of the troublesome did under
hand only and by indirect means seek to bring in some princes Ambassadors, to
favor their sedition by making it a matter of State, as though they had been
contradicted only by men depending of Spain: now these our brethren do
manifestly in the sight of all the world attempt the same seditious course, by
running to ^aris, and seeking to inform falsely his most Christian Majesty
that he has interest in their tumultuations, and that it is a matter of State
for him to favor them, for that they oppose themselves against Spaniards and
Jesuits devoted to them, Which unchristian devise, tending to set Christian
princes together by the ears about our country affairs, as it cannot be but
odious to God and all good men that hear of it, so above all other it is
injurious to his Holiness whose spiritual authority and ordinations are drawn
by these men to matters of state (as we have before both in the Apology, and
this book noted) about his Hol. institution of the Archpriest maliciously
drawn by them to matter of Praemunire, and no less malicious is this to
entangle now their obedience to wards his Holiness with interest of secular
princes.

For we would ask them here seriously in all law of reason or honesty, A
point to be considered of tumultuous proceeding.
what can it concern the state, either of the King of France or Spain, that
these men should obey or disobay the Ecclasiastical substitute of his Holiness
in England? Is this to be made a matter of state by these new Statists? is this
a thing to intrecat secular Princes and monatches with all? no truly, but only
where there is intent to set sedition, and to put in garboyle and variance
secular princes with the Pope, and thereby themselves to be free to say and do
what they list under the protection of some of those princes abused by them, as
Martin Luther and his parteners did under the protection of Frederick Duke of
Saxony when they meant to be tumultuous, and to break with the Pope himself,
protesting on the other side no less obedience then these men do now, though
we hope these mean better, but the course is not unlike nor other effects
hitherto.

These points then and circumstances (as we said) his Hol. of his wisdom
cannot but consider; and then hearing furthermore (as is probable he either
has or will do) of their bold and intemperate speches uttered already in their
books^ as that his Holiness could not appoint them an Archpriest without their
consent, and that in doing so he did against the Church Canons, warning him
also very presumptuoufly of his da^nger of damnation thereby in those words of
the scripture, Lib. Copies of discoutles.
Qui amat periculum, peribit in eo. He that loves danger shall perish therein;
affirming moreover, that they had sufficient power to examine and demurre not
only upon the Cardinal Protectors letters, as they did, though written in his
Holiness name expressly, ^ope of Peace.
but upon his Holiness letters also them selves if they had come from him, etc.
And conform to this when his Breue came, they saying thereof; that they knew
not out of what shop it was procured. And then further, Relat. Pa. 57.
that his Hol. was not endewed with the worthy gift of the holy Ghost, termed
discretio spirituum, when he made his deputation to the Card. Protector for
ordayning the Archprist, etc.

And then again, Import Consid. Page.11.
that his Holiness was deceived in sesting up the Archpriest, as Pius 5. was in
his fact against her Majesty, and that it was no unusual thing with Popes so
to be deceived in matters of fact, etc. And yet moreover; that the Archpriest
is an vs^rp^r in the behalf of the Sea of Rome, Imp. Consid. Page 20. 21. 22.
that F. Campion M. Sherwyn and other martyrs ought plainly and reseluttly to
have professed to stand against the Pope if he should move arms for religion,
and not hold their peace or eschew the question as they did, etc. That his Hol.
has no authority. to move war for religion against any temporal prince
whatsoever, or for whatsoever cause or pretense, etc. And that they will oppose
themselves against him if he should come in person in any such attempt, and
that they will also reveal whatsoever they shall come to know therein. Imp.
Consid. Page (...)
And finally that all the hurts, damages, losses, deaths, rackings and other
calamityes hitherto suffered by Catholics in England are to be laid not so
much upon the persecutors, as upon the rash, unlawful and inconsiderate doings
and wrytings not only of Englishmen, but especially of Popes themselves, as
Pius 5. Gregory the 13. Syxtus Quintus. and now this Pope, for concurrance in
this last attempt in Ireland, etc.

When all these things (we say) shall be read, heard and understood by his Hol.
and that they profess to do this for recovering of their good names and credit
both with his Hol. and others abroad, you may easily guess what will be thought
of them, and what opinion will be conceived both of their affection and wisdom
in choosing such means to obtain their purpose. And so much shall suffice for
Rome and foreign nations and countries.

And now it shall not be amiss to return to England again, and to consider
what credit or reputation, they can gain there, by this their manner of
proceeding. For first with Catholics who does not see the infinite iniuryes
which they have done them and do lay daily upon them, Their credit with
Catholics.
by discrediting so much as lies in them, both their cause and persons, and
that with all sort of men both at home and abroad; Their cause, in that they
would persuade the whole world that all is sedition; conspiracy and rebellion
among them, and not matter of religion: Their persons in that they make them
the true authors and occasioners of all their own troubles, vexations and
damages by their own indiscreet and temerarious actions, as has been said.
They justify also the cause of the persecutors and do lay the fault upon the
presecuted: and what greater iniuryes can be offered then these:

Moreover by these their later books and libels (they discovering notoriously,
their passion venom of stomach, indiscretion, intemperance, lack of conscience
modesty, shame and other such points, as are evident to those, that read their
said books) this cannot but work in all Catholics whose mynds are holylie
bent, and endued with the contrary virtues a great disreputation and auersion
from them. We pass over their follysh speches used como^ly against all
Catholics, whom they think not to favor them (which are in effect all)
calling them, Epist. to Imp. Consid. Page 17.
mad dogs, set on by Jesuits to bark and byte and devour their dear ghostly
Fathers, etc. And then again a little after in the same place: VVheras (dear
Catholics) many of you do account us disobedient, true it is that we are so,
and a pious vvish.
would to God that you were so likewise. You infer heervpon that we are
factious, seditious rebellious, malcontents, schismatiks, etc. (mark how good
opinion Catholics have of them by their own confession) but therein you do belly
us by false suggestions, put into yowr green ignorant, passionate,
affectionate, indiscretly zealous heads.

Lo what Epythetons they give them. And in other place they call them, Epist.
Page 8.
fancyful fellows of the new fashion, infected with the Spanish pip,
iniesuitated, and the like. But it little imports what names or co^tumelious
speeches they use toward them in respect of the things themselves, and crimes
objected, and urged against the^, as before has been said, whereby they seem to
labor to overthrow directly (so much as in them lies) the whole merit and
honor of the Cath. cause, and of Cath. men's sufferings, making them not to be
for conscience, but for practice against the Prince and state, a most wicked
and iniurio^s devise practiced principally by Constantius the Arrian heretik,
and Iultan the Apostata as Ecclesiastical historyes do recount. And this is
held for the principal point, wherein these unfortunate men are thought to be
hired by the public adversary in religion to join with them in this Capital
slander against their own brethren and cause confirming herin the reports of
our heretics in foreign countries who tell staungers that no man is troubled
in England for matters of conscience, but all that are punished are chastised
for other delicts: then which unworthy reproach all men of judgment do see that
nothing can be more falsely, s^aunderously or injuriously laid upon our public
cause. For avoiding of which our late good Card. stryued so much in his learned
book against the libel of English justice, as all men know, and these men jest
at and impugn. This then being the effect of these men's labors and endeavors,
and their whole stryse and contention, being to deuyde, disgrace, and
discreedit both Catholics and their cause, we may immagine what credit they are
like to gain with them by these their doings. And so much of this.

But yet further it shall not be amysse to ponder also what reputation they are
like to win at length with the very adversaries themselves, Their discredit
with the adversaries.
who (setting a side the contrariety of religion) being many of them very wise
and discreet men, and of no evil nature and condition (especially of those,
with whom these men are said to deal) they will easily discover the great and
strange passion of these men together with their intemperate spirit, and that
they do not this, they do or say for any love toward them, but for revenge
toward us, not of judgment or affection, but of envy and precipitation, and
there upon it must needs follow that albeit their treason for the time he
admitted yet must the traitors be contemptible; and to this effect have we a
notable story recounted both by Eusebius and Zozomenus of Constantius, Father
to our great Constantine, who was governor, once of England, and perhaps the
fact it self fell out here, and so much the more to be noted by us.

The forsaid two authors do recount, that this Constantius being a notable wise
man, A notable fact of Constantius father to Constantine.
though a heathen, at the same time, when Dioclesian and Maximinian the
Emperors to whom he succeeded afflicted infinitely Chirstians every where, he
(though misliking that extreme cruelty) yet to seem also to do somewhat, for
that he was declared Caesar and successor of the Empire, made an edict or
proclamation, that so many of the Christians about him as would sacrifice to
his Gods should not only have his favor and enjoy honors in his court and
commonwealth, but be used and trusted also by him above other men, and such as
would not, though he meant not to put them to death, yet would he exclude them
from his friendship and familarity, and from all dignityes, etc. This being
done, every man began (say the forsaid authors) to show his affection, some
retired themselves with greef and sadness, some held their peace, some denied
flatly, but none of all these had intention to please the Prince in his
demand: others there were, that thinking by this occasion to win the spurs,
and get themselves credit and authority above the rest, came fawning to
Constantius and his officers, offering to do what he would have them, and
thereby show their true dutyful affections toward his Ma. and the state, with
other such like flattering protestations, A just revvard to flattery.
whereof when Constantius heard, and had considered well of the matter, he caused
them all to be thrust out of his court, deprived them of the honors and offices
which before they had, and the other that had refused of conscience so to do
against their own religion, he willed to be called back from exile, advanced
and trusted above the rest, using that notable wise saying, as Eusebius
recounteth it: Quomodo fidem erga Imperatorem (says he) seruare poterun^
inuiolatam, Eusebius. l. ^. de vita Constatini ca. 4. and 1. Zozom. li 1. Ca. 6.
Eccles. historiae.
qui aduer sus Deum persidi esse manifesto conuincuntur? Quapropter hos procul
a regali suo domicilio statuit ainandandos; illos vero stipatores suos and
custodes regni consti^uit. How can they keep their faith inuiolate toward
their Emperor (says he) that are convinced to be prefidious toward God: (and
their own religion) For which cause he commanded these (that flattered) to be
banished far from his royal palace, and these other (that dealt plainly and
syncerly, though contrary to his will and comaundements) he took them into his
own guard and defense and made them guardians of his kingdom.

Behold here a worthy wise example, which our English magistrates cannot but
remember and think of, and our brethren ought not to forget to doubt rather,
and fear least the like may happen unto them in time. For albeit our
adversaries be content to use them for a time, as for a rod to beat us with
all, and thereby to increase our affliction, yet rods commonly are cast away or
burnt afterward when the turn is served or the occasion past. And this (we
say) in case the Prince and state should mean to punish us more by their
incitation or assistance offered, which yet we hope they do not, but rather (as
noble mynds are wont to do) will conceive the more compassion of our grievous
sufferings by that they see us betrayed also and injuriously vexed by our own,
and if God almighty should at length move their hearts (for which we pray
daily) to harken unto that most honorable and wholesome motion so often
propounded by the best Catholics for some toleration in religion, whereof these
men also do whisper and brag much in corners as they pass through forrayne
countries, as though they were designed Ambassadors for the same, and that at
their demand the matter were in consultatio^: yet do we most certainly assure
our selves, knowing the gravity, honor, and wisdom of our Counsel as We do,
that this is but a vain vaunt; and that when God shall inspire them to harken
to this proposition, they will deal with other manner of men of the Cathol.
party then these, who being divided from the rest, that is from the body, head,
and principal of that cause, can have little credit to treat or set forward any
such weighty affayre, in the name of the rest, being like s^ayles that bear
each one their castle on their own backs, that is having no further
reputation then themselves bear about with them in their own heads and
immaginations, or give it out by their own tongues to such as will believe
them. And so much of this.

There remains to say a word or two of foreign Princes, Their credit with
foreign princes.
whose favor they seek to gain by this their dissenting from their fellows,
as namely with the king of Scotland, to whom they sent first to offer
themselves, as diverse ways we understand, and after that to the K. of France
by their known Agents in Paris, promising to be at his disposition, and to
oppose themselves against all pretenses for Spain, etc. but these are devises
so ordinary in court, and with so great Monarchs as these are (we mean to
offer mountains, and to curry favor by accusing others) that it cannot work
any great impression in them, especially considering how little these men ca^ do
either pro or co^tra in the weighty affair which they pretend about the
succession of England, and this, whether we consider either the protestant
party or the Catholic of our realm, for that with the former they have but
very poor credit hitherto, except they go forward, and with the second perhaps
much less except they turn backevvard; and so for the time they rest between
both, which the wisdom of princes and their counselors will soon espy and
discern; especially his Majesty of Scotland (being very wise as he is
reported) will easily hear and come to know, His May. of Scotland.
that since they dealt with him by their late messengers to offer their
services, they have dealt again another way in England, and have devised a new
discourse about the succession (as we are credibly informed) more to the taste
of some great personages of our State, whose present favor they most desire.

He will ponder furthermore, that if they be truly Catholic as they pretend,
then can they not with a good conscience to God and to their own religion
desire sincerely, and from their hearts, whatsoever they say or pretend, his
Majesty's government over Catholics, except he be of the same religion, which
if it were, then is the desire of his preferment not only theirs, but common to
all Catholics: and if it be not, then are they in the case of those flatterers
of Constantius, whereof we spoke before, and not unlike to be so esteemed by him
as those were by the other, though not so roughly handled. And finally his
Majesty of Scotland will weigh and remember that whatsoever these men do say or
do, they being of so small consideration and credit as they are, and so mutable
as we have showed, and their motives so weak and passionate (as by their own
wrytings and doings appears) no great account is to be made thereof.

And the like may be said of his Majesty of France, who being so great and
potent a monarch as he is, must needs every day have store of such poor
sawning people running unto him for their own interests, but yet with pretense
of offering services against Spain, whom though in wisdom and law of
princely royalty he cannot presently reject, yet considering with maturity of
former points and circumstances, to wit, what they are, why they come, from
whom and against whom? what grounds they have to work upon, to what end they
tend, what they can perform, and other the like, he will quickly both discover
and discard them, for seeing by his wisdom, that to deal much with these men,
can neither be honorable not profitable, as tending rather, to alienate then
oblige, or gain the Catholic party in England. And this will prove the true
event of this action, if we be not deceived, and when they shall have spent in
Paris the good sommes of money which they carried out of England with them, and
shall want the supplies, which now perhaps they hope and expect, and shall hear
from all places (as already they do and will daily more and more) the general
bad opinion that is of them among all good Catholics, both English and other,
they will then begin (if we be not deceived) to see the folly of this bad and
mad course taken in hand, which we beseech God they may so do before it be to
late to amend it. And this is all we shall say of this matter, for the present.

OF FIVE OTHER BOOKS or rather absurd and sclanderous libels come forth since
the answering of the former two; and ten more promised.
CAP. VII.
MOST pitiful it is to consider how the frailty and infirmity of man once
beginning to slide, comes soon after to rush on with violence and
precipitation if stay be not made in time, lik as when a violent river stopped,
or bayed up begins to break forth at a chinke or two and the breaches not
remedied at the first it ouerfloweth all, making a deluge irremediable, even so
falls it out in this disorder of our transported brethren, who beginning to
exceed the limits of modesty and truth upon anger emulation and other such
passionate motyues as before have been mentioned, and not staying themselves
with the consideration either of reason, conscience, or religion, have now made
such an open breach to all licentious liberty of vnshameful railing, and being
(as the prophet says) de^rita front have so inured both tongues and pens
with a certain vein of opprobrious and contumelious scolding, as every day
there come forth and appear new books from them, the later ever worse and more
intolerable then the former. In which kind, since we took in hand the
answering or examining of the former two, five other are come to our knowledge,
and in the last of these ten more are promised, not books but volumes: so as
you may see whether this breach of modesty that seemed but little in them at the
beginning is now come in so small time, you will remember the poet, amisso
frontis, petulans, ruptoque, pudore, proruit in praeceps inuenis, etc.

But to the five last books already come forth, Propetuis.
albeit in truth they are such as do easily answer themselves, and punish also
sufficiently their authors with contempt and infamy for their intemperate
style, nor do deserve either to be read by discreet men, or refuted by them
that have no time to loose, yet we have thought good for this once to give a
stort taste of each of them in this Chapter aduertising the reader, that if he
will vouchsafe to reduce them and all their substance, to the former heads and
Chapters by us mentioned, to wit what argument or substance they conteyne; with
what wit, grace or modesty the argument is handled; against whom and by what
sort of men, what notorious lies, manifest slanders and clear contradictions
they conteyne; these points (we say) and such other being considered in each of
these books, the judgment will quickly be made both of them, their substance,
quality and authors, as by these ensuing short notes analisis or anotamy is
easily also to be seen.

Of the libel entitled, a sparing discovery of English Jesuits, and of F.
Persons proceedings, etc.. 1.
THis is the title of that book, and for the posie thereof is written under all
this sentence: Eccles. 4. Vidi calumnias quae sub sale geruntur, etc. which is
so fit a sentence not only to discover but also to condemn the writers (the
contents of the book considered) as we think in the whole scripture would be
found, for that the whole narration here set down is nothing else indeed but a
texture of infinite false calumniations against innocent men, and those
oftentimes so scurrilous and immodest as we are forced somtymes to spare the
very naming thereof, and consequently, the word sparing discovery in their
title, might have been spared and left out, seeing they spare neither modesty
shame or conscience, nor yet their own credit in disgorging their gaul
against far better men then themselves and namely the whole body of the most
reverend Society in general, so well deserving of them, or F. Persons in
particular their hountiful benefactor, how ungrateful soever they be to
acknowledge it.

And truly it were ouerlarge and loathsome to set down here their intolerable
wanton malepart and mad speches Intolerable speeches against Jesuits in
general.
uttered only in the very preface or Epistle prefixed to this wicked libel we
have in hand yet some you shall hear for examples sake; and first they take in
hand to auerre this general proposition, Epist. Page 2.
That in very deed the Jesuits are men of the most corrupt manners, imperfect
life, and stayne of religion that live in the Cathol. Roman Church this day,
Ibid.
etc. And yet further. Jesuits drifts ouershadowed with hypocritical zeal,
pharasaical pretense and Cath. show of true religion, etc. set forth a
counterfeit of moral perfection, concealing the essentialles of Christian
Catholic religious piety, because they are not in them to be found.

And yet further exhorting all men to fly them as most wicked men and
dangerous inchaunters they say thus: Page 4.
Manifest it is, that whether you give any thing to Jesuits, or receive any
thing from them the very gift, receite, contract, bargain, condition,
familiarity or act of intermedling with them, is a plague infectiue^ a poison
remediless, a pitch that floods of watery tears (what if I should say bloody)
will not wash away, so dangerous are their inchauntments and^ charms, etc.

Thus they say: and did you ever hear Christian people speak or write thus of
a whole body of men of their own religion? But they go forward defying and
defaming without exception all Jesuits and their actions, calling the effects
of their travels in England: Page 5.
the unsavory fruits of their luckelesse labors: And then further. What foul,
loathsome, and fearful vices are among them pharasaically ouershaded with a
pretense of religious zeal, Page 6. and 7.
I could (says he) here touch, if confession reue^lors, if murders, if
extorsions, if cosenage, if what not dreadful offenses worse then these (if
worse may be) can touch them, etc. They are failed and fallen from all
religious piety in general; Most wicked speech.
and I might take occasion here (say they) in this anotomie-lecture of the
Iesuitical ghosts, the diuersyty of such wicked spirits as transforming
themselves into angels of light do lead more souls to hell, then the fiends of
most ugly shape appearing in their own proper coulors, etc. I ^ight dedact
also a triple alphabet of their machauillian practices setting down their
rules atheal, making all lying, perjury, swearing, forswearing, murder,
incest, sacrilege, symmony, idola^ry, and whatsoever else, to be lawful,
pr^fitable commendable and necessary, etc.

This and other such like stuff he writes in this his Epistle or prologue
saying further of himself, Page (...).
that he cannot let pass any of his bret^rens works that have hitherto or shall
hereafter come to his hands without an exhortatiue epistle unto all true
English hearted Catholics to beware of Iesuitical poison. And then in the same
place having ^euealed in this order against so many hundreds or thowsands of
me^ whom he never knew he becomes very humble and devout upon the suddayne,
desyring of the Readers, a charitable remembrance of his poor sinful soul in
their Catholic religious devotions, and then concludes as orators are wont to
do with dixi, as though all were ended with that word. But a man that is
acquaynted with Christian divinity and church discipline would think that
somewhat more satisfaction were to be required for so hideous and horrible
detractions, slanders and infamations against so many venerable men, then to
end with dixi, that his poor sinful soul termed so by him in jest has need
of more effectual remedy in deed then a bare remembrance of other men in their
devotions, which yet we (having ^ead his libel and sinful dealing therein) are
moved with true compassion to yield him, The sinful soul of vvil. watson.
praying God that the poor sinful fellow may have grace to acknowledge in
deed, as well as in words his poor sinful soul to be ouerladen with a heavy
sinful burden of so horrible sins as by so many most unchristian
calumniations uttered, he has incurred.

But to the end you may know better this sinful lad, and his poor sinful soul
in deed, and how great need he has not only of a charitable remembrance, but
of earnest prayers, sighs and sobbes of his friends, and of some sharper remedy
also in himself, to get him out of his sinful suddes, whereof he iesteth against
Jesuits, I would have you but hear the very first entrance of this his
epistle, which discryeth the man sufficiently what is in him, and in what state
he is, for thus he begins his Epistle.

Wise was the painter in his amorous conceyt who in portrayting out the
porport of Venus, Epist. Page 1.
drew her picture, with so great art, slight and significant resemblance of
her natural blazon, as the portrayt of her foreparts all over shadowed with the
porch where she entered in, A beastly beginning of a book.
posteriora eius on the back, being only seen going into the temple,
presented an abstract to the beh^lders of so rare excellency, as the type of
the prot^t ypon by signs and symptons seemed to say: give back enamorades of
ladies bewtyes, seek not to se the face of the peerlesse, content your curious
eyes with this, which though the meanest part of the delightful object, yet of
that perfection, as wherein you may behold the works of dame nature to be so
far above reasons reach, as wit and art should skip beyond their skill, if
they should attempt to set forth the worthiest parts of this goddess paragon
sance peer. And yet was Venus but a very strompet, a common queen, fitter for
Vulcan the blackesmith then for Mars the Captain and more admired at, talked
of and followed for her wanton tricks, in satiable lust, and shape to frame an
eye to vice, them for any complemental perfection to be found in the purest
parts of her filthy carcass or lineaments of her vading, though seming fair,
sweet, blisful cheeks shrewded in the auriflame of carnation die, dropped in
every line mathematical with argent and gules, milkewhite and scarlet red.

Now if you did not know this fellow before, you may take a scantling of him
both in body and soul by this narration and thereby make a guess how poor,
defectuous and sinful he is in the one and other. For as for his body and
outward feature (if you know him) you will hardly think him a fit creature to
talk so much of natural blazons or enamorades of ladies bewtyes, etc. or of
royal damsels of rare aspect, himself being so wrong shapen, and of so bad and
blinking aspect, as he looks nine ways at once, as scarsely he can discern
any thing that touches not his eyes, which yet we object not as natures
defect, but as representing rather the state of his mind, which seems by this
filthy description of Venus and her posteriora so often mentioned as also by
the wanton imaginations of pleasing objects, and sweet blisful cheeks, and
other such lasciuions phrases that he is so deeply overwhelmed with sensual and
venereous apprehensins, contemplations and desires, no maruayle though he cry
out so hideously against Jesuits that are sworn enemies to the very thoughts
thereof: and we know both by experience and otherwise that there is no other
motive of enmity greater then this set down by the holy Ghost contrarius est
operibus nostris, Sap. 2.
Jesuits are of contrary life, spirit, judgment, will, works and manners to him,
and what maruayle then is there if he profess himself so mortal an enemy to
them.

Yet we do know and can testify that the time has been, Epist. to Imp.
Considerat.
when this sinful and wretched poor fellow being in extreme necessity both of
body and soul, and in other sort of suddes then he now threatens to leave
Jesuits in, had his cheifest relief by some of there means, though now most
vngratfully he forget the same, paying them evil for good as honest men are
wont to be paid from such as he is. But a judgment day will come to justify
all; and for that this lost lad and true stayne of his religion and order (as
falsely and wickedly he calls the Jesuits) is permitted by God and used by the
devil at this time to so public a reproach of our profession, as all the world
sees, by so many infamous books as come daily forth from him or through his
hands we are forced in this place, full sore against our will and purpose to
discover the man somewhat further unto you, The discovery of VVil. watts.
to the end you may see what a pillar and proctor the factious have chosen to
themselves for their bookemaister, to defame by his labors their brethren and
whole religion, this being the especial service, for which it seems M. Bluet
so carefully made his peace with the counsel when he wrote to M. Mush (as in
our Apology we have set down) that M. VVatsons peace was made if he would, Se
the lettere of Bl. to Mush. Apol. cap. 13.
which will (no doubt) was to agree to some such good service of their side, as
this is, which now he performs under the direction of my L. of London, of
whom yet we cannot but marvel (being otherwise of that judgment and
temperate nature which some men report him to be) that ever he would use so
base and absurd an instrument as this fellow is, having been taken by them in so
many trippes as he has. But you will say that to a base work a base instrument
is fittest; and we see herin verified that observation which Philippus
Cominaeus makes in his story, to wit, that in time of sedition the worst men
do grow fastest, and he that in a quiet and ordinate state of things should be
abject and nothing esteemed in a troubled state becomes admirable: by which
means William Watson (for so at length he puts down his name in his book
of Quodlibets) who in time of quiet was worth nothing, now by broils is become
upon the suddayne a great master in Israel among our mutined brethren, whose
common wealth is no less disordered since their rebellion against their lawful
Superiors, then that of the Jews, since they left their obedience due to
Christ and his law; and for that we shall have occasion after to mention often
this book master of theirs or prefect rather of their print, we are forced
here to tell you breefly somewhat for better knowing him.

His coming out of England and manner thereof we know not in particular, nor
greatly does it import, only we know that he came to the English Seminary of
Rhemes in France a poor little begging boy, The being of VV. watson at Rhemes.
where being taken of charity, his first allowance was for a good time pottage
only and licking the dishes which other men had emptied before him: after this
he was admitted to serve at the table, and carry away dishes: after that again
he was admitted to make beds, swepe chambers and other like offices belonging
thereunto, in which kind he served especially one M. Boast a good priest and a
holy martyr since, which if he had known then or suspected that the squint
eyed boy (for so he called him) would have proved so wicked a man he should
never have comen (no doubt) within his chamber door. And yet further you must
note, that all this while VVil. Watts. besides his poor estate was the most
contemptible and ridiculous thing in all that house for many years, for that
his grace was in tumbling and making sport to others, for which his body (if
you know him) was fitly made, and so he passed by the name of will was, or wat
tumbler all that time.

But at length after diverse years pretending much humility and devotion, he
was upon compassion and favor made priest and sent into England, where for a
time he used himself not evil, but by little and little falling to liberty and
sensuality, and not having either sufficient wit or learning (but especially
grace) needful for the government of such a charge, he fell into diverse great
disorders and absurdityes, whereof one was his foul fall by going to the
protestants Church, and thereupon also the discovery of many Catholics to the
persecutors, whereof M. Bishop (if you remember) speaks, in his depositio^s at
Rome 1598. and we have made mention thereof in our Cap. 9.
Apology, and the matter is notorious, and if there were not so many witnesses
thereof yet living as there be, yet his own letters written thereof, to ask
forgiveness of priests for his fault were sufficient which we have seen under
his own hand with this date and subscription.

Farewell from my Chamber uncertain the 13. of December 1588. Your poor
afflicted friend through bodily persecution and spiritual discomfort. William
Watson.

This was the end of his letter, but the beginning was as follows:

Reverend Fathers (to whom this my true confession with low submission and
humble supplication shall come to be read, VVatsons confession.
heard or seen) may it please you (for Gods sake) with compassion to hear my
woeful case, and thereunto, according to your (I doubt not) unfeigned and
Catholic charity, I beseech you make answer to mitigate my pain. I do freely
acknowledge to my woe, shame and grief, to the devils confusion, and to the ever
advancement (I trust if with reverence I may speak it) from hensforth evermore
of Gods glory, and our holy another his espoused church Catholic, that my
deadly fall (known to many in generalty, but to few in respect of the
particular circumstances) was in this doleful wise:

After that I had been two days in Durance I (hearing that I should be urged to
go to the heretical Church) wickedly determined (after a great though short
conflict had with my self) to prevent their evil attempt by pernicious policy,
in requesting conference with some learned protestant, which being granted,
His pernicious policy.
I did (though faynedly yet altogether unlawfully) so far condescend by a
little and a little unto him, that lastly I went to their heretical service, with
this intent (and truly with none other at that time God he knows) thinking
thereby to have escaped their hands, adding herunto a blind supposition, that in
such an obscure place, I should not give scandal to any Catholic by that
wicked act, because (those being compelled oftentimes that will not come
voluntarily) it should not be known (til I had escaped) whether I came without
or with my own accord.

But as this was a mere dissimulation with my Savior, so did he justly punish
me for the same: for as soon as I had let him also think of his now.
deprived my self of his heavenly grace, I had no power to resist that which
before I did always most detest and abhor: so that where I thought by
schismatical policy to have dallyed with God almighty until I might have
escaped the hands of men, and so to have returned unto his holy Church again,
he most justly (seeing my presumptuous sin) gave mine enimyes power over me in
such sort, that although both at the court and other places in the time of my
durance, I had utterly denied my being with any Catholic after my release of
imprisonment, yet that wicked heretic Topcliff, did urge me so far, to tell
where I had been and whom I knew (protesting that my show of coming to the
Church should not serve, except I would reveal such things unto him) that I
most sinfully at the last did condescend unto his devilish request, though at
the first I was of that mind, rather to have suffered death then to have
proceeded to any further wicked^nesse then that (which was to much) in going to
their heretical service. And so departing, etc.

Thus far we thought good to recite of his own letter, pretermitting a great
deal more that follows, wherein he sets down the particular acts and
circumstances of his bewraying and betraying Catholics, for which he confesses
that he was so much eschued and abhorred by all Catholics, as he complaining
thereof says:

My burden is too great already for me to bear, but that God of his mercy, I
trust, will ease me with this grace, yet I feel none so great discomfort now in
my misery, as the want (I dare not say of charity) but of compassion amongst
Catholics of this my wretched state, in so much that it is not sufficient to
deny me bodily relief (as some hard hearts have done, VV. VVat aba^doned by all
Catholics.
in refusing to help me with a cup of cold water, or a glass of beer) but
further those that pity this my wretched life are glad to hold their peace,
least they should be suspected for speaking in my cause, and therefore are
privately warned by their friends not to meddle with or in my defense, if they
will escape blame. I therefore humbly desire all good Catholics, first of
forgiveness for that which is past: secondly of their charity to judge of me
no worse the^ they know: thirdly if they can accuse me of any crime, whereof I
have not accused and do not accuse my self for Gods sake let me know it, and
appoint the punishment due unto me for the same and I will withal my heart submit
my self unto their censure, and undertake the pain. Last of all, whereas I
hear that diverse are incensed against me (by wrong informatio^ truly as I
suppose) in accusing me of a new, great and fearful sin in presuming to
celebrate being in the state of excommunication, or at least of irregularity
(as they say) whereby (if it were so) I have incurred a new irregularity and
consequently a great sin, He had more need to look to this matter now.
if invincible ignorance did not mitigate the offense (as I doubt not but it
would) as being a thing whereof as yet I never stood in doubt and therefore had
no cause to examine the case. I will therefore set down my case plainly
according to the true confession which I have already made and set down in
this writing, and that is, first that my lamentable fall was public in respect
of my schism and alienation from Gods Church not by public revolt at the
bar before a judge, but before civil magistrates in a court of common causes.
Secondly my great syn of accusation which divines do call Clerici percussio was
not public, nether in respect of the company nor place, but private as written
in my chamber or wards, and sent unto that wicked Tyrant (very wickedly indeed)
closed up like a letter, etc.

Here lo you may see VV.VV. his accusation of his own offenses, which grace
would God he had not lost since; and that this is his own style you may judge
in part by the defense he has made in his book of Quodlibets about the
multitude of his parentheses, misliked (he says) by some Readers. Secondly you
see after his accusation and confession, both a complaint against the severity
of some Catholics, with some excuse of himself. The complaint we think verily
to be false: for what Catholic (think you) would deny a cup of water, or a
glass of beer (except there where no glass in the house) to so miserable a
poor fellow standing in bodily need, though never so much spi^itually
offending by his fault? As for his excuse or defense it is very simple and
ridiculous as you see especially in that point, where he says that his great
sin in accusing Catholics is called by divines Percussio Clerici, striking of
a clarke whereby he shows that he has no learning at all nor knows what he
says in matters of divinity, or if he do and have any light or remorse of
conscience left him (as then he seemed to have had) let him consider in how
far worse case he stands now, then he did then having scandalized so much
the more Catholics in this fall, This fall of VV. VV. greater then the former.
then in that, by how much this is more public and prejudicial to the common
cause, hurtful and injurious to infinite particular persons belyed and
slaundered by him, and that this is voluntary conspiring with the common enemy
whereas that was upon fear and fraylty, this is of mere malice, envy, pride,
and other like motyues the other upon infirmity: so as there is much more cause
for him to accuse himself of Percussio Clerici then before, seeing the most part
of the^ that are injured by him are priests and percussio linguae striking with
the tongue is by S. A^gustynes judgment grounded on scriptures the most
grievous and dangerous striking and wounding of all other violences. In tract.
super Psalm. 63.
And consequently this miserable fellow having added this syn to his former is
in far worse state of damnation, no doubt, if he repent no^, and may better
bewail his sins now then before^ when he wrote the conclusion of his letter
thus: I now take my leave (says he) in most humble wise, beseeching God to
grant grace, strength and co^sta^cy to all such as do stand, and to us sinners
that have fallen true repentance, with continual contrition, and sorrow for our
sins so long as we live in this vale of tears, etc.

Lo here in how good a mood he was, when he wrote this; and if he had been
constant therein, he had never fallen into that desperate case, wherein now he
has plunged himself. But soon after this he returning to his former,
licentious course abroad, and then being taken and breaking prisons, we know
not how often, and once with the death of some of better merit with God, as it
seems then himself, he became in short space to be so gay and gallant with
horse and man, and his little body so decked and laden with jewels, chains
rings, bracelets, and other such ornaments gotten partly by importunity, partly
(as we are informed) by shifts, and other like means (whereof we could recount
here diverse particulars, if we had but half the desire to discredit him, as
he has malice to belly the Jesuits) as none or few in England were more
notorious for those matters then he; and being in this state, and living as it
were in outlawry with the state by his breaking of prisons, and in no credit
with Catholics for his disorderly life, and notorious foolery, having made a
ridiculous commonwealth a little before about sitting at table and other such
proceedings among priests and gentlemen, See VVatsons common wealth Apol. Cap.
^.
the seditious lacking men of audacity to make more styrres, and immagining him
to be for their purpose, M. Bluet (as before has been said) made his peace with
the B. of London, if he would yield to the condition appointed him, which by
all likelihood was this to rail against Jesuits, the Archpriest and their
friends, write and print books by the Bishops direction: and this was William
VVatsons holy vocation in the state and dignity of perdition wherein now he
stands. And so much for his person at this present.

Now let us pass over to the book it self set forth by him here in his
brethrens name (as he calls them) that is to say the mutined and discontented
priests, though no man in particular sets his name thereunto. The substance
of the spa^ing discovery.
And this fellow in his Quodlibets says that some do disclayme as well from
this as other books set forth in their name, whereby we see, that all is but
mutiny, dissension, and disagreeing among themselves, and their wrytings of no
substance, ground, or care of truth, but only to rail, revel and revile, as
turbulent spirits are wont to do, until God from heaven or magistrate upon
earth repress them.

And so now if we will begin to examine this book entitled A sparing
discovery, according to the former points and chapters set down by us before,
we shall first find, that for argument or subject this has none, but only to
rail at Jesuits in general and F. Persons in particular. And secondly for
handling, it is far more shameless foolish and malicious then any of the
former. Thirdly though it be meant and directed principally against the men
aforesaid, yet breaks it out also most insolently against any other, that is
thought by them not to favor their faction and rebellion: fourthly for open
lies, manifest untruths, apparent contradictions and intolerable slanders
(which is the fourth consideration before specified to be weighed in their
books, if you remember) this is so replenished, as it is impossible for us to
examine them in this one head or member, whithout making a whole volume in
answer, especially if we should descend to particulars; yet some examples for
a taste shall we touch unto you, and thereby you may guess of the rest, noting
only by the way, that together with impudent lies we mean to join also for
breuityes sake the absurd, wicked, and impious speeches in testimony of their
good spirit and holy constitution of mind, and in the one and the other we
shall be as breef as possible we may be, for we are weary of so loathsome matters
before we begin.

First then they begin this libel with an odious comparison taken from the
Scribes and Pharasyes in the old law, as representing (say they) our religious
orders now, but yet greatly, reprehended by Christ, etc. which heretical
objection is answered as well in the old time by the ancient Fathers S. Basil, S.
Chrysostom, S. Nazianzen, S. Augustine, S. Gregory (which were all religious
men, though priests and bishops also) as in like manner by all the writers in
controuersyes in our time against Lutherans, zuinglians, Caluinists, Atheists
scoffers and ribaldes, of which later sort the writer of this sparing discovery
shows himself to be, as also a most ridiculous companion, in that after he
has said of Jesuits, that their followers presume to affirm, Sparing
discovery Page 1. 2. and 3.
that they are more free from error, more familiar with God, more particularly
illuminated, and more specially endued with the spirit of guiding souls, etc.
which if a man did say, it was but an imitation of S. Bernard. speaking of
religious men rar^us cadunt, Bernard^^.
velotius surgunt, securius ambulant, saepius irrorantur, etc.) he adds
presently of himself and his: We profess and glory in our calling, that we do
not bold is necessary for the better credit of our functions to vaunt of our
more near acquaintance with the almighty then our predecessors and brethren
have had: that we are most confident not only in the excellency of our
priesthood, but also in the assurance, that we in the execution of our
functions have a sufficient direction of Gods holy spirit, etc. and do pray
with all our hearts, that God will evermore deliver our secular priests from such
familiarity (as Jesuits have) with his divine majesty, etc.

Lo here two points: the first of pride, and as high presumption as any
heretic lightly in these our days can profess, to wit, that they are most
confident of well by the excellency of their priesthood, as by the assurance of
Gods holy spirit, that they shall be sufficiently directed for the execution of
their functions: Great vanity and prophanity.
as though either priests by their character only were made secure from
synning, or erring, or that these few companions (for as for the greatest part
of priests in England twenty for one to these, we know full well do detest this
vanity) had any spiritual assurance of Gods spirit above the rest, or may
confide or glory therein with lesser vanity then all sectaryes do of our days.

The other point is of impiety and Lucianisme, jesting at all spiritual
devotion and familiarity with God by frequent meditation, contemplation and
other like caelestical virtues most highly commended by all ancient fathers in
true servants of God, but contemned by this good fellow that has no feeling
thereof according to the saying of S. Paul. animalis home non percipit ea, quae
sunt spiritus Dei: the sensual or carnal man does not understand those things
that are of the spirit of God. But let us go forward, you see how they begin.

And truly it were an endless course to follow them in their exorbitant
raylings and lying, first against the Society in general, and then against F.
Persons in particular. For of the first they say: Notorious railing against the
society in general. Page 6. and 7.
That albeit the order of the Society being approved by the Pope, is to be
honored, etc. yet few do live according to their calling, but rather as if
religion were nothing else but a mere political devise, etc. Machauillian rules
are raised up by them for rebellions, murdering, of Princes, etc. Few Kings
Courts are in Europe, where some of their maisterships do not reside of purpose
to receive and give intelligences to their General in Rome, etc.

These are their own words with infinite more of like untruth and immodesty
which were ouerlong to recite: We shall touch some few matters of innumerable
objected by them, but no one proved or proueable. He accuses them of
slaundring the State of England with injurious handling of Catholics both
abroad and in prison: Page 10.
they falsify the doings of the state (say they) ^e they never so apparently
true, etc. For either they do pretend, that the parties that confess things
committed were urged thereunto with tortures, Maike these fellows drifts to
discreedit Catholics.
or that it was a plot of the state to make all Catholics odious, or that there
was no such matter at all, or that we wot not what, but they have always some
shift to bleare men's eyes to the discredit of all proceedings in such cases
within the realm; if any of our brethren die in prison, it is said they were
poisoned or famished, if any kill themselves, it is given out they were
murdered, etc.

Behold here the complaint against Jesuits for speaking in defense of
Catholics against their presecutors. And are not these proctors (think you)
worthy of their fees for this good office done? But hear another more wicked
and impious then this in the very next page, where complaining of Jesuits
(though very falsely and foolishly and against all Cath. learning, as before we
have showed in our Apology) that they teach men to avoid certain bloody
quaestions by equivocations: this (say they) amongst others is one of their
rules, etc. As for example: one demanding of you, whether if the Pope should
come in warlike manner to invade this land by force of arms, would you take
his part or the Queens? you framing this answer in your mind, Odious and
wicked questions proposed.
we will take the Queen's part, if the Pope will comaund us so to do: may by their
doctrine give this answer lawfully, videlicet we will take the Queens part,
and co^ceale the rest, whereby he that asks the question is plainly deluded,
etc.

Behold here young new Herodians that move and renew most odious and dangerous
questions about Caesar and his tribute, all tending (as you se) to entangle
Catholics again by a figurative manner of accusing Jesuits after the question
has been solued by the sheding of much innocent blood of martyrs and the memory
thereof almost extinguished by length of time. But hear yet another example
more odious then this: And other examples (say they) they may ask us (to wit
the persecutors) whether we have taught that her May. has no interest to
the crown of England? and we answer, that we have not so done, iush say they
you equivocate with us, you keep this in your mind, videlicet as long as the B
of Rome will suffer her, etc. Page 12.
Did you ever hear such wicked devises to bring innocent men into hatred and
danger? What could these bloody companions say or do more to endanger their
brethren, then to bring in this odious dispute?

But now hear another impiety exercised by a slight and figurative speech
suggested to them (no doubt) by heretics to bring in contempt, suspicion, and
auersion, the holy sacrament of Confession and wholesome use thereof, Page 16.
saying: Understanding how that our Jesuits are most rigorous in their taking
of men's confessions, whereby they know as well by the servants as by their
masters and mistresses their several confessions, all the secrets in those
familyes: the wives against her husband, the husbands against his wife, and the
servants of them both, etc. What heretic could write more odiously then this?
And may not the like inconvenience be urged against all priests? yea against
themselves, if they be worthy to hear confessions? Surely this is more like
some ribalds speech then of a priest or Catholic.

There ensue a huge multitude of notorious lies repeated again in this libel
which were handled by them before, and refuted by us in our Apology. Page 17.
and 18.
As for example, That the Jesuits were banished out of all the Seminaryes
within the State of Milan (an evidently as there we have proved) by Card.
Boromaeus: Apol. Cap. 4.
That Card. Allen should say of Jesuits at their first entrance into England,
that they would prove but thorns in the sides of secular priests: (a
shameless assertion, as many ways is convinced) and many other such points
there discussed, whereto now we ad, that all that they talk here Page 19. 20.
21. etc. about alms and money wrongfully taken by Jesuits and their followers,
is as false as they are shameless to report it, being never able to prove any
one particular.

All their irreligious scoffing and deprauing of the spiritual exercises (from
the page 21. of there libel unto 28.) Against the spiritual exercise.
used by Jesuits for reducing men from syn and wicked life, to a more clear
and feeling knowledge of almighty God which being mental exercises consisting
principally in heavenly meditations, are highly commended by all learned Cath.
men of our time that have either read the^ with attention or experienced the^
in the^ selves being confirmed also expressly by the Sea Apostolic, and tried
by example of infinite men's conuersions to be an excellent rare instrument of
Gods deuyne glory in these our days, all this contemptuous, and scoffing
spirit (say we) against sovereign helps and remedies must needs come either
of infidelity, or notable profane irreligiosity, and lack of spirit and sense
in Gods affairs; and consequently it is very probable, that some egregious
Apostata, or other heretical or Atheal head, had their parts also in so wicked
a woork.

And thus much for the Jesuits in general. But as for F. Persons in particular
there is no end nor measure of their outrageous detractio^ when they fall on
him, as though he were the only but against which all heir fiery darts of
hellish hatred, and serpentyne tongues were directed. Most spiteful and
malicious dealing against F. Persons in particular.
And yet if you consider what hitherto they say or write of all their books
against him you shall not find one point of moment alleged by them whereat
worthily they may take just offense, but as mad or possessed men that rave and
rage most at those that most seek their good and most have assisted them
hitherto. And truly in this our English Cath. cause and reduction of our
country it seems that God has suffered him to be in signum, cui
contradicetur, as a mark o^signe set up for all sort of bad people, atheists,
heretics, aposta^aes, seditious, contentious, tumultuous, disastred, and
dissolute to inueigh against, and this is to the immitation of his master and
Savior Christ, who was, and is, and shall be to the worlds end a sign of
contradiction in the highest degree to all wicked whatsoever.

We have answered both truly and sufficiently in the 12. Chapter of our
Apology such malicious and envious calumniations, as these his passionate
emulators in their first two books uttered, of which two books the first being
in latin and read in Rome by diverse great men that had some acquaintance in
English affairs, they found therein so many and manifest malicious slanders
(especially against F. Persons) as they professed afterward to have been
ashamed in reading thereof and to have wondered at the impudency of the writers;
and more to esteem of the said Father then ever before, by discovering the
devils envy against him. And among others we understand for certain, that the
most honorable, wise and learned Card. Burghesius. Viceprotector of England
giving up the said book to his Hol. protested upon his conscience, that he had
read many things which himself knew to be stark lies and malicious inventions
against the said Father in particular, and thereby made a guess at the untruth
of all the rest.

And further you have seen by that we have discussed in the fornamed chapter
of our Apology, how many most evident and apparent calumniatio^s we have there
refuted, which here yet and in other their ensuing books these miserable men
(for you know what a pitiful torment envy is) do repeat, affirm, urge, and
amplyfie again, yea have procured heretics also to publish the same in their
books, as appears by that which a certain impudent minister O. E. (but not
exceeding the malice of these) has written and printed of late, about the
illigitimation of F. Persons birth, which these his emulators in their first
latin inuectiue do but call in doubt, saying that the said birth was of evil
fame (raised to wit by themselves,) but now (as wicked men are wout to do) they
pass further and affirm it in all their later books for a thing certain,
having devised besides, that his Father was parson of a church, and that thereof
he was called Persons but as then we answered, so now again having informed
our selves since that time of more particulars, we affirm and avouch that this
is a most unchristian and devilish devise to slander and defame their
neighbor, and neither is nor could be true.

For clea^ing of which so egregious, a calumniation we have made diligent
inquiry and do find that the said Father was borne in the parish of Stowey in
Somerset shire in the year 1546. a year before K. Henry died to which parish
there came soon after out of Devonshire to be vicar their (for parson their is
none) John Hayward a virtuous good priest that had been a cannon regular before,
and this man lived there for 30. years together, until after F. Persons
departure out of England, who having been his master in the latin tongue, and
liking his forwardnes in learning did ever afterward bear a special affection
toward him, all the time he lived, but yet was there never any least suspection
of that which these malicious people have devised and given out, as those do
and will testify that lived at that time, neither could there be with any
probability, the one being borne (as we have said and appears by the register
book) before the other came into that country neither is it likely, that he
should have been called Persons (as they fondly say) for that this priest was a
parson, seeing that benefice is no personage but a vicaridge as all men know:
and more like it is he should have been called Hayward after the said priests
name, and not by his office if he had been his son:

Moreover, as in our Apology we have said F. Persons had five brothers and
systers elder then himself by the same mother and father borne all many years
before the forsaid priest came to that country, and other five younger then he,
whereof one is now a preacher here in England, and chaplayne to a noble man,
and all called by the name of Persons; diverse uncles also, nephews, and cosyns
there are of the same name; and how then do these lying lips, urge so much
that he was called Persons, for that his Father was Parson of a benefice?

Finally we have showed in our said Apology that his parents were right honest
people, and of the most substantial of their degree among their neighbors
while they lived, and his Father was reconciled to the Cath. Church by M.
Bryant the martyr, and his mother a grave and virtuous matron living diverse
years, and dying in flight and out of her country for her conscience, and was
never so much as suspected for any such matter as these wicked companions have
devised. And if there were no other argument, but that neither F. Persons
himself nor any friend of his had never any doubt or least scruple thereof
hitherto (as may appear by that neither in his entering into religion nor holy
orders of priesthood, any dispensation was required or sought for) this we say
were sufficient to any honest man that is tymerous of God and measures other
men's consciences by their own, to convince this exorbitant malice of these
co^sciencelesse railing people, that make no scruple to publish so false a
matter, and impossible to be known to them for a thing most certain, whereas
in true conscience by Christian Cath. divinity it is known to be a heyno^s
deadly sin to publish such a matter of infamy, though it had bin true, (if it
were otherwise secret and not known before) but much more to devise and spread
the same of malice, or being devised or brought in suspicion by others to
avouch and diuulge it, as in all their books they do, wherein we can say no
more (considering, there desperate course) but remember with fear the saying of
the scripture, impius cum in profundum venerit, contemnit; The wicked man
co^temneth all when he is once over the ears in sin; God help them out if it
be his holy will; but yet in the mean space we are forced to admonish them that
this and other such slanders must needs ly heavily upon the consciences of the
deuisers or publishers, and be a dangerous chirographum against them at the
day of judgment, except they repent and make due satisfaction here, which
either willing or unwilling once they must do ( est enim qui quaerit, Joan. 7.
and indicat God grant they do it in this life, whereunto we have showed before
that their ghostly fathers are bound to oblige them if they will remain free
themselves from the participation of so great iniquity.

And thus much we have thought good to ad about this scurrilous objection so
often repeated and ^o odiously brought in by them in all their later books: and
as for the rest though in every new book they tell again the very same things
which before they invented, and by often telling do seem at length as it were
to believe them (for so it falls out often in coining and frequent repeating
of lies) yet for that our former answers be such as do evidently demonstrate
the falsehood and folly of the said calumniations and calumniators (especially
about F. Persons departure from Oxford, Many calumniations against F. Persons
passed over as ansvvered before.
going into Italy, entering the Society, mission to England, and return thence
into France, with other his public and private actions since) we mean not to
write again here that which there we wrote, but to remit the Reader to our
said Apology, and only here to ad a word or two about certain new fresh
cauillations framed since the writing of their two first libels, among which
one is this, which follows:

To wit that F. Persons, Spar. disco^. Page 1^.
within these later three years brought D. Bagshaw and some others for his
sake in danger of his life about the stratage^e, undertaken by one Squiar that
was hanged, etc. But how mere and malicious a cauil this is, all men may
easily see. For D. Bagshaw was never in danger, A mere and malicious cauil
about Squiar and D. Bagshavv.
that we know, but in special favor with the state, and so both his usage at
home and his late going over Sea do testify. The same does witness also his
authority with the keeper in Wisbech while he was there, his friendly calling
up to London and usage in the tower, his power to draw thither from Wisbech
whom he li^ted of his adversaries, and other like circumstances which agree
not to a man suspected, and brought in question of so heinous a crime as
poysning her Majesty and never quit by any trial which we know.

Secondly this fiction of Squiars attempt is sufficiently discovered already
and proved to be a mere fiction in deed, and so it appeared by the miserable
fellow at his death, and has otherwise been declared by evident demonstrations
of Catholic books, and no man but a counterfeite or cauilling Catholic would
for shame make ^^^ention thereof again: But howsoever that matter were, F.
Persons cannot with any probability be presumed to have had any part therein he
being at that time in Rome and the thing feigned to be done in Spain. So a^
here is nothing else but malignity with folly and improbability showed.

Another cauil is about F. Persons speech with one James Clark in London before
his departure over the Sea, to whom he should say, that he meant to go to
Padua to study physic and not ever to be a papist, offering also to swear the
same. But this seems a^^ale of a tubbe neither probable not importa^t, for
nether do they say that he swore in deed, and if they did, yet will you easily
see how far they were to be believed against F. Persons, who are ready of
pure malice and swelling envy to conspire and swear, against him every where
if thereby they might hurt him. But whatsoever talk he might have with M. James
Clark, 28. years past before his departure out of England about being a papist
for the time to come (which word you know is odious in England, and was at
that time, and not a term professed by us) and whatsoever M. James Clarke
might report thereof (which yet if he be the man whom we imagine it is not like
he would report injuriously of his old friend) yet God be thanked F. Persons
proved after a good Catholic, and if he had not it is very probable (and
morally also sure) that many hundreds who are now such, had not been so at this
day, in which number we may recon diverse also of them that write these
pestilent books, so ungrateful are they to God and his instruments for their so
great and singular benefits.

That which follows of Cardinal Allens opinion of F. Persons violent nature,
Page 43.
is a violently or slander raised against the one and the other, and refuted
before both by the testimony of the Cardinals own letters yet extant, as also
of such as lived nearest him and knew best his intrinsecal judgment affections
and censure of men, others also that know the said Father and converse daily
with him, and do consider his actions, even toward these violent and virulent
people that strive so desperately against him do both (...), and some also
reprehend the contrary disposition in him.

There ensues another long reprehension of F. Persons for dealing in Sir
Thomas Stukeley his action for Ireland and setting it forward in the year
1578. Whether F. Persons furthered S. Tho. Stukley his action.
which only cauil, if there were nothing else does evidently convince that these
libellers have neither wit not honesty to see or care what makes for or
against them. For first as has been touched F. Persons at that time had not been
above 2. or 3. years at most in the Society, and was a student of divinity in
Rome, and not yet priest, and consequently cannot be presumed to have had any
hand in such public affairs, and secondly it is notorious to all men, Doctor
Jews after B. of Cassano.
that M. Doctor Lewis afterward Bishop of Cassano, Archdeacon at that time of
Cambray, and Referendarie to his Holiness being the principal Ecclesiastical
person of our nation in Rome was the cheef and only man that set the action of
Sir Thomas Stukeley forward with Pope Gregory the.xiij. procuring the said
Sukeley to be made Marquess, and to have the forces he carried with him, and
upon that point had he the controversy with Sir Richard Shelley Lord Prior of
England, which these lying people do mention here, and lay to F. Persons
charge: which matter both Doctor Fagon and other Irish men yet in Rome (as we
are informed) will testify against our Appellants when they come thither, and
against these their shameless books, if they deny them not, as no doubt but
they will, which Irish men were taken by violence out of their beds at
midnight to be carried away with Stukely, as was also M. Myuers an Englishman,
and M. Thomas Clement should have been if he had not saved himself in a Card.
house which he will testify to this day being alive in Flanders, and that he
conferred first his whole affayre with F. Persons who disliked utterly such
hard proceeding both with him and others; and had some disgust with D. Jews
about the same, which Doctor notwithstanding th^se false libellers do never
once so much as name in all this matter, he being the cheef doer as has been
said and this for that they will have men think that he was of their faction
against the Card. and Jesuits.

All that which follows for diverse pages against F. Persons (if it be against
him and not much more against themselves:) Page 45. 46. 47. etc.
us that by practices and factious disposition he came to be made Prouincial of
the Jesuits that were to be sent into England: A heap of Iyes against F.
Persons.
(a good disposition you must think to get credit amongst such men) that he
entered with two subjects only Campian and C^tam: that M. Blackwel bewailed his
coming in, as an unfit man to be sent; and that it was an indiscreet fact of
Doctor Allen to send him, that the Catholics also misliked it, and told him
plainly, that if he desisted not from his courses they would deliver him into
the hands of the civil magistrate: that F. Heywood and he striued about
superiority: that he made great collections of money pretending therewith to
relieve prisoners, but having once fingered the money fled therewith into
France, etc.

These (we say) and a huge heap of other such wilful calumniations as do
follow in this book we find to be so false (having informed our selves of the
truth) as if they can prove but any one of all these points to be true but
only the first that he was made superior of the mission of England, and sent in
with F. Campian and another, but not Cottam; if they can prove we say but one
point only of these and many other which they name, we shall say they are honest
men in the rest, and if they can prove none of the former, nor of a hundred
more besides set down by them in this, and other their books for truths, we
shall yet be more liberal with them, and give them another to prove which
follows immediately in their fabulous Lucianical narration, which is so
famous a^ly, as it may deserve a crown to be painted in the margent, as some
learned men did to some of Luthers, written (no doubt) by the same spirit of
spite and lack of shame, that this is, and consequently if our libellers will
save their honesty let them bring forth some proof of this tale, Page 47.
which is; that F. Persons coming to Paris (in the year 1584.) and desyring to
exempt himself from the subjection of the Prouincial and other Superiors of his
order there (for always these good Christian men do ascribe some naughty
meaning to all his actions) he persuaded them that the Q. of England and her
counsel did pursue him with such diligence, as they had sent over already two
men to murder him in Paris, for which cause it was not convenient for any one
of the Society to go abroad with him, but that he might go alone, and to make
the matter more probable he hired a couple of Englishmen with no small some of
money acco^pagned with a flemming to come (...) the College late as night and
to enquire for him, where with the Fathers being sumwhat ter^ified suffered him
to depart to Rome, etc.

This is their tale, which being devised by one of them is avouched and printed
again and again in all their later books, with some addition always by him
that comes after the rest, Foolish improbabilyties
and how probable this tale is that F. Persons living in Paris in his habit
(which cannot be denied) should seek to go out alone without a companion,
thereby to be the more safe from violence, or that he should procure to be
delivered from the subjection of the Prouincial and Superior there by such a
stratageme (as they call it) and with so much cost, seeing it was in his own
hand to stay or not stay with them, being not their subject: this we say is
easy for every man that has common sense to judge but much more for that we
understand that he went not to Rome immediately from thence, as these men give
out but above a year afterward with D. Allen from the Spaw, where the said D.
had been extreme sick in the year 1585. And finally having informed our selves
thoroughly of this fact, we find that there was never any such thing either done
spoken or thought of by the said Father or his Superiors, until this
ridiculously and so many others came abroad in print; the infamy whereof we
leave unto the relators, and mean to pass no further in this matter having
been longer therein then otherwise we meant, to the end to satisfy such
objections as follow in the other books also, of which it seems that this is
a compendious abstract containing a fardel of lies packt up close together,
which in the other libels are somewhat more delated though in substance the
same, etc.

And surely if impudency her self with never so brazen or iron a face should
step forth to scold against all truth, honesty modesty and other virtues at
once, she could not behave her self more desperately then these fellows do in
this their book. For if you would have a list only of loud lies most lewdly and
desperately faced out in this libel, and hitherto not so much as named or
touched by us, you may view over the pages following, A list of loud lies.
to wit page 30. the whole story of D. Gyfford his conuention before the Nuntio
in Flaunders for slaundering the Society and styrring sedition in the college
of Rome, and that F. Baldwyn did first ask him pardon in name of the Society,
etc. The quite contrary whereof is evident both by the order of the action it
self (the Doctor being conuented, and nor conuenting) as also by the Nuntio
his express letters yet extant about that matter.

Page 31. that Robert Fisher (who spread their infamous libel against the
Society) was sent from Rome to the gallyes of Naples, A notoriously about R.
Fisher.
and remains there a galley slave (others ad he was slain) whereas the
contrary appears by his own letters written to Rome from Viterbo (a quite
contrary way to Naples) after his departure from thence, and this does testify
the whole company of English scholars then in Rome, who both saw his good
treaty there, and read his letters afterward.

Page 32. The whole tale about D. Jews being their General Visitour (as they
say) and namely his procuring, A notable fiction about a chain of pearl.
to hush a notorious fraud of the Jesuits for alluring a gentlewoman in the
City of Perugia to give the^ a rich chain of pearl without her husbands
priuity, etc. whereupon (they say,) the Society should have been expelled from
thence. All this we find upon search to be so notorious a ly, as that neither
the bishop of Cassano was ever General Visitour over the Jesuits in his life,
but only was joined for companion to the Bishop of Montreale for visiting
seculars and some certain religious in Rome, and that his authority never
extended to Perugia, though it be within the State of the Church, and that
never any such thing happened in Perugia concerning the Jesuits, as the fact
and chain here mention, and consequently never any such hush needful, etc.

The like monstrous^ly in the same page is, A devised prayer against the B. of
Cassano.
that devised prayer of the Jesuits against the B. of Cassano: Vel Tur^a, vel
mors, vel demon cum cripiat a nobis. And almost as impudent is the other that
follows page 34. that F. Hieronimo F^orauanto Rector of the College would
not suffer the stude^ts to visit Card. Allen upon his deathbed himself
desyring it, whereas all that live now in Rome of the Card. kindred and family do
testify the contrary that they wear all there at 2. or 3. times.

No less shameless and yet more insolent is their speech of Card. Bellarmyne
page 37. and iterated so often in their other books to disgrace him to wit
about his speech, that Pope Syxtus 5. was damned, etc. Most wicked and
impudent suspicious.
but more impious are the suspicions cast out by them in the same places about
the poisoning of the said Syxtus 5, and of Pius 5. before him, as also Card.
Allen, the B. of Cassano and others by the Jesuits, etc. which we are sure the
devil himself will not object for that he knows the contrary.

The sending also of F. Haywood for penance into Calabria, where he never was
in his life set down page 49. and the dealing with the Duke of Guise to have
intelligence with the Queen of Scotland the Earl of Northumberland, and
others in England anno 1583. laid by them to F. Persons, but proved before to
have been done by Mope or Charles Paget their cheef pillar sent into England for
that purpose.

Their accusing also of F. Persons for Parry his fact sent into England as
himself confessed by Thomas Morgan and that crew; The accusing and deprauing
the institution of the Seminaryes in Spain page 53. and that Card. Allen wept
for sorrow in Rome when he saw the oration made by an English scholar in
Vallidolid to the King at his coming to the English College for thanks giving
in the year 1592. and that this oration is left out in the printed book set
forth about that matter (as they affirm) page 54. These we say and a hundred
other assertions, as wyld, mad, and insolent as these are set down without any
proof at all; but their own words, and so recounted as though they were
without all controversy true. This desperate course (we say) is such as seems
rather to be of frantic and possessed men, then of moderate and well
co^scienced Christians, and therefore we leave further to refute the same
remitting them to that which we have said before.

Wherefore to conclude, seeing that this whole libel is nothing else but a
connection of monstrous lies, absurd prophanityes, malicious fictions and
conscienceles calumniations, we will follow them no further, either in defense
of the whole Society or of F. Persons in particular, whose actio^ns are so
openly known by apparent public facts to the general good of our country, as
these wretched and miserable men's hearts that write so dispitefully against
them, may sooner break with envy and rancor, then any least discredit come
unto them by these furious barkings in the sight of wise and indifferent Reader.

And here now the very multitude of these outrageous libe^s with the immensity
of hatred, hellish spirit, and poisoned entrals discovered therein, do force us
against our former purpose to cut of and stay all further passage and
proceeding in this horrible puddle of lies, slanderous inuectiues and devilish
detraction, for that the very looking them over, does weary the heart of any
true Christian, and consequently whereas before we had determined with our
selves to give you some tastes or examples out of them all, yet now finding the
multitude to be without end, and the quality so base, vile, and malicious as
the venom of any lost or loose tongue armed with audacity, and defended with
impudency, stirred up with envy and enraged with fury, and bounded no way by
any limits of conscience, piety or fear of God can vomit or cast out to defame
their brethren: finding this (we say) we have thought good to cease here
without further styrring the loathsome rags of so filthy a donghil.

Of the libel entitled A Dialogue betwixt a secular priest, and a lay
gentleman, etc.. 2.
Having ben ouerlong in examining the former libels we shall be so much the
shorter in this that follows. The title is, as you have heard A Dialogue,
etc. and the author thereof is esteemed by many to be M. Mush, one of the cheef
Appella^ts gone to Rome; and for the little substance thereof, it may be well
enough (though we doubt not but he will deny it when he comes thither) the
invention of the book is a devised talk had bewixt a secular priest and a lay
gentlemen: before which treatese VV. VV. to wit, whyly VVat tumbler before
mentioned has put as wise a preface as he is wont to the other books of his
fellows that come forth through his hands. And as this worthy work
deserves, bestowing 7. or 8. pages, to prove by all laws and lawmakers,
Ridiculous writing.
divine and humane reasons, and authorities, that man's nature is so weakened by
the fall of our first parents, as Jesuits may sin also, and consequently are
no better then other men: which is like to the discourses made in the beginning
of K. Edward his days to allure old priests to marry by telling them and
proouing, that concupiscence does remain after baptism, and consequently all
must needs have wives or do worse, though indeed the discourse of VV. VV. be
much more fond if you examyne it.

The bulk of this treatese is much conformeable in substance to the folly of
the Preface, though in words it be more te^perate, for that it goes about to
defend and justify the secular Clergy against Jesuits of many slanders
devised by themselves and never laid upon them by the Fathers of the Society,
so far as we can learn or understand, which may be proved as well for that
these men are not indeed the secular Clergy of England (as falsely they
presume) but certain unworthy rags thereof torn and rent from that honorable
body by their own wilful mutiny and rebellion, as also that these plaintifes
were never hitherto charged in particular to our knowledge with those several
accusatio^s which here they set out against themselves by any of the fathers
or their followers but only so far forth as they have either accused
themselves or else (which is the same in effect) have gone about to purge and
defend themselves before they were accused, Absurd accusing and defending of
themselves.
as namely, in the matter of schism; their dealing with the Counsel; their
Appeal to Rome; their hatred to the Jesuits; and their dealing in matters of
State, which are the five cheef general points members and branches whereunto
this little new wrangling Clergy of ours do draw the slanders uttered against
them, but whosoever shall read their books with attention and indifferency,
shall find that they are more desirous to quarrel and pick matter of slander
against others then able to prove themselves to have been any way slaundered,
and whatsoever is there said being but repetitions of things uttered in their
former libels and fully answered by us in our Apology and some former parts of
this present book we will remit the Reader thither, and leave both the libel and
the author, who if he be the man that he is given forth has just occasion by
the writing of this book to think his burden of conscience more increased since
his last dealing with the old good Queen Mary priest, who justly refused to
hear his confession, except he would be ready to acknowledge his sin and
make restitution of fame, for that he had offended in concurring to the setting
forth of the two first books answered by our Apology: which refusal and
admonishment, though proceeding of mere conscience in the good old man, and of
love also to this man's soul (if he had been endued with so much grace and
humility as to consider it) he took so evil (thinking belike that he being so
great a master in Israel should have his confessor to follow him, and not he
the others judgment, in such matter of restitution) as he not only fell out with
the old Father, but went and told it also most profanely to a lay gentleman,
laying the fault upon a Reverend priest Assistant to the Archp. dwelling not
far of and threatening him as though by his counsel this denial of confession
had been made unto him, (...) a letters of this matter subscribed by diverse
hands december. 16. 1601.
whereby he made three several witnesses as you see of his pride and arrogance
or rather of his ignorance and obstinacy, seeing as we have showed before in
this book both Navarre and all other learned deuynes do hold this case of
detraction and infamation which they have used in these libels to bring with
them irremissable obligation to restitution, of their fame whom they have
slaundered and discreditted, and so we doubt not but any learned Catholic man
in christendom at this day (if he be not one of their faction and accomplices)
will say, and knowing truly their case will not dare to absolve them without they
offer themselves effectually to perform the same, and so much the less M.
Mush then the rest of his fellows, by how much the less remorse of conscience
he frames to himself thereof, and yet presumes to know more then others. His
syn also of railing and bitter slaundering the whole company of Jesuits in this
libel is so much the more wicked and odious both to God and man, by how much
the more he is beholding and most deeply obliged unto them, for that they both
took him into the College at Rome by extraordinary favor (being a poor rude
serving man before) and used such special love and charity toward him
afterward (to make somewhat of him) as moved envy to many others. And this is
evident as well by the testimony of all them that lived with him in the College
as also by the printed narration of John Nicols where he complayneth of the
undeserved favors showed always to Doctor Dodipol Mush which contumelious
speech though we approve not in the Apostata, yet shows it the ingratitude of
this fellow against those men now, and so much the more in that he cannot but
speak against his own conscience in so many malicious things as he has set
down contrary to that, which hertofore he has written with his own hand, and
testified with his own mouth whereof good proofs are extant, and some you have
heard in our Apology, and seeing that he sued to be of the Society having a vow
also thereof as himself to diverse has professed, and the Society differring
his admission (as prudently they are wont) to a better satisfaction of his
nature and behavior; for him now to slide so far back, and run so
desperately to the other extreme, as to profess himself their public enemy
(which yet is not rare in such cases wherein diverse of his companions are also
with him) this spirit (we say) how far it may participate of secret Apostasy
from religious vocation in the sight of almighty God we leave to the discreet
reader to ponder with him self, and to weigh the events; which commonly in such
men are from bad to worse, and so to Gods grace and their own consciences we
leave them.

Of the libel of A. C. to his Cosyn.. 3.
THere follows in the number of these libels one see forth by A. C. entitled
an answer to a letter of a Iesuited gentleman, etc who if be the man that we
do guess, we do not greatly maruayle, that after so great variety of State and
formerlyfe as some of us have known him in, he become now to his l^st
preferment to serve the seditious for a scold against Jesuits who have been his
masters and best friends for many years beyond the seas, where both he and his
had need of their friendship, and never wanted it. For some of us knew him
first, a little wanton idle headed boy in the English college so light witted
as once (if we remember well) he went up with a rose in his mouth to preach or
make the tones (as there they call them) before all the college out of a
pulpit. After that he fell to such devotion, as he not only took the oath of the
college to be priest, which now we see how well he has observed, but also
pretended to be an Angustin friar, and proceeded so far therein, as the friars
every day expected his entrance, but how far he proceeded therein for vow or
other obligation we will not affirm for that we are more fearful of conscience
to avouch things we know not for certain, then he seems to be to protest and
swear matters that he knows to be false. Wherefore what he did in that
behalf then; or what dispensation he has had since that time in the one or the
other we leave it to his own conscience at the last day, only it may be taken
for an aduertisment to good Catholics that yonkers which slide back from so
high good desires and purposes do ordinarily slip afterward into dangerous pit^
and dungeous of disorders, and contemn when they be in the depth. But let us
go forward.

From this spirit of religious and ecclesiastical life he fell back again soon
after to the spirit of poetry, forsaking the ordinary study of the house, for
which he was dismissed and sent by the charity of the fathers to the College
of Rhemes thinking thereby to save him from further falling, but being arrived
there, he presently became an enamorate, and fell in love with one of Cardinal
Allens neeces, and proceeded so far therein, as he presumed to write a letter
to the said Cardinal to request his consent that he might marry her, but the
Cardinal took it in so high disdain (knowing the leuity of the lad) as he
gave order presently that he should be put from Rhemes also, from whence he
went to Flanders and became a soldier first amongst the English under Sir
William Stanloy, where his unconstant head suffering him not to stay he went
to serve among the Spaniards, and had besides, by Father Hol^s help and
assistance a pension of 25. crowns a month, and so having eaten of the King
of Spaines bread for diners years, he comes now to pay both him for his
maintenance, and the Jesuits for their good turns toward him with this
infamous inuectiue which here he has printed against them both, with as great
spleen and spite as any malicious stomach in the world could utter against
mortal enemies.

He deuydeth his whole discourse into three points in his first page to wit,
Appeal, State, Jesuits, adding thereunto this sentence Recta securus, which if
Recta be understood in the ablative case it agrees not improperly to his case,
who seems to run securely and without fear in the right way to perdition,
whereunto do lead him not only the vanity and inanity of the young man's head, but
his poverty and need also, in respect whereof it seems he would gladly get in
with some of them that be in authority, whereunto he thought good to make this
prologue, and his brothers living is a great allurement. God grant we see not
him pass further then hitherto is professed by him for where charity is
overthrown, faith soon after is quickly shaken; but now in a word to the
substance of his book.

The first point concerning Appeal and matter of schism, is already
determined by his Holiness especial Breue, to wit, the Appeal rejected, and the
controversy of schism prohibited from further dispute under daine of
excommunication ipso facto; into which this man must needs have incurred if he
knew of the said Breue when he wrote this book, and if not then at least ways
the book it self remains forbidden under the same pain and punishment. And
albeit this were not so, yet were it but lost time for us to answer this
quarreller that seeks but matter of strife and occasion to rail at the
Archpriest, and his Assistants his spiritual Superiors that never deserved evil
of him, and he not understanding the substance of the controversy tatleth
without any purpose at all, saying the same in effect, but yet much less and
worse then others of his crew have said or written before him, and spends
both time and wynd without knowing what he talks: as for example hear one
reason of his.

Then again (says he) for the Jesuits that they are notable schismatikes in
this case, it is not their disclayming from being members of the body of the
Seminaryes but of another body, Page 27.
videlicet, their own society that can excuse them, for that to be a
schismatical member to a body is suffiseth to be membrum genericum to that
body, though not specificum etc. And herby the discreet reader will see how wise
an vniesuited gentleman this is to instruct his cosyn the Iesuited gentleman in
matter of schism.

The other point about State matter is as learnedly handled by him as this.
Harken to one reason of his against the Popes authority to move war for
religion. Page 40.
Besides this (says he) that Christ did never delegate any such power to S.
Peter, as tradere gente^ in gente^, that being a mere temporal revenge and he
but his Vicar spiritual, yea he expressly rebuked him for drawing his sword,
and cutting of Malcas his care, etc. And do you not see by this reason, that
this young gentleman soldier, is fitter to cut of boys ears, then to reason
of State-matters or to hacke at the Popes authority by such arguments as these
are?

But what says he of the third point about Jesuits? Oh here is his vain in
deed, to rail and revel against them, who (good men) have been always careful,
so far forth as in them has lain to stay his shitle brains, and to make him
careful of some christian constancy, but all in vain as it seems. We pray
you hear him a little, and judge of his vain in malediction. The truth is it
(says he) that a Jesuit is a piscator, but not like S. Peter, Page 12.
animarum so much as pecunia^^m, and therefore his fishing is ever best in a
troubled water, etc. And then further a little after: Have you not heard, I pray
you, how not long age a Jesuit here in London crected a kind of family of
love, lecturing by night 3. or 4. nights together to his auditors all women,
and those fair ones for the most part? Have you not heard of the night
meetings for fear, Page ^3.
a^ least wise I am sure you have heart of many and do know some, who mis^ing
their wives the white have scratched their hearts, whore it iched not, and bit
their tippes, etc.

Do you hear this lascivious companion going about to discredit good and
virtuous men, and in them the whole Catholic cause, by the me^sore of his own
beastly and sensual imagination? Do you think this is a Catholic, but only in
the very ryne and paring? No no, this is a copes mate shrouded in a Catholics
coat, an Apostata in his heart from God and all piety, and so we fear that
in the end, he will prove, howsoever in the mean space he make a show to
believe the Cathol. Doctrine, but denying (as the Apostle says) the virtue
force and feling thereof both in words and deeds.

And as for particular impudencyes in this treatese of his he is not ashamed to
avouch, Page ^^.
that F. Persons not many years since did offer by his letter and messenger
both which (says he) are yet extant) to be her Majesty's true intelligencer
from Spain, and is this likely? That the king of Spain after the loss of his
Armada ran to an altar, Page ^^.
and taking a silver candle stick swore a monstrous oath, that he would wast
not only all Spain, but also all his Indies to that candle stick. but he would
be avenged on England, etc. which how likely it is, all they which knew the
said King his grave and modest nature may easily guess. Page ^^.
That the Jesuits have by letters gone about to reproach and desame Cardinal
Allen since his death, alleging for proof the words of Doctor Haddock to Sir
Francis Inglefeld. been profect^ obije. etc. which Doctor was never Jesuit in
his life nor ever wrote such words in latinor English since he was borne. That
F. Persons having hired a couple in Paris, Page ^7.
whereof he says, that he knows one (...) come one evening late to their
college gate with pistole half in sight and half out, and so wish angry looks
to speak with him. etc. and himself with pale look and trembling members to
(...) the Rector, etc. that very n^ght he was conveyed pri^ily out of the
College with mency in^^ugh in his purse, the next day he took his journey to
Rome, etc. which how salfe a devise it is, before has been handled. That the
said F. in his book of reformation does appoint all bishops, Deanes. Prebe^^s,
persons, etc. to be pencioners to the Popes Hol. and to have no other
pr^prictyes, etc. but 4. Jesuits with only 2. seculas priests of their
choosings to be his Holiness Collectors of these renewes, etc. VVherof no one
word, or the like is found in that book, nor ever passed by the writers
cogitation, as may appear by that weeyted before.

And finally his deadly and devilish hatred to Jesuits in General, and to this
man in particular, to whom notwithstanding he was wont to profess great
obligation for his spiritual good, as he is not ashamed to conclude thus of
him: In breef, Page 102.
if he have been a Judas to Gods church and his country, to the disparage of
the Seminaryes, etc. And now where you find such ungrateful traiterous and
Iudas-like natures to them that have been benefical to him and so profitable to
Gods Church and his country as this man has been, what disputing is there with
him? We leave him to Gods judgment, and so an end of that.

Of other two libels, the first called a Memorial, the other the Quodlibettes..
4.
IF the former three books lately come forth, stuffed as you have hard with
infinite slanders, lies and reproaches, would require as many volumes to
answer them and lay forth the malice and untruths therein contained then much
more would these two books that ensue demand the same, the first being only an
infarceme^t of malicious devised calumniations, partly laid together in
England and partly supplied in Flaunders by the factious crew, as the author
himself Robert Fisher returning afterward to himself, and going to Rome of
purpose, The examination of R. Fisher in Rome Martij 1^. 1595.
to discover the same and discharge his conscience did declare under his oath
to his Hol. Fiscal, as by public record appears, which Robert Fisher
confessed also, that notwith standing diverse of the points he had to set down
were known and proved to be false before he came out of England, yet was he
willed to set them down, and publish them when he came to Flanders. He
discovered also his accomplices both in England and Flanders; in England the
faction of Wisbech, whereof now the heads are gone to Paris and Rome: D. Griff.
in Flaunders the two Doct. of the Cleargle in Cambray and (...), whereof the
first is gone (...) which we beseech Go^^ may be merciful unto him in this
behalf: D. Giff.
The second (...) we hear has written letters of late into England to some
friends of his (though nothing of his humor) of no less seditious falsehood
then were the points of that Memorial, affirming that he never liked the
proceedings of such as either in word or work have dealt or written against
the State of England, whereas notwith standing, no man ever flattered so much
the late Card. in that kind as he nor any man of the nation has been so
intemperate in his words hitherto as himself, for which we could allege his
sermons in Rhemes while he was there, his orations also to the Duke of Guise,
D. Giffords. letter to Doctor Allen 7. Maij 1516. together with Sir Fra^c.
VValsin gha^^ pasport and letter unto him 14. Maij 1585.
and other princes at their coming thither, his speches to many private men yet
alive, his letters exta^t to D. Allen Sir Francis Inglefield and others, with
such speches of the highest in England, as very modesty makes us to forbear
to repeat, except we beforced thereunto.

And finally his printed book, de iusta Reip. in principes impios authoritate,
whereunto his name is set, does conteyne such violent matter against all
Princes, but especially him of France at that time (being also a Catholic) and
with whom he had nothing to do, as it is most ridiculous now to see him write
into England as he does against modest religious men, who never came near by
ten degrees to the acerbity of his spirit against both Prince and State, which
we offer our selves to prove at large in another more ample treatese, if we be
required thereunto. And for the present it shall suffice that this memorial of
Fisher was recalled by himself, disauouched by the cheef suggestors afterward,
impugned as ^^lfe and devilish by the cheef and most grauest Clergy men of
England, as appears by a letter of six (...), testifying the same, and many
other letters of the grauest priests of that realm; and finally so absurd in
it self, and apparently forged and malicious, as the very reading thereof did
cause men to abhor it, together with the deuisers and publishers thereof, The
6. A^^stants letter of the 2. of Maij 1601.
and yet have these shameless creatures presumed to diuulge the same now
again in print, but it is their condemnation withal men of judgment, piety or
other good respects.

As for the other great gross libel entitled: A Decacordon of ten
Quodlibetical questions, The ^ececordon or book of Quodlibets.
wherein the author framing himself (as he says) a qu^libet to every Quodlibet,
decideth an hundred cross interrogatory doubts, etc. This is so ridiculous (but
yet impious) a piece of work, as we dare say never came hitherto out in our
tongue, by any sort of fond, furious mad or pathetical men whatsoever. For
whether you consider the Quodlibets or the Quilibets that is to say either the
work it self, and questions proposed or the author and answerer (to wit will
wat the ^umbler) nothing can be imagined more contemptible or contumelious. His
questions are foolish, impertinent, triuial but yet audacious; His answering
rash, unlearned; confuse and inconsiderate; his speech and manner of handling
fan^astical, s^urrilous, infamatorie, and for the most part contradicting
himself, and the purpose that he has in hand: He spares no man that stands
in his way, nor bears respect to any state or condition of men at all, friends
or enemies.

And finally it is a most lewd libel fraught with foolery, ignorance, audacity,
and notorious impudency and irregilious impiety, and would require as many
volumes, as he has Quodlibets to set forth the egregious impicty, and
contemptibility of this ridiculous Quilibet, which hereafter may chance be
done, though in a far shorter sum, when the rest of his books promised of
this argument shall come forth. And in the mean space we understand that the
latin interpreter of our English late Apology, has taken upon him in that
language to say somewhat by way of a certain Appendix to the said Apology, as
well of this Decacorden as the other former libels of that sort and suit:
whereunto we remit our selves, thinking this to be sufficient for this place.

CERTAIN DIRECTIONS unto Catholics, how to discern the truth; and how to
bear themselves in this time of contention with an examination of diverse
notorious and famous lies of VV. VV. in his book of Quodlibets.
CAP. VIII.
ALbeit we doubt not (good Catholic Reader) but that you are weary to hear
and peruse these things already uttered against our brethren, and no little
grieved to behold such scandalous contentions raised and continued among
professors of one and the self same Cathol. religion, yet cannot we let pass
to trouble you somewhat further, and to ad a few words more of this matter in
the end of this treatese which may serve for some direction in this troublesome
and perilous time, for such as have not so great experience of like events.

And the first aduertisment amongst others may and must be to fly to the
contemplation of Gods inserutable providence, whereby he permits these
sca^dals to fall out; in which high providence we shall find not only the
necessity or ineuitability of these disgustful accidents, but the profit and
vtility also, albeit the first be more easily seen and confessed by vulgar
men then the second, but both are most certain. For as for the first about the
necessity of these accidents it is sufficient to remember the word^ of the
Apostle, oportet haereses esse, 1. Cor. 1^.
it is necessary that heresies and divisions should be; and then the words of
our Savior: Math. 1^.
necesse est vt veniant scandala; Of the necessity of scandals.
it is of necessity that scandals should fall out, etc. And furthermore he that
will but consider the practice of almighty God in this behalf, from the first
planting of Christian religion until this day, how among the Apostles, the
Deacons, the disciples, the first believers, the bishops, pastors and other
learned men that followed in all ages, how this providence and discipline of
almighty God did exercise them in this kind, of scandals, breaches divisions,
contradictions, contentions, treasons, afflictions and combustions of mind
(called so by the Apostle, when he says: 2. Cor. 12.
Quis scandalizatur, and ego nonvror, who is scandalized, and my heart borneth
not for it) he that considers this (we say) will easily see the necessity and
ineuitability of this probation every where in Gods work, and consequently in
our English cause also and reduction of our country, being so great and weighty
a matter as it is, and no man will greatly marvel to see the devil rage and
raise up so many scandals and stumbling blocks therein as he does, but rather
will maruayle that he does not more, and that he had not done it sooner
considering matters how they have past. And this for the first point of the
necessity.

As for the second of vtility, Of the vtility of these scandalous contentions.
D^ut. ^2.
more men doubt, as not seeing so easily what profit or emolument may be
expected at least wise in our English cause) by these scandalous and enormous
attempts, which bring with them so many apparent hurts, perils and damages, but
God that draws out mel de petra, oleumque de saxo dur^ssimo, honey from stones
and oil from the hardest rocks, can bring forth good also (if he will) of
these so great evils. And to speak of that we see, and begin to feel already
of his Fatherly mercy therein, one great and important good effect mentioned by
S. Paul in the place before touched, ^. Cor. 11.
has begun now to show it self, which is, vt qui probati sunt in vobis
manifesti fiant; that those that be of proof amongst us, may comme to be known
publicly by these means; that is to say, there zeal, their fervor, their
fidelity to God and his cause, their union with his servants and other such
like points.

Another effect is uttered by the holy prophet S. Simeon in S. Lukes ghospel,
who having said of our Savior yet an infant: Ecce positus est hic in ruinam
and in resurrectione^ multorum and in signum cut contradicetur, etc. Luc. 2.
Behold this child is set for the ruin and resurrection of many, and for a
sign which shall be contradicted, etc. he adds presently, vt reuelentur ex
multis cordibus cogitationes; all this shall happen to the end that the
cogitations of many hearts may be revealed, as though he had said, that one
principal end and purpose why God sent his son into the world to be
contradicted by many troublesome spirits was thereby to make known the good
from the bad, and reveal the cogitations of many men's hearts which otherwise
would be hidden, and this to the ruin or resurrection of many, etc. behold
here a misterious effect, and such a one as is deeply to be wayghed and
pondered by those that desire to comfort themselves in the secrets of Gods
judgments for permitting so great strife, contention and scandals in his Church
as he does.

But now if we will apply this to our own particular case, The application of
the former places of scripture in our case.
thereby to instruct and comfort our selves in this doleful and disgustful
affayre of our brethrens scandalous clamors and contradictions, and that any
should ask us what particular good or vtility may be expected thereby, in
England or to English Catholics? we answer: First that the effect mentioned by
S. Paul, to manifest those that are of proof among us, is evidently already
seen, for that many good Catholics both in England and abroad as well of other
nations as our own seeing the indignity of this scandalous fact of division
set in our church by these disordinate and disco^tented priests have
maruelously showed their compassion, love and zeal in behalf of union, order
and disciplyne and of all good men impugned by the seditious which otherwise
perhaps they would not have done, if this occasion had not been offered; others
also that lived only to themselves before and meddled with no other men's actions
seeing now this, manifest assault of Satan (under priests coats) against our
whole cause and religion have styrred up themselves to knyt and join with
others of the same zeal to resist the enemies malice herin. And this for the
first important effect prophesied by S. Paul: vt qui probati sunt, in vobis
manifesti fiant. A manifestation (no doubt) which will turn to the everlasting
praise of many, for standing zealously in this breach against sedition, whose
fervor and fidelity would not perhaps otherwise so much have been known, or
published, seeing that the standing against open known enimyes is not so
markable oftentimes as the withstanding of domestical.

But now the second effect, of revealing men's h^rts and inward cogitations,
mentioned by S. Simeon, is also diligently to be considered by us, for that the
same is more pertinent and important also to this our English affair then the
former, for that by this revelation made of hearts and mynds by this contention,
English Catholics do come to know what substance and weight there is in every
man, and how far he may be credited when time shall require, which is a point
of no small moment as matters stand with us, for if this revelation and
discovery had not been made by this occasion, but that so great a depth of
dangerous and poisoned humors, as now is broken out, had lurked in men's breasts
until such times as their ability might have been equal to their naughty will for
setting of division and raising broils in our cause and country; what
remediles hurts might have been wrought (think you) both in the one and the
other? but now being reuelated, the predictio^ of S. Paul, so often by us
repeated before will no doubt take place, 2. Tim. 3.
vltra no^ proficient, insipientia enim eorum manifesta erit omnibus. They will
not be able to go much forward in this their attempt, for that their folly
will be manifest to all men.

Well then, Revelation of 3. sorts of people.
and what will be the end, think you, both of men and matters in this affair?
Surely for the matter we have no doubt at all, but that it will receive vtility
by this temptation, for that the holy ghost has avouched it, factet cum
tentatione prouentum, God will give profit also with temptations, and this
profit is evident for that our church after this storm past, will remain as,
Math. 3. Luc. 3.
area purgata and ventilata, as a barn floor swept and cleansed and our corn
both winowed and purged.

But as for the men that have moved this tempest, though we would be loath to
make our selves prophets in their cause and success, but rather do pray
heartily for them, that it may be good, yet if we will consider matters according
to the former prophesies of scripture or else by the foresight of reason and
discourse (which are the best grounds of prophesies of temperate and wise men
in these our days) we may probably make this triple conjecture that some
(especially the writers and publishers of these late libels and principal
dealers with the adversaries) are like enough (if God work not a miracle) to
pass further, and become as Th. Bell and others have done before upon like and
perhaps less ground of passion, and malice; and these are to be deplored as
you see: others that do offend upon evil information only, or have been misled
by other men's persuasions, not seeing the danger whereunto they are drawn will
(we trust) upon sight of the truth return again, and these are as heartily to
be embraced and highly esteemed, as if they had never run away, the ground
thereof not being evil intention; but sinister information.

A third sort there is, that probably will stand indifferent, and doubtful for a
time, and according to this, will good men's opinions be also of them, to wit
dubious and uncertain until they see the final issues of their actions, and
thus comes our Church of England as you see, to know her people distinctly,
as well by manifestation of their actions as revelation of their thoughts which
are the two effects mentioned; prophesied by S. Symeon and S. Paul.

It follows that we say somewhat how Catholics are to bear themselves in this
time of trial, which point may be considered either in respect of the enemy,
and persecutor, or of the trouble some of our owneside, that vaunt to be in
credit and favor with them, and say that the fault is ours, What carrage is
expedient toward the persecutors ^.
that we are not also: And toward the former sort of men together with our
Prince and State, there is no doubt or question but that the dutiful manner of
carriage hitherto used by our English recusant Catholics in all humility,
patience longanimity, obedience and true spirit of Christian sufferance
(whatsoever these brabling people do or have calumniated them to the contrary)
is absolutely the best way, and most pleasing in the sight both of God and man,
and the principal means whereby we may hope that God will one day have mercy
upon us and our country and inspire the hearts both of our Prince and State to
deal more myldly and mercifully with us.

Yet notwithstanding if any question or matter should be urged against
religion, faith or conscience in any one point of Christian Catholic doctrine
and belief, therein it is necessary for every good man to stand firm and
immovable, Where and when Catholics must stand immovable.
and to say with the Apostles: Act. 5.
Oporiet mag is Deo obedire quam hominibus. We must obey God more then men.
And in this point we do not think that any one religious Protestant in the
world holding his faith for true, would not do and say the like, if the case
were his, and concerned his religion, and consequently the yiedling or going
further of these our unquiet spirits in matters that be against true Catholic
Doctrine, and to urge other men also to the same for gayning to themselves some
temporal favor and credit, or to make thereby others odious whom they envy or
mislike, is more perfidiousnesse to God, then fidelity to the Prince or State,
and so ought it to be held by all men of wisdom and judgment of what religion
soever, and no ways to be imitated by those that be true and sincere
Catholics. And thus much for their carriage toward the Prince and state, and
persecutors in Religion.

And as for the second sort, which are our passionate disordered brethren,
broken out from us these months past by intemperate heat of emulation and
contention, the best direction that we can give for Cath. men's behavior and
carriage toward them is, Carriage toward the troublesome
as toward brethren and friends in a frenzy or trance, or as men rather
possessed with violent and raging spirits; that is to say to wish and work all
good unto them that may be procured by good means, but yet to beware of
coming into their fingers, or within their reach whiles they remain in the
fit of their fury, and to the end we may know and consider with what spirits
they are possessed or ruled by for the present albeit we have discussed the
matter somewhat particularly in the preface of this book, and more largely
throughout our Apology, but especially in the last Chapter thereof, yet now
having seen and discerned more of their condition and state by reading their
later books and by the manner of their proceeding and progress in their
affairs. We mean in this place to ad somewhat to that which we have said
before, noting first by the way, that the difference of spirit between man and
man, Difference of spirit, what great diversity and contrariety it makes.
is the greatest and most important difference that in moral matters can be
observed which holds also in beasts, byrds, and other creatures according to
the proportion of their inferior spirit or natural instinct, as for example,
two eggs put in one nest, the one of a dove, the other of a hawk do bring
forth two young byrds, whose bodies at the beginning are not so easily discerned
as the difference of their spirits is seen as soon as they grow up. And the
like is in the whelps and cubbes of dogs and foxes the one naturally running
to man's conversation the other flying, which diversity of spirit, and inward
instinct, bewrays quickly the contrariety of their natures, nor is this only
seen in creatures of diverse kynds, but even in those that be of the same, as
two young colts of one breed the one of a generous, the other of a iadish
inclination are so opposite the one to the other in the whole course of their
future life by this diuersytie of spirit as the one is of much value, the other
contemptible.

And if this hold in horses and other unreasonable creatures, that have only
the participation of the inferior sensual part of soul or spirit, how much
more is the difference to be noted in man, whose higher part guiding all the
rest, depends of the worthiness of his spirit for life and action, wherein
two men that be brethren in birth, and as like one to the other otherwise as
nature can proporture them, yet by this diversity of spirit may they be as
opposite one to the other not only as things of diverse kinds that be enemies by
nature, as hawks and doves wolves and lambs, foxes and dogs but far more,
even as much as heaven and hell. And this we se by example as well of Cain and
Abel Esau and Jacob, Lucifer and Michael borne brethren, as also by evident
reason, seeing that the spirit of man is that whereby he is ruled, and the stern
of all his actions governed, so as if that be naught, corrupted, perverted or
coinquinate with malice, envy, pride, ambition, or other such plagues and
spiritual poisons, he follows that with all violence, as a bark carried away
under full sail with pernicio^s wynds to her assured ship wrack upon rocks of
perdition.

And on the contrary side he that is blessed of God with a good spirit, he
flows on sweetly, though more softely and calmely to the assured port of ever
lasting salvation, and these two men though never so like in shape of body, or
near in propinquity of flesh, office, charge, degree, vocation or other such
conjunction upon earth, yet are they indeed more opposite and contrary the one
to the other, then any reasonable or unreasonable creatures whatsoever, except
only the good and bad angels Michael and Lucifer, by us before mentioned so as
a good and bad spiri^ed man do differ much more then a man and a beast, or then
a wolf and a sheep, which cannot be expressed sufficiently by any other
example then by Satan and Christ, when he was upon earth which very
contrariety remains still between men that participate the one or the others
spirit. So as to conclude you need not (for true discerning of men) to seek any
other note, sign or argument, but only to look upon their spirit and marks
thereof, whether they be of Christ or his enemy Satan, according to the counsel
S. John: 1. Joan. 4.
Probate spiritus si ex Deo sunt, prove spirits whether they be of God or no.
Romans 3.
The reason whereof S. Paul gives: Quicunque enim spiritu Dei aguntur, hij
fitij Dei sunt. For whosoever are ruled by the spirit of God, they are his
children, and contrary wise those that are not governed by that spirit are
children of Satan and not of God: for so the same Apostle affirms plainly in
another place: Romans Ibid.
Si quis spiritum Christinon habet, hic non est eius. He that has not the
spirit of Christ pertayneth not unto him. For which cause he adds so
carefully in the end of his letters: ^. Tim. 4.
Dominus Jesus Christus cum spiritu suo vobiscum. Our lord Jesus Christ be
among you with his spirit. And when he would commend himself and his
determination in matters of virginity, marriage, divorce, and other such of
great importance, he alleges this for cheifest argument: 1. Cor. 7.
Puto autem quod and ego spiritum Dei habeam. I do persuade my self that I
have the spirit of God my Savior.

So then all the controversy or doubt, which here may be; is, who have the
spirit of Christ or go nearest there unto in this contention, Who are likest to
have the spirit of Christ in this contention.
for that this being known it cannot be denied but that whosoever follows or
favors the worser spirit, (except upon misinformation) he shows himself to
be ruled by the same spirit. And as for the spirit of Christ our Savior which
must be our pattern heerin it is evident both by testimony of all scriptures,
as also by the example of his life while he was upon earth, what it was: For
Esaias Esaias 11.
the prophet foretold a seven fold spirit should be in him, to wit the spirit
of VVisdome and understanding, of Counsel and Fortitude, of knowledge and
piety, and of the fear of God. But himself appearing afterward upon earth, not
only confirmed all this to be true, and other things written of him by the
prophets; but preached further, and shows in his actions, the spirit of
humility, mansuetude, meekenes, patience, modesty, sobriety, truth obedience,
poverty, charity and the like, which spirit, whether our discontented brethren,
in their late actions words, and wrytings have showed or no, or rather the
quite contrary spirit of pride, envy, rene^ge, elamors, slanders,
calumniation, disobedience, and the like, is easy to judge by that which before
we have represented out of their books and doings.

And now if we would but relate unto you the hundredth part of that which is
uttered of this wicked spirit in their last book (hitherto seen by us) called
Decacordon or Quodlibes, we should tire you and make your ears glow and yowr
charitable hearts to rue with the hearing thereof. For first if we would begin
with the very name and nature of Quodlibets which the author sets down in
his preface, saying; that in this kind of writing it is lawful for him to
d^spute, whether God or the devil he to be honored? whether our blessed lady
were an adulteress or common woman or not? etc. Who will not say, but that
this Quodlibetical companion, calling himself a quilibet, has a profane,
audacious and impudent spirit to propose and put in print such questions; and
then that he has a spirit also of foolery and lack of understanding in
conioyning with these questions other against himself, to wit, whether a
Seminary priest or a Jesuit ought sooner to be credited, esteemed of, and
followed? etc. Whether a Jesuit be a good or bad man? whether their doctrine
be crroneous, Ibid.
treacherous and seditious or not? etc. Which questions being joined by him
with the former, may seem no less absurdly brought in and called in question
then the rest. And finally he concludes his preface thus.

I will hold the indifferent, The conclusion of VV. VV. epistle to the
Decacordon.
dispassionate and diligent Reader with no longer discourse of a peramble, but
leaving all to his best conceats, I commit his sharp wits or her swyft thoughts
to the speedy encounter of this buck of the first head in the quest at every
Quodlibetical relay, set in the pursuit of their gain, etc. And now we would
ask the same dispassionate reader, what wit or sense is there in this writing?
What gravity, what maturity, what consideration worthy of a priest or sober
witted man? Is Spiritus sapientiae and intellectus (the first spirit of Christ
mentioned by I say) to be found here? But let us pass from the Preface to his
book, or as he calls it, his buck of the first head.

The first and most notorious point of his wicked spirit (contrary to that of
Christ, and all good Christians and Catholic men since that time) is against
religious men, and their profession, affirming first, that all are corrupted. I
have made (says he) an historical discourse, of the beginning, Quodlib. Page
49.
progress, end, and fall, of every religious order, as well of the Basilians,
Antonians, and other among the greeks, as also of the Benedictines, Augustines,
Franciscanes, etc. among the latynes, etc. Secondly he takes, a position in
hand refuted and condemned not only by S. Thomas of Aquine and other writers of
that time, D. Tho.
but S. Chrysostom also, and other ancient Fathers, writing against such
irreligious companio^s in their days and the position is, that the life and
State of secular priests is more perfect, the^ the state of religious men; for
thus he frames his first article of his third general Quodlibet^.

Whether the Jesuits, Page ^.
or any other religious order be to be preferred before secular priests or not?
And then he holds the negative. Who ever hard (says he) or made any
question, Page 15.
but that a secular priest was to be preferred before a monastical person? And
again in another place; All seminary and secular priests are Superiors to
Jesuits, Page ^.
or at least their betters. And yet further in another place. Page ^.
The secular priests, as worthier and superior presons, are ever to be credited
and preferred before the Jesuits in matters of any account. And that you may
know how humble he is, he describes these his high minded secular priests
thus: Page 6.
A gallant troup of as grave sages, and as fine a breed of wits as the world
this day enioyes, etc. A ridiculous definition of a secular priest. Page 4.
Rightly called seculars because they have the cure and charge of souls laid
on their backs to direct all that live in a secular wordly, and temporal State.

Thus he says: and to the end you should not mistake him, as though he meant
of the Jesuits only, or of any other particular religious order, he sets
down this general proposition: Page ^^.
Therefore still (says he) is a secular life of more perfection then a
religious, etc. Now we would ask what spirit this is? what sanoureth it of?
what does it breath forth? Is there here any thing else, but pride, emulation,
ignorance, temerity and folly? But let us hear further the effects of their
good spirit?

He signifies page 42. that he would have, Page 42.
all Jesuits except (says he) they amend their manners and reform their order
damned for ^eretiks, and thrust out of Gods Church, as Apostatates, and
Atheists, etc. as those ietting iuglers (the Pharasyes) were out of the temple
of Ieruss ^Iem, etc. Do you see what spirit of fraternal charity here is? Nay
he goes further to affirm, that their order is no religion at all, and the
persons thereof neither secular nor religious, whereby he incurreth a plain
excommunication ipso facto, Page 61.
by the Bull of Gregory the xiij. which begins: Ascendente Domine in ^^^^lam,
etc. confirmed and ratified again by Gregory the 14. But it seems this man
little esteems ce^sures of Church or Pope, being ingulfed in the main Sea of
outrageous malice, which shows itself most egregiously, Page 35.
in that he persuadeth Jesuits to become Apostatates and leave their religion.
I pray God (says he) they may reform themselves in time by coming (...) of
their order and Society, etc. and then conformable to this good and godly
prayer he says of F. John Gerrard (who both for his birth education, learning
spirit, wisdom religion zeal, modesty, and all other Christian virtues,
Persuading men to Apostasy.
is more fit (as you know) to be this man's master, then he worthy to be the
others man) Well well poor man, I pity his simplicity, that being otherwise of
a good nature, he is much blinded and corrupted in his life and manners by
being a Jesuit, Page 4^. ad marg.
which society would God he did and would forsake, etc. What spirit is this?
could Martyn Luther himself or any other Apostata, give other counsel in such a
cause?

And for that this fellow and his compagnions do delight themselves so much
with secularity and Apostasy, and diverse yea the most of the cheifest heads of
this faction are notoriously known to have slydden back either from the habit
or vocation of religious life to secular, and that it is probably suspected,
that a notorious Apostata or two have had their hands also in the compiling of
these wicked Quodlibets we shall put, them only in mind of the sentence and
judgment of S. Bernard as good and wise a man no doubt as any of them, and
known to have had the true spirit of Christ by the public testimony of his
Cath. Church, who talking of this very matter of going out of religion,
whereunto these fellows exhort Jesuits, does make it such an horrible act, and
the syn so great in him that goes out, and others that cooperate with him
therein, as is dreadful to read. But his conclusion is this: Quid plura?
dissimulatur lex, Bern. Sermon. 63. in Cant.
abdicatur ius, fas proscribitur, derelinquitur timor domini, dantur postremo
impudentiae manus, praesumitur ille remeraerius, ille pudendus, ille
turpissimus, plenus ille ignominia and confusione saltus, de excelso in
abyssum, de pauimento in sterquilinium, de (...) in eloacam, de caelo in
caenum, de claeustro in saeculum, de paradiso in infernum. What shall we say
more of this horrible fact of Apostasy or going out of religion? S. Bernard.
judgments of Apostatas.
When once a man is come to this resolution, he dissembleth the law of God, he
casts from his sight all equity, he banisheth all justice, and the fear of
God is cast away, and so he giving himself lastly over to impudenty he
presumes to make that rash, that shamful, tha^ filthy leap full of ignominy
and confusion, from a high state to a dongton from a fair pauiment to a foul
donghil from a seat of dignity to a loathsome place of filth, from heaven to
earthly mire, from a monastery to the world, and from paradise to hell. Thus
says S. Bernard, and by this may will Watson who calls himself here, John
indifferent and wilful VVil, Page 28^.
se what good counsel he gives to Jesuits in persuading them to make this
wicked and miserable leap so described by so great a Sayn^. And herby also we
see the difference between these men's spirit and that of S. Bernard.

Wherefore being over long to treat matters in order we shall touch only
certain breef heads of his discourses here and there, whereby you may better
discern his spirit. He inueigheth greatly and at large against the Fathers of
the Society page 140. and after that for diverse pages to geather for that they
admit not into their Society every man that offers himself but, Page 48. ad
marg.
that they examine them well, and take their chayse, etc. for which most
laudable diligence hereuyleth the^ in these words: Tow progeny of vipers, you
offalles of scribes and pharasyes, who has taught you to eschew iram venturam,
to sequester your selves from the world? to take upon you the state of
perfection? and to include and exclude, to chase and refuse whom ye list, and
to thrust, back whom you like not of that gladly would This is spoken perhaps
for that diverse of that crew, have been refused by Gods providence and vvisdome
of the Fathers that foresavv their conditions.
enter in etc. Is this your perfection of life? is this your zeal of souls?
etc. ^y blasphemous wretches you prei^^dice christ, etc. No no seditious
Choristes, Dathanians and Aby^onistes, there is no ^ne Scripture, no Canon, no
decree, no tradition of Church, no consent of Doctors, no rule, no principle,
no least clause in the foundation of your society, that makes for you in this
point, of singularity election and choice. And then a little after again.

No no proud pharasyes, you are deceived, non est personarum acceptio coram Deo
nether has be left the kingdom of beauen to be given to one more th^n to
another etc. Railing at the fathers for using choys in admittinge m^.
And what spirit think you comes this of? Is it folly or madness? Is it
spiritus vertiginis or arreptitius, that so inuigheth against the spirit of
discretion and probation in the Fathers before they admit men to the high
calling of religious life? We would ask him what he will say to S. Paul
writing to Tymothy a Bishop, about admitting men to priesthood, ^ Tim. ^.
saying: Manus cito nemini imposueris, etc. do not lay thy hands easily upon
any man to admit him to holy orders. And if any Bishop should admit all that
offer themselves unto him to serve God in that vocation, and this without trial
or notice had of their worthiness; would he praise this man so much trow you as
he rayleth at the Jesuits for making diligent trial of those whom they receive
into their order? who sees not this madness?

Again page 279. and 280. he would have no more youths sent to the
Seminaryes, but new laws rather to be made for inflicting grievous punishments
upon them that send them thither. And this also you see from what spirit it
proceeds. Furthermore he threatens the Catholics page 305. that he and his
fellows, will surceaese from the execution of their functions, and from the
increasing of that number, that will not be advised by them, etc. that is to
say, to be enemies with them against the Archpriest, and Jesuits, and
consequently also against the Pope himself. And further: They will convert no
more (as few God wot they have done already) if this be not graeunted them. Of
what spirit proceeds this, trow you? Is this the spirit of Christ? is this of
his Apostles?

But if you will see the pattern of a strange spirit indeed framed wholly of
deadly hatred and temerity, do you read what this author of the Quodlibets does
write in diverse places of his books most intemperately against F. Persons,
that never perhaps saw or knew him, nor he the other, for if he had, and were
in his right wits he would never write as he does. Page 236. 237. 238. 239. etc.
I mean, says he (after much reuiling used against him) the great Emperor,
irregular, abstract, quintessence of all coins, coggeryes, and forgeryes, who
flying hence with the spoil of many poor Catholics, practiced in Paris to be
exempted from the check of the Parisian Prouincial under pretense that the
Queen had hired certayn^ persons to murder him, etc. This is that famous
conquer^^^ that has bathed all England in priests blood, etc. This is he of
whom his own General reported that he was more troubled with one Englishman,
then with all the rest of his Society: This is he of whom Cardinal Allen held
opinion that he was a man very violent and of an unquiet spirit, Devilish
^ayling against F. Persons.
and of whom M. Blackwel said that his turbulent head and lewd life would be a
discredit to the Cath. cause; and in few, the general conceate of all that ever
have thoroughly conuersed with him is this, that he is of a furious, passionate
hot, cholerike, exorbitant humor, etc. a most diaholical unnatural, and wicked
fellow, unworthy the name, nay cursed, be the hour in which he had the name of
a priest, nay of a religious person, nay of a temporal or lay Jesuit, nay of a
Catholic, nay of a christian, nay of a humayne creature, but of a beast or a
devil, a violator of all laws, a contemner of all authority a stayne of all
humanity, an impostume of all corruption, a corruptor of all honesty and a
monopole of all mischeef, etc.

We leave out ten times as much as this in the same and other places. Answer
to diverse calumniations against F. Persons.
And seeing his lack of shame, charity and honesty is such as to wish that F.
Persons had not been a man nor Christian but a beast or devil, consider whether
the devil himself could speak more like himself than this fellow does, not
only by railing but also by open lying: For as for his going out of England
with the spoil of many poor Catholics, it is a most malicious falsehood, as
Apol. Cap. 12.
other where also has been showed, seeing that F. Persons and Father Campian
both being wholly mayntayned by the liberality of that most excellent zealous
Catholic gentleman M. George. M. George Gilbert.
Gylbert took nothing else in effect of any other, neither had they need. And as
for a certain contribution and collection that certain gentlemen made at F.
Persons instance to be sent to D. Allen for printing of the new testament in
English which arrived to some 2. or 3. hundred pounds, we having informed our
selves, do find that never any one penny thereof entered into F. Persons power,
nor can this calumniator, or any other ever bring proof in any one point to the
contrary.

The other Parysian fiction, is refuted in the former Chapter; and for the
three foul lies that do enfue concerning the speches and iug^ments of the
General, Card. Allen, and M. Blackwel, they all are witnesses of the falsehood
thereof; the General yet living, and esteeming of F. Persons, as the offices and
charges committed unto him both of the English College in Rome, with the
oversight and Praefecture of all other Seminaryes and English men of the
Society do testify. And for the Card. do bear witness not only his actions and
letters set down in the Cap. 4.
Apology, but his nephew also M. Tho. Allen, and M. D. Hadock his kinsman,
Three notorious lies fathered upon F. Claud. Aquauiua, Card. Allen, M. Blackvvel
and master of his chamber, M. Roger Baynes his Secretary and Mator domo all
most intrinsecal to the Card judgment, sense and meaning, who living this day
in Rome do detest this wicked fiction of the Card^ evil opinion or speech of F.
Persons. The third is here in England to answer the matter both by word and
writing, accounting himself nolesse injuriously slaundered by this wicked
forgery, then by other infinite like douises framed against him, which these
malicious people have devised of their own brain.

Wherefore leaving this odious and ireful vain of railing, which has no end
mean or measure when it begins against F. Persons, it is a strange thing to
consider their passion in this behalf, for this fellow having alleged in one
place a very moderate letter of F. Persons written by him from Naples in the
year 1598. A lettere of (...) much abused.
though somewhat corrupted both in word and sense in the allegation as by the
true copy we have discovered; in which letter the said Father does very gravely
set down for excuse of the troubles in the English College at Rome, some
extrin secal causes also not known or considered by others, this fellow was so
much troubled therewith that he wrote as follows: Page 128. and 129. etc.
I could not (says he) with patience set band to paper after I had read this
letter, but walked two or three times up and down my chamber trembling in
anger with my heart as high as my head, to think on the villainy of this Persons;
cursed be the hour wherein he was borne, this filius peccati, sacrilegij,
iniqu^t atis, diaboli, etc. o monster! woe worth the wretch, we worth thee and
all thy Iesuicical brood! etc. Behold here, did you ever hear Hercules fureus
upon a stage Is this preistlike? is this christian man^er of writing against
our even Christian? To what manner of spirit will you ascribe this?

And yet must you note here, that this man or mad fellow rather is brought by
Gods just judgment to condemn himself in a marginal note, He condemns
detraction and uses it. Page 124.
not full three leaves before these outrageous rauings which note says thus: Of
all other sins detraction is holden of deuynes to be most dangerous, because
fame styeth furdest, and would the back byter never so feign make restitution,
yet he can never possibly perform it. Thus he says and more to this purpose
in that note, whereunto we add only those words of our Savior: Deore tuo te
iudico, serve nequam: Luc. ^9.
I do condemn thee by thy owue mouth and confesion thou wicked servant. And so
much for this.

We are weary, and therefore we desire to make an end. If you will see more of
these men's spirit, read page 134. 135. where they affirm Jesuits doctrine, to
be erroneous and heretical, for that they teach the Popes ordinations to be
obayed. Read their contemptuous discourse, of the little respect due to his
Holiness excommunications, page 178. 183. how they call their Archpriest and
immediate Superior, Antipape, Antichrist, and golden calfe. They say that in
matters of succession for our Realm, they mean to abstract the same clerly
from matters of religion: page 150. as though religion were to be had in no
consideration at all, about the next successor; and in the mean space, they
write, that they desire nothing to themselves, An abject quiet sought by the
seditious.
but an abject quiet, in a froundon state, page 198. which is as much to say,
as to eat and drink and live quietly with other sensual abiections without care
of gayning souls or procuring other perfection in them that are gained, if it
be conjoined with danger of persecution or temporal trouble. And who then does
not see this spirit what it is, and whether it tends. But let us yet hear
some other marks thereof.

You have heard in our Cap. 9.
Apology what a stir VV. VV. keeps in his spiritual commonwealth about
places and preeminences, and sitting at table just as our Savior describes
the matter in the ghospel of pharasaical vanity, Matthew. 22.
amant primos recubitus in caenis, etc. they love to have the highest places at
the table, etc. But now in this book as a fuller treatese of all their
spiritual designments he handeth the matter much more largly in diverse places,
showing thereby how he and his fellows are mightily impressioned with this
vanity of sitting in the higher place, and himself tells stories of his own
shameless striving for the same with men of great calling, being fitter for
his own baseness, evil feature, and contemptible qualyties to sit lowest at the
tables end, or to be thrust out of the parlour into the hal or kitchen, then to
sit with such men as he braggeth that he has done, if he be the man of whom
he writes. Hear his first complaynt.

Old Pinny (says he) the Inkeper of Broadway in Somersetshire, Page ^^.
would always take the highest place at the upper end of the table, A grave
complaynt against hosts for sitting at the upper end of the table.
whosoever had been his ghest, which though in some sort his old age might
excuse, yet is the contrary course more commended among civil gentlemen and
nobles generally, etc. And I once being in company where ^ secular priests
being at supper with a noble person, his L. would not sit down until they all
were set, jesting merrily, that priests and women had always the preeminence in
the land of peace, etc. But now that a religious man should have or look for a
place of honor or preeminence, among men, having by sollemne vow renounced all
earthly honors and dignityes, etc. was never hard of before this day. And this
much in that place against Pinny his host, that sat above him, and in
comendation of the noble man, that gave him the upper place.

But in another place he handles the matter more largely showing three valiant
exploits done by a certain priest (which we may immagine was himself) at the
table side against other three all gentlemen and the one a priest, that would
have set before him: Page 117.
A very fit example (says he) taking his argument about stryuing for places at
the table) was of la^^ showed by a secular priest to three sundry persons all
Catholics, and one of them a priest also iesuited, the first being a lay
gentleman, but of meaner calling then either of the other to whom he gave
place at table, hand, wall and style, because he saw it proceeded of simplicity,
inciuility and rudenes in him, etc. To the second having given place also
before time, because he was an intruding person, and one that thought himself
no small fo^le, being able to dispend eight hundred pounds by the years, the
said secular priest reasoning with him at one time about these matters, etc.
took him by the sleeue, as they were going to dinner in a Catholic company,
where they were sure, and thrust him back sitting down before him and telling
him in plain terms that the case was altered, and that albeit he had winked
at his arrogance before, yet now for the honor of priesthood, he must make him
know his duty and give place to his better, etc.

To the third (which was a gentleman priest) understanding that he had boasted
of this gentility and noble alliance, and that therefore he was to be preferred
before any other secular priest, that was not a gentleman of equal calling with
him, they iumping just together upon a time at dynner, he put him back, and
after the table was drawn taking him a side he said: Sir, Extreme vanity and
folly.
I understand you boast much of your gentility preferring it before your
priesthood, it is a foul byrd that defiles his own nest, a base minded,
ignorant, and unworthy priest, that knows not whether he takes his place
according to his dignity and calling or not, and as worthy to have his skyn
razed, cut of, and fleaed both from head and hand, and so degraded, as an
abuser of noblenes and gentry deserves to have his colors reuersed, his arms
pulled down, and his coat pulled over his ears, and so degentred for ever
after. Know you therefore Sir, etc.

Mark here the spirit of humility and meekness in these men, and to what case
they are come, that dare not only do these things and commit these insolences,
but brag of them also in writing. Here is fulfilled the saying of the holy
Ghost, Prou. 2.
gloria^tur, cu^ male fecerint, and exultant in rebus pessimis. They do glory
in doing evil and triumph in the greatest wickedness which they commit.

We might here consider of many other things as vain, false and wicked as
these infarced throughout this book, without all conscience, modesty or respect
of christianity, if time did permit us, and that we were not ouercloyed with
these. Page 12. 13. 37.
We might set you down how wickedly many gentlewomen, and noble personages
are here discovered, discryed and dishonored, some by name, some by signs and
letters and other like most perfidious detections. We might lay open unto you
how seditiously the author of this book goes about to set rancor, Page 3^. 113.
malice and sedition between the noble houses of Arundel, Howards Dacres, and
others. How he threatens Catholics with new persecution, if they abandon not
the Archpriest, with the rest of his clergy and Fathers o^ the Society, Page
194.
against whom he threatens, that he and his companions, Page 25.
like angry sleeping dogs unwillingly awaked by them, will now both bark,
byte, and leap in their faces, etc. all which shows the quality of their
spirits.

But no one thing shows the same so much (as often we have noted) as their
most impudent devised and forged lies both against the Society in general, A
notorious spirit of lying.
as page 311. That the King of Polonia is defeated of the kingdom of Suetia
only by their treacherous, ambitious and tampering aspyres (a thing notoriously
false as is most evident) as also against F. Persons in particular without
number or limitation. As for example that he wrote a letter to the Marquis
Huntley of Scotland about that kings title (to whom we understand he never
wrote letter in his life) and that he sent a Jesuit priest to the late Earl
of Essex to have him take a pension of the king of Spain (a mere forgery as
we are acertayned) and that the said Father (under benedicite be it spoken
(says he) cosened a very reverend priest and ancient gentleman old M.
Midleton of three hundred pounds at least; Page 150.
and that he dealt with him about the succession of the lady Infanta to
England, Page 306.
and her marriage there.

These (we say) and infinite such other bold assertions being altogether
known to be false, and uttered without all remorse of conscience, do plainly
discover the spirit of Satan delighted principally with lying. Confutation of
the lies about Middleton.
For as for this Midleton among the rest which often is mentioned by these
companions, we have informed our selves of grave men, that were in Civil when
he came thither and know all that passed there in his affairs, and do avouch
that this Middleton, whom he calls old being of some forty years of age
coming out of England into Spain with some store of money hidden about him
(though not half so much perhaps as here is mentioned) about the year 1594.
bringing with him a youth that was his brothers son, and arriving first at
the English College of Vallidolid, and hearing that F. Persons was at Civil,
he resolved to go thither, but yet in such miserable poor sort, as though he
had been a very beggar in deed in respect whereof he did not only take the alms
of the said College of Vallidolid, but of all other houses also of the Jesuits
in the way, which is 300. miles, offering to ly in their stables and hayloftes
amongst their servants, when they had no room within the house, as at Cordu^
by name where he got 30. spanish ryals of alms, which had been gathered in the
Church at a sermon for a poor Italian, this man making his necessity to be
greater then his, and then coming to Civil he so assaulted F. Persons with
weeping and tears, and by intercession of D. Stillington and M. Martin Array
his country men and others, as he took his nephew for scholar into the house,
and himself also for commoner through their infinite importunity, but yet so as
he offered to pay his own commons, and somewhat also at the beginning for his
nephew, who being a very proper youth died soon after, and that greatly
occasioned (as he said) by his uncles intemperate dealing with him, and after
P. Persons was departed from Civil to Madrid, his said uncle the old Midleton
was removed also by the Rector out of the College for his intolerable,
passionate and unruly behavior, which yet the Father returning to Civil did
seek to remedy most charitably, and being importuned by his continual
solicitations with tears and cries, yielded also at length to have him made
priest by priuiledg of the Seminary, The ungrateful behavior of M. Midleton
toward F. Persons.
which he once having obtained and F. Persons departed thence again he fell out
with the Rector again and with M. Martin Array and other friends, and so went
he away from Civil insalutato hospite, and going thence to Madrid he found F.
Persons there, who offered again to provide for him in the Seminary, or
residence of Lisbone, but he refusing to go, stole away secretly from Madrid
also and went toward Rome in the year 1596. and in the way falling into the
company of a Spanish gentleman that loved greatly F. Persons, he made himself
his dearest friend and scholar, and thereby got the most part of his charges;
but when he came to Rome, he joined again which the troublesome there, where
F. Persons arriving soon after he excused the matter, and asked him pardon, by
whom he was very courteously used, and often times invited to the College,
and being afterward taken in a certain tavern with some disorderly scholars
and put in prison, he was delivered again soon after by F. Persons means,
and besides this when he meant a little after to depart from Rome the said
Father not only procured him the grant of xxv. Crowns in gold of his Hol. for
his viaticum, but also agreed with one Don Andrea de Cordua a noble Spanish
gentleman in Rome auditor of the Rota that M. Middleton should go down with
his nephew a young noble man, into Flaunders in form of a certain tutor, and
thereby have his charges born by the way, which yet took no effect, for that two
days before they should depart according to his former tricks he delighting
more in private begging then otherwise to be provided for, departed secretly
out of Rome, without taking his leave of F. Persons, or any of the English
College, in so much as great doubt was conceived what was become of him until
some months afterward it was understood that he had passed beging through
Germany into France where he placed himself in service with a certain Bishop,
and thence again in the year 1600. he returned to Rome, and repayring to F.
Persons was by him most courteously received and entertained for diverse days
in the College, notwithstanding all the former prankes played and ingratitude
showed, which he fell unto afterward again, joining with them that were
factious abroad, and so went from Rome again without saluting him.

And this is the whole true story of M. Midleton so often objected by our
seditious people in their libels, for which cause we have thought best to
relate the same once at large, to the end you may by this one example judge of
many more of like kind alleged against F. Persons, the truth whereof we have
received by the relation of diverse grave and Reverend priests that do know all
this to be most true, and can prove it by many witnesses, and that F. Persons
never so much as talked with Midleton in his whole life of the Infanta to his
remembrance, or of her succession or marriage in England, he being no fit man
for such treatyes, and much less that F. Persons ever had penny of his money
by cosenage or other ways, but that whatsoever he brought to Civil with him,
he carried away again, excepting only that little contribution which for
himself and his nephews commons he paid to F. Peralta the Rector of that
College, as he will testify, which was much less then they spent, or
otherwise could have had for double in other places. So as heerby you may see
the truth of these libels, or rather the lying spirit of the writers.

There were no end if we should go forward to repeat but the hundredth part of
notorious slanders and lies which are diuulged in this infamous book of
Quodlibets, About the book or Memorial of Reformation.
nay it would ask a particular volume to answer the manifest untruths, and
shameless assertions, that are in one only article of one of his Quodlibets,
to wit the second article of the fourth Quodlibet where among many other
absurdityes and notorious lies, he presumes also like a bold blind bayatd to
put down resolutely and particularly, the Decrees and particular statutes (as
he terms them contained in the fornamed book ascribed to F. Persons about
the reformation of our English Church in a Catholic time, of which book we
have written sufciently before in the 5. Chapter of this work, and only have
to ad in this place, that the audacity of these people, is such, as not having
seen or read that book as appears by their writing, yet do they every where
urge the same, first under a known false title devised by themselves, calling
it, the high Court of Reformation, Supra Cap. 5.
the true title being, A memorial for Reformation, etc. as has been declared;
and then setting down such decrees (whereas indeed nothing is decreed but
suggested only throughout that book) as never were made, written or thought of
by the author, but rather the quite contrary.

As for example they say, the first decree is, that when England shall be
restored to the Cath. faith, no orders of religious people, shall be suffered to
return into England or be permitted to live within the Brytans Ocean (as their
words are) but only Jesuits and Capuchynes, and this for that Capuchines taking
no rent or temporal possessions, the Jesuits shall remain with all, etc.
VVheras first he that reads the said Memorial shall not find the Jesuits so
much as once named throughout all that book; and secondly there is no speech of
British Ocean or Scotland therein contained, but only of England. And thirdly
the plain contrary to that which they affirm is expressly set down in
diverse parts of the said Memorial, to wit, that all religious orders approved
in the Church of God, without exception should be restored in respect of the
public injury done to all by their expulsion, which is set down in one place
thus:

And for that religious orders have been more defaced, Memorial of Reform. part.
1. Cap. 7.
dishonored and persecuted in our realm, then in any other Christian country
in the world, perhaps it would be convenient to make such amends and recompense
as is not besides in any other kingdom, to wit that all the approved religious
orders, that are in the Church of God, should be called into England, and
placed jointly in the city of London at least, for that it is to be presumed,
that this city would be capable of all, and from thence they might be deryued
afterward by little and little into other places of the Realm as commodity were
offered, About the restoring of religious orders into England.
and as men's devotions should require, and as they should be proved to be most
profitable and agreeable to the state of our country, but altogether to be in
London, and that in the perfection of their first institution would be a most
excellent thing, and a privilege above all other kingdoms in the world, where
all religious orders are not seen together, and much less in the perfection
of their first institute and observance, which ought to be the condition of
admitting any order into England at our next reformation, be they men or women,
to the end that the greater glory of God be procured in all things.

Thus says the memorial in this place which is afterward repeated again upon
diverse occasions, as namely in the second part and 6. chapter, where it is
said: that as on the one side it is greatly desired (as before has been noted)
that all the approved religious orders of Gods Church should be admitted again
into England for more honorable satisfaction of impietyes committed against them
in times past by their eiectio^; so is there no less desire of good men, that
such persons thereof may be called, as will promise the perfect observation of
their first institution, and rule, and thereby be true lights and salt of our
country indeed, etc. This is there written: and now let every one judge how
honest and true a man he is, that puts forth these Quodlibets, and so
shamfully avouches the contrary.

The second act enacted or Statute (says he) made in that high infernal
Consistory, Page 93.
was concerning Church and Abbey lands, etc. all which must be under the holy
Society of Jesus, presently upon the establishing of the spiritual monarchy,
which done, their Father General must call out 4. Jesuits and two secular
priests, (who must be also demi Jesuits) and these six vicars (I pray God not
of hell, for of heaven they are not) like six Duch peers shall have the lands,
Page 94.
means, etc. resigned over to their hands, for to allow to Bishops, persons,
and Vicars, etc. a competent stypend only to live on, even as the Turks
Bassaes and Genisaryes do live under him.

Thus writes he as out of the said book whereof no one word is there but all to
the contrary. The third Statute (says he) was made concerning the nobility and
gentry, such as (to omit others) Sir Robert Cecil, Sir John Fortescue, etc.
with sundry other knights and Squyres, all which were limited by that blind
profane parliament, what retinue they should keep, how much should be allowed
them to spend yearly, etc. And do you not think these men to be more then half
frantic that publish such devises in print?

The fourth Statute (says he) was made concerning the common laws of this
land, and consisted in this principal point, that all the great Charter of
England must be burnt, Page 94.
and all the manner of holding lands in fee simple, fee tail, frank almayne,
etc. must be brought into villainy, schoggery and popularity, etc. Thus he
says; but if you read the book it self you shall find the plain contradictory
of all put down in the said Memorial. For in the fourth Chapter of the third
part thereof which is entitled: Of the Innes of Court and study of common
laws, etc. the whole course of the same laws is persuaded to he continued
with supply of some points that may be found wanting and reformation of others
that may be abused, so as all this here alleged is a mere fiction in the
air.

The fifth Statute (says he) was concerning Calumniation, with a prouiso in
the forsaid Statute that whosoever did offend a Jesuit, or speak against this
high Counsel of Reformation, it should be lawful for the Fathers or their
Synodical ministers to defame, detract and calumniate him or her at their
pleasure; be who they shall be, noble peer, or Prince, Bishop, Cardinal or the
Pope himself, etc. To this devised Statute, we know not what to say, seeing
there was never any such word or thought.

The sixth Statute (says he) in the forsaid high Counsel of Reformation, may
weary well be called the Statute of Retractation, which is a hoate counterblast
to the former horneblast of Calumniation, and it goes under the tenor of a
prouiso, that if such and such things do happen, then the persons defamed,
contemned and condemned ad inferos alive, shall be as highly exalted, advanced
and elcuated ad caelos after their death, etc. This they write, which being
matters of mere madness, as you see, and never dreamed of by the author,
deserve only contempt and compassion for answer, especially seeing that in the
end of all their babbling about this book of reformation and Statutes therein
contained, they conclude their whole treatese thus:

Happy were some men, Page 109.
if they might but have a sight of that Statute book, etc. No doubt, but he
should find notable stuff in it, that would serve for many purposes, etc.
Confession of their own folly and malice^
This he seems to say of himself confessing herby that he never saw the book
by him impugned, so that whatsoever he has set down in almost 20. pages
together against the same is not ouely without book but also must needs be
forged and devised hy himself. And this is sufficient to show the man's honesty
and the credit of his compagnions and cause.

All which being considered little more needs to be said in this place, for
direction of discreet and prudent Catholics how to bear themselves (which is
the argument of this Chapter) in this time of controversy and contention raised
by the common adversary and mayntayned by his instruments, wherein we can say no
more, but as the holy Apostle S. John said vnctio docebit, 1. Joan. 2.
the sweet direction of Gods holy spirit will be a sufficient guide unto
Catholics in this behalf; 1. Cor. 12.
and the discretion or discerning of spirits so often and highly commended by
S. Paul, Hebr. 5.
and by us before recommended will yield abounda^t light for the same.

For he that shall but a little consider with himself on what side goes the
spirit of modesty, Some considerations for discerning the spirit of our
contentious.
patience, longanimity, obedience, truth, charity, mortification, fear of God
and the like, and on the other side the plain contrary spirits of clamors,
rage, revenge, envy and emulation, audacious speches, disobedience, contempt,
resistance, temerarious assertions, false and slanderous asseuerations, as out
of their books have been showed. He that will weigh further with himself, where
how and when, and by what men, and against whom and upon what causes and
motives these emulations and contentions were first begone, and have been
continued since and what manner of men out of all sorts of discontented people
have run unto them against their Superiors, masters, Fathers, and
benefactors, and what ends the most of the^ have had or are like to have,
according as in our Cap. 2. 3. 4. and 5.
Apology we have declared. He that will ponder moreover how, and by whom this
great work of Englands conversion was begone, and has been mayntayned since,
and is brought to the state wherein now it stands, and that the union of this
body has ever consisted in due subordination of one to another, which these
men now cannot abide; it will be very easy to frame a sound judgment of the whole
cause and men that handle it.

For first denied it cannot be, that priests and Jesuits joining all together
at the beginning of the Seminaryes, both at Doway, Rhemes, Rome, and other
places afterward, to wit, D. Allen, D. Saunders, D. Stapleton D. Bristow, D.
VVebbe and many other grave men of our nation, Who do gather and who do
disperse.
together with the help, credit, and assistance of the Fathers of the Society,
both there and else (...) did set this cause first on foot, and have promoted
the same ever since, with conjoined labors of teaching, preaching writing
books and the like, and God has prospered their labors, as by the effects we
see, which being so it is easy to perceive what spirit this is now which goes
about to separate and disioyne all this again, under fond and odious
pretenses, that they are of diverse bodies of diverse Societyes and of different
vocations? etc. Is not this that devilish spirit of dispersing; so much
detested by Christ himself in the ghospel? Consider we pray you, who do gather
and who do disperse.

And then further if we consider wherefore these dispersers have made all this
trouble and division, all this foul breach in our public cause that was so
highly honored and admyred by strangers before, and have alienated so many
men's hearts from us, and given so much matter of joy and laughter to our enemies
at home: Why our contentious priests have styrred so much.
if we examine what has been the foundation of all this we shall find no other
by their own confession, but for that an ecclesiastical Superior was put over
them without their asking or consent. But was this a sufficient cause (trow
you) to make so great broils in such a time and place, as this is? Suppose he
had been an evil man that was so appointed (as no moderate Cathol. or Protestant
we think will affirm that know him) had it not been more modesty, meeknes and
prudence also to obey, as the rest of the Clergy did (being twenty to one of
them and their faction) then to have made these scandalous broils, for which
their souls must one day answer to almighty God?

And yet further when afterward upon their first tumultuation that little
treatese of schism was written with diverse sharper words then some could have
wished, but yet taken out of the Canons themselves, and suppose it had been
ouersharply and unadvisedly done, yet seeing it was never printed, nor passed
furrher then the hands of particular men at home, can this be an excuse to such
multitudes of horrible sclaunderous books and libels published fynce for
revenge both in English and latin, to the utter infamy of our cause and Nation?

No heretic or Archeretike, All heresies have some show of just cause given
them at the beginning.
that ever was, wanted some probable show of offense or expostulation at the
first breach, as may be showed in every one of them: and if we believe the
writers of our time Martyn Luther had no small occasion given him by the
Dominicans, for depriving him and his order of the preminence to publish the
Popes Bulls. John Caluyn also had a great exasperation by the Bishop of Noyon
in France, that burned him in the back; But was this enough (think you) to
justify or excuse the scandals that after ensued by their seeking of revenge?
One thing is certain in this our case, and not unlike to theirs (especially to
that of Luther) that as he knowing well his superiors mind and judgment to be
against him, and not daring openly to contradict them, gave fair words and
promises for a good space, but ever did the contrary and passed from worse to
worse: so our trouble some people knowing from the first beginning of the
institution of the Archpriest yea before he was appointed, that his Hol.
judgment and affection was wholly against them in this contention and emulation
against the Fathers of the Society (for he had told diverse of them so by his
own mouth in Rome before they came from thence and this with very sharp speech
as in the Cap. 4. and ^
Apology is showed) yet went they forward in protesting in their first books,
that their quarrel was only against Card. Cai^tans letters, and the credit
thereof, and that any least word of his Hol own writing should quiet them and
end all controuersyes; and yet now after two Apostolical Breues written to
content and satisfy them, and diverse other letters both of the Card. Cai^tan,
and Burghesius, and others to the same effect to testify his Hol. will, desire,
judgment, resolution, determination, and commandment therein, yet are they more
troublesome and less satisfied then before and do break to further scandals
every day more then other as you see.

If any man will maruayle at this, and ask the true causes, we can answer no
otherwise, but that this is Gods judgment against them for breaking union and
unity so highly commended, and earnestly commanded by Christ in his work. But
if we will seek for some other causes also a parterei, Causes of obstinacy.
there want not diverse, especially that of ambition, liberty of life, and their
promises and obligation to their new patrons my L. of London and orhers; All
which being considered; no man ought to maruay le if they hold out with great
obstinacy in she contraspem, as M. Bluet says in his letter to M. Mush, even
against the remorse of their own consciences. God send them his holy grace to
see the danger whereunto they run. And with this we end this whole treatese.

FINIS.

