A LITTLE TREATISE CONCERNING TRIAL OF SPIRITS: TAKEN FOR THE MOST part out of
the Works of the R. F. ROBERT PARSONS, of the Society of JESUS.

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED a Comparison of a true Roman Catholic with a Protestant,
whereby may be discovered the difference of their Spirits.

With an Appendix taken out of a later Writer.

My dearest believe not every Spirit, but prove the Spirits if they be of God,
because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. 1. Ioh. 4. 1.

IHS

Permissa Superiorum. 1620.

A COMPARISON OF A TRVE ROMAN CATHOLIC WITH A PROTESTANT, whereby may be
discovered the difference of their Spirits, not only in things belonging to
faith and belief, but also concerning their lives, conuersations and manners:
taken out of a more ample discourse of this subject, made by that worthy and
reverend Father, F. Parsons, is the 20. Chapter of his Examen of Fox his
Calendar, the last six Months.
FIRST the Roman Catholic A comparison of a true Roman Catholic with a
Protestantin matter of doctrine.
(whom Fox calls Papist) touching matters of Faith and belief, composeth
himself to that humility, as whether he be learned or unlearned, or what
arguments soever he has on the one or other side: yet presumes he to
determine nothing of himself, but remitteth that determination (if any thing
be doubtful or undetermined) unto the judgment and decree of the universal
Church, and Governors thereof. And hence proceeds the agreements and unity
of Faith, which they have held and conserved in so large a body, for so many
ages, as have passed since Christ and his Apostles. Whereas Protestants in this
behalf following another Spirit of self-will, and self judgment, and
loosing the raynes of liberty to the pregnancie of each man's wit, do hold and
determine what their own judgments for the time do think to be true, or
most probable, and are subject to no authority in this behalf, but to their
own Spirit; which is variable, according to the variety of arguments and
probabilities that do occur. And hereof do ensue the great variety of
sects and opinions among them, even in this one age since they began, as you
may see by that which is set down in the third and seventeenth Chapters of the
fourth part of the three Conuersions of England.

Next to this, for so much as appertains to life and actions; the Catholic
man holds that we can do nothing at all of our selves, no not so much as to
think a good thought, but we must be prevented and assisted by Gods holy
grace, as may be showed out of the Council of Trent, which teaches with
Saint Paul, that our sufficiency ^rid. Sess. 6. cap. 16.
is of Christ; yet is the force of this grace so tempered notwithstanding, as
it uses no violence, nor excludes the free concurrance of man's will, prevented
and stirred up by the foresaid grace of our Savior, and motion of the holy
Ghost: So as freely by this help, we yield to the said good motions, and do
believe in God, and his promises: and this act of Faith (as you may learn out
of the said Council) is the first foundation and root of all our Sess. 6. c. 8.
justification: but yet not sufficient of it self, except Charity and Hope
(two other Theological virtues) do accompany the same; so as we do both love
and hope in him, in whom we believe. And out of these, and by direction of
these, do flow again other Christian virtues, called moral: for that they
appertain to the direction of life and manners, which virtues do consist
principally in the inward habits and acts of the mind, and from thence do
proceed to the external actions and operations, whereby we exercise our
selves in keeping Gods Commandments, and exercising works of piety toward
our neighbor, as clothing the naked, feeding the hungry, visiting External
actions flowing of internal virtues.
the sick, and the like. In works of devotion in like manner, as singing, and
praying to God, kneeling, knocking our breasts, mortifying our bodies, by
fasting, watching, and other such like. All which exterior actions are so
far forth commendable and meritorious, as they proceed from the inward
virtues and motions of Gods Spirit.

And albeit (as Saint Thomas says) these exterior acts do add nothing S.
Tho. 1. 2. q. 20. art. 4.
in substantial goodness to the inward acts, but have their merit from
thence; yet, for that man consists both of spirit and flesh, it was reason
that he should be bound to honor God with both, that is to say, both with
inward acts of virtue, proceeding from Gods grace and motion, and with outward
virtuous acts, testifying the inward, whereby we see what an excellent
Christian Commonwealth the Catholic Religion does appoint, if it were
executed according to her doctrine, to wit, that all men's minds should be
replenished with all sort of virtues, toward both God and our neighbor, and
that their actions should be full of all righteousness, piety and charity in
exterior behavior, so as neither in thought, word, nor deed they should
offend either of them both. And thus much for the Catholic man, concerning his
actions, life and manners.

But this Catholic Religion does not stay here, nor teach only in general
what actions a Christian man should have, and from what internal principles of
grace and virtue they should flow, but does offer us diverse particular means
also how to procure, The Catholic doctrine of seven Sacraments, and their use.
and conserve, and increase this grace, which is the fountain of al goodness:
for first, it exhibiteth unto us, besides all other means of prayer, and
particular endeavors of our part, seven general means and instruments left
us to that purpose, by the institution of Christ himself, which are seven
Sacraments, that being received with due disposition of the receiver, do
always bring grace by the virtue and force of Christ's merit and institution,
without dependence of the merit, or demerit of the Minister that administreth
them. By use of which Sacraments, infinite grace is derived daily by Christ our
Savior unto his Church, and particular members thereof, in every state and
degree of men.

Moreover, Catholic Religion not contented with these generalities, does The
particular direction of a Christian man from his Baptism until his death, by
help of diverse Sacraments. Baptism.
come yet more in particular to frame direct, and help a Christian man in the
way of his salvation, even from the first hour of his birth in Christ, until
his soul, departing from this world, be rendered up again into his Creators
hands. For first, he having all his sins forgiven clearly and freely by the
grace of Christ received in Baptism, he is strengthened to the fight and
course of a true Christian life, by the Sacrament of Confirmation, and
imposition Confirmation.
of hands: his soul also is fed, and nourished spiritually by the sacred food
of our Saviors body in the Eucharist: Eucharist.
two several states of Christian life are peculiarly assisted with grace of
two particular Sacraments, Priests and Clergymen by the Sacrament of Holy
Orders; and married people by the Holy Order.
Sacrament of Matrimony. And for Marriage.
that in this large race and course of life (as Saint Paul calls it) we often
fall and offend God by reason of our infirmity; there is a most sovereign
Sacrament of Penance, for remedy hereof Penance.
appointed by our provident Savior, founded in the merits of his sacred
Passion, called Secunda tabula post nausragium, by holy Fathers, that is, the
Hier. in cap. 3. Esa. and ep. 8. ad Demetr.
second table or planke, whereon we may lay hands, and escape drowning, after
the shipwreck of our pardon, Pacian. ep. 1. ad Sympron.
grace and justification received in our Baptism, which was the first table:
by which second table of Penance, all sorts may rise again how often soever
they fall; which Sacrament consists of three parts, sorrow for our sins,
and confessing the same, for the remission Contrition Confession Satisfaction.
of the guilt, and some kind of satisfaction on our behalf, for removing the
temporal punishment remaining: the true use whereof brings such exceeding
help and comfort to a Christian soul, as it is unspeakable. For that by the
first two parts a man is often brought sweetly to sorrow for his sins, to think
upon them, to detest them, ask pardon of God for them, to make new purposes of
better life for the time to come, to examine his conscience more particularly,
and other such heavenly effects as no man can tell the comfort thereof, but he
that receives them.

By the third part also, which is Satisfaction, though a man perform never The
force of Satisfaction.
so little thereof in this life, yet does it greatly avail him, not only in
respect of the grateful acceptance thereof at Gods hands, for that it comes
freely of his own good will, but also for that it humbles even the proudest
mind in the sight of almighty God: it restrains also greatly our wicked
appetites from sin for the time to come, when we know we must give a
particular account, and satisfy also for our sensualities somewhat even in
this world. And finally, it is the very chief sinew of Christian conversation
and behavior one toward another: for when the rich man knows (for example
sake) that he must satisfy one way or another, and be bound by his ghostly
father to make restitution so far, as he is able, of whatsoever he has
wrongfully taken from the poor, when the poor also are taught that they must
do the like toward the rich, the son toward his father, the servant
toward his master, if he have deceived him; when the murmurer in like manner
knows that he must make actual restitution of fame (if he have defamed any)
this Catholic doctrine, I say, and practice, must needs be a strong hedge to
all virtuous and pious conversation among men, that believe and follow the same.

And finally, not to pass to more particularities, whereas Catholic doctrine
teaches us, that all or most disorders of this life in a sensual man (to omit
the infirmities of our higher powers in like manner) do proceed originally
from the fountain of Concupiscence, and law of the flesh remaining in us after
our baptism, and, ad The war of Consupisce^ce and help of Gods grace for the
same.
certamen, as holy Fathers do term it, that is to say, for our conflict and
combat, to the end our life may be a true warfare, as the holy Scripture
calls it. This Concupiscence, I say, or sensual motion, being the ground of
our temptations, though it be not sin of it self, except we consent unto it,
yet is she busy in stirring us daily to wickedness; as a Christian man's
principal exercise, and diligence, ought to be in resisting her, which he may
do by the help and assistance of Christ's grace, (merited by his sacred
Passion) wherein he extinguished the guilt of this original corruption, though
he left still the sting and provocation for our greater merit, and continual
victory by his holy grace, in them that will strive and fight, as they may and
ought to do.

But yet, for that this fight is combersome, and fastidious in it self, and
deadly also to many, that suffer themselves to be overcome; the Catholic
Religion does teach a man how he shall fight in this conflict, what arms, and
defense he may use in particular to defend himself, and to gain victory. And
to this head or branch are red^ced all our spiritual books and volumes about
mortification, as well of our will, judgment, and affections of mind, as all
other parts also of our inferior sensuality, to wit, how you may resist this
and that temptation, what prevention you may make, what bulwark you may raise,
what defense you may rest upon, wherein do enter all particular directio^s, of
fasting. prayer, watching, haire-cloath, lying on the ground, and other bodily
afflictions so much used by old Saints, and may be used also now by all (if
they will) for gaining of this important victory: there enters also among
other defenses, that great and sovereign remedy of flying the world wholly,
and retyring to the port of a religious life, for such as otherwise see
themselves either weak, or in danger to be wholly overcome by this venomous
beast of Concupiscence, or else do desire to merit more abundantly at Gods
hands, by offering themselves wholly and entirely to his service, and to the
more near imitation of their Lord and Savior. By all which helps,
assistances, and directions delivered in this behalf by Catholic doctrine, to
every man's state and degree of life, a Catholic Christian passes on more
securely during his life, and at his last going out of this world, receives
finally the grace and comfort of the last Sacrament of Extreme unction,
instituted by Christ, and Extreme unction. James 5.
recommended unto us by Saint James his Apostle; and from thence passes to
receive that eternal joy and kingdom at his Saviors hands, which he has
prepared for them that believe in him, and strive and fight for him in this
life against sin and iniquity.

And thus have we described briefly, but seriously and truly, the state and
condition of a Roman Catholic man, to oppose the same against a ridiculous
vain definition, or rather fiction of JOHN FOX. But now if we would paragon
the same with the Protestants Doctrine and practice, in all these points before
mentioned, we shall quickly see the difference. And as for the first point of
all, concerning Faith and belief in general, the difference is so palpably
set down in that which has bin already said, as it is needlefse to say any
more.

In the second point concerning the inward principles of our outward actions:
The comparison of the foresaid Catholic doctrine, with that of the Protestants.
truth it is, that they agree with us in somewhat, to wit, that all good
comes originally from Gods holy grace and motion; but presently they disagree
again, for that they hold our grace of Justification to be no inherent
quality, but only an external imputation, and that Gods motion to our mind
is such, as it excludes wholly all concourse and cooperation of our Free Will,
whereby they cut off at one blow, all endeauours of our part to do any
goodness at all, and leave us as a stone or block to be moved by God only,
whereof also ensues, that he must needs be author of our sins, and other
blasphemies, and infinite inconveniences, not only in matter of Faith, but in
life and actions also; for that this principle being once received, that our
Free Will, though it be prevented, moved and strengthened by Gods grace, can
do nothing at all, nor cooperate to any good work, or resist any evil: who
will have care afterward to endeavor, labor, strive, or weary himself about
any thing that is difficult, or displeasant unto him?

Next to this, concerning the virtues Theological, of Faith, Hope and Charity,
Protestants are content with Faith only to our justification, as you see by
John Fox, who says that the Scriptures ^ox. p. 22.
do expressly exclude both Hope and Charity. And albeit some others of his
sect will seem to cover the matter, by Cap. pro ^ed.
saying, that Hope and Charity do follow Faith as fruits thereof, if it be
true Faith; yet in practice is there no man of the^ indeed, that will permit
his faith to this trial: but whether he have these fruits or not, he will
defend his faith to be good, and that himself is justified thereby. So as from
hence you see another gappe opened to all presumption and liberty of life: for
howsoever a Protestant lives, yet will he not yield thereby that his faith is
naught (and indeed the argument inforceth it not) and then follows it, that
his faith being good, he is justified, and consequently, howsoever he live,
yet is he a just man, and who will trouble himself with the labor of a good
life, if believing only be sufficient. And this for internal virtues.

But as for external actions, even those of the Law and ten Commandments
commanded by Christ himself, Fox derideth them in our people, as may be seen
in his Definition, and requires only two exterior actions in his people, to
wit, Baptizing and supping, or celebrating the Lords Supper, for all other
matters, he says, no one thing is necessary for the exercise of his new
Gospel, or to make a perfect Christian after his definition. So as if you lay
before you two sorts of people, the one laboring and wholly occupying
themselves in all godly life, fructificantes in omni bono opere, fructifying
Coloss. 1. verse. 10.
in all good works (as the Apostles words are, who also in the same place
calls this work, The true wisdom and right understanding of Gods heavenly
will, and worthy walking before him:) you may behold, I say, the one sort of
these people, which Fox The continual exercises of Catholics in good works.
calls Papists, not only endued with inward good desires, but externally
also busied altogether in good deeds, showing the same by the fruits of their
inward virtues, to wit, in building of Churches, Hospitals, Monasteries,
Colleges, giving alms, maintaining Orphans, Widows and Pupills, receiving
Pilgrims, and other such Christian exercises, as also meeting at Churches,
praying on their knees, sighing and sobbing for their sins, and confessing
the same to Gods substitute, to wit, their ghostly father, asking pardon also
of their neighbors, and making restitution, if any thing with evil conscience
they have taken or withholden, etc. Whiles in the mean space, the other sort
accounted Saints of the new making by Fox, do walk up and down, talking of
their belief, but lay their hands upon no good external work at all by
obligation, if we believe Fox, except only the Lords Supper, nor is it
incident to their vocation. And hereby also may we consider, how great a
difference there is between these two sorts of people in a Commonwealth,
where they live together, and what an infinite gate is laid open by this loosse
new doctrine, to idleness and lasie behavior in Christian conversation, quite
opposite not only to the doctrine and practice of ancient Fathers, and the
Primitive Church, but to the whole course of Scriptures, in like manner, which
every where do inculcate with all solicitude, the continual performance of
external good works, and that thereby indeed true Christians are known, in
exercising themselves in Christ's Commandments.

And as for Sacraments, which according to our doctrine, are heavenly The
difference about Sacraments and effects thereof.
conduites and most excellent instruments, appointed by God, for deriuing of
grace unto us in every state and condition of Christian men; these fellows do
first cut off five of the seven, and the other two they do so weaken and
debase, as they are scarce worthy the receiving: for they do not hold, that
either their Baptism, or the Lords Supper, does give any grace at all to him
that receives them, though he prepare himself never so well thereunto, but
only that they are certain signs of their election and justification, which
signs notwithstanding, having no more certainty in them, then themselves list
to apprehend by their special faith, concerning their own justification, and
the matter standing in their own hands to show themselves justified, when they
will; by these signs it seems indeed to be a very jest or comedy, but yet
breaks down a maine bank of Christian discipline, care and solicitude, that
is to be seen in our men, when they receive any Sacrament, for that believing
(as Catholic Faith teaches them) that all Sacraments bring grace to them,
that receive them with due preparation, and of their own part, put no let by
their indisposition; they do labor and endeavor to prepare The different
preparation to receive Sacraments.
themselves worthily, to the said receiving thereof, by Penance, Fasting,
Prayer, Almsdeeds, and other like holy endeauours, assuring themselves also
on the contrary side, that negligent receiving of Sacraments does not only not
bring grace, but increases rather their own offense. So as this preparation
of Catholic people to the receiving of Sacraments, is a continual kind of
spur to good purposes, virtue and renouation of life: whereas this other sort
of good fellows, persuading themselves that their Sacraments are only bare
signs of things already past; and as it were, a continual representation of
justification already received, there needs not any such laborsome endeavor
for due preparation, nor yet care or solicitude of life or manners; for that
already they have the thing, which they desire, and that those are but signs,
tokens and testimonies that they have received it indeed, which yet, as I said,
has no more assurance, then every man's own persuasion and apprehension will
afford.

Lastly, concerning the foresaid fountain of temptation in our flesh and
sensuality, called Concupiscence: they differ from us in two essential
points: first, that they hold this concupiscence, not for a tempter only, but
rather for a conqueror, for so much as they teach that every motion of her to
sensuality in us, is a finne, whether it be yielded unto by our will or not.
The second point following necessarily The difference about mortifying and
refisting of our Concupiscence.
of this first, is, that all resistance of our part to the motions of this
concupiscence, is either needless or bootlesse; for that the motion it self
being sin without our consent, it follows consequently, that the matter is
not remediable by our endeauours; and here now breaks in a whole sea of
disorders to Christian life, for that supposing first, that which is most true,
that every Christian man has this assault of concupiscence within him; and
secondly, by this new doctrine, that no man can avoid to sin thereby upon
every motion that is offered, what neeneth, or what avails any resistance of
ours, or any conflict to the contrary? sin it is, though we resist never so
much, and but sin it is, if we yield. And seeing that by another principle
of this new doctrine, all sins are equally mortal, what is gained by
striving, or what is lost by yielding? And to what end are all those large
Treatises of ancient Fathers, about fighting against this concupiscence, and
mortification of her appetites and motions? What do avail all their
exhortations to this purpose, as also those of the Scriptures, to continency,
chastity, virginity, abstinence, sobriety, and other like virtues; for so
much as every first motion of our concupiscence to the contrary (which first
motion we cannot avoid) is sin in it self, to what purpose (I say) are woe
persuaded and animated, to fight and strive against this enemy, seeing there
is no hope of victory, but that at every blow she conquereth and overthrows
us, as the Protestants teach?

Wherefore to proceed no further in this comparison, you may easily by this,
that is said, consider the differences between Five principal inundations of
licentiousness, brought in by Protestants doctrine.
these two people, and in particular, you may with grief and tears
contemplate among other points, five general inundations of looseness and
wicked liberty, brought into Christian conversation, by the foresaid five
principles of these men's doctrine, to wit: First, in taking away wholly all
concurrance, and good endeavors of man's will to any virtuous action whatsoever,
though never so much prevented or assisted by the help of Gods grace.
Secondly, in ascribing all justificatio^ to

Which five principles being well weighed and considered, together with the
practice and success that have ensued upon them throughout Christendom, where
this new doctrine has prevailed; no indifferent man can be so simple, but
that he will easily discover the true difference between these two people, and
their Religions; as also between Fox his lying fond Definition of a Catholic,
and this our Description of Catholics and Protestants, containing the most
substantial points of Faith, and life, both of the one and the other.

AN ADDITION MADE by the Collecter.
NOW because I have mentioned JOHN FOX, I would desire thee (good Reader) to
read that learned Treatise of Three Conuersions, especially the third part,
wherein JOHN FOX The 17. Chapter of the six last Months,. 6. in the beginning,
to the. 8.
his book of Martyrs (so called) is particularly examined and confuted, where
thou may clearly descrie the erroneous and false spirit of the Protestants,
for so much as they make choice of any sort of people whatsoever, bearing the
name of Christians, to be of their Church and fraternity, notwithstanding that
they held and believed many most damnable errors and herefies; but howsoever,
if they spoke freely against the Pope, or floutly denied but one article of the
Catholic Faith, for which they have been condemned for Heretics by our
Church, they were presently accounted for right good Protestants, and fit for
JOHN FOX to Canonize and make Martyrs. Of this that worthy Author in the
foresaid Treatise shows briefly in a Consideration which he makes, what
sort of people be put by JOHN FOX into his Calendar.

It is then to be noted (says he) that Three Conuers. part. 3. chap. 17. n. 6.
in the Calendar and story thereof (to wit, FOX his Acts and Monuments) are
comprised all the heads of Factions and Sects that have been different from the
known Catholic Religion, and among themselves for these three or four last
hundred years, as Waldo of Lions, and his Waldensians, the Earl of Tholosa,
and his Albigensians, John Wickliffe of England, and his Wickliffians, John
Husse of Bemeland, and his Hussites, John Zisca of the same Nation, and his
Thaborites, Walter Lollard in Germany, and his Lolardians: and in our days,
Martin Luther, and his Lutherans, both sects, Molles and Rigidi Vldericus,
Zuinglius, and his Zuinglians, John Calvin, and his Caluinists both mingled,
and Puritans; and other the like: All which are allowed and commended by Fox,
either in his Calendar or History, thongh they did not a little disagree, as
well among themselves, as with the Catholic Church, both in words and actions,
manner of life, preachings and writings, as before has been showed.

And whereas we that follow Catholic doctrine, are so exact for holding unity
therein, as we reject and hold for wicked (according to the Creed of Saint
Athanasius, and first Council of Nice) whosoever does not believe inuiolably
the said Catholic Faith, and entirely in every point, and do sometimes
condeme even to death, and burn some for dissenting in one only point of
Faith, (as John Fox himself has diverse times complained) how can it be, that
he and his Church can gather up and tie together in one union of Faith, and
communion of Saints, all these different and opposite heads, together with
their members and followers? Truly no other way, but only as Samson tied his
Foxes together by the tails, though their heads and faces were opposite, and
contrary one to another, which served him not to plow nor sow, plant nor till,
but only to set a fire, waste, and destroy the corn which others have sowed
before, which is the only office and peculiar work, that these wrangling
opposite heretical heads do bring forth in the Church of God, to wit, pull
down, dig up, destroy, discredit and disgrace that which was sown, planted,
and established before them, and thereby to bring all to misdoubt, unbelief,
and atheism. So F. PARSONS.

And because peradventure every one, desirous to know more of this matter,
cannot so easily procure to see or read that discussion or examination of John
Fox his Saints, and of their different spirits from the Catholic; I will let
you see the sum of both Kalendars, as it is set down by the forenamed Author
in the end of the Calendar, both in the first and last six Months of that his
Examen.

The sum of all Saints named in both Kalendars.
In the Catholic Calendar.
The number of all mentioned 1704. whereof are Popes Martyrs 27. Popes
Confessors 8. Bishops Martyrs 37. Bishops Confessors 63. Virgins Martyrs 76.
(besides the 11000. slain with Saint Vrsula) Virgins Confessors 11. Kings and
Queens Martyrs 3. Kings and Queens Confessors 8. other holy men and women
3429. other men and women Confessors 42.

All these were of one Faith and Religion agreeable to the Roman at this day.

In the Foxian Calendar.
The number of all mentioned 456. Bishops Pseudomartyrs 5. Bishops Confessors
1. Virgin Martyrs 000. May d Martyrs 2. Kings and Queens Martyrs and
Confessors 1. other men and women Martyrs 393. other men and women Confessors
53.

These were of diverse sects and opinions, and contrary in many points the one
to the other: as for example.
Waldensians and Albegensians 13. Lollards and Wickliffians 36. Hussites and
Lutherans 78. Zuinglians and Caluinifts 268. Anabaptists, Puritans, and
doubtful of what sect 59.

Again of those were
Husbandmen, Weauers, Sawyers, Shoo-makers, Curriers, Smithes, and other such
like occupations 282. Poor women and Spinsters, 64. Apostata Monks and Friars
25. Apostata Priests 38. Ministers 10. Public Malefactors, and condemned by
the Laws for such, 19.

The greatest Disputers of this rank against the Catholic Bishops and learned
men, were
George Tankerfield a Cook, August 13. John Mandrell a Cowheard, Men.
March 27. Richard Chrashfield a young Artificer, March 28. Raph Allerton a
Tailor, September 19. John Fortunea Blacksmith, September 30. Richard Woodman
an Iron maker, June 23.

Ellen Erwing a Millers wife, August Women.
23. loan Lashford a married maid, January 18. Isabell Foster, a Cutlers wife,
January 17. Anne Alebright, a poor woman of Canterbury, January 19. Alice
Potkins, Spinster, November 15. Alice driuer, a famous Doctrice, November 22.

And to give you some particular taste of this roauing spirit which reigned in
some of Master Fox his principal Protestant Martyrs; Master John Bradford,
whom Fox most highly extolleth See this in the Examen of Fox his Calendar chap.
11. number. 28. 29.
in many leaves, and styles him Preacher-Martyr; was accustomed much to brag
of his singular assurance that he had of the right course he was in, which he
said was so clear and evident to him, that there could be no more doubt
thereof, then whether the Sun did shine upon a fair day: and when the
Bishops asked him How he came to so great a certainty, he answered, I am
certain of my salvation and religion by the Scriptures: but when they posed
him further, how he could be sure of Scriptures themselves, and of their true
meaning without the testimony of the Church; he had no other shift, but to
run to the assurance of his own spirit, telling them, that albeit he
received the knowledge of the Scriptures by the testimony of the Church (as
those of the City of Sychar did the notice of Christ by the woman from the
Well) yet that John 4.
when he once had them, then could he use them well enough, for understanding
them; and for show hereof, when a little after he had occasion to interpret
some pieces of Scriptures, he did it so absurdly as a man might well see, how
much might be builded upon the assurance of that his particular and private
spirit, as for example, among other places, he took upon him to prove by
Scripture that the Pope was Antichrist, and cited for it only those words of
the Apostle to the Thessalonians, That Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of
God, etc. which though it prove nothing, as you see, for that we deny not but
that Antichrist when he comes, shall sit in the Temple of God, yea and
pretend to be God himself, (which no Popes ever did or shall do;) yet to
Bradford the allegation of this place seemed much to the purpose, and to John
Fox, that admireth all which the other uttered, it appears so full a proof,
as he makes this note in the margent: The Pope proved to be Antichrist by
Scriptures. But this proof (as you see) stands only upon Bradfords
interpretation, which interpretation is not only not conform to any ancient
Fathers exposition whatsoever, but is manifestly also contrary to the text it
self, where immediately before the words alleged, That he shall sit in the
Temple of God, are these words, Extolletur supra omne quod dicitur Deus, aut
qued colitur, That Antichrist (when he comes) shall be extolled above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped for God, so as he shall not call him
Gods servant (as the Pope does) nor the servant of his servants, but chief God
himself, which no Pope, as is said, ever did or will, and consequently these
words cannot possibly agree to the Pope, and yet forsooth the spirit of
Bradford, that cannot err or be deceived, does expound it so, and thereby you
see the certainty of his spirit.

After this, again he went about to persuade the two Bishops, who examined
him, that he agreed with them, and with their Church in substance of Faith and
belief, and consequently might be saved with them, notwithstanding this
denial of two articles, for which only he said he was condemned: to wit,
Transubstantiation, and that the evil men do not receive the body of Christ,
when they communicate, which two articles Bradford affirmed not to appertain
to the substance of faith, or foundation of Christ, and consequently, that he
was unjustly cast our of the Church for them, for so much as he firmly
believed all the articles of the Creed with them: whereunto, when the Bishops
smiling replied saying, Yen, Is this your Divinity? BRADFORD answered Noe; it
is PAVLS, which says, That if men hold the foundation 1. Cor. 3. 11.
Christ, though they build upon him straw and stubble, yet they shall be saved.
So he, whereby you see that this great learned Cleake would prove by Saint
Paul, that both Protestants and all other Sectaries, that in words do profess
to believe all the Articles of the Creed (though each one in several sense to
himself) shall be saved together with Catholics, and that all these our
contentions with them, and other Sectaries are but straw and stubble, and touch
not the foundation of Christ at all: This was his spirit, and do you think
that this spirit could be deceived, or will our English Protestants at this
day, allow this spirit, or join with Bradford in this paradox? I know they
will not, and would be ashamed to interpret the place of Saint Paul in that
sense, for so much as it is evident, that he means of the straw and stubble
of works, and not doctrine, or at least such principal points of doctrine as
those are, which Bradford did profess contrary to the Catholic truth.
Notwithstanding there be some principal Protestant Doctors, who, howsoever
they interpret the foresaid place of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 3. and upon what other
place soever of Scripture they pretend to build, yet do they hold and
maintain the same Paradox in Christian Religion (as I may call it) and the
same exorbitant gross error, which the phanaticall spirit of John Bradford
suggested unto him for an assured truth, to wit, that all, even Heretics, as
well as Catholics, may be saved, so long as they hold the foundation Christ.
For so Master Doctor Morton (now Morton in his Treatise of the Kingdom of
Israel, page 91.
called a Bishop) says, Wheresoever a company of men do jointly and publicly
by worshipping the true God in Christ, profess the substance of Christian
Religion, which is Faith in lesus Christ, the Son of God, and Savior of the
world, that there is a true Church, notwithstanding any corruption whatsoever.
And, giving this title to one section in his book, That Heretics are members
of Ibidem.
the Catholic Church. In proof hereof he says further, Who profess JESUS
CHRIST to be the Savior of the world, etc. although they do indirectly by
wickedness of life, or heresy in doctrine deny their own profession, yet are
they to be accounted Christians, and true members of the Church: by whose
account you see all Heretics whatsoever are to be accounted for true members
of the Church, seeing all do confess Jesus Christ to be the Savior of the
Supra page 94.
world, and therefore he holds the Arrians, who deny the Godhead of Christ,
to be also of the Church of God. The like does Doctor Field, concerning the
Greek Churches, though they err against the holy Ghost; saying in his
Treatise of the Church: We Field of the Church. page 220.
cannot condemn the Grecians as Heretics: And again, before that page 70. It
no way appears that the Churches of Greece are heretical, or in damnable.
Schism. Which opinion and judgment of these principal new Ministers in our
Protestant Kingdom of Israel, if it were sound and good, and proceeded from
the true Spirit; we might easily grant and believe that all sort of Heretics
whatsoever are, or ever have been, may be saved, notwithstanding their
abominable and blasphemous heresies, which they have taught and believed,
concerning God, the blessed Trinity, the Incarnation of our Savior, or in a
word, against any, or almost all the Articles of our Creed: which strange
paradox how contrary it is unto the whole current of holy Scripture, which
says expressly, That an heretical man is damned; let any Tit. 3.
indifferent man consider and judge, surely the whole stream of all
Antiquity, the grave, holy, and wise judgment of holy men that have lived in
Gods Church throughout all ages, were of another belief and opinion, and of a
quite contrary spirit to this of Protestant Doctors: you shall hear one or two
speak for the rest. Saint Cyprian says, Whosoever is separated Cyprian. li^.
de Simpl. praelat.
from the Church, and joins himself to an adulteress conuenticle (which
every Heretic does) is separated also from the promises of the Church, nor
ever shall he come to enjoy the rewards thereof, if he leave her; he is an
alien, a profane person, an enemy, he cannot have God for his Father, that
has not the Church for his Mother: yea though he should be slain for the
confessing of Christ's name, yet can Much less may Protestants flatter and
deceive themselves, by thinking they live well, and may be saved.
he not be saved; Macula ista nec sanguinae abluitur, this crime of seperating
himself from the Church cannot be washed away with blood: Inexpiabilis culpa
nec passione purgatur, It is a fault vnexpiable (supposing one continue in it)
nor can it be purged by death it self. Saint Augustine also, Neither is
Baptism (says he) profitable to an Heretic being out of the Church, nor yet
if for the confession Aug. l. 4. de Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 17.
of Christ he should be put to death, for that he is convinced to want
charity, where of the Apostle says, Though I should deliver my body so that I
burn, and have not charity, it aoth profit me nothing. The same has S. Austen
in many places of his Works, and the same is the constant and common opinion
of all holy Fathers: and therefore whether these holy ancient Fathers, or our
late modern Protestant Doctors are most likely to be guided by the true spirit
of God, as well in this, as in many most important points of our Christian
belief, wherein they differ as much as light from darkness, truth from
falsehood; I leave unto every Christian man, who has a true and earnest care
of his eternal salvation, seriously and diligently to weigh and consider.

ANOTHER DIFFERENCE worthy of observation between the Catholic and Protestant
spirit, consisting in the willingness of the one, and unwillingness of the
other to admit public and indifferent trial of their Doctrine.
WHEREAS one principal mark by which a good Spirit may be discerned from a bad,
is that the good Spirit loves light, and willingly comes to the light,
admitting any reasonable and indifferent means of trial. But the bad Spirit
hates light, and comes not to the light, but flies all public and
indifferent means, by which it may be examined. I wish the gentle Reader duly
to consider how this property of the good spirit agrees to the Catholic
Church and the property of the bad spirit agrees to the Protestants
Congregation.

On the one side it may easily be seen how much the Catholic Church loves
light, in that the Doctors thereof in their public writings ordinarily use to
explicate and set down clearly and sincerely, the state of the question in
controversy. Secondly, They truly set down the opinions and arguments of
their Adversaries, and this sometimes more fully then is done by their
Adversaries themselves. Thirdly, They explicate the Catholic doctrine,
confirming it with clear testimonies of holy Scriptures, Councels, Fathers,
and Reasons, and answering fully all, or the strongest Objections. Fourthly,
They are ready both in their public Schools and in their Provincial and
General Councels to admit, yea inuit, their greatest Adversaries to speak
freely whatsoever they think good, for trial of the truth in all matters of
Controversy. This to be true, appears partly by the learned and methodicall
books of our Catholic Authors, namely, Bellarmine, Stapleton, Valentia, and
others; partly by the practice of our public Schools, where any may freely
make whatsoever arguments they will, for disputation sake, partly by some
especial examples of free disputation permitted to be made in Catholic
Countries, even by known Heretics: as for ancient times, we read how the
Council of Carthage invited the Donatists to a public and free Conference or
disputation, saying, Eligatis exvobis ipsis, etc. Choose some among your selves
who may undergo this business to prove your cause, that we also may do the
like, and that some from among this Council may be appointed, who may at the
same time and place agree upon, examine or try together with those which shall
be chosen among you, whatsoever controversy it is which hinders us from
communicating with you, etc. For if you do brotherly admit thereof (to wit, of
this conference) the truth will easily appear. But if you refuse to accept of
this, your infidelity (or false faith) will presently be made known. Thus
this ancient Council did inuit Heretics to a trial, also in latter times in
our own Country, to wit, in the reign of Queen Mary, there were permitted
several open disputations, once in Paul's Church in London for six days, and
after at Oxford, and again secondly at Oxford with liberty to make election of
Notaries upon their part, and with offer of books and liberty of further time
to amend their answers, all which is affirmed and granted by Fox in his book
of Acts and Monuments, and clearly conuinceth the Catholic Spirit to be a
good Spirit, which admits so willingly, and offers so freely such public
trial of the truth. But chiefly this which I said appears to be true, by
the most ample free offer, and Inuitement, and safe conduct made and granted by
the holy general Council of Trent to all Protestants, both of Germany and
other places, the tenor of which is as follows.

Salvus conductus concessus Germanica Nationi:

The Safe Conduct granted unto the German Nation.
In the general Congregation the fourth day of March, MDLXII.

Sacro sancta oecumenica and generalic Tridentina Synodus, etc.
THe most Sacred oecumenicall and general Council of Trent most lawfully
gathered together in the holy Ghost the Legates of the holy Sea Apostolic,
president in the same, does make known unto all men, that it does grant unto
all and every one, Priests, Electors, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Counts,
Barons, Nobles, Knights, Commons, and to all other whatsoever, of whatsoever
state and condition, or quality they be of the Province and Nation of
Germany, to all Cities and other places thereof, and to all other
Ecclesiastical and Secular persons, especially those of the Confession of
Augusta, who shall come, or any who together with them shall come or be sent,
or whosoever have hitherto come unto this General Council of Tr^nt, by what
name soever they be called, or may be called by the tenor of these presents,
does grant by public promise a most full and true security, which is called A
safe Conduct, freely to come unto the City of Trent, and there to remain,
stay, abide, propose, speak, treat, examine together with the Council, and
discourse of what business soever, and freely to offer up and publish
whatsoever it shall please them, and whatsoever Articles, as well in writing,
as by word of mouth, and to declare, maintain, confirm, and prove the same by
the holy Scriptures, and by the words and sentences of holy Fathers, and by
reasons; and if need require, even to answer unto the objections of the
General Council, and to dispute with those who shall be appointed by the
Council, or peaceably to confer without any impediment, all approbrious
speeches, reuilings, and contumelies wholly laid aside, and in particular, that
the matters in controversy shall be handled in the foresaid Council,
according to the holy Scriptures, and traditions of the Apostles, approved
Councels, the consent of the Catholic Church, and the Authority of the holy
Fathers, adding this moreover, that it does yield and absolutely grant, that
they shall not be punished under the pretext of Religion, or of any offenses
committed, or to be committed against the same, so as by reason of their
presence, none shall in any case need to cease from performing the divine
service either in journey or in going, abiding, or returning from any place,
noe, not in the City of Trent it self: and that these businesses being
finished or not finished, whenever they shall please, or by comma^dment and
consent of their Superiors they shall desire, or any one of the^ shall desire to
return to their own dwellings; presently, without any let, hinderance, or
delay, their goods, their honor likewise and persons preserved, they may
freely and securely return at their pleasure, as often as they will, with the
knowledge notwithstanding of such as shall be appointed by the Council, to
the end that provision may be made in due time for their security, without
fraud or deceit.

Moreover, the holy Council will, that in this public promise and SafeConduct
be included and contained, and to be held for included all clauses whatsoever,
which shall be necessary and convenient for their full effectual and
sufficient security in their going, staying, and returning: expressing this
moreover, for their greater security, and for the good of peace and agreement,
that if any of them either in jorney coming unto Trent, or whilst they abide
there, or in returning thence, should do or commit (which God forbid) any
enormous crime, whereby the benefit of this public fidelity and assecuration
might be annullated or made void, that it is the Councels will, and it does
grant that such as are found to have committed such offense, be presently
punished by those of the Confession of Augusta themselves only, and not by any
other, with such condign penalty and sufficient satisfaction as may be well
liked of, and approved by some part of the Council, the form, conditions, and
manner of their assecuration (or security) remaining still unviolated.

In like manner also, the Councels pleasure is, that if one or more of the
Council shall either in their jorney or abiding, or returning, do or commit
(which God forbid) any enormous crime, whereby the benefit of this public
fidelity and assecuration might be violated, or in any sort broken, they who
are taken in such offense, are to be punished by the Council it self alone,
and not by any other, with such condign penalty and sufficient amendment, as
may rightly be well liked of by the Lords of Germany, of the Confession of
Augusta, being at the same time here present, the form, conditions, and
manner of their assecuration (or security) remaining still unviolated.

It is moreover the will of the Council, that it may be lawful for the
Ambassadors, all and every one to go abroad out of the City of Trent, so
often as they shall think fit or needful to take the air, and to return
into the same: as also freely to appoint or send their messenger or messengers,
as also to receive messengers or any messenger, sent as often as they shall
think expedient: so that some one or more of such as are deputed (and
appointed) by the Council, do accompany them, who may provide for their
security.

Which Safe Conduct and security ought to stand and continue from the time,
and during the time that it shall happen they be received into the care of the
protection of the Council and Officers thereof, and be brought unto Trent, and
all the time of their abode there: and again, when they shall have had
sufficient audience, then after the space of twenty days, when they shall
require it, or the Council after such audience had, shall give order unto them
to depart, they shall be conducted from Trent, until they be (God willing)
restored unto that secure place where every one shall choose unto himself, and
this without all fraud and deceit.

All which the Council does promise, and with assured fidelity does profess
shall be inuiolately observed (and kept) for and in the name of every
faithful Christian, all Princes whatsoever, as well Ecclesiastical as
Temporal, and all other Ecclesiastical and Secular persons, of what degree or
condition soever they be of, or by what name soever they be called.

Moreover, without all fraud and deceit, it does truly and faithfully promise,
that the Council will neither openly nor covertly seek any occasion, or in any
sort use, or permit any to use any authority, power, right, ordinance or
privilege of the Laws or Canons, or of any Council whatsoever, especially of
Constance and Seenes, in what form of words soever expressed, unto any
prejudice of this public fidelity and full assecuration, and public and free
audience granted unto them by the Council, all which (authority, power, etc.)
it does abrogate in this behalf, and for this time.

And if the Holy Council, or any one thereof, or of their adherents, of
whatsoever condition or state, or dignity they be, shall in any point or cause
violate (which nevertheless we beseech God forbid) the form and manner of
the above written assecuration and Safe Conduct, and that sufficient amendment
be not presently made, yea and such as in the judgments of those of the
Confession of Augusta, shall rightly be approved and well liked of, let them
account, and it shall be lawful for them to account the Council it self to
have incurred all the penalties, which either of the Law, of the Law of God and
man, or custom, the violators of such Safe-conducts can incur (and this)
without all excuse, or any gainsaying in this behalf.

The extenting of the former Safe Conduct unto all other Nations.
THe same most sacred Synod, being most lawfully gathered together in the holy
Ghost, the said Legates delatere (so called) of the Sea Apostolic presiding,
does grant the public fidelity or Safe Conduct under the same form, and with
the same words, wherewith it is granted unto the Germans, unto all and every one
who do not participate with us in matters belonging to Faith, of whatsoever
Kingdom, Nation, Province, City or place where is publicly and freely
preached, or taught, or believed, contrary unto that which the holy Church of
Rome does teach.

A SPEECH OF Cardinal BARONIVS placed in the beginning of the second Tome of
his Annals.
I think it fit to adioyne in this place a Speech of that worthily renowned
and learned Cardinal Baronius, directed unto all Heretics; showing how assured
the faithful children of Gods Church are, and ever have been, concerning the
undoubted truth of their holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Religion, and how
prompt and ready they have ever been to admit of any indifferent trial of
the same. The Speech or Admonition he entituleth thus: who is out of the
catholic church.

AT nec te dispiscimus, etc. We contemn not thee (I speak to the Reader much
auerted from the Catholic Faith) nor set upon thee with rebukes, provoke thee
with reproaches, load thee with contumelies; because we are not moved with any
perturbation of mind against the persons, when we reprehend men's errors, we
deal most kindly with thee, to the end thou may understand that the Truth
it self, rather then the Patron thereof, fights against thee: yea we will
be most liberal to thee, so far forth, as that we will not fear, with all
lenity and submission of mind, to allow thy self perusing diligently these
our works, and desiring to find forth the truth, as a just arbitrator. We
having a confidence in the goodness of our cause, will yield so much unto
thee, as not to disdain to undergo thy judgment, concerning the truth of
those things we speak of, provided that thy reason, as it were, equally
balanced, be placed between, but above both parties, that is, supposing thee
to be of a sound and sincere judgment, void of all perturbation, wanting
particular affections, and so inclining to neither party. If thou be ready to
show thy self such a judge, I appeal from thy self, when at other times thou
had thy mind troubled, unto thine own self, now examining things more
exactly with the cleared eye of thy understanding, the which power of man's
soul is most vigorous, if being unchained and free, it be suffered freely to
discourse. This consideration enforced our Ancestors, relying upon the truth
of their doctrine, when they had occasion to deal with most obstinate
Heretics, refusing and contemning the Church her judgment, to condescend so
much unto them, as to permit their cause to the arbitrament of Heathens, and
demand their sentence in the same. These being Judges, the Jews after much
contention overcame the Samaritans. In like manner, Origin Joseph. An. tiq.
lib. 13. cap. 6.
choosing by consent of his adversaries a Gentile for Vmpire, overthrew five
most perverse Heretics, and converted him who sat as Vmpire in their dispute.
Likewise the holy Mesopotanian Bishop, Archelaus, confuted the Epiphan. Here Is.
66.
most impious Arch-heretike Manes, by the arbitrament of Gentiles, chosen to
decide by common consent of both disputants. There are many other like
examples, by which it appears the professors of the truth to have refused no
man's judgment or sentence, no not so much as of those who seem to be
condemned by our Lord himself, saying: He that believes not, is already
John 3.
judged. All these we seem to over go in our manner of free dealing with thee,
because we seek no other arbitrator then thy self, if thou follow the rules
of reason, most certainly assuring our selves, that thou will give sentence
for, and agree with us, if thy reason of it own nature most affecting equity,
do willingly hear the truth. One thing we expect as the sole reward for our
labors, that is, to see thee at length so condemned by thy self, judging most
justly, as that thou may be quitte of thy errors. God grant we may once
joyfully meet thee rectified in judgment, embrace and kiss thee as our
brother, Cant. 8.
sucking the breasts of our Mother: at this present although it be unlawful for
us, because of the prohibition of the Apostle (we speak it not without a most
hearty sorrow) to salute thee, or to say so much as all hail unto thee,
notwithstanding there is none that will forbid us, to beg of almighty God by
earnest prayer thy salvation, which we most earnestly desire.

By this it appears how much the Catholic Spirit loves light, and wishes
to have a full and free trial of the truth. Contrariwise, the Protestants
Spirit shows it self to hate light, first in that ordinarily their
professors write confusedly of Controversies, seldom setting down sincerely
and clearly the state of the question, but often perverting it, making that
seem to be the question, which is not, also ordinarily wronging the Catholic
sentence, in making it seem to say what it says not, also usually
concealing, or not fully urging the arguments of Scriptures, Fathers, Councels,
and Reasons brought by Catholics in their public writings. Their own
sentence and opinion also they set down so darkely and obscurely, as that
often times they scarce understand themselves, and much less is it understood
by others, what they hold, or would say. The arguments also which they bring
for confirmation of their opinion* as likewise their answers to our objections
are so light and unsound, yea sometimes so far fetched and ill framed, as it
is wonder that men of wit and learning can suffer such stuff to pass from
them.

I omit to speak of their falsification and corruption of Scriptures and
Fathers, where of a taste may be taken by that which is set down in M.
Walsingham his Search into matters of Religion. I omit also their flying the
judgment of ancient Fathers and Councels, and their retiring themselves into
the mist of their own private fantasies, covered with the spacious titles of
only Scripture and Gods Spirit.

That which chiefly shows Protestants Spirit to love darkness, is that by any
means they will not be drawn to permit Catholics living in their quarters,
to come to such a public, free and in different trial of the truth (even by
such grounds as Protestants themselves do admit, or which by force of argument
Catholics will soundly prove ought to be admitted) as Protestants have bin
permitted, yea invited, yea vehemently urged unto by the Catholic part: How
ofteu have even our English Catholics Challe^ged Protestants to such a public
trial of truth? Hear I beseech you the the words of one of Defense of the
Censure in the Epistle to M. Charke.
them, writing about this point, against a Minister called Master Charke: And
here (M. Charke says he) because we are fallen into this matter, I am in the
name of my fellow Catholics to renew our public Challenge, of equal
Disputation to you, and to all your brother Ministers again. M. Campian is
gone, whom you name in this matter to be our only Champion, you see that
Master Sherwin is made away with him, whom you are wont to say (for more
abasement of the other) to have been far better learned then M. Campian
himself. But howsoever that was, both of them have you dispatched, and thereby
(in your opinion) greatly weakened our cause; yet notwithstanding we are the
same men that we were before: yea much more defirous of this trial then
before. Wherefore we request you now at length, yea we conjure you either for
the truth sake, if you seek it, or for your own credit sake, if you will
retain it, that you yield us after so much suite and supplication, some equal
trial, either by writing, preaching, or disputing. There is no reason in the
world (but only fear) that may move you to deny us this our request. For the
reason (of State) which you allege (M. Charke) in the reply, is most vain.
For what can a peaceable disputation, granted to us for Religion, endanger the
State? but only (that you would say) that this disputation may chance to
discover your errors, and so make the hearers detest the state of your herefie,
for other danger there can be none to your State. And if you had the truth with
you (as you pretend) whose property is, the more to show her self, the more
she is examined, you should much increase your State by this public trial:
for that you should both gain more to your part, by opening the said truth,
and also confirm many of your own side, that now justly do waver upon this
open discovery of your fear in trial.

Wherefore once again, I say unto you Ministers, obtain us this disputation,
though it be only but for a show, thereby only to hold and maintain your
credit: we protest before God, that we seek it only for the trial of Christ's
truth, for search whereof, we offer our selves to this labor, charges, and
peril of life, we ask for our safeties, but only such a warrant from her
Majesty, as the late Council of Trent did offer unto all Protestants in the
world, whereof you have the copy with you: we will come in what kind and
number, at what time, to what place you will appoint.

If you will have your own Countrymen, they are ready to come. If you will have
strangers to dispute in your Universities before the learned only, there shall
not want. For your selves, we give you leave to call all the learned
Protestants of Europe for your defense; we will take only our own Countrymen,
if you permit us. We give you leave to oppose or defend, to appoint questions,
to choose controversies, to begin or end at your pleasure, and to use any other
prerogatives that you please, so that they impugn not the indifferency of
Trial: What can you allege why you should not accept this?

If you had rather make trial in other Countries, then at home before your own
people, as perhaps you had, choose you what Protestant state you list, and
procure us therein the foresaid safety from the Prince, and we will neither
spare labor nor cost to meet you therein also. Or if this seem hard, and like
you not, then take you but the pains some number of you, to come into any
Catholic Kingdom or Country where you please, and we will procure what
security soever reasonably you shall demand for your persons. And more then
that, we will bear your expenses also, rather then so good a work shall
remain unattempted. And if you can devise any other condition to be performed
on our parts, which I have left out, do you add the same, and we will agree
(by the grace of God) to fulfill it. If we offer you reason, then deal somewhat
reasonably with us again. For all the world will cry shame, and begin to
discredit you, if you will neither give nor take upon so great odds as are
here offered you. If you dare not venture with Disputations, yet grant us at
the least certain Sermons to encounter with you upon this matter: or if that
also be so dangerous, procure us but a little passage for our books.

Now whereas the Denfence of the Censure, wherein the fore-rehearsed Challenge
made by our learned Countrymen is set down, was published Anno Dom. 1582. the
same Challenge unto the Ministers of England, with humble suit and earnest
petition to the Prince for the same, has bin continually ever since made,
during the late Queens days, and the same also more often reitterated and
urged since the reign of his Majesty, unto whom the grave and learned Doctor
Kellison presented the same petition in the name of al Catholics, yea and
after that entreated for the same in his Epistle Dedicatorie to the Kings
Majesty, prefixed before his learned book called The Survey of the new
Religion. The same petition also for disputation and trial (to omit many
others) was made unto his Majesty by that learned Priest M. Brierley, in his
unanswerable book entitled, The Protestants Apollogie for the Roman Church,
where having directed the whole current of his discourse unto his learned
Majesty, he closes up the same with a final petition and humble entreaty
for some open and equal trial of disputation. For the obtaining Tract. 3.
Sect. 7.
whereof (says he) we presume hereby to become most humble and earnest
petitioners unto your Majesty. The evident and necessary incertaintie of our
Adversaries judgeme^ts in doctrine may well seem to need it. The weight and
consequence of the cause (being no less then the matter of Faith and Religion)
deserves. Our Adversaries rule of reducing all things to examination and
trial, appoints it. Our earnest desire of their conversion thirsts greatly
after it. Their full persuasion of our pretended erring, and like charitable
care of our reformation, should in all reason be no less willing of it. Our
often admitting, or rather provoking of them to open and equal disputations had
in Queen Mary's time, does as now again by way of requital answerably
requite it. The serious and resolved confidence of our Catholic Divines, men
confessedly no less able to perform, the^ willing to undertake the same, does
with most grave, and not to be neglected solicitation, provoke and challenge
it. The several examples of the same course, heretofore observed and practiced
in sundry Nations, and by our very Adversaries prescribed, do as it were
conduct and lead us to it. The venerable and confessed antiquity of Catholic
Faith established, but never hitherto condemned in any General Council (and
therefore un worthy to be now rejected without some indifferency of trial)
presumes very confidently to obtain it. And lastly, your Highness mature and
ripe judgment, able to moderate and censure the same, makes us so much the
rather to become most humbly desirous and earnest for it.

Thus you see with what confidence in the truth of their cause, and with what
fervent desire of disputation, and public trial of their Spirits, these
learned Catholics in the name of the rest desire it. With the same
carnestnesse do our learned Catholics abroad call upon the Protestant
Ministers, in all such places where they bear sway, to come unto some public
trial of their cause: Witness Sir Edwine Sands, who (...).21.
in his Relation of the Religion used in the West parts of the world, reports
of our Catholic disputers, that they cry out mainely in all places for trial
by disputations. This says he, Campian did many years since with us. This as
I passed through Turrick, did the Cardinal of Constance and his Jesuits, with
their Ministers, being by ancient right within the Diocese. Not long before,
the same was done to them of Geneua. And very lately the Capuchines renewed the
challenge: so this Knight a Protestant.

FINIS.

