A GARDEN OF FLOVVERS, WHEREIN VERY LIVELY IS CONTAINED A TRVE AND PERFECT
DESCRIPTION OF ALL THE FLOVVERS CONTAINED IN THESE FOUR FOLLOWINGE BOOKS.

AS ALSO THE PERFECT TRVE MANNER OF COLOVRINGE THE SAME WITH THEIR NATVRALL
COLOVRES, BEING ALL IN THEIR SEASONS THE MOST RAREST AND excellentest
flovvers, that the world affords: ministringe both pleasure and delight to
the spectator, and most espetially to the well affected practisioner.

ALL WHICH TO THE GREAT CHARGES, and almost incredible labor and pain, the
diligent Authore by four years experience, has very Laboriously compiled,
and most excellently performed, both in their perfect Lineaments in
representing them in their coper plates: as also after a most exquisite manner
and method in teachinge the practisioner te painte them even to the liffe.

FAITHFVLLY AND TRVELY TRANSLATED OVT OF THE NETHERLANdish original into
English for the common benifite of those that understand no other languages, and
also for the benifite of others newly printed both in the Latin and French
tongues all at the Charges of the Author.

Printed at Vtrecht, By Solomon de Roy, for Crispian de Pass. 1615.

The Book to his Readers.
C Ome hither you that much desire,
R are flowers of dyvers Lands:
I represent the same to you,
S et down unto your hands.
P resentinge them unto your view,
I n perfect shape, and fair:
A nd also teach to color them,
N ot missinge of a hair.
V singe such couloures as requires,
A master workemans will:
N ot swarvinge thence in any case,
D eclaringe there his skill.
E ach flower his proper lineament,
P resentes from top to toe:
A nd shows both Root, budd, blade, and stalk,
S o as each one does grow.
S paringe no pains, nor charge I have,
E ach seasons flower te pass:
I n winter, Somer, Spring and fall.
V ntill this complete was.
N ow use this same for thy delight,
I nioy it as thou will:
O f blotts and blurrs most carefully
R efraine, or else it is spilt.
Thomas Wood.

FINIS.
To the Reader Salute.
FOr the avoydinge of all confusion, I have thought it good. (gentle Reader) in
this description of the Colors, to follovv the order of the flovvers, like as
they are noted and marked by their Cipher or letter in this Book, Follovvinge
herein the time and season of the year. First begininge with those flovvers
vvch are presented unto us in the spring time, in regard that by the Consent
of all vvryters, it is placed as the begininge of the year, even as Nature it
selffe teaches us the same. For the Earth being burdened, then Labors and
trauaileth daily to be delivered of that Burden of her marvailouse and
admirable fruits, the vvch for a long time had been suppressed by the
violence of the vvynters cold. Thereby addinge the greater delight to the
understanding and occuler aspection, by that vvonderfull and maruailous
alteration and multiplicities of varieties, vvch therein may be observed.
Intreatinge both the Courteouse readers and also the diligent practisioners
acceptably to receive and entertain these my labors, and profitably to make
use of them.

Fare well. From Vtrecht this 23.th of April 1614. Stilo magnae Brittaniae.
Saint George's day. Youres in these or the like to do you all Service.
Crispian de pass Junior.

THE FIRST BOOK, CONTAYNINGE A VERY LIVELY AND TRVE DESCRIPTION OF THE
flovvers of the spring.
Thy wearied mind with others pains,
Come recreate and see:
How Lively Natures grouth (by Art)
Presents it selffe to thee.

1. The dubble blew Hepatica: or noble Liuerwort.
THe dubble blew Hepatica, has a flower of many leaves very Conveniently
composed together, being of a very sad blew tendinge toward purple, and may
be painted with a very high Ashcoloure, or else with a fair blew Azure mingled
with a little lack in gomme water, in such sort that the natural gloss may
seem to appear, it may well be shadowed with indigo. The leaffe and steal
there of may best be colored with Aschcoloure and sad yellow well mingled
together, and shadowed with the same being made somewhat more sadder, the
steal may be rounded with Lack, the root is of the color of maide^ hair
color, and may be best represented with red and omber mingled.

The single Hepatica, or white Livervvort.
The flower of the white Hepatica is white as snow, and the little seeds
there of are yellowish yet tendinge to a pale red, the little heads thereof
are greenish with some little white stipples, and may be colored with pure
white color and shadowed with florey.

2. Lenten Saffron with small purple flowers.
THe flower of the small Lenten Saffron is almost of the Color of the purple
violett, yet somewhat paler above, and Colored by the steal of a sadder
purple, the three threedes of Saffron which stand upon the seed bole, are of a
very fair yellow, and may be shadowed and Iagged with menie, the steal is
white upon red, and may be shadowed with ashcoloure and masticott well mingled
together. The sheathes or Codds where the flowers spring out and bud are also
of a ruddy, or a reddish color, and may be painted with a sad yellow, and
shadowed with a little omber, the leaves are small and of a grass green, and
may best be represented in colors with sad yellow and ashcoloure mingled to
gether and furrowed or channeld down with a white line or struck through the
middle.

The flovver of the naples Saffron.
This is greater, yet in fashion like unto the former, not differinge in the
color, havinge his seedebole of a gold yellow with white furrows in the
middle, garnished with little knobs, at the end of a bright yellow color,
turninge up at the end, and smelling very pleasantly.

3. The dubble Narcissus, or dubble yellow Daffodile.
THis flower is very thick of leaves, in regard where of it wants that
Stockett which some other flowers have in the middle, the leaves thereof may be
Colored with masticott, and may be shadowed with oker or a dark yellow, the
steal with verdegreece, and shadowed with Sap-greene, and the leaffe in like
manner minglinge the verdegreece with a littel berry-greene both together.

The Daffodill with the triple sockett.
This flower is of a very fair gold yellow Color.

4. The great dubble Narcissus of porrett.
THe leaves of this flower are of a very pale yellow, and may be painted with
light masticott, a little white being mingled under the same, but the middle
sockett, is of a fair gold yellow, and may be shadowed with omber.

The greatest Nacissus with the dubble leaves.
This flower is of the same Color as the former is, and differinge only in
the plurality of the leaves.

5. The pleasant muscari, or the yellow grape-flower.
THe flower of this muscari is exceedingly Commended because of his pleasant
smell, and is of a perfect yellow Color, and therefore may be painted with
fair berry yellow, being illustrated with fair light masticot, and shadowed
with sad yellow being mingled with a little lack and green together, the
stipples are bluish of indigo and white mingled together, the steal may be
painted with mountain green and white together so far as the flowers hang
downewardes, but lower with verdegreece, being sprinkled all over with small
spotts of purple and lack mingled together, the leaffe may be painted with
mountain green, and shadowed with verdegreece.

The white muscari, or the white grape-flovver.
This flower is only differinge in Color being of a more vnpleasanter,
sullied, or sadder white.

6. The Radiall Iacynth of Guienne.
THe flower of this Iacynth is of a bluish purple and may be Colored with
lack and ashcoloure with a little white being mingled there under, the seeds
there of Colored with indigo and lack as likewise the small scutchion which
stands in the middle thereof, the small branches whereupon those flowers do
stand are somewhat bluish, the steal below may be painted with spanish green
and masticot together, the tops thereof with a little white and verdegreece
together, and shadowed with sapgreene, those thin skinns at the end of the
flowers are green and shadowed with indigo.

The Radiall Spanish Iacynth.
The flower of this Radiall Iacynth, and the leaves of the spanish Lillies both
in form and fashion do agree with the former, the leaves being fully as
long, and are of a very pure white Color.

7. The English dubble prime rose.
THe flower of this primula veris (so called in Lattine) in this season do
appear, they are of a yellow Color, and may be painted with fair masticot
yellow, being topt with light masticot, and shadowed with Saffron or a sad
yellow. The seedeboles are of the color of mountain green, the stalk is
whitish and may be shadowed with mountain green and sad yellow tempered
together. The leaf is of a light green somewhat yellowish* and may be painted
with mountain green mingled with a little masticott, the furrows of the
leaves may be painted with sad ashcoloure sad yellow and a little sapgreene all
mingled together, or else alone with sapgreene, the points or the height of
the leaves with a little white and sad yellow tempered together, and about the
very end of the leaffe, the R^bbes may be represented with lack Color, as
also the steals of the leaves are toward their ends somewhat reddish.

The dubble Covvslipp.
The other twice dubble flower is in form and fashion much differinge from the
former, as consistinge of two perfect single flowers, the one cominge out of
the middle of the other, yet in Color like unto the former.

8. Auricula vrsi, or yellow Beares-eares.
THe flower of this first Beares-eare is perfect straw-Coloure, or brimstone
Color, havinge in the middle within it, a white ringe, from whence there
arises out of a little round hollow some few small spriggs Colored yellow
about that round, the Sockett of this flower is of a pale yellow somewhat
greenish, and may be painted with light masticott and ash-Coloure, the steal
downewardes is of a pale green, and as it were sprinkled over with meal. The
leaffe thereof is very like the leaffe of the primerose, but smooth without any
veins, appearinge also somewhat white as if they were strewed over with meal.

The violl at Colored beares-eare.
The form and fashion of this flower is almost agreeinge with the former, but
somewhat greater, of a fair Violet Color, havinge in the middle thereof a
cercuite of a pale yellowish Color, and in the middle of that a small round,
of a sadder violett Color, and may be painted with lack and a little indigo
mingled therewith.

9. The flagg-flower deluce, with broad leaves.
THese are here represented in two several sorts, the first has flowers of a
blew violett Color being stripped throughout with a sadder blew the^ the
flower is, and is shadowed also in the same fashion, but topt somewhat lighter.
The leaff agrees almost with the leaves of the comone flower de luce. The
other sort of these flower deluces are of a more sadder purple, espetially in
the three nethermost depe^dinge leaves, which seem somewhat roughe, as sad
purple velvett, havinge from bellow unto the middle rysinge up a hayrie fringe,
like unto fair yellow silk, the leaves that stand upright are of a pleasanter
Color.

10. The Oriental Iacynth.
THe first Oriental Iacynth, has his flowers of a purple bluish Color,
being topt with a little white and blew, and shadowed with indigo and lack
mingled together, within they seem to be a little whyter, and toward the
knopes somewhat more purple, the steals where upon the flowers do depend are
of a tomone green, and the great steal may be painted with verdigreece,
being there with all topt and shadowed as is most convenient for the^, yet the
little sports at the rysinge out of the steal is almost white. The Bole is of
Ash-coloure mingled with a little omber, and shadowed with lack and indigo
mingled, a little white added thereunto serves for the toppinge of it. The
leaffe may be painted with sad yellow and ash-Coloure, and shadowed with
sapgreene, and for the toppinge of them take mountain green mingled with a
little white.

The other Oriental Iacynth.
This other has his flowers somewhat greater, and is of a more paler purple
Color, yet otherwise very like unto the former.

11. The Oriental Iacynth with the leaved stalk.
THis Iacynth with the leaved stalk, has his flowers very like in Color to
the former, but the long leaves upon the stalk must be painted with sapgreene.

The dubble oriental Iacynth.
But this dubble orie^tall Iacynth has at his first cominge green flowers,
which afterward appear somewhat bluish, and being full blown, are white yet
somewhat greenish, yet those, stripes or veins that go through the leaves are
very green.

12. The Imperial Crown.
THe dependinge flowers of the Imperial Crown may be painted with oker and a
little meny mingled together, and the rares thereof, with lack and sad yellow
mingled together, yet for the expressinge of the brownesse at the ends of the
leaves take a little indigo among the former, the clappers that hang within
with the knopps, Color them with a pale yellow mingled with a little oker,
and may be topt somewhat bright, and shadowed with lack, the steal may be
both topt and shadowed very conveniently with verdegreece.

13. The common purple Anemone: or wind flower.
THese three several sorts of wind flowers, with the small leaves are of all
other flowers most differinge in Color from each other. The first flower of
them is of a fair violett Color, topt with light azure, the seed boles are
sad purple, the budds are of indigo color.

The Scarlett Colored Anemone: or vvynde flovver.
The second sort of them is of a perfect Scarlet Color, and may be painted
with vermilion, and topt with lack and white both mingled together, the ground
of them is of a silver Color stripped with small crimson colored veins, the
budds are of a blew purple, thiere little steal is blood red, and the
middelmost bole is of a sad purple almost black, and is topt with a Russet
Color. These (as also all the wind flowers commonly) in Colouringe them must
be very well gomde and varnisht for the better demonstratinge of the glance and
shyninge brightness thereof. The stalk is green upon red up to the very
flower, but below is more greenish painted with mountane green, and may be
shadowed with ash-coloure and sad yellow mingled, and topt with white and
masticote.

The princely vvynde flovver: or Anemone.
The third sort of these flowers, by reason of their exceedinge beauty are
called the princely wind flower, and may be painted with vermilion and lack
tempered together, the ground thereof is somewhat lighter with spreadinge
rays throughout even unto the seeds (which are of Azure blew) and a little
whyter, the seedbole is of the color of indigo shadowed with a little Lamb
black the color of the steal is as verdigieece and a little masticott among
the same. The leaf may bepointed with mountain green and verdigreece
together, and shadowed with ashcoloure and sad yellow mingled together which a
little sapgreene, but toward the steal it is always of a lighter color
somevvhat toward yellow, and topt with mountain green.

14. The wind Flower of a small leaf, or the smale-leafed-wyndeflower being
dubble and of a maidens blush.
THese two sorts of wyndeflovvers being very dubble and with small leaves,
are in form very little differinge from each other, yet the former of them is
of a maidens blush, but at the bottom of the leaves a sadder red, and may be
topt with white and blevv, and may be shadowed with lack and blew both being
mingled together.

The Crimson colored vvynde flovver.
But the other of these dubble flowers is of a fair Crimson color, and may
be painted with fair vermilion, shadowed with lack, and topt with lack, and
white mingled together.

15. The broad leafde wind Flower.
THese three followinge wind flowers, are very much differinge both in their
leaves, color, and fashion. The first of them is of a fair vermillion and a
little lack tempered the^^ under with an appearance of a purple couloure
shyninge or glancinge upon it, the ground being white, with exceedinge small
veins of a yellow color, the seed bol^^s black, the threedes or seeds are
of the color of Indigo tempered with a little white, the steal is garnished
with stripes of white omber, or a sad yellow being tempered vvth a little
lack. The leaf is colored with mountain green and shadowed with
verdegreece.

The spanish vvynde flovver.
The second sort is of an carnation color like unto the roses of provance,
the ground of the leaves is of vvhitish yellow, the little knopes are of a sad
blew, and the m^delmost bole is yet more sadder.

The Oringe Colored vvyndeflovver.
The third sort of these flowers is of a perfect Oringe tawney color, and
may be painted with fair vermillion and masticott appearing in the ground
thereof, shadowed with lack, and with the veins which shoot through the
leaves may be drawn, the little knopes of an Azure blevv, and may be
shadowed with Indigo, and topt with white.

16. The single peacocks wyndeflower.
THese two sorts of broad leafde vvyndeflovvers, are commonly called by the
name of peacocks. And the first of them is single leafde, and of a fair red
couloure.

The dubble peacocks vvyndeflovvers.
The other dubble vvynde flower is of a fair scarlet color, and may be
painted with pure vermillion, being topt with lack and a little white, and
shadowed only with lack, the ground which compasses the middle-crowne is a
light masticot yellow, the knopes must be of a willow green, and the middle
bole blood red somewhat tendinge toward a murrey, the steal with mountain
green, but yet above to wards the flower somewhat reddish, and the middle
leaf stripped through with a white vein, the leaves are colored with mountain
green, ad shadowed with verdigreece and ashcoloure.

17. The Chalcedonian wyndeflowers.
THese two very fair dubble wind flowers are very rare, and called by the
name of Chalcedonian and very delectable to behold, the first of them is of a
fair bigness adorned with many leaves, where of 8 or 10. of the outtermost
are green, besett with veins of a vermilion color, the other leaves are
smaler and of a fair vermilion color mingled with meny, and endinge with
some pretty white flames as branches, havinge in the middle certain curled
leaves in the place of the seedbole, coveringe the heads which are of a pale
yellow and meny, and yet somevvhat lighter at the bottom.

The other Chalcedonian vvyndeflovver.
The other flovver of these two, is somewhat lesser yet very dubble being at
the ground somevvhat vvhytish, the leaves flaminge with lack, white and
vermilion colors one through another, the innermost seeds are of light
masticot, the steal is light mountain green, the leaves are mountain
green, shadowed with verdigreece, the outtermost side is of a sadder color.

18. Adonis flower: or Eranthemum.
THe first of these commonly called Adonis flovver, is of a fair blood red
color, and may be colored with lack and vermilion mingled together, and
shadowed only with lack, the bole is of a decayed lack red, or as it were
withered, being topt with lack and white, the seeds are of Indigo color
mingled with a little oker, the steal is mountain green mingled with
masticot, and so is the leaf also but somewhat more greenish and is shadowed
with sad yellow, ashcoloure and sapgreene al mingled together.

The other of these commonly called the cow eye is yellow and garnished in the
middle with spriggs of a reddish saffron color.

19. Narcissus flower, or the Ox eye.
THese two sorts of the small leafd' Narcissus, are in colors of their
flowers very different, the first flower consistinge of six white leaves
havinge a long hose or challice that extendes it selffe far out, garnished
about with a red border, the middle knopes are withered yellow and sometimes
somewhat reddish, the steal is mountain green, the leafers mountain green
mingled with ashcoloure. The shadow is of verdigreece and sapgreene, and topt
with a little white among the same. The skin or husk from out of which the
flower proceeds is of a russett color, shadowed with ashcoloure and
mingled inflames with omber. The other Narcissus has a very yellow sockett,
with a saffro^ colored border about the edge, very curled, and may be painted
with pale oker, and somewhat greenish with in, the little wattels are brimstone
color, the white leaves may be colored with white lead and a little bright
masticot mingled, and shadowed with Lambs-black.

20. Narcissus Flower with the long Sockett.
HEre are showed two sorts of broad leafd' Narcissus flowers, whereof the
first consistes of six white leaves as the former flowers do, but the sockett
is very long and greater, of a fair yellow color, havinge six spriggs of a
pale yellow about the bole of it where upon hang the knopes being of a darker
yellow.

The other Narcissus flovver.
The other Narcissus flower differs but a very little from the former, but
that oftentimes there comes two flowers out of one steal.

21. The white Narcissus Flower.
THe first of these Narcissus flowers are little, Snow-whyte, with a pure white
Sockett, havinge in the midst three or four knopes of a light yellow, and are
shadowed with mally or lamp black, the steals of the flowers are of a sad
green, the lower steal is mountain green and shadowed with verdigreece, and
the leaves may be Colored with the some.

The dubble narcissus flovver.
The other narcissus flower is great and fair, and the leaves are very
white, havinge in the place of the Sockett six other white leaves, smaler then
the other, where there runs veins of yellow through the same.

22. The greatest Narcissus flower.
THis first narcissus flower is very fair and the greatest, havinge russet
leaves, somewhat like unto the whitest brimstone, the Sockett is of yellow oker
mingled with masticot, shadowed with omber, and topt with fair masticott, the
border thereof resemblinge a faded red Color. The leaf and steal may be
Colored with mountain green, and shadowed with spanish green according as
is requisite.

The Italian narcissus flovver.
The other Italian narcissus flower is fair and great, and of a pale
brimstone Color or a honey yellow, havinge a Sockett of a gold yellow
Color.

23. The yellow Rushie Narcissus flower.
THe first of these Narcissus flowers according to his proportion has a great
Socket of gold yellow color, the leaves are yellow, and likewise also the
knopes hanging upon the yellowish spriggs, and yet every yellow is a little
different from another.

The white Rushie Narcissus.
The other Rushie or rather Reedelijke leaued Narcissus flower, is of a perfect
white color havinge some leaves curled or turned up like unto the fashion of
the flower caled Cyclamen or sow-breade, with a long Sockett standinge out,
(within the which are three white spriggs with saffron colored knopes at
their ends,) which compasses the feedebole.

24. The thick Rushie Narcissus flower.
THe first of these Narcissus flowers which are set down here, is full of
leaves, without either socket or seedebole, being of a fair gold yellow
color, and shadowed with omber and brown masticort.

The Narcissus flovver with the great socket.
The other of these is single leaued, and of a yellow color and may be
painted with masticort, and shadowed therewith in like manner, these are of the
greatest sort, with Reedie leaves, havinge in the middle of them a great
sockett which far stretches out it selffe, of a yellowish saffron color.

25. The Persian Lilley.
THe Persian Lilley bringes forth many flowers of five of six leaves a piece,
hanginge downewardes like bells, their color is of a withered or stained
purple color, like unto the color of the resinges of the son, and may be
painted with Indigo and lack with a little smair mingled together, and may be
shadowed with the same color, and may be topt at the very end with white, a
little blew and lack, being all mingled together.

26. The tymely flowringe Tulipa.
THese three tymely or early Tulips which are here represented are painted as
follows. The first flower has leaves of a pale purple color, mingled with
ashcoloure, lack and white: shadowed with lack and topt with white: the leaffe
is mountain green, shadowed with sapgreene and topt with mountain green
mingled with a little white.

The white flovver'd tymely Tulipa.
The Second is pale and somewhat yellovvish topt with pure white, and
shadowed with a very darck green.

VVolfsvvinckel Tulipa.
The third sort of these is of a purple Color, with white borders, and
may be shadowed with lack Color, as most agreeing unto the same Color,
and topt with white.

27. The persian Tulipa.
THe persian Tulipa has six leaves standing upright, the one of a bright
purple, and the other very white: the white leaves may be shadowed with
black and blevv, and purple and lack Color, and the borders may be topt with
a little white being mingled there with, the middle seed bole is green, and
the spriggs that stand about it are black.

The Candian Tulipa.
The other Candian Tulip is a flovver of purple Color mingled with white
strypes, shadowed with lack and topt with white in the middle there of both
as well with in as without, beneath it is sprinkled with menny, the knopes
within are of the glance of a very sad purple.

28. Tulipa pumilus, or little Tulipa.
THe little Tulipa flovver is Colored with menny topt with masticot or yellow
oker, and shadowed with lack.

Tulipa Bononiensis.
The Tulipa of Bonnonia is of the Color of masticot, shadowed with sad
aker, and the middle strype that is in the leaf is of verdegreece as also the
seeds, the knopes or budds that stand so far out are shadowed with menny.

29. Tulipa ducis.
HEre are presented three sorts of Tulip flowers, the first is like unto cloth
of gold, and may be painted with fair yellow, topt with masticot and shadowed
with lack, the root is of a pale soet color, topt with white, and shadowed
with brown.

The other is of a straw color, topt with a little white, and shadowed with a
little black.

Tulipa alba.
The third sort of these is like unto a white rose, of lack and white mingled
together, the topping and borderinge of the same is straw color, the lower
most part toward the steal is white, and shadowed throughout with lack, yet
the middle ribbe of the leaffe is perfect yellow.

30. Tulipa sanguina.
THe first of these flowers is bloode-red, and may be painted with lack and
vermillion mingled together, and shadowed with a sadder lack, and topt with
vermillion and a little menny, these colors may be well gommed the better to
show the glance of the leaves.

Tulipa Cinna:
The other flower is white, flamed throughout with menny and vermilion,
shadowed with a little lack, and is below toward the steal somewhat greenish
out of a white.

31. Tulipa Honnesti.
THese three Tulip flowers are very fair and delectable, the first is very
great and best known by the name honesti, being very cunningly spotted
interlaced and flamed with lack and white the one among the other, and
between them here and there some greater stripps and flames of lack, being
below at the bottom of the leaf somewhat yellowish, and now and then some
appearances of yellow color.

Tulipa Nivea.
The second is a smaler flower, of a white color, and in the middle of the
leaf has a fair strype of lack, and garnished about the edge with pretty
little flames of the same color.

Tulipa alba:
The third sort of these is also white, with somewhat brother strypes and
flames clean throughout of lack color.

32. Tulipa alba cum rubris flam:
THese two which are here placed, are not inferior to any of the former, the
first is white mingled with brimstone color, flamed throughout with lack,
somewhat paler below, and above of a Scarlet red, the glance is given by a
thin white stroke upon it.

The other has as much yellow under the white, and his strippes and flames are
of a another manner, like as the picture of the flower and the shadowinge
thereof very lively expresses.

33. Checkered daffodills, and white.
THese two sorts of Checkered daffodills have different colored flowers: the
first flower is milk white, but a little toward the steal is a little
greenish, somthinge one of a yellow, the Ribs which go about this flower are
greenish, the steal and the leaves may be painted with ashcoloure and sad
yellow tempered together the toppinge of mountain green and white together,
the shadow nearest unto the lack color, the seedebole and thee seeds are
white with yellow knopes.

The other of these two is whitish, but the uppermost edges and part of the
flower is Checkered with red spotts of lack, the Ribs that swell out are of a
sadder red, and green about the steal.

34. Other Checkered daffodills.
THese two sorts are greater then the preceedinge flowers are. The first has
his leaves of a gold yellow very finely garnished with spotts of blood red,
and a greenish Ribbe goeinge through every leaf.

The other being the greatest is speckled with the like coulored spotts, but
more thicker, yet tendinge toward a purple color.

35. Orinthogalum, or the star of Bethlehem.
THese two staire flovvers here expressed, are only differinge in bigness
from another, the flovvers are white, and the little knopes (upon the spriggs
that are white,) are masticot yellow, the leaves thereof upon the outside
have a greenish circle of a grass green color somevvhat broad, all tending
toward green, the steals are mounta ne green broken with white,
shadowed with ve^digreece, the little leaves that hang onder the steal are
vvhitish, havinge an ere of green upon their right sides, and may be
shadowed with lamb black, the leaf is of a grass green tempered with
masticot, white, and sadd yellow, to his proportion.

36. The great white Asphodill flower.
HEre are represented two sorts of Asphodill flowers, the first has leaves of
the color of sopps in wine, the strippe that goes through them, and the
hindmost knopes are of oker and lack together, the knopes and seeds are of a
sad oker color, the stalk is mountain green shadowed with verdigreece, the
little side steals are mountain green and sad oker mingled, the little
leaves upon them are of sad oker and lack, topt with white. The leaf is like
unto the stalk, of a mountain green, shadowed with verdigreece.

The yellow Asphodill flovver.
This other is very like unto the former, but of a yellow color, and the
leaf is somewhat bluish.

37. Columbines.
THe first of these his called after is proportion the Rose columbine, is of a
a sad purple color, and may be painted with brown blew and lack and red
mingled together, taking very little brown blew there unto, less it should
be too sad, and darken the purple as much as may be. The head in the middle is
of a light green, and the knopes about it are whitish the upper part of the
steal is somewhat like unto purple.

The Starrey Columbines.
The Color of the Starrey Columbines are also of a sad purple and may be
painted with Indigo and lack, and minglinge a little white under it even to
the middle of the leaf, and so toward the end of it a more paler blevv, the
seed codds are greenish topt with masticot, the knopes or budds are white, the
steal is of a pleasant green of verdigreece and white mingled together, the
leaffe is bluish of mountain green and verdigreece mingled together,
shadowed with sapgreene, and the edges topt with green and white.

38. Crowes-feete or Bachelors buttons.
THese two sorts of Crowes-feete flowers are very different from each other.
The first consistinge of single leaves after the manner of the Anemone or
wynde-flower, of a fair red color, and has in the middle a round seedebole,
the kernells that stand about the same may be p^^nted with sad yellow; and
shadowed with omber, and the middlemost knopes being of a sad purple are of
lack and indigo mingled together, the leaffe is mountain green, shadowed with
sap-greene, and the steals also, that part where the flower hangs upon may
be painted with white, red, and green tempered altogether.

39. White Crowes-feete flowers.
THe first of these Crowes-feete flowers, has a white flower and very dubble
in leaves, wherein appears certain strains of a pale green, the uppermost
edges are somewhat reddish.

The great round Crovves-feete.
The other has a great flower, the leaves always bendinge inward, being of a
fair yellow color, and may be shadowed with sad yellow and a little
vermilion mingled, and topt above with bright masticot, the knopes or budds
that look out from with in, are masticot yellow, the leaf is of a sad green,
topt with omber, and ashcoloure, and a little white together, and shadowed with
sapgreene, the steal is somewhat brighter, and may be topt with masticot.

40. Satyrion, or male foole-stones, or hare-stoons.
THe male Satyrion has flowers like unto friars hoodes being white, but the
covers have stripes of a greenish purple scarce appearinge, the steals and the
leaves whereon the flowers do hang, are of a pale verdigreece and white
mingled together, the leaffe is also verdigreece and white together, and a
little masticot among the same, and may be shadowed with, verdigreece, and
upon the leaffe may be marked a kind of small spotts glanc^nge throughout the
same.

The female Satyrion.
The flower of the female Satyrion which is here first placed, is like unto a
pale rose color, shadowed with lack and indigo, and topt with white and lack
together, the spotts and threedes are of a sad purple red, the little steals
are of the berrie yellow, laced with verdigreece, and shadowed with sapgreene,
the small leave, betwixt the flowers are of a greenish purple, the lower steal
is mountain green sprincled with white, the leaves may be colored with
masticot and mountain green; the covers, with verdigreece and sapgreene
mingled together, and the toppinge of it with masticot, the flackes or sports
are black upon green.

41. The Rushie Narcissus flower.
THese 2. sorts of Rushie Narcissus flowers, differ nothing but in the
greatness from each other, And called by the spaniards Ioncquilles, somewhat
smaler the^ the common Narcissus or oxe-eie, and is of a fair yellow color,
shadowed with omber and sad masticot, the Sockett is more yellovver, wherein
grows three or four small sp^iggs, the steal is yellovvish even to the
knope, but afterward it is of sapgreene and verdigreece mingled together,
shadowed with omber, the leaff is mountain green shadowed with
verdigreece.

Here ends the Spring Flowers.
Meridies
depiction of garden

Lati. Hepatica trifolia coeruloea polyanthos. Germ. Dubbelen blawen Hepatica.

L. Hepatica trifolia flore niveo. Ge. Edel Levercruyt met wit bloemen.

depiction of flowers

L. Crocus Neapolitanus flo: purp: major. Ge. Saffraen vanden Lent met gro:
purp: bloe:

L. Crocus Vernus purpureus minor. Ge. Saffraen vanden Le^te met kley: purp
bloe:

depiction of flowers

L. Pseudo Narcissus calice ple: multipl: color luteo Dod:. Ge. Dubbelde geele
Tytloosen.

L. Narcissus duplice tuba. flo: lut: Clus:. Ge. Narc: met die dubbel trompet.

depiction of flowers

L Narciss, maxi: dupl: folijs. Ge. Grooten dubb: Narcisz.

L. Narcissus omnium maximus. G. Narcissus nom pareille.

depiction of flowers

L. Muscari flore luteo. I. Muscio graeco. Ge. Welriekende discadi.

L. Muscari obsoleto, color Albo. 1. dod:. Ge. Weisse Muscari.

depiction of flowers

L. Hyacinthus stellatus Aquitanicus coeruleo flore. Ge. Hyacinth van Guienne
met blawe bloemen.

L. Hyacinthus stell: hisp: flo: albo. Ge. Spaensch Hyacinth met wit bloemen.

depiction of flowers

L. Primula veris Anglica pleno flore. I. Fior de primavera. G. Brayes de Cocu
doubl: Ge. Dubb Schluetel-bloeme^.

L. Primula veris flore g^of an c^^a^

depiction of flowers

L. Auricola vrsi flo: lut:. Ge. Geele Beeren oor.

L. Auricola vrsi flore violaete. Ge. Beeren ohr violbraun.

depiction of flowers

L. Chamaeiris color coerulaeo violaceo. Ge. Leech Lisch met blaw violette
bloemen.

L. Chamoeiris colo: purp sa^er. Ge. Leech Lisch. I. Iride. G. Iris basset.

depiction of flowers

L. Hyacinthus orientalis coerul I. Iacinto orientale. Ge. Orientael Hyacinth.

L. Hyacinthus orientalis pall. purp. G. Iacinthe orien^^e.

depiction of flowers

L. Hyacinthus orienta caule^foli:. Ge. Orietaclschen Hyacinth.

L. Hyacinth' orien ple^ flo. G. Jacinthe orien: double.

depiction of flowers

Corona Jmperialis class duplici florum.
depiction of flowers

L. Anemone tenuifolia violaceo. It. Cocles. G. Coquelourdes. Ge. Kuchenschel.

L. Anemone coccineo.

I. G. Anemone princess sangui.

depiction of flowers

L. Anemone tenuifol: plen: flor: pallido rubro.

L. Anemone tenuifol: plen: flor: coccineo.

depiction of flowers

L. Anemone latifolia Verdunia.

L. Anemone latifolia hispanica Carneo Color.

L. Anemone latifolia flo: simpl: orengiaca.

depiction of flowers

L. Anemone pavo flore simplici.

L. Anemone pavo Major.

depiction of flowers

L. Anemone latifolia Chalcedonica maxima polyanthos.

L. Anemone calcedonica cacumen^.

depiction of flowers

L. Eranthemum Dod: flore sanguineo. G. Fleur du vent. Ge. Brunettekens.

L. Buph^almum. I. Occhio de bue. G. Oeil de b^euf. Ge. Ge^ss^um.

depiction of flowers

L. Narcissus medio purpureus. I. Narcisso. G. Narcisse. Ge. Narciss.

L. Narcissus medio luteus Ge. Narciss int midden geel.

depiction of flowers

L. Narcissus oblongo calice.

L. Narcissus medius lute^ amplo cal^ clusij.

depiction of flowers

L. Narcissus totus albidus.

L. Narcissus flore multiplici.

depiction of flowers

L. Narcissus maximus griseus caliee flavo.

L. Narcissus mayor medio lure' Jtalic^s.

depiction of flowers

L. Narcissus Iuncifolius amplo call: lut:.

L. Narcissus Iuncifolius albo flore reflaexo^.

depiction of flowers

L. Narcissus Iuncifolius flore pleno.

L. Narcissus maximo call flo: lu^.

depiction of flowers

Lilium Persicum.
depiction of flowers

L. Tulipa praecox flore purpureo.

L. Tulipa praecox flore albo.

L. Tulipa praecox wolfswinckel flor: purp: et marg: albo.

depiction of flowers

L. Tulipa Persica.

L. Tulipa Candia.

depiction of flowers

Tulipa pumilus.

L. Tulipa Bononiensis. G. Tulipa de Montpeliers.

depiction of flowers

L. Tulipa Duris.

L. Tulipa lutea.

L. Tulipa alba et rosea col: mixta.

depiction of flowers

L. Tulipa cin^ab: et alb. flamm.

L. Tulipa sanguin:.

depiction of flowers

L. Tulipa Honesti.

L. Tulipa alba coccineis flammis.

L. Tulipa nivea cocc: col: satur:

depiction of flowers

L. Tulipa alba cum rubr: flam: et fun: lut:

Willem Pass. f

depiction of flowers

L. Frittillaria flo: albo.

L. Frittillaria flore purpureo.

depiction of flowers

L. Frittillaria flore luteo.

L. Frittillaria maxim: polyanthos.

depiction of flowers

L. Ornithogalum minus.

L. Ornithogulum maius.

depiction of flowers

L. Asphodelus albus mayor.

L. Asphodelus luteus.

depiction of flowers

L. Aquilina rosea flo:. G. Ancoiles.

L. Aquilegia flo: stell:. Ge Akeleyen.

depiction of flowers

L. Ranunculus Asi:. simpl:. Ge Hanenvoet

L. Ranunculus Grum: dupl:. G. Bassinets.

depiction of flowers

L. Ranunculus albus flore pleno.

L. Ranuculus flore globoso niaxi:.

depiction of flowers

L. Satyrion Basilicum foemina. Ge. Handchenskruyt.

L. Satyrium Basil mas. Ge. Creutzblun^.

depiction of flowers

L. Narcissus Iuncifol: mayor.

L. Narcissus Iuncifol: minor.

depiction of flowers

TRAICTE COMPENDIEVX ET ABREGE DES TVLIPANS ET DE LEVRS diverses sorts and
especes, avec vne certain maniere; comme on les peult semer, planter, and
lever, qui est vne chose vtile and profitable a tous ceux quy sont amateurs de
tells excellentes fleurs.
Apertient a le premier livre en fin du saison printeniere.
A My lecteur and Cur^eux amateur des plus riches and precieux joiaux,
ressevrez au Cabinet de la dilligente and tresnoble de esse flora. l'ay bien
voulu choisir l'un d'sceux pour en escrite aucune chose selon mon petit pouvoir
and congnoissance que j'en ay acquise pour vous en fair participantz estant a
vous seulement ansquelz s'adresse ce mien petit labeur and non a autres,
esperant que vous aurez agreeable ce que j'ay escrit du Tulipan de la beauty
d'icelluy, de ses diverses especes, de la maniere, de le semer, planter, and
lever, and du moien de les entretenir, selon quelles sont descriptes and
distinguees par ce tresdocte homme Monsieur Charles de lecluse en ses livres
tressingulieres des plants Rares, ou il en remarque de trois especes,
seulement, don't les premiers sont appellez precoces, les secondz Midionelles,
and les troisiesmes sont dicts tardifz, a cause comme j'estime quilz
fleurissent les derniets, and ces premiers dicts precoc^s sont comme lo^igine,
don't tous les autres procedent estantz de diverses couleurs, les vns entiers en
leurs couleurs, and les autres variez sy comme jaunes, rouges, pourpres,
blancz, blancz-ensoulphrez, pourpres avec des bords blancz, incarnatz rayez de
blanc, rouges raiez de jaune avec le fondz noir, and autres diversement raiez
and variez, les touges Cramoisis rayez de jaune a fonds blanc, un qu'on appelle
les Escus de lecluse, desquelz selo^ l'experience des Curieux Amateurs
procedent les plus Excelentes estimable fleurs, les pourpres a blanc board and
fondz bleu, les verds, les blancz, le ducat and le na^, quy sont ceux enter
tous les autres quy sont les plus recherchez and plus desirez pour femer
d'icelle.

De la Culture and maniere de planter les Tulipans.
POur avoir bonne terre and proppre a bien noutrir, eslever, and entretenir les
Tulipes and garder aussy quand and quand que les taulpes ne les mengent ou
endommagent, il est necessaire de les planter en bonne terre and grass, parmy
laquelle il fault messer des Cendres de boys de vigne avec du tan, don't se
servent les tanneurs pour habiller les cuits, and ne le fault planter trop
avaunt dans terre, car le Tulipa est de tel^e nature qu'il se jette plus dans
terre que dehors, puis quand il a jette ses fleurs, il fault auoir le soing de
t^re^ les boulles horse de terre, and les garder en lieu sec, carelles se
porroyent gaster sinon celles don't vous attender les seme^ces. Puis apprez
quand on les veult replanter en la mesme maniere, cela se do^bt fair enuiron
la fin de l'automne, and ainsy en ce faisant vous conserverez tousiours vos
tulipans beaux and sans estre endommagez, negastez, and se pourrez aussy
dilater les petitos racines facillement, pour en multiplier and nourrit de
nouvelles plants.

La maniere de semer la semence des Tulipans.
ET d'autant que le Tulipan est vne fleur qui abonde en semence, and que pour
son excellence elle est dig^e dest^e semee a cause mesme des belles and
diverses fleurs quy en procedent. I'ay bie^ voullu vous enseigner la maniere de
les semer qui est tell, vous ferez fair un Auge de boys longue and large a
discretion felon que vous voudrez en semer and l'emplirez de bonne terre
preparee en la facon cy devant descrite puis vous se^erez vostre semence de
Tulipans la dedans enviro^ sur la fin de l'automne ayan le soing de la tenir
tousiours vis a vis du soleil, and la bien garder du vent septemtrional qu^l ne
done ^essus, and pour le choix de la semence prendre tousiours de celle que
l'on verra estre, la plus belle, me^re, and ^eux no^rrye, ce qu'ayant observe,
vous aurez de^ plants a vostre souhai^, and aurez pour maxim de prend^e
tousiours les semences que vous voudrez semer de ceux. Don't ^'ay cy devant
escrit, cat celles sout les plus dig^ses d'estre semez and sans d'oubte vous
aurez de belles deurs d'icelles.

De la nature and proppriete des Tulipans and de leurs Corruptions.
POur bien escrire de la proppriere des Tulipans and de leur corruption ou
multiplication il fault scavoir quilz ne a pas fort abo^dantz en ses fleurs
mais sont accidentelles, mais neantmoins de nature assez dure, estant en les
racines de soy mesmes asses abondant a se multiplier augmentant ses racines
tous les ans de deux ou trois, voules mais d'auta^t que la taulpe est vne best
fort dommageable a ^elles racines, il est bien necessaire que les persons quy
sont Amateurs d'entreteni^ de tells fleurs pour en avoir le plaisir dans leurs
jardins, soyent foigneux de les bien garder decet animal, comme aussy de
grandes humiditez, and pourtant il est bon voire aussy necessaire, aussy tossed
que les fl^urs sont passees qu'on tire les boulles de ses Racines horse de la
terre pour les garder en lieu sec and propre sinon celle duquel vous voles
semer.

Secret pour garder les Racines desfleurs lesquelles la taulpe menge volontiers.
SY vous voulez preserver vos fleurs and les Racines d'icelles du dommage de la
taulpe, prenez de la terre grass and la messez avec du tan que les flamens
appellent run/don't les tanneurs se servent pour tanner leurs cuirs and de la
cendre de boys de vigne, and enterrez vos boulles ou Racines soit de Tulipes en
autres fieurs la dedans un demi pied en avaunt dans terre, and ne craignez plus
que la taulpe vienne menger vos Racines, car else haissent vne tell terre and
n'entretont jamais dedans.

Contre un autre accident arrivant aulx Tulipans.
ET d'autant que les racines des Tulipes peuvent estre endommagez par plusieurs
and diverse accidentz, qui tournent souvent au grand desplaisir and
mescontentement de ceux quy les ayment and qui les possedent, je les ay bien
voullu advertir d'un, enter plusieurs accidentz qui peuvent arriver a cela qui
est assez dangereux, assavoir, que les boulles ou racines se trouvent
souventefois endommagez des verse ou lombris qui les font mourir. Ce qui je
peult remedier en ceste facon, quand else seront levees horse de la terre, and
quae l'on verra quil y aura quelque dommage des verse en icelles ou en aucunne,
vous la mettrez au soleil avec du sablon a l'entour and les laisserez ainsy par
quelques jours ainsy else seront garantyes.

NECESSAIRE INSTRVMENT POVR REPLANTER TOVTES SORTS DE FLEVRS AVEC VNE FACILE
and tres excellent maniere de retirer un Tulipan hor^ de terre sans fair
dommage a la fleur.
depiction of flower planter

Treschers and bien aimez de la noble deesse flora and Curieux amateurs, enter
autres Richesses de son Cabinet, des delectables fleurs des Tulipans, puis-que
mon intention a este deser^e aucune chooses ^^elles pour vostre contentement te
nay peu delaisser de vous fair participantz de cest instrument quy est vne
chose tresproppre, lequel ma este monstre par les Curieux amateurs and
diligentz en tells recher^hes, Albert and Guillemme de Heu^lum avec la maniere
de seu servir.

POur done scavoir l^sage and maniere de se servi^ de cest instrument, tu le
feras en ceste sort, (...) as quelque fleur que tu desitaste mettre d'une
place en l'autre affin de la point gaster ny endommager, tu p^endras le susdict
instrument and en estraignant par dessus la test de la fleur te perseras
jusques a c^ que tu pense estre en terre jusques au dessoubz de la boutte and
racine, puis le leve ho^s de s^ place, and le remerz ainsy au trou que tu auras
premierement faict au lieu ou tu la voulois avoir avec l'autre Instrument, puis
l'ayant ainsy replante, tu retireras ton Instrument avec la brochette ou fet
pointu dehors, and ta fleur demeurera ferme dans la terre sans aucun dommage.

Facon de l'Instrument 1. Le Cuiure. 2. L'agraphe. 3. La Brochette.


La maniere de retenir les Tulipans longuement en fleur.
POur garder ou retenir longuement les Tulipans en fleur, il les fault garder
fort soingneusement and dilligement que la pluye ne tumbe dessus la nuict, and
pour ce fair vous prendrez du parchemin and en ferez des petits capuchons de
grandeur ptoppres pour ^ouvrir vos Tulipans, puis les ayant attachez a des
petitz bastons, vous les ficherez auprez de vos fleurs, de sort que le
capuch^n sera droict pendant sur vostre Tulipan pour le couvrir justement fa
fleur qu'and il pleuvera soit de nuict ou de jour, ou quand le temps sera
pluvieux, ou quand il fera trop de froid, and cecy a ceste experimente de sort
que l'on peult en ceste facon conservir un Tulipan en sa plain fleur bien six
ou sept sepmaines, quy autrement ne dure pas plus longuement que 12. ou 14.
jours.

FINIS.
Registre des plus estimes Tulipans, qui pour le present sont recherches and de
grand valeur, qui soient a recouvrir facilement avec semence dor.
TVlipa Cattelijn. Tulipa le Admirael. Tulipa le Svvitser. Tulipa Quackel.
Tulipa Del pont. Tulipa St. Cromhout. Tulipa Doelman. Tulipa Kouckebacker.
Tulipa Palton. Tulipa St. Garret. Tulipa Mulmans. Tulipa Laproc. Tulipa de
Goyer. Tulipa Honnest. Tulipa Duc. Tulipa pourpre a bort blanc. Diverses.
Tulipa St. Iacobi bommi. Diverses. Tulipa Toc de argent. Diverses. Tulipa
Ernest. Tulipa Toc dor. Tulipa de pourpre a font blange jaune. Tulipa de
Persica. Tulipa Candia. De pourpres precoces.
Amiss Amateurs s'il y a quelques Tulipa aupres quelques amateurs qui me soit
cognu, j'espere avec le temps de porter en lumiere.


Avec cecy ie vous offres mon oeure vostre Treshumble Crispian vande Pas le
Ieune.

Tulipa Doelmani argente Coloris ruberis flammis ornata
depiction of flower

Tulipa Gomhaudi alba rubris flammis ^logan vti plum: Ornata

Tulipa Rommerlandi Elegan fondo alba orie purpurie rubert: ornata

depiction of flowers

Tulipa Gerardi Jacobi lutea cum rubris flammis

Tulipa Johannis Semmii argent. Coloris cum purpuris flammis distinct

depiction of flowers

Tulipa Jacobi Bommi lutei Coloris coccines flammis diuisa et ornata
depiction of flower

Tulipa mayor Do Jacobi Bommij lutei Coloris rubris flammis des tincta
depiction of flower

Tulipa Octauiani Del Pont: niuei Coloris Sanguine: flammis ornata.

Tulipa Elegant lut: Coloris cinabris flam: ornatus.

depiction of flowers

Tulipa Andrea ob Holsdinge argentea rubris maculis punctaca

Tulipa Iacobi bom^i alba rub^ flamis diuisa.

depiction of flowers

Tulipa Hugoni de Goyer lucea Color: rubris flammis diuisa

Tulipa Erust Janssoni lutea Col ad latera rubera

depiction of flowers

Tulipa alba rubris flammis dispersa, alias Couckebackeri.
depiction of flower

Tulipa Adriani Bilsi lutea rubris flammis Elegan: ornata

Tulipa Nob: viri Johan a Seulen alb. rubris maculis punct^

depiction of flowers

Tulipa Jacobi verbec^ argente Coloris rubris macul: destincta

Tulipa Johannis Deby luteri Coloris rubris maculis aspersa

depiction of flowers

Tulipa lutea oris rubris Genata.

Tulipa Johannis de Rijc purpurei Color* margin: albo

depiction of flowers

AESTAS HORTI FLORIDI, INQVA PRAECIPVI AESTATIS FLORES EXCELLENTI, CR. PASSAEI
STYLO ADVIVVM ADMODVM INGENIOS EXPRIMVNTVR.

VLTRAIECTI. Ex Officina Hermanni Borculoi.

ET Prostant apud Ioannem Iansonium Bipliopolam Arnemiensis.

Index AESTIVVS. Vcl secundae partis Horti Floridi.
PAEonia femina, mas. Fol. 1. Iris mayor Dodonaei. Fol. 2. Iris Susiana. Fol.
3. Iris Angustifol: Clusij. Fol. 4. Sisynrichium maius, and Iris bulb: latif:
Clusij. Fol. 5. Iris flore lut: and Iris Hispanica. Fol. 6. Moly mont: latif:
flavo fl: Moly angustifol. Fol. 7. Lilium montanum. Fol. 8. Lil: Martagon
Pomponij. Fol. 9. Lilium Rubrum Bulbi ferum. Fol. 10. Gladiolus Narbon* and
Gladiolus vtrimq: floriferus. Fol. 11. Rosa pleno flore albo, and R: rubra
Praenestina. Fol. 12. Rosa centifol: Bat: and Rosa versicol: Fl: Fol. 13.
Campanula Flore caerul: and Campan: flo. albo. Fo. 14 Papaver, flore pleno.
Fol. 15. Lychnis Coron: fl: rubro pleno, and L flore albo. Fol. 16.
Caryophylleus flos minor, vel Superba. Fol. 17. Caryophyll: flore albo punct:
fl: sanguineo, fl: niveo. Fol. 18. Melanthium sativum, and M. pleno flore. Fol.
19.
ANAGRAME
Du nom de l'auteur.
Sur son liver de rares Fleurs.
CRISPIAN DE PASE.
PRIS DE SAPIANCE.
Timante en peignent son enorme Cyclope.
Apelles sa Venus, Zeuxe sa Penelope.
Nom aquis tell renom parleur divine science.
Que DE PASE en ses Fleurs qu'ale PRIS DE SAPIANCE.
Iacques Chioze. Orangenis.
THE SECOND BOOK CONTAININGE THE FLOWERS OF THE SVMMER QVARTER ACCORDING TO
THEIR SEASON, AS THEY FIRST GROVVE IN SVCCESSION OF THEIR MONTHS, BEGININGE
WITH THE FIRST OF THE SUMMER FLOWERS.
How carefull-diligent I have been.
These colors to express:
In painful paintinge of the same
Good reader use no less.

1. The female peionie flower.
THis greatst female peionie flower, consists of very many leaves and my be
painted with lack and a little vermilion mingled with it, shadowed with
glancinge brown lack, and topt with white and a little lack thereby. The
leaffe may be colored with ashcoloure, m^^ticot, and a little sad yellow all
mingled together, and shadowed with sapg ^ene. A little white added unto the
former colors will serve for the toppinge of it, the budde is of a fair red
like unto the flower, but somewhat sadder, the pillinges thereof are as the
leaffe of the flower, the steal is a pale ^teene, the toppinge thereof is sad
yellow, and the shadow is of verdig^e^^

2. Iris mayor Dodonaei: or the field flower de luce.
THis great flower de luce expressed by Dodonaeus, has his three n^ther most
dependinge leaves, being under pale and of a fair blew purple above
resemblinge the violet with white stripes taking their begininge from the
golden fringe, over the which are small pale purple colored leaves hanginge,
the three leaves that stand upright are of a light purple* and are shadowed
there unto as is fittinge.

3. The flower de luce of Susa.
THe flower deluce of Susa is a Brownish ashcoloure, being full of blackish
spotts and veins, (as the picture well declares, his lesser leaves which are
in the middle have a purple border through the middle of them. The leaf and
the steal may be painted with mountain green and verdigreece, and shadowed
with sap-greene with his stripes in ^^^e manner as is fittinge.

4. The Narrow leafde flower deluce.
THis is also a very delicate flower deluce, and the leaves standing upright
may be painted with a sad blew ashcoloure and lack mingled together, shadowed
with Indigo and purple lack, the downe-warde bendinge leaves are stripped with
sad purple flames, and toward the edge is appearance of light aker and lack,
the middle leaninge leaves being but small are a sad purple, the steal is
verdigreece with mountain green, and a little berry yellow mingled together.
The short steal whereupon the flowers do grow is ashcoloure and sad yellow,
and shadowed with sap-greene.

5. Sysinrichium maius. or the Bastard flower deluce.
THe first of these two here expressed flower deluces, is of a very pleasant
color, havinge his extended leaves of an Azur blew and a little lack
appearing under the same, the other stripps are lack and Indigo, the innermost
leaves may be shadowed with lack and indigo, the thick sheathes where-out the
flower comes are berriegreene, and the flames that spread above them are of
lack and sad yellow mingled together, the steal that goes betwixt, is
verdigreece and berry yellow tempered together.

Clusius his broad leafde bastard flovver de luce.
The other flower deluce with broad leaves, has a pale blew flower, more
paler then the former, both topt and shadowed as is most fittinge, the leaf
is pale mingled with ashcoloure and sadyellovv, the bole is pale and somewhat
blackish.

6. The yellow flower deluce.
THese two flower deluces are much differinge in color, for the first is a
very fair perfect yellow, and may very conveniently be topt and shadowed as
the picture it selffe declares the mouth leaves are whitish be a somewhat
tendinge toward blew, yet the upper ribbe appears to pale masticot color.

The spanish flovver deluce.
The other has whitish leaves, and the borders may be expressed with a little
lack and ashcoloure mingled, the leaves that stand upright within are more
blewer* spread abroad with purple flames.

7. Moly, or the Sorcerers garlieke.
THese two several sorts of Moly, are both in the flowers and the leaves very
different, for the first sort has yellow starre-lyke flovvers, fair within,
but without of a more paler yellow, the knope within is greenish, the spriggs
and knopes that stand at the end of them are fair yellow, the leaffe is of a
brownish green, which may be colored with ashcoloure and sad yellow, and
shadowed with sapgreene, and the steal may conveniently be shadowed with
mountain green.

Mountain Moly.
The other sort has purple like leaves and may be painted with white and
soetblack, and shadowed with the same, the inner knopes are of masticot yellow,
standing about a head of light green, the enclosed knopes are reddish, the
steals are a light green, of verdigreece and mountain green mingled
together and topt with white.

8. The Mountain Lilly.
THe mountain Lilley has his flower of a withered purple color, and
shadowed accordingly, and garnished with certain sad purple spots, the steal
has certain spotts, but more darkly appearinge.

9. Martagon, or Mountain Lilly.
THe Lilly Martagon, called after the name of pomponeus. Is a fair Origne
ravvncy, and may be painted with saffron, and shadowed with lack, and the
Ribs topt with white, the spotts are black, and the spriggs and knopes are
white Masticot, the steals are mountain green mingled with a little
verdigreece and the leaves also shadowed with sapgreene.

10. The red Lilly.
THe red Lilly may be colored with high masticot and menny, and shadowed with
vermillion and lack; the spotts are black, the blade or bodekin is oker yellow,
and somewhat reddish toward the point, the spriggs are vermillion color
with a little masticot there under, the steal is mountain green mingled with
verdigreece; as also those leaves that are upon the steal. The edges are topt
with white, the shadow may be tempered of sap-greene and verdigreece, the
toppinge of masticot and mountaine-greene.

11. Gladiolus Narbonen* or Corne-flagge.
THe Corn flagg flowers which are here represented are little differinge from
each other. But this, the one bringes flowers forth but on one side; and the
other on both sides* without they are of a Reddish red, shaddowed with lack,
appearinge toward the bottom of a pale yellowish color, and at the ver^
end are redd. The steal is mountain green, as also the leaves that are ^on
it, yet the spotts or stipples upon them are somevvhat reddish, a^ may be
shadowed with sapgreene.

Cornes^-flovvers leaued on both sides.
This flower is also of ^le red within, and at the mouth thereof there is a
pale whitly stripe, v^^ a garland of a blood red color about it, the
middlemost bodkin is of a whitish color tendinge toward red, and the
shorter spriggs appear more yellovvish.

12. The dubble white rose.
THis first being a pleasant and well smellinge rose may be painted with lead
white, and shadowed with a little florey, the middle seeds are of a brown
oker yellow touched only with a little sad yellow and lack, the steal is
verdigreece only broken with a little masticot, and also the side leaves, the
veins which go through them are masticott, shadowed with verdigreece. The
leaves are to be colored with sad yellow and ashcoloure and a little florey
being mingled among the same, topt with a little white among the
aforesaid colors, and sha^^wed Lambe-black, the steals of the leaves are
somevvhat lighter and tendinge toward yellow.

Rosa Rubra.
The other rose is of a fair light red, and may be shadowed with fair lack,
the seeds are masticott yellow, shadowed with brown oker, the color may
be tempered with common lack, and topt with white lack.

13. The Hollandes rose of 100. leaves.
THe Hollandes rose of a hundred leaves is of a fair and goodly ^^shcoloure,
and may be painted with lack and white, and shadowed with lack, and topt
with white and a little lack among the same. The steal is of mountain
green and a little verdigreece mingled therewith, shadowed with verdigreece
and lack, and the little budds may be painted with the same. The leaffe may be
painted with sad yellow and light ashcoloure mingled. The Ribs with
verdigreece and sapgreene and in some places tempered with a little lack.

The Changeable Rose.
The other Changeable colored rose, is of a light red and white strypt one
within another, and may far better be expressed by the draught of the pensill,
then described with the pen.

14. Bell flowers.
THe flowers of the first Bell flovver, may be painted with light smal^ blevv,
and shadowed with a little lackmoes, the spriggs are vvhitish tendinge
toward yellow, and within is the flower more paler and vvhitte liar about
the knope.

The white Bell flovvers may be painted with white and lamb black, the
spriggs within are bluish as the former is, the middle knope where the
spriggs do grow upon is vvhitish green and has a pleas^nt green circle
about them. The leaffe is mountain green, shadowed with verdigreece, the
sprigges that stand out are more paler, and topt with white and masticot
mingled under the aforesaid colors.

15. Poppie flowers.
THese two sort^s of Poppie flowers which are here expressed, the first is white;
and the second carnation color, being very dubble and consistinge of very
many leaves, and may be painted with menny and vermillion, being topt with
vermilion and white, and shadowed with fair lack and a little vermilion
among the same, but the lowest shadow may be drawn with fair vermilio^,
and for the better glansinge of them the middle knope is of yellow oker, and in
the middle of it mountain green.

16 Wild rose Campion, being dubble.
Wild rose Campion being dubble leafde is very delectable to behold, and may
be painted with rose red, and topt upon the ends of the flames with a little
lack onder the same. The shadow is like unto black velvett, and spotts or
stripes colored with highcoloured lack. The leaff is light mountain green
and white mingled together, topt with white, and shadowed with verdigreece and
mountain green.

The single VVild-rose Campion.
The single one is of a white color, as well in the leaves, as the teeth in
the middle. It may be shadowed with thin black florey the veins being
somewhat greenish.

17. White Sweet Williams.
THe first of these flowers is white, and may be colored with lead white and
a little redd in such wise that it very hardly may be perceived, the garland is
of a fair blood red and toward the middle a little russett, the ^aggs are
white with a little lack color, the garland may be shadowed with a little
brown red, the seedebole is of light mountain green the spriggs are somewhat
a light yellow. The leaff is of mountain green and ashcoloure, and shadowed
with verdigreene.

Single svveete Williams.
The other is fleshcoloure or cornation red, and toward the middle it is
almost white, the jagges are at the ends of a carnation color, the seed
bole is mountain green, and shadowed with verdigreene, but the knope or b^dde
at the end is lack color, the sheath of the flower is like unto the
seedebole, the steal is verdigreece, and the leaves are somewhat lighter.

18. Carnations or: cloue gilleflowers.
THese three very fair great dubble Carnations or clouegille flowers, are
exceedinge pleasant to look upon, most differing in the diversity of their
colors, the first is white with some red lack spotts finely adorned. The
Iaggs are also white, the Socquet or sheath of the flower is mountain green,
and shadowed with verdigreece. The steal is verdigreece shadowed with
sapgreene, the leaff is of a pale mountain green, appearinge somewhat bluish.

The red Carnation.
The middle flower of the three is perfect blood red.

The white Carnation.
The last of these is white as snow, and may be colored with lead white, and
lightly shadowed with brown blew.

19. The flower Gith: or nigella.
THe flower Melanthium or Nigella, and called in dutch Narduszaet, is here
represented in two several forms. The first has single flowers, being
whitish and tendinge toward a blew ashcoloure, havinge blew veins with white
lagges and sprigges, the seed bole being of a pale green, being curled in
the middle.

The dubble Nigella.
The other sort bringes forth a flower that is dubble like unto the former in
color, but about the seedebole the leaves are more purple like. The steal
and the leaves may be colored with light ashcoloure and sad yellow, and topt
with white, and shadowed with verdigreece, the form of the flower is much
after the fashion of the blew dubble ruffes that are dubble set about men's
necks.

20. The great dubble Carnations or Gilleflowers.
THe greatest dubble Gilleflower, or dubble carnation, is a very fair and
goodly flower to look upon. So that the first of these two is of a fair
fleshcoloure and spread over with a little whiter fleshcoloure, the shadow of
pale lack color tempered with a little vermilion very softly and dilicately
handled, but in some high shadows, only touched with a brown red, there do
fall in so^e small spotts of lack color, but ca^ hardly be observed.

The greatest changeable Carnation flovver.
The other is besides his fair greatness very fairly stripped and may be
painted with leadewhite, somewhat silverlike, and dravvinge the flames with
fair lack, the broader somewhat lighter, and the narrower somewhat sadder. The
shadow being tempered of blew, and the seedebole is of mountain green,
shadowed with verdigreece, but at the knope there is a small besprincklinge of
lack color, the steal is somewhat sadder, and between the joints are some
lighter spots of verdigreece, the leaffe is also mountain green* shadowed
with spanish green, and topt with a little white.

Here ends the Summer Flowers.
Meredies
depiction of garden

L. Paeonia foem: maxim:.
depiction of flower

1. L. Iris mayor. I. Giglio. G. Glacyul. Ge. Lisch.

depiction of flowers

3. L. Iris Susiana mayor.
depiction of flower

L. Iris angus ti folio Clusij.
depiction of flowers

^ L. Sysinrichium maius.

L. Iris Bulbosa latif: Clusij.

depiction of flowers

.6. L. Iris bulb: flore luteo.

L. Iris Hisp^^^a bulb.

depiction of flowers

7. L. Moly latifolium mont: flore flavo.

L. Moly mo^tan: angustifolium.

depiction of flowers

.8. L. Lilium montanum. I. Giglio salvatico. G. Lis jaulne. Ge. Cymbels.

depiction of flowers

.9. L. Martagon Pomponeum.
depiction of flowers

L. Lilium rubrum bulbiferum. I. Giglio rosso. G. Lis orange. Ge. Roode Lelien,
often Gold gilgen.

depiction of flowers

11 L. Gladiolus vtrimque floriferus

L. Gladiolus Narbonen:.

depiction of flowers

.12. Rosa alba ple: flo:

L. Rosa rubra praenestina.

depiction of flowers

13 L. Rosa centifolia Batavica.

L. Rosa versicoler.

depiction of flowers

14 Belvedere. L. Campanula flo coerul:.

L. Campanula flore alba. Ge. Cloxkens.

depiction of flowers

15. L. Papaver flo: multipl:. G. Pavot. Ge. Heul.

L. Papaver flo: plen: jncarn:.

depiction of flowers

16. L. Lychnis coronaria flo: rub: ple:. I. Lychnide. G. Oillets. Ge. Christus
oogen.

L. Lychnis flore albo. Ge. Himmelrosslein.

depiction of flowers

17 L. Superba alba.

L. Superba flo: simp:.

depiction of flowers

18. L. Caryophilus flore albo punctato.

L. Cariophilus flore sanguineo.

L. Caryophylus flore niveo.

depiction of flowers

19. L. Melanthium flore simplici.

L. Melanthium flore ^^pli^^

depiction of flowers

.20. L. Cariophylus maximus col: carneo.

L. Cariophylus maximus variegatus.

depiction of flowers

THE THIRD BOOK CONTAININGE THE DESCRIPTION OF THE FLOVVERS IN AVTVMNE, MADE
BY THE AVTHOR AFORESAID.
If that these works shall well content,
Thy curiouse mind and Sense:
Be mindful of the Authors praise
And judge of his exspence.

1. Clematis, or the travelers joy.
CLematis is a twiggie growth, and this flower is called by Clusius a second
woodbyne, first the flower comes up like unto red Ivy, and afterward grows
more twigg-like, the branches are of a Chestnut color, the smaler branches or
steals where upon the leaves depend and grow up, are very small and tender,
and are very brittle. The flower is very tender, and withers as soon as it is
broken of, as experience teaches us, it is enclosed in long knopes that are of
a very light sky color and purple like. This flower opens in the middle,
and it has 3. furrows in it, which almost by the knope is of a light green:
And this flower may be painted after this manner, first take fair lack
color, put thereunto a little Lambeblack, because the purple may fall
somewhat sad, the spotts are light green mingled with ashcoloure and masticot,
the side leaves are of a lighter green, the leaves are of a light ash color
mingled with sad yellow, the steals of the leaves are green, the branches
or twiggs that bears the flower are chestnut color.

2. The musk rose.
THis rose is perfect white a little tending toward a whay color, within it
has yellow veins, the leaffe and steal is even, and smooth, with very few
pricks, which are of a chestnut color the steal is a lighter green then the
leaves are, the leaves may be painted with sad yellow and ashcoloure and
shyninge, and upon the wrong side, not so sad a green but somewhat lighter
being mingled with white and mountains green, the steal of the rose is of a
Chestnut color, and it may be painted with a little lack and oker.

3. The mary gold of the son.
THis great and fair son marigolde comes late, not before September, and
although this be a very great flower, yet it grows yearly up, of a small
seed, and must be new sown every year.

The lesser marigolde of peru.
This smaler is in all things like unto the former, but is of a shorter
growth, and there arises of these three or four of them upon one steal and
of one seed.

The leaves that stand round about are of a fair masticott color, and if
the masticot be not of a high color, it must be tempered with a little lack,
made shyninge, and shadowed with sad yellow, the innermost must be of a berry
yellow there must be regard had in toppinge the stars with light masticott,
the laggs must also be topt with the former color, the cowne within is the
saddest of all, the leaves that come after the yellow leaves, must very
evidently appear, because they are green, these leaves and the steal must be
shadowed with sad yellow and ashcoloure, and topt with white and masticott.

4. The Indian Reed.
THe flower of this Indian Reed, is gold yellow and spotted with black
spotts, the leaves are like unto white niesinge powder, and may be colored
with mountain green and masticott, the middle ribbe is somewhat whiter, the
strepes thereof are of sapgreene, and shadowed with a little verdigreece among
the other, the root is of a Chestnut color, the two reeds are colored with
the sap of berry yellow, and shadowed with sad yellow and ashcoloure.

5. The great Affricaen, or french Marigolde.
THis great french marygolde is of a very fair growth, and hardly will grow
in this clymate by reason of the cold, for it grows up very slowely, with
single leaves spread abroad, set like a ruff, and must be colored with
operement, and topt with masticott, and shadowed with lack and sad yellow, the
middle crown is of a straw color or light yellow, tendinge toward
masticot, and shadowed with sad yellow. The steal and leaffe must be colored
with the sap and juice of verdigreece and shadowed with verdigreece and
sapgreene, the budde is mingled with a little operement at the top, and is
shadowed as is a foresaid, the steal below has some reddish stripes.

6. The dubble french Marygolde.
THe great dubble french Mary gold differs nothing from the former, but
only that it is thicker of leaves and has a shyninge gloss, and must
beshadowed brightly.

7. The little french Marigolde.
THe little french marigolde is of a high and bright color shyninge, topt
with operement and masticot resemblinge gold, the shadowinge of the leaves
upon the sides appears like red velvett, and of some there fore they be
called velvett flowers, in the temperinge of the colors, there must be used
good lack, a little vermilion, and operement, the greater of these two sorts
resembles much velvet: as is aforesaid. The borders of the leaves are of
masticot yellow, the leaf is of a yellow oker and ashcoloure mingled, and it
must be shadowed accordingly, the steals of the leaves are lighter then the
leaves themselves, the great stalk is sadder then the leaves, the knope is
more yellowish, the root is somewhat reddish.

8. Mallows, or dubble hollihock.
THe dubble hollihock, is a very pleasant colored flower, of a vvhitish
fleshcoloure, the edges more lighter then the middle, with some small stripes
in the middle like unto the vermillion color, sprinkled with a little lack:
the highest toppinge of this flower must shine white like unto silver color.
The leaffe is of a Common green somewhat yellovvish, the knopes are of a paler
green more whiter, the steal is more yellower, and all these must be tempered
according to their own propriety, the point of the openinge budde must be
topt a little whyter then the leaves, the lagg of the buddes be of lighter
green then the leaves be above.

The other sort of this full leafde flower is of the color of a Rubie, it is
painted with lack and vermillion, and topt with white and vermillion, and
shadowed with fair sad colored lack. The buddes where they appear through
are as fair red as the flovver, the steal and the leaffe is like unto the
former.

9. French curled Mallowe.
THe French curled Mallovve, is of a very strange and crooked growth, the
flowers in the husks are hardely te be espied, of a red fleshcoloure, the
husks are green, of masticot and light ashcoloure, the leaves are of the same
color, yet somewhat sadder, the shadow sapgreene, the curled edges, are topt
more whiter then the leaffe is, and also the veins of the leaves too. The
steals are light ashgreene and shadowed with sapgreene.

10. Palma Christi, or kick.
KIck, is a verry strange and unusual growth, the steal is like unto wood,
the leaves thereof a sad and unpleasant green (it is called of some the mole
or the moldwarps herb because they eat there of) it may be painted with sad
yellow and florey for it is a blackish morphen color, and yet in the
reflection there may be seen a whitish color at their uppermost toppinge;
The uppermost budds at the top are of a berrie green, and are shadowed with
sad oker and omber, the appearance of the buddes at the top are of a purple
color, the open budds at the sides and the flower is of light masticot. The
great budds at the sides which is the seed is the braunched budds, being of a
sad mountain green color, the steal is of a Brasill color strewed as it
were with white meal, the Joints are reddish of lack color and the steals
of the seed buddee are green.

11. The Mexican flower, or the wonder of peru.
THis vvonder of peru, is found in India, and is in our days by the matiners
(that are this may addicted) brought into these countries, and is reckoned and
esteemed for a vvonder in regard of the alteration of the colors, there are
of them of dyvers sorts, some of their flowers of sad lack color, and also
the great budds, and are topped with lack and white together, the veins and
the knopes are a little bluish, the little budds are green like unto the
leaves, and the steals of some of them appear red, like unto the flower of
the buddes as the others do. The leaffe and steal is green, of ashcoloure
and masticott, and are shadowed with verdigreece.

The other flower of this sort, is checkered, some of the leaves within are of
lack color, and others are of white and masticott, and so are they that are
folded hanging downewardes, and are marbled with some stripes or veins of pale
lack color. The steal of the flower, even to the flower, is colored as the
flower is, the stalk and leaves are green like unto the other.

12. Tobacco, or Henbane of peru.
TObacco in these Countries is more common then in the days of out forefathers,
it is of a high growth, the leaves may very well bepainted with sad yellow and
ashcoloure, and shadowed with verdigreece, the budds are of a sad green when
they first appear, and when the flowers shows it selff, then are they of a
masticote green, the flower is underneath a pleasant green, almost a yellow
green, the flower is within lack color and white, in the hallownesse of the
flower it is a yellowish green, with a bluish green budde.

13. Round Sowbread.
THis flower is called the Italian Swynes bread, and that because of the root
thereof, the color tendes tovvard a purple lack, and about the bottom where
the leaves spring out it is somewhat sadder, the leaves toward their ends
are somewhat brighter, the wrethen steals are chestnut color, the leaf is a
pleasant green, havinge whitish, flames, in the middle somewhat darker, and
not so shyninge as the others are. These leaves must be painted with brown
ashcoloure, and sad yellow mingled together, shaddowed with sapgreene, the
white flames are of masticot and lead white mingled together, the topping a
little brighter and whiter, and a little sad green in the middle.

The Root of this Italians Sow bread is of a Chestnut color, the uppermost
spriggs above are somewhat lighter the steals of the leaves are, the shadow is
a black red, or of omber and black and brown red together, the toppinge is a
little white mingled under the aforesaid colors. The little leaves are like
also unto the former little leaves of the flower.

14. Ivy Sow bread.
THe Sowbread with many leaves, is the greatest of all these yt are known by
that name. The color of these flowers is painted with fleshcoloure, and
shadowed with purple lack color, and that in special toward the lower
heads of the flowers, they are topt with a pale purple color, the steals
are a chestnut color and somewhat purple like, the buddes betwixt the leaves
are green, and when they are spronge out, they be of a purple color,
Concerning the leaves, they are much at one with the leaves of the former Sow
bread, but yet their green is tendinge somewhat toward mountain green,
and although that green be the lightest, yet the spotts are the saddest.

The Root of this sow bread is almost like unto the former, but that it is
more blacker, and it may be painted with lamp black and red-black very thin
laid upon it, and shadowed somewhat sadder. The steal and leaves are as it is
said in their description, but the buddes that are a little open may be seen
a little light red appearinge out, the shaddowe of the bole is as the former
but a litte sadder, the toppinge is of white and a little lamblack, and the
veins are more blacker.

15. The great winter Daffodill: or Narcissus flower.
THis Narcissus comes in the harvest and is called the great winter daffodill.
The one is thicker of leaves then the other, the single one is of the color
of masticot being thinly laid on, shadowed with sad yellow, the knobes in the
flower are like unto masticott, but the spriggs whereupon the little knobes do
stand are of a light green. The steal or stumpe where the flower comes forth
of, is of a pale masticot yellow at the upper part of it, but below it is of a
pale green, and is painted with sad yellow and ashcoloure, and shadowed with
omber and sad yellow and a little black red altogether, and the vein must well
be observed that passes through the middle of the leaves, because of there
shyninge glance.

Narcissus, or the dubble vvinter Daffodill.
The dubble one, is like unto the last mentioned daffodill in color, nothing
differing therein, but that it is more thicker of leaves, and fewer green
leaves then the other has.

16. The winter Iacynth.
THis Winter Iacynth, may be colored with Indigo and lack mingled together,
but at the sharp ends of the flowers, there be certain stripes of a sad
brown color, and the more inward the more lighter: the threedes that stand
within the flower are almost as sad indigo, the steal is of a pale verdigreece
color, the small spriggs whereupon the flowers grow, are above almost like
unto indigo, and below are green, and when the buddes begin to open, it is
reddish under the steal it is of a reddish purple, the seedebole is red, and
topt with white, the two long leaves are yellovvish. The bunche and the steal
is as the other aforesaid is.

The greater vvinter Iacynth.
The color of this great winter Iacynth, is, (concerning the color),
agreeinge to the former, only it it of a greater proportion, and has two
steals, the one against the other, and the budds black, the seedebole is like
the former, but somewhat whyter.

17. Fever few, or fedder few.
THe single and the dubble of these are both of one color, the middle crown
is sad yellow, mingled with a little white, the leaves are almost white, the
branches are lightgreene, and the leaffe is a sadder green, and is painted
with sad yellow and ashcoloure, or the lightest masticott and ashcoloure.

The dubble is like unto the former, of a pure white and very many small
leaves, in the crown of it there is a spott of a fair greenish yellow.

18. Dogs bane, or purple meadow saffron, or the son before the father.
THis flower comes in harvest, is of a fair red and purple color, it may
well be painted with tournesol and white tempered together and shadowed with
lack, there goes a white stripe within through the leaves, the spriggs that
stand within the flower are vvhitish, the little knopes on the end of those
spriggs are oker yellow topt with masticote. The steal is to the bottom of a
silver color, the budds when they open are whitish colored.

The white meddovv saffron.
The other sort of these flowers is pure white, and is painted with white
lead, and topt with that white whichs is called the schillffer white, and
shaddowed very thin with a bluish black, the tongues have their heads of a
masticott yellow; and the spriggs of those tongues are whitish. The steal of
the flower is white from the top to the toe, and the budds likewise, only the
uppermost part of the steal hard by the flower is a maidens blush color.

19. Saffron of constance, with broad leaves.
THis flower when it first appears is of a red purple color marked with
spotts of a sad lack color, but havinge stood a while open, the^ are those
spotts very even, so that they can hardely be marked where they were, the
color toward the end of the steal is of a white silver color the neck
is of a vvhitish yellow, but more lower it is of a reddish yellow, and
agreeinge with the color of the dry earth.

Checkered saffron flovvers.
This Spanish saffron that is so checkered, is a speties of the Constantinoples
saffron, but his leaves are much lesser, and with sad red lack spotts checkered
like the checkered daffodill the seed bole is almost of the same fashion, the
flower may be colored with a flesh color ground, being lightly laid on
with fair red stryped checkers and spotts divided so toward the end of the
flower, the steal is perfect white as the common saffron is.

20. Spanish mountain saffron flowers, of diverse colors.
SAffron of dyvers colors grows close to the ground with three or four
flowers together, as though it were all but one flower, but standing platted as
it were the one leaffe purple, an other halffe purple, another perfect white
another but halffe white, as in the figure you may perceive: divided with
spotts and shadows, the outtermost leaffe is very beautiful, flamed clean
through with murrey flames, whichs in the middle of the leaffe are all even so
that no flame can be seen, the color of this flower, is a purple tending
toward a tournisol the pointinges even and thin, and shadowed with pale
lack, and in some places shadowed more sadly, the pesteales are masticot
yellow; the husk where out the flowers do come forth of, is of a reddish
color.

Mountain saffron.
The spanish saffron is of a more sadder color the^ others are, but yet of
one proportion, but for changinge of the purple color you must take
ashcoloured lack and white lead together, and shadow these accordingly as is
aforesaid, the clappers that come in the middle, temper them with a little
oker and sad yellow, the leaves are topt with white and verdigreece, the green
color that goes over the cod is an eve^ whitish green but the cod or the
sheath it selffe is more greener, the steal is reddish, the bole may be
painted like roest or brown red.

The least and shortest portugals saffron, the leaves without are of a fair
flesh color drawn through the middle with one line of Indigo and with in of
a whiter flesh color in the line appearinge a green shynings through the
other color, the oudd at his first arysinge is maidens blush color with
springinge out spriggs with yellow knobes, the bole is as the former.

21. Saffron of naples.
NAples saffron is of a reddish purple, painted with ash color and lack
mingled together, and topt with a little white lead amongst the former, this
flower has some spotts but they are very hardly seen, and are of a fair lack
color, the steal is silver color, the knopes are of oke^ yellow, topt with
masticott.

Dubble leafde saffron.
This is of a pale purple, and here and there has white flames and sometimes
brown flames or rays; the buddes are masticot yellow, the steal is almost
white; and topt with silver white, but toward the bottom it is more lighter.

22. The unpleasant, whitered or decayed Iacynth.
THis is a strange and a rare Iacynth, it has white leaves, and must be
painted with ocket-yellow and purple mingled together, and a little ash color
among the same, the buddes are of the same colloure, and the shadowinge is
well represented in the figure it selffe, the laggs below are ash-coloure, and
within the flowers are of a shyninge ash color, the steal is of the same
color, with a shyninge shadow, and so are the leaves. The leaffe is
mountain green, shadowed with sad yellow and ash color, the boles
colored with ashcoloure and shaddovved with omber, the other half are
milkwhite leaves, the steal is of a light green, and the leaves like unto the
other.

23. Common Saffron.
THe flower of this Common saffron, is of a bluish purple somevvhat light,
mingled with sad purple flames cominge by degrees from the middle, they are of
a light ashcoloure mingled with lack and white lead, the flames are
indifferent sad, and may be painted with Indigo and lack, but toward the
middle somewhat sadder as like unto red purple. The spriggs are almost blood
red. For the Saffron is vermillion red and shadowed with lack, the middle
spriggs are masticott yellow, and topt somewhat lighter.

The other is like unto this, but is a little lighter.

24. Constantinoples mountain saffron.
THis saffron has a very odd flower, and may be colored with fair tournisol,
mingled with a little white lead, and topt with the same, the shadow of Indigo
and lack, the husk from whence the flower comes out of, is like the same. The
bole is of a pale yellow, with white spotts, and shadowed with omber. The
longest husk tends toward a silver color, it has a short steal, and at the
lower end it is whitish.

25. The strange daffodill: or the unknown Narcissus.
THis strange and unknown Narcissus, is called by Doctor Clusius, Narcissus
La^^folio Major, and is of a purple color, somewhat tendinge toward a sky
color, havinge two white horns, with reddish yellow seeds, the steals of
the flowers are of a shyninge, yet a withered green color. The husk that
enclosed the flower is of a pale green. The bole is as bigg as a man's fiste,
but therein there is no difference betwixt this and the Common Narcissus, and
may be painted with a little white and oker together, the shadow is of omber
and brown blew, the veins are like the earth and are shaddowed with omber,
the upper neck is divided into shilffers which must be separated with a little
omber from the other part, the uppermost top is a yellovvish white.

Here ends the flowers in Autumn.
Meridies

Septentrio

Oriens

depiction of garden

1 L. Clematis altera Purpureo flore Gu Viorne H. Gormadera Ge. Braeckcruyt,
often Waldrebe

depiction of flowers

2 L. Rosa Moscata alba pleno flore I. Rosa Moschetta magiore G. Rose musquee
double Ge. Dubbelde moscaet Rose

depiction of flowers

3 L. Chrysanthemum Peruvianum maius. I. Trombad Amore. P. Gigante. Ge. Groote
son bloeme. Sonnenkron. An. Indien Golden son.

L. Chrysanthemu^ Peruv^: minus Ge. Kleyne Sonnenbloeme.

depiction of flowers

4 L. Arundo Indica florida. I. Canna d' Jndia. G. Roseau d' Inde. Ge.
Indiaensch bloyende riet, often Blumenrohr.

depiction of flowers

5 L* Flo* Aphricanus mayor. I. Garoffano Indiano. G Grand Oeillet d' Jnde. Ge
Groote Thunis blom, oste Gross Indianisch Negelein.

depiction of flowers

6. L. Flos Aphricanus mayor multifolius. I. Girofano Jndiano magiore. G. Grand
Oeillet d'Inde double. Ge. Grote dubbelde Thunis blom.

depiction of flowers

7 L. Flos Tunetensis minor. I. Girofani de India. G. Oeillets d'Inde. Ge.
Kleyne fluweel bloemen, oste Jndianisch Negelein.

depiction of flowers

.8. L. Malua rosca multiplex. I. Malua magiore. G. Rose d'outer mer double Ge.
Dubbel Winter rosen.

depiction of flowers

.9. L. Malua crispa. I. Malua cr^spo. G. Maulue crespu. Ge Gecronckelde Malue.
Krauss Pappelen.

depiction of flowers

10 L. Ricinus. I. Girasole. G Palm de Carist. Ge. Mollencruyt often.
Wunderbaum.

depiction of flowers

11 L. Flos Mexicanus. I. Gelsemino Indico. Ge Iasmyn van Indien often. Ge.
Gescheket Indianisch blum.

G. Merveille d'Inde a diverses conieurs.

depiction of flowers

12 L. Hyoscyamus Peruvianus. I. Negotiano. G. Nicotiane. Ge. Taback often.
Bilsen cruyt van Peru.

depiction of flowers

13. L. Cyclaminos Italica rotundifolia. I. Pan porcino. G. Pain de porceau.
Ge. Verckensbroot. Erdapfel.

depiction of flowers

14 L. Cyclamen folio hederae. I. Pan porcino. G. Pain de Porceau. Ge. Verckens
broot met veylbiaderen Erdscheib.

depiction of flowers

14 L. Radix Cyclamini folio hedera. Ge Eertrape.

13 Radix Cyclamini praecocis sive Italici Wortel van het ronde Jtaliaens
verckens broot.

depiction of flowers

15 L. Narcissus Autum: mayor flore luteo. I. Narcisso de Autonno mag: G.
Narcisse d' Autumn. Ge. Gross herbst-Narcissen.

Ge. Dubbelde groote herfst-Nariassen.

depiction of flowers

16. L. Hyacinthus Autum minor. G. Vaciet d'Automne. Ge. Klein herbst Hyacint.
Cleyn Hyacint va^ de^ herfst

L. Hyacinthus Autumnalis, sive serotinus mayor. I. Cipolle camino d'Autonno.

depiction of flowers

17 L. Solis oculus. I. Marella. G. Maroine.

L Parthenium p^e: Ge Matercruyt often. Nutterkraut.

depiction of flowers

18 L. Colchicum purpureum. I. Colchico. G. Tuechien. Ge. Zeitlosen.

L. Hermodactylus Ge Weiss Zeitlosen

depiction of flowers

19 L. Colchicum Byzantinu^ multiflorum. Ge. Colchicum van Constant met bread
bladeren.

L. Colchicum lusitanic: reticulatum. Ge. Portugaelsche Colchicum fritillare
g^lyck.

depiction of flowers

20 L Colchicum flore Versicolore. Ge. Colchicum met verscheide vervige bloeme^.

L. Colchicum hispanicum montanum. Ge. Spaensch Berch Colchicum.

L. Colchicum lusitan: serotinum. Ge. Spade portugaelsche Colchicum.

depiction of flowers

21 L. Hyacinthus Hisp: obsoletior.

Ge. Wynterschen witten orientael Hyacinth. L. Hyacinthus brumalis. lobe^y

depiction of flowers

22 L. Colchicum Neapolitanum Ge. Colchicum van Napels.

L. Colchicum polyphyllantes Ge. Dubbel-bloemige Colchicum

depiction of flowers

23 L Crocus. ^ Zaffrano. G Safran. Ge Saffraen.

L. Crocus Montan, Ge. Berch herbst Saffraen.

depiction of flowers

24. L. Crocus Byzantinus Ge. Berch Saffraen van Constantinoplen

L. Crocus Montanus hispan. Ge. Purper Spaens Berch Saffraen

depiction of flowers

25 L. Narcissus marinus exoticus. Ge. Vremde zee Narcis.

depiction of flowers

2^ L. Bulbus Narcisci Marini.

Ge. Den Bol van den Jndi: Zee Narcis.

depiction of bulb

THE FOVRTH AND LAST BOOK CONTAININGE A DESCRIPTION OF THE FLOVVERS OF THE
WINTER QVARTER.
If hethertoe (my friend) you have,
Performde the task in hand:
With joy proceed, this last will be
The best, when all is scande.

1. Mountain Pepper.
THese two sorts of Pepper, the first being called a laurel Pepper, because
of the likeness of these leaves with the laurel leaffe, the one resemblinge
the other, but yet the laurel Pepper-flovver has a small long leaffe of a
pale green color. The leaves both in form fashion and color agree with
the leaves of the laurel tree, the branches are of a sad hair color, and
may be painted with omber, and white mingled together, and are shadowed and
topt, as such requires.

Mezereon.
The other which is called Mezereon, has both smaller leaves and flowers, of a
shyninge light purple, which may be painted with white and lack color
mingled together, the budds are of a sadder lack color, the steal is as the
former is.

3. Black neesinge powder, or pellitorie of spanie.
THe flower of the Helleborus, or black neesinge powder is white, only upon
some sides there is an appearance of maidens blush color, and the leaves at
their ends are of the same color. The veins are snow white, but they have
small spotts of a light masticot yellow, and the ground of them is greenish,
the steal is of berrie green, shadowed with sapgreene, the leaves agree with
the leaves of the laurel tree* and are a little Iaggd from the middle unto the
points of them.

3. Bastard black Hellebor.
THe flower of this Bastard Hellebor, is of a yellowish green, and may may be
painted with berrie green, very thin lay de upon it, and shadowed with
sapgreene, but with great consideration of the veins and small stripes, that
they be not too grossly handled, the toppinge must be of light masticot, the
seeds in the middle are as the former, the steal is of a light green, and
the leaves somewhat sadder, and may be painted with ashcoloure and sad yellow
together, and with the same both shadowed and topt by discretion.

4. Bulbed violetts, or bulbed stockgillo flowers.
HEre is expressed three sorts of stock gilloflowers, differinge, but very
little from each other, the first has a white flower of six leaves, whereof
the three outermost are longer then the other, and the three middle most being
shorter are cloven in the middle, and garnished with a border of a light green
color. The steal and the leaffe is of a pale green, the boles are of a
light maiden hair color tendinge somewhat whitish. The Second of these, is
called by the name of the Constantinople violetts or stockgillo flowers, being
(though smaller,) both in the flower, leaffe and steal resemblinge the other
greater.

The third and last of these, is differinge from the two former in the leaf,
and in the flower, the upright standinge leaves, are of a sad green, and may
be painted with sapgreene and indigo, and sad yellow for the shadow of it, the
flower is pure white and shaddowed with a sad blew, the spriggs within are of a
fair yellow, standing round about a small white hole, the steal as also the
leaves are all of one color.

5. Yellow winter woluesbane.
THis winter woluesbane has a yellow flower, and is topt with masticot, and is
shadowed with yellow oker, and omber mingled together, the knopes are greenish.
The steal may be colored with ash-coloure and sad yellow being lightly
mingled together, and is of a lighter green then the leaves be, the leaf that
is folded downewardes is yet somewat lighter, the young ones at there first
cominge out of the ground are more yellower The root is of a verry deep and
sad brown ruddy color.

6. Golden trefoile, or 3. leafde liverworte, or the herb Trinity.
OF these trefoiles being of party colors that is of red and blew. The
first has a flower of six leaves of a fair red color, and may be colored
with a thin brasill red, and may be shadowed with lack and blew mingled
together, the knopes and spriggs in the middle are white, the seeds are a
light green and garnished with pearls that are white, the ondermost leaves
are white, with a little appearame of red among the same. The steal is of a
light Sapgreene, but hard at the leaves (which are of a sadder color of an
ash-coloure and sad yellow mingled together) are somewhat reddish tendinge
toward the lack color, the root is mayde^haire color, and may be
represented with red and omber mingled together.

The blevv Hepatica, or trefoile, etc.
The other of these flovvers is of a sky color, and is topt and shaddovved
as is requisite, in all things like unto the former exceptinge the color.

7. Saffron with a silver colored flower.
THese Saffron flowers which are here represented, are of two several
colors, and of either sort, they are single, and dubble. The first are of a
light white color, and are so on the outsides, but are garnished with stripps
of a tawney color even to the steal.

Saffron with golden strypt leaves.
The other are of a gold yellow color with sad purple strypes, the boles are
of ashcoloure, etc.

8. The little Narcissus.
THese little Narcissus flowers, all of them are reckoned among the Bastard
Narcissus flowers. The flowers are withoutt smell, of the color of fair
masticott yellow. The leaffe is of a light green, of masticot and ashcoloure
mingled, and is shadowed as is requisite.

Saffron with golden strypt leaves.
This great one, is like unto the little one in color, and may be topt with
light masticott, and shadowed with saffron, or else with a little sad yellow
and lack color.

9. The dubble yellow Rushey bastard Narcissus or Daffodill.
TWo several sorts of bastard Narcissus are here represented, that are
Rushey. They differ most in the color of the flowers, for the first has a
yellow sockett, and may be painted with light masticott, vsinge thereunto a
more sadder color for the shadowinge of it.

The other of these two flowers is white, and needs no description for the
paintinge of it, the knopes within are yellow, only of ocker color, the
skin or sheath from whence the flovver comes forth, is of a light maiden
hair color, the sheath is light green. The leaves and the steals are of a
sad green like unto Russhes.

10. Red Dogs teeth.
THe colors of the flowers of Dogs teeth, are of two dvvers sorts, that
spread abroad their leaves at the son rysinge. The first ^^^e of these is
of a light purple or lack color, shadowed with a sadder lack the spriggs are
white with little knopes, of a sad purple color almost black, the clapper is
a lightgreene.

White Dogs teeth.
THe other flower is perfect white, and shaddowed with lambesblack, have nge
sometimes certain little spotts of omber or of a very sad yellow, the laggs
are rounded with sad omber, and topt with a little white under the omber, in
the middle of those Iaggs there arises a manner of a clapper of a pale green,
shadowed with green, and topt with masticote. The steal there of is a sad
red, of lack, oker and a little green tempered all together, shadowed with a
little omber the leaves are of a cypres green, and are marked with spotts of
lack and saffron mingled together, the outtermost part of the leaffe is
somewhat sadder, and commonly throughout, they are as the spotts are that are
within.

11. Common Grape flowers.
HEre is expressed three sorts or several fashions of the Grape flowers or
grape Iacynthes. The first of these has a sad blew colored flower, painted w
th sad ashcoloure, shadowed with lack moes and indigo, where in is to be
observed that the vppermoste flowers which stand at the top above show
somewhat lighter, and the ondermost must be white upon the edges but those
that are not fully blown and open, needed to be made white upon the edges.

Sky colored Grape flovvers.
The Second sort of these is of a sky color, and may be painted with the
common ^iddle sort of ashblewe, and shadowed with lack moes, wit^^h same
observation to be used as is spoken of in the former, which must be referd to
the discretion of the painter in vsinge consideration for the colors vsi ge
either, the flower it selffe for his direction, or else so as it is here
expressed which of all is the surest way.

The white Grape-flovvers.
The third sort of these flowers, is milk white, the steals may be colored
with mountain green, and shadowed with mountain green, or ashcoloure and
sad yellow mingled together, but yet at the topp, tou^ht with lack or a red
purple over the green, the leaves are mountain green shadowed wi h a little
verdigreece, the uppermost edges are like unto verdigreece, and at the bottom
are of light purple. The bole is almost white and is shadowed with red and
purple.

12. The German, or the Oriental Iacynth or lilly.
TWo sorts of false or bastard Lilleys or Iacynthes are here expressed. The
first has leaves standing up like unto the fashion of a lilley, and may be
painted with ashcoloure mingled with a little lack, but the flame falls
throughout the same a little sadder, the shaddowinge and the toppinge of it
must be applied as it is conveniente for these colors, at the discretion of
the painter, the knobes are of indigo blew, the heads, or the seed-^curchions
are of a bluish purple, the small threedes about the same are whitish, the
skin or husk that the flowers come out of, is almost of a mountain green,
and a little blew appearinge amongst the same.

The dubble Oriental Iacynth.
The other Iacynth is very copious of leaves, which are of an ashcoloure,
tendinge toward a blew, otherwise in form and shape not much differinge from
the former.

FINIS.
The translator to the Readers, or practisioners.
THe Courteous practisioner shall please to understand, that these being (by
earnest request) committed to me to be transta^ed, and the names of the
colors so much differinge from the original language, that neither by search
of books, not conference with painters, not merchants beyond the seas, could
sufficiently express the same to an Englishmans understanding. Yet by some
that made profession of that art, being persuaded that they all had one
general name; whereof I my selffe know better, have done them all, or the most
part of them, to be understood of any Englishman, only in one color which
the dutchmen call Schijt-geel which translated signifies a sh^tter yellow. I
have in place thereof (because of not offendinge modest ears) called it
throughout the whole book a sad yellow. It is that which the Lattines, french,
and spanish, call Buxus, that is box color, which is a ^ad or dead like
yellow. Thus committing you to the protection and direction of the father of
all goed spiritts, I rest.

From Vtrecht this 12 of September 1615. Yours E. W.

WHat others with expenses great,
And toil to pass have brought
In searchinge out most foreign lands,
And long experience sought:
And ventured have both liffe and good,
To satisfy their mind:
Making the chieffest still their choice,
And rarest of that kind.
Which havinge found, have careful been,
With curious art to express:
In perfect lineaments the same,
As here you will confess.
If well you please to take a view,
From th'top unto the toe:
Of every flower, both stalk and root,
Expressed here in show.
You will confess and grant with me,
This youth deserves much praise:
Whose whole delight from infancy.
Has labored most always,
His knowledge still for to augement,
In this his painful trade:
Until by industry at last,
This book was fully made.
Which here to you this pass presents,
With passinge free good will:
Surpassinge all such former sorts,
In workemanshipp and skill.
Receave then these as his first fruits,
What after shall ensue:
Of other subjects, time will show,
So for this time a deu.
T. W.

FINIS.
HORTVS FLORIDVS HYEMALIS CR. PASSAEI FILL. LABOR ET INDVSTRIA NVNC PRIMVM IN
LVCEM EDITVS ANNO M.DC. XIIII.

VLTRAIECTI. Ex Officina Calcographica CR. PASSAEI.

INDEX. HORTI FLORIDI HYEMALIS.
MEzereon and Piper montanum. Fol. 1. Helleborus niger. Fol. 2. Pseudo
Helleborus niger. Fol. 3. Leucoion trium generum hulbosum. Fol. 4 Aconitum.
Lut: hyem. Fol. 5. Hepatica Trifolia. Fol. 6. Crocus flore argent Crocus aureo
purpureo striato Flore. Fol. 7. Pseudonarcissus Luteus Mayor Hispan. Narcissus
Pumilis. Fol. 8. Pseudo Narcissus Iuncifolius minor, flore luteo. Pseudo
Narcissus Iuncifolius Flore albo. Fol. 9. Dens Caninus albo Flore Dens caninus
rubro purpureo Flore. Fol. 10. Hyacinthus Botryodes Fol. 11. Hyacinthus Germ:
Liliflorus Stellaris Hacinthus. Polyanthes cineritio Flore. Fol. 12.
Non Hyemis potuere rigentia frigora nimbis
Candentique adeo constringere grandine terram,
Quin medias interque nives interque pruinas
Conetur varias Florum proferre figuras.
Nam Boreae coelique minas industria vicit
Humana, ignotasque novo traduxit ab Orb
Plantas, quas docuit nostris assuescere ventis.
Has nobis PASSAEE tuo nunc exprimis aere,
Spectandas clauso pulcre praebesque cubili:
Pro quo florentem optamus tibi munere vita^,
Perpetuumque aetatis ver, viridemque senecta^,
Et tumulum nullo careat qui floribus aevo.
A. B.

Meridies

Septentrio

Oriens

depiction of garden

L. Piper montanum. I. Olivella. G. Laureole. Ge. Klein Lawerbaum.

L. Mezereon. G. Boys gentil. Ge. Kellerhals often. Boeren peper.

depiction of flowers

L. Helleborus niger. I. Elleboro nero. G. Viraire noir. Ge. Christwurtz. oste
S. wart Niescruyt.

depiction of flowers

3. d L. Pseudo Helleborus niger. Ge. Elleboro nigro.

L. Ellebore noir bastard. Ge. Wrangecruyt.

depiction of flowers

L. Leucoion bulb. Triphyllon. G. Wit Tide: losen.

L. Leucoion Triph. Byzant:*

L. Leucoion secund. Dod.

depiction of flowers

5. d L. Aconitum lut: hyem:. G. Tuc lup jaune. Ge. Winter geel Wolfswortel.

depiction of flowers

6. d. L. Trifolium aureum. I. Herba Trinita. G. Hepatique fleur rouge. Ge.
Gulden Klee.

L. Hepatica Trifolia caeruleo flore.

depiction of flowers

7. d. L. Crocus flore argent: violac: lincis striato.

L. Crocus arg: striato polyphyllo flore. Ge. Saffraen met dubb: argentin:
gestrep: blu:.

L. Crocus flore aureo purp: striato. Ge. Saffraen met goutgeel gestrepte
bloemen

L. Crocus pleno aureo flore striato.

depiction of flowers

8. d. L. Narcissus pumilus.

L. Pseudo Narcissus hisp: man G. Coquelourde. Ge. Geel Tytlo osen.

depiction of flowers

d. 9 L. Pseudo Narcissus juncifoli, min: flor: lut:. Ge. Geele Narcissen met
biesblader:.

L. Pseudo Narcissus juncifo:. Ge. Wit Ionquillos.

depiction of flowers

d 10 L. Dens Caninus rubro flo.

L. Dens Caninus albo flo.

depiction of flowers

d. 11 L. Hyacinthus botryoid: vulg:. G. Barreletz.

L. Hyacinthus botry oi^cerul:.

L. Hyacinthus botry^i lac^.

depiction of flowers

d. 12. L. Hyacinthus Germ: Inliflo:

L. Hyacinthus polyant: cinerit: flo:.

depiction of flowers

ALTERA PARS HORTI FLORIDI INQVA PRAETER FLORES, VARIA ETIAM REPERIVNTVR
ARBORVM FRVCTIFERARVM, FRVTICVM, PLANTARRVM QVOQVE ET HERBARVM MEDICINALIVM
GENERA.

Per CRISP. PASSAEVM in lucem, edita.

AD LECTOREM.
EGressus, benign lector, hortum priorem, tot florum varietate conspicuum, tot
colorum mixtura varium, tantaque diversitate formarum commendatum, ingredere
hunc alterum, qui non minore voluptate te afficere poterit, abundante^ non
tantum florum delitijs, sed and frugum, fructuum, herbarum, fruticumq copia;
adeo vt nihil desideres, praeter vnum odorem, quem tamen diuturnitate sua large
compensat. Habes n^totius anni flores herbas, fruges and fructus, in vnum
eumque exiguum locum veluti compendio coactos, nullis frigoribus, nulla hyemis
aut ventorum intemperie obnoxios; tutosque ab omnibus vermiculorum ac
animantium reliquorum insidijs, a vetustatis corruptione liberos; at semper in
eodem decore constanter permanentes. Non hic avium rapacitas, quadrupedum
gulositas, neq: reptilium depastio metuenda. Sponte omnia proveniunt and
perennant, nihil fossione opus habet, nulla rigatione, nulla insitione, nulla
stercoratione aut purgatione indiget; nullaque insuper huius horti timenda
sterilitas est; qui semel Passaei labor consitus, aeternitatem secum adducit.
Hoc igitur perfruere perpetuo florente, and paruo aere constante; and authori
similia aut meliora vobis paranti, faue.

COGNOSCITE LILIA AGRI QVOMODO CRESCANT, NON LAborant, neque nent: attamen dico
vobis ne Sal^monem quidem in vniuersa gloria sua sic amic tum fuisse vnum ex
his. Matthew: 6. cap. Formulis Crispiani Passoei et Joannis Waldnelij.
engraved epigraph

I. CHAMAEMELON FLORE SIMPLICI.
CHamaemeli herba vulgaris licet sit, ejus tamen flores non vltima^ laudem, cum
ob forma^, tu^ ob aptissimum Medicinae usum, merentur. Nome^ vero inde
procedit, quod in floribus mali odor deprehendatur, ex quo fere verum and
legittimum esse Chamaemelum conijcere licet, quod and ipsae facultate
levidentius ostendunt. Lassitudini, si quid aliud cum primis confert;
doloresque sedat and mitigat; praeterea tensa remittit and laxat, ac test
Dodonaeo, mediocriter dura emollit, constipata rarefacit; nihilque notius aut
frequentius in pharmacopolarum officinis occurrit; omnium quippe medicamentorum
sere praeludium, and graviorum purgamentorum praeparamentum in se continens.

II. OXYACANTHA SILVESTRIS.
OXyacantha ab acutis videlicet ramulorum spinis sic dicta, nascitur passim in
frutetis locisque asperis, silvestri fere pyro similis, nisi quod minor est and
spinosa: Fructu^ sert myrto non dissimileba^, rubentem, fragilem, nucleos intus
habentem; solium mali cydonij sed angustius, viridius teneriusque: Et praeter
vim astringendi, varios in Medicina usus habere creditur.

2 L. Chamaen^olum G. Came^ille (...) Ca^ille A. Chamomill Ge. Ca^ll^n.

L. Oxyacantha G. Epinis Vnoette A. Barberyes Ge. Versich.

depiction of plants

III. SIRINGA CERVLEA.
SYringa caerulea alijs Lillach Matheoli, frutex est multorum ramorum rectus,
tenuis, nodulis suis distinctus, levi intus medulla repletus: folia se invicem
adversa ex singulis gemmis erumpunt fere gemina, lata, viridia mucronata.
marginibus crenatis: Flores exigui sunt and multi coloris caerulei diluti.
Exigni in re medica nostrorum vsus, quod vires eius minus adhuc cognitae,
lateant.

IV. ANDROSAEMVM.
ANdrosaemon quasi dicas (...) id est viri sanguis, quod attritu^ seme^ eius
sive flores, humorem, humanum sanguinem referentem, emittant; Germani Kunrath
appellant. Erutaru^ genere esse and Hyperico annumerari volunt: folijs tamen
multo majoribus: provenit in locis incultis and asperis; floretque in Iulio and
Augusto mensibus calefaciens and desiccans; semen vim expurgatoriam habet;
officinis tamen minus est notum.

3 L. Syringe cerulea G. Syringe (...) A. Blew pip^

4. L. Androsemum G. T^^te saine A. Tutsans or park leanis

depiction of plants

V. SILIGO.
SIliginem frumentaceam, sive secundum tritici genus Colummellae, nostrum esse
vulgar roggem plerique existimant, nasciturvero stipite culmoque triticeo
recto sed graciliore and proceriore geniculis vt plurimum quatuor, spica
innocentioribus aristis horrente: Excale facit magis quam triticum, and minus
refrigerat quam hordeum. Tota fere Germania hodie and maxim borealior pars hoc
frumento nutritur.

VI. MALICA HORTENSIS.
MAlua Hortensis grandescit saepe in arborem, and baculi vsum prabet; est que
folijs amplis, rarioribus, in ambitu segmentis divisis; caudex simplex
luxuriosae proceritatis attollitur, a medio fere ad verticem pulcherrimis
floribus decoratus, brevi admodum pediculo dependentibus, qui venustate rosis
non cedunt, and si suppeteret odor, de principatu merito certarent.

6 L. Siligo G. Seigle A. Rye Ge. Roggen.

L. Malica hortensis G. Rose d'outer mer A. Holli hoke Ge. Winter rosen.

depiction of plants

VII. CAPRIFOLIVM.
PEriclymenos Graecis a convoluendo dicta; Latinis, Volucrum maius, vulgo
Caprifolium, and Lilium inter spinas, Germanis VValdgilgin oder Geyssblatt
dicitur; frutex est juxta Dioscoridem simplex in aruis and sepibus nascens,
vicinis se adminiculis convoluens folia habens per intervalla, subcandida,
hederacea: inter folia surculi exeunt, in quibus baccae hederae similes: flos
fabae, candidis longiusculis foliolis cavis rotundus, and quasi in folium
procumbens. Vis eius est calida and sicca vehementer, cujus stillatitius liquor
oculorum inflammationibus and jecoris aestui medetur.

VIII. RVBVS IDAEVS.
RVbus Idaeus sive (...) Germanis Hindelbern dicitur; Idaeus vero ab Ida monte,
ubi nascitur copiosius: Rubo est long tenerior and minoribus spinis horrens.
In siluis frequens invenitur Vehemens huic refrigerandi facultas inest;
commodior vero and gratior ob odorem quem refert violaceum est liquor
stillatitius qui inde deducitur.

7 L. Capifolium G. Cheurefueille A. Honisuckles Ge. Geiszbart.

8 L. Rubus Ida^us G. Framboise A. Raspis Ge. Brem-beer.

depiction of plants

IX. CORYLVS.
COrylus Germanis Haselnuss, fructus hujus Graecis dicuntur (...) quod e Ponto
venerint; Latinis nuces Avellinae sive Avellinae ab Abella oppido antiquo
Campaniae, item Praenestinae ac Heracleoticae, a locis circa quae olim
frequentius crescerent. Haec nostra silvestris est, quae sponte vbique
nascitur, minoresque fructus profert quam sativa, qui contra scorpionum venena
valere perhibentur.

X. FLOS ARMERIVS.
HIc altera Dodonaei Armeriorum speties exhibetur, folia circum caules
geniculatos ferens latiora, majora and crebriora nec non candidiora, quam
prima, Constantinopolitani floris folijs haut multum dissimilia. Flores in
vmbella vna plures simul congesti pulcri, rubentes, exiguis candidulis punctis
ornati; In petrosis collibus and asperis sabulosisque locis apud Germanos and
alubi nascitur: a Belgis a: m hortis scritur, vbi secundo anno cum alijs
Cariophylleis aestate floret.

9 L. Corylus siluestris G. Noiselles A. Haselnutts Ge. Haselnuss.

10 L. Armeria rubr^ G. Gyr^fflees r^^^es A. Sweet Williams G. Stein negli^.

depiction of plants

XI. MALVA SILVESTRIS.
MAlua silvestris a sativa nonihil differt and pulchritudine and magnitudine:
locis nascitur incultis; folio fere rotundo, pingui, paucis in ambitu serrato
segminibus, intercepto; floribus propemodum purpurascentibus; radice candida.
Est esui ac alueo subducendo cum lactuca conveniens, vnde Martialis.

Vtere Lactucis, and mollibus vtere Maluis. XII. OLEA.
OLea Minervae tribuitur, quod semper vireat; and pacis est symbolum, viuax
quoque est, and diutissime durat, adeo vt Theophrasto test, ad 200^. perveniat
annum: Veteribus vt probata, sic and nostris vsibus frequens, nec a Medicorum
Pharmacis aliena: Vnde quoq: Martialis ejus fructus olim in delitijs fuisse
videtur hoc disticho innuere: Haec quae Picenis venit subducta trapetis
Inchoat, atque eadem claudit Oliva dapes.


11 L. Malua syluestris G. Ma^l^^s sa^^^ges A. Mallowe Ge. Wild pappelen.

12 L. Olea Lateua G. Olive A. Olyues Ge. Oliuen.

depiction of plants

XIII. PIMPINELLA.
PLura referuntur Pimpinellae genera: Sanguisorba vero Italica Pimpinella
creditur, a miris in sistendo sanguine viribus sic dicta, quae tamen ab hac
nostra nonnihil diversa, quam lonicerus Daucum Creticum Dioscoridis ee putat,
and Ruellius a Germanis Pimpinellae nomine vocari tradit. Semen ejus
calefaciendi vim habere scribitur; Meminit quoque ejus Bapt: Fiera ineleganti
sua caena, hoc disticho.

Vesicae lapides si Pimpinella remollit,
Ignita est, iecori sana, lienque tibi.
XIIII. ANTIRRHINVM.
ANtirrhinum Belgae orant vocant, cui caules sunt rotundi, glabri, fragiles and
ramosi; folia multa, vt plurimum oblonga and acuminata, Linariae similia, sed
majora: Flores secundum caules superiori part ordine digesti, forma oblongi,
anteriori part latiores; qui aperti hiantis leonis rictum referunt, vnde
Columella, Nascissique comas and hiantis saeva leonis
Ora feri.
color roseo rubentes, aut candidi, vel ex candido purpurascentes, non raro
etiam sublutei; quos deinde capitulum sequitur, oblongum, anteriore part
angustius and foraminosum, narium vituli similitudine; in quo semen parvum and
sub ingricans. Vires contra venesicos habere tradit Dioscorides.

13 L. Sanguis^rba G. Pimpenelle A. Burnet Ge. Pimpernell.

14 L. Antirrhinum G. Test de Veace A. A snap dragon Ge. Ka^^^ k^ps.

depiction of plants

XV. IRIS.
IRis dicta ab coelestis arcus similitudine, quem flores ejus referunt,
Germanis autem VeielvvurtZ appellatur, non quod violae sit radix, sed quod ejus
radix violae odorem imitutur; Estque multiplicis in medicina vsus. In hortis
passim est obvia, nec alibi apud nos reperitur.

XVI. OXYACANTHAE SPECIES.
IS frutex qui nobis Haechdoorn, Lonicero Cynosbatus Theophrasti ee creditur
and Latin rubum caninum dici posse existimat. Certe descriptio Dioscoridis non
valde ab hoc nostro differt: Frutex (inquit) est arboris instar, rubo long
major, folia fert multo latiora Myrto, firmis circa ramos spinis, flore
candido, fructu oblongo, nucleo Olivae simili, qui per maturitatem slavescit ac
rubescit, and flocculos intus continet.

15 L. Iris G. Flambe (...) Gl^yeul A. Flower de luca Ge. Bl^^ Gilgen.

16 L. Oxyacanthus G. Arbespine A. Hauthorne Ge. Weisser Hagdorn.

depiction of plants

XVII. LYCHNIS SILVESTRIS PLENO FLORE.
HAec Lychnis silvestris ex Verbasci specibus ee videtur quam sic Lomcerus
describit: In silvis and mo^tibus crescens, folijs mollibus and canis, e cujus
medio flos eru^pit, Cyano per omnia similis, sed major and plenior, caul
palmu^ vix alto. Omnibus fere pectoris vitijs mederi creditur, and tussientibus
prodesse.

XVIII. MESPILVS.
MEspilus Aronia (vt putant) Dioscoridis, arbor est mali vulgaris altitudine
inferior, ramis in gyrum comosis asperisque; folio promisso, tenui, and longo
pediculo; flore subherbaceo, Amigdalae forma; fructu, dum pubescit, viridi and
duro, vbi maturuerit fulvo ac molli, circa verticem cristato vel potius
coronato, quatuor imo quinque intus nucleis lapideis, vnde divulgaris apud
Germanos versiculus.

Kein Ionckfrou ward ne so reyn,
Ass sie drei nespelen, gib sie von ihr funfftzen stein.
Est tamen and proprie Mespilus quae tricoccos a tribus granis quae malo ejus
in sunt dicta, haec Germanis minus cognita.

17 L. Lychims syluestris multiplex G. Oeillets on Oeillets Die^ A. Double
campion Ge. Frawen roslein.

18 L. Mespilus G. Nesples A. Medler Ge. Mespelen.

depiction of plants

XIX. SVPERBA.
CAryophylleus minor, Superba etiam Officinis dicitur, and Belgis pluymkens, a
flosculorum folijs fimbriatis and plumarum similitudine dissectis. Hi^flosculi
apud nos hortorum sunt delitiae, in Germania etiam sponte in pratis and
montibus nascuntur. Vsus horum in medicinis olim nullus, sed in coronis
frequentissimus fuit: Nunc autem calculo atterendo ac educendo, comitiali etia^
morbo laborantibus succum vtilem credi, scriptum Fuchsius reliquit.

XX. MALVS CITRIA.
MAlus citria vel Assyria ab odore commendatur Amat loca calida, quae causa
quod in Germania rara sit; folium fert Lauri, perpetua frondens coma,
intercursantibus in ramulis spinis, fructu perenni: Arbor omnibus horis est
pomisera, alijs cadentibus, alijs maturescentibus, alijs vero subnascentibus
pomis. Huius poetarum apud nos princeps sic meminit in Georgicis: Ipsaingens
arbos, faciemque simillima Lauro,
Et si non alium late iactaret odorem,
Laurus erat; folia haud vllis labentia ventis;
Flos apprima tenax: animas et olentia Medi
Ora fovent illo, and senibus medicantur anhelis.


19 L. Caryophylus minimus G. Gyrosskes petites A. single Red pinck Ge. kleine
N^ge^^^^^.

20 L. Limonia mala G. Limons A. Limons Ge. Limonen.

depiction of plants

XXI. PRVNVS SILVESTRIS.
TAntum abest yt hic expressus frutex conveniat prunis suo in genere optumis,
and a primo nativitatis loco, Damascenis dictis, quod silvestribus oio
annumerari debeat, nostri Belgae slay prumen vocant: Hujus fructus astringendi
vim habet, vt ex viribus ejus and gustu satis est manifestum. Temperamento est
frigido.

XXII. LEVCOIVM.
LEucojon a foliorum non florum color sic dictum, vt olim veteribus non
incognitum, and a Theophrasto quoque descriptum, ita and hodie in nostris
hortis frequens est, vocantq: Belgae stockviolieren, multiplici, tam
magnitudinis, quam colorum in floribus, differentia. Habet suos etiam in
Medicina vsus, febricitantibus n. and maxim pueris ac infantibus subvenire
creditur.

21 L. Pruna Damascena G. Pruncaux de Damas A. Damsons Ge. Pfra^men von Damas.

22 L. Leucoium G. Violiers bla^es A. Stok gilloflower Ge. Weiss e Violen.

depiction of plants

XXIII. MVSCIPVLA.
MVscipula sine viscaria haec, Clusij videtur esse Lychnis silvestris altera,
flore muscoso; quae Germanis Lymcruyt dici posset, ob viscosum quo abundat
succum, qui non solum tangentium digitis adheret, sed and muscas
praetervolantes ad se trahit, and veluti reti quodam involuit, vnde and Belgae
ei nomen vliegenet, vt Latinum exprimerent, dederunt. Habet caules geniculatos;
folia lata and venosa, e singulis fere geniculis bina; flores in summo multos
and odoratos, color pulcro roseo rubentes, vel dilute purpurascentes. Et
quamvis nullas ejus in re medica vires agnoscat Dodonaeus, sunt tamen qui
adversus pestem valere arbitrantur.

XXIIII. ACVLEIFOLIVM.
Aquifolium vel potius Aculeifolium Agriam ee Theophrasti credidit Tragus, and
Lauri silvestris speciem; quod aliquando arborescit, and in majorem excrescit
crassitiem: ramos habet nihilominus teneros and flexibiles, ex duro tamen ligno
nigrescente and ponderoso, quod lapidis instar in aquas conjectum mergitur,
cortice vero tegitur aequali: Folia etiam sunt and aequalia and nitida, sature
virescentia, a Lauri folijs non multum distantia, sed minora, and acutis in
ambitu spinis armata, quae cum arboris aetate minuuntur. Flosculos producit
candidos and odoriferos, fructus rotundis instar pisarum, and rubentes, quorum
nucleus est subalbidus and ingrati saporis, qui colicis prodesse creditur.

23 L. G. A.

24 L. Agri folium G. House A. Hollye Ger. Hulsen.

depiction of plants

XXV. CINIRA SATIVA.
HAEc cardui species mensarum fere nostrarum delitium est, folia habens
Chamaeleonis and Acanthae albae, sed nigriora and crassiora, subpallida,
aculeata, acincisa; caulem oblongum, pollicis crassitudine; capitulum oblongu^
spinosum, corticosis vnguibus turgens, spicisque squammarum coaginentatum, in
formam pini fructus; florem in purpureo rutilantem, vnde Columella: Nunc picea
vertice pungit.

Graeci Ciniram vocant a Cinira puella, quam vis and Athenaeus aliam ejus
appellationis causam afferat. Bapt. Fiera hujus quoq: mem.

Hispida ponatur Cinira quae dulcis Iaccho
Potanti veniat.
XXVI. LYCHNIS SATIVA.
LYchnis coronaria sive sativa, folia gerit, (vt hic exprimitur) oblonga,
pollicis latitudine aut paulo latiora, mollia, lanosa, cana, caules cubitales,
rotundos, geniculatos, canos quoque and lanuginosos, in plures breves alas
divisos; in quarum summo singuli flores e calycibus suis, aspectu pulchri sed
inodori, color subpurpureo aut dilute rubenti fulgentes, ex foliolis vt
plurimum quinis constantes, Lychnidi vim inesse contra schorpionum venneum
Dioscorides testatur.

25 L. Cinaca satina G. Artichaux A. Artichoke Ge. Strabeld^n ^^d Artischocken.

26 L. Lychuis satiua G. Oeillets priuez A. Rosa Campion Ge. Zame fra^ren
roselein.

depiction of plants

XXVII. PRIMVLA VERIS MINOR.
PRimula Veris minor Betonicae (vt quibusdam placit) species esse videtur, ob
similitudinem foliorum. Haec cum ex primis anni floribus prodeat, nomen suum
invenit, quamvis and officinis herba Paralysis dicatur, quod nervorum doloribus
prestantissimum remedium prabet. Floris color est fere melleus, sed and aliorum
colorum flores in hortis curiosorum mangonio inveniuntur.

XXVIII. PYRVS.
VVlgaris arbor Pyrus, quae nihilominus gratissimos orbi fructus profert,
infinita differentia varios, nec ea dissimilitudo forma tantum, sed pyra and
bonitate constat: Stomacho grati sunt and desiccant, plus tamen astringunt
silvestria, quamvis minus grati saporis, ideoque in fluxibus valentiora
domesticis creduntur.

27 L. Primula veris G. Pri^e vere ou Blaies de Co^n A. Primrose Ge. Sch^^sel
bl^men.

Z 8 L. Pyrum G. Du poires A. Pear Ge. Biren.

depiction of plants

XXIX. ERICA.
ERica frutex apud nos frequens Myricae similis, sed long minor; flores
Autumno in candido purpureos profert, quorum odorem serpents far nequeunt,
Dioscorides quoq: tam comam quam flores Ericae Serpentum ictibus mederi tradit:
Apes vero plurimum Ericae floribus delectantur indeque optimum mel conficere
comperiuntur, ita vt probare non possim Dioscoridis sententiam, qui apes
reprobum mel ex hisce floribus colligere scriptum reliquit.

XXX. LINARIA PVRPVREA.
LOnicero haec herba linariae est species, virgas habens tenues lentasque in
quibus foliola sunt oblonga ceu lini, nigra initio, deinde color mutato
subrubescentia; nascitur in locis aridis and juniperos ferentibus, flore lini
subcaeruleo and purpurascente, vnde and quidam Heydens Vlas vocant. Variae huic
vires a Medicis tribuuntur, oculorumque imprimis inflammationes ac rubores
succo suo sanare perhibent.

29 L. Erica Caliculata G. Bruyere A. Chalie hearth Ge. Heyde.

30 L. Linaria purpurea G. Lin sauuage bleu A. purpel Tode flax Ge. Harukrant.

depiction of plants

XXXI. SABINA.
SAbina Graecis (...) dicta, folijs est Cupressi vel potius Myricae, sed spinis
horridior; graviter olens, acris ac feruens, coactae brevitatis arbor, and in
latitudinem magis se effundens, coma virens perpetua; florem fert, vt inquit
Lonicerus, puniceum absque fructu: Dodonaeus vero baccas Iuniperi baccis
similes tribuit. In hortis sicut buxus plantatur, vulgique opinione infamis
habetur, quod mulierum pudori non sine scelere subvenire credatur.

XXXII. PAPAVER, FLORE PLENO.
PApaver notissimum inquietudinis remedium, and multa florum varietate
conspicuum; vnde and hortorum apud curiosulos decus audit: nec tantum colores
in floribus mutare, sed and multitudine foliorum luxuriare solet, ejus
praeterea dotes non incleganter Bapt: Fiera in sua caena expressit hoc carmine:
Lurida Niliacis nigra exsiccata sub hortis,
Pessima, Laethaeum quae genuere opium:
Candida sint profugos latura Papavera somnos,
Ni modo sint oculis noxia turgidulis:
Lenimen querulae tussis, sistentia fluxus
Quosque, sed in calidis commodiora focis
Trita calescenti super inducenda podagrae,
Prosunt insipidae ni gula parcet aquae.


31 L. Sabina G. Sauine A. Sauni Ge. Seuen^a^m.

32 L. Papauer multeple^^ G. Pauor d^ble A. Double poppie Ge. Magsa^^^.

depiction of plants

XXXIII. SEDVM MAIVS.
_(...) Dioscoridis, Latinis sedum majus and Semperviuu^ Graeco etymo dictum,
hoc nominis a re ipsa imposito, perpetuo n. virescit, nec vlla frigoris iniuria
offenditur. Ab Apuleio vitalis and Semperflorium dicitur. Caules habet
cubitales vel majores, pollicis crassitudine pingues, virentes: folia pinguia
carnosa, longitudine pollicis, in cacumine linguae similia, in circuitu
tenuiter crenata. Flores circa cacumina plures ex tenuioribus ramulis prodeunt
lutei coloris steliae formam imitantes. Nascitur in montanis locis, in tectis
quoque domorum seritur, vnde and Germanicum nomen invenit: refrigerat autem and
restringit plurimum.

XXXIIII. VERBASCVM.
VErbascum Graecis (...) vel vt alij (...), quod caulibus ejus pro Ellychnijs
vta^tur qua ratione candelariam hodie vacant. Officinis Tapsus dicitur
barbatus: folia habet hirsuta and lata; flores habet flavescentes quinque
foliolis constantes. Est a. verbascum multa varietate insigne, album n. and
nigrum a folioru^ color nominatur, illud quoque sexu distinguitur. Praecipua
ejus in Medicina vis, ab hujus facultatis professoribus expressa.

33 L. Sedum maius G. Joubarbe A. Housleeke Ge. Hauswurtz.

34 L. Verbascum G. Bouillon A. Nullein Ge. Wulkrant.

depiction of plants

XXXV. VICIA.
VIcia a vinciendo M. Varroni dicta; vel quod capreoles vt vitis habeat, quibus
sursum serpit, aut quicquid attigerit apprehe^dit. Nascitur locis maxim
siccis, cubitali altitudine, folijs Aphaces, sed amplioribus, flore pisi;
minutis nigricantibusque in siliqua granis. De satione and cultu eius plura
Columella and M. Cato in libris de re rustica. calefacit mediocriter, exsiccat
vero in secundo ordine. Serpentum etiam ac canum morsibus medetur.

XXXVI. MILLEFOLIVM.
MIllefolium a folioru^ multitudine, Graecis vero (...) dicta quasi militaris,
quod milites in castris ad vulnera potissimum sunt hac vsi, frutex est exiguus,
palmi altitudine, folijs avicularum pennas imitantibus, brevi admodum
dissectoque foliorum exortu, silvestri cumino similibus, praesertim brevitate
and scabritie, vmbella densiore and pleniore. Surculos in cacumine gerit
exiguos, and capitula in modum anethi; flores parvos candidos vel etiam
purpureos. Nascitur in solo macriusculo and circa semitas maxim, tota florens
aestate.

35 L. Vicia G. Vesce A. Tares Ge. Wicken It. Veccia saluatica.

36 L. Mill folium G. Mill fueille A. Yaccow Ge. Hasengarb.

depiction of plants

XXXVII. CERASVS.
CErasi fructus vbique obvius, praeter aspectum quo oculos adficit, grato
admodum sapore palatum recreat; propter sanitatem and bonitatem sua laud
minime privandus, quem non neglexit in eleganti sua caena Fiera, his versibus
illum celebrans: Iam dedit e Ponto nobis triapoma Lucullus, etc.
His aluus fluida arcetur, famis improhus ardor
Crescit adempta fitis, quam gula docta coquit.


XXXVIII. PSEVDO-NARCISSVS.
PSeudo-Narcissi non vna species, aut cognomenti causa est, verum Narcissum
imitatur, adeo vt in certamen cum ipso praecipuo flore, diligenti cultorum
industria saepissime descendat. Horum supra benign lector, in priore libro
desciptiones and differentias habes, ad quem te mitto, ne acta agere vel dicta
dicere in hoc verborum compendio cogar,

37 L. Cerasia G. Cheriss A. Cherys Ge. Kierechen.

38 L. pseudo-Narcissus G. Narcisses A. Daffodill Ge. H^r^^ge bl^^^n.

depiction of plants

XXXIX. VIOLA MARIANA.
VIola Mariana ceu rapu^ silvestre Dioscoridis, folia primum habet oblonga,
lata, subnigra, aspera, nonnihil hirsuta, vulgaris Buglossi folijs nigriora,
minora, minusque aspera. Caules deinde secundo anno profert rotundos, rectos,
ramosos, aliquantulum hirsutos. Flores in summis virgis exeunt oblo^gi, cavi,
rotu^di, per oras incisuris quinque sed non profundis divisi; coloris vt
plurimum in caeruleo purpurei, subinde candicantes, in quibus stamina duo aut
tria candida; qui priusquam dehiscunt quinquangulares sunt. post flores
capitulum nascitur, superiore part latius, quinque quoque angulos habe^s,
quinque loculis hirsutis deorsum pendentibus circumvestitum, in quo semen
exiguum subruffi propemodum coloris. Radix esui est apta, and astringentis
potentiae.

XL. ELATINE.
VIdetur Helxines species, Elatine dicta, Germanis Kletten kraut; folia tamen
habet minora and rotundiora, pilosa; tenuibus ramulis foliosis caulis ornatur,
gustuastringentibus; flores eius sunt stellari forma, mellei coloris. Viridis
herba tusa, frontique imposita, aestum and inflammationem, item fluxus oculorum
sistit. Cum vino rubro cocta, intestinorum ex dysenteria affectionibus medetur.

39 L. Viola mariana G. Mariettes A. Couentry belle

40 L. G. A.

depiction of plants

XLI. HYACINTHVS ORIENTALIS.
QVanta Hyacinthorum sit varietas, and quantum flos ille vt olim in fabulis
poetarum celebratus, ita and nunc hortorum ac florum cultoribus in delitijs
habitus, nemini, vt credo ignotum est; quare ad superiora cupidum lectorem
remitto, and ad caetera properando vlterioris desiderij spem adgredior.

XLII. IVNIPERVS.
SOla fere arborum Iuniperus foetus suos in biennium prorogat, qui ne
maturescunt quidem novis supervenientibus; simile tamen de Grano (ita vocant
piperis rotundi speciem, quae plurima in Africae littoribus nascitur) nostri
mercatores referunt; quod is fructus secundo demum anno perficiatur. Baccae
eius Arceuthides Dioscoridi dictae, stomacho vtiles sunt, contra pectoris
vitia, tussim, inflammationes, tormina, serpentum ictus, and vt nostri putant
pestilentis aeris infectiones efficacissime sumuntur. Fiera non praetermisit
sed hoc carmine virtutes eius expressit.

Gratia Iumperi baccis sitientibus ingens,
Pulmonem stomachumque igne tepente iuvant. etc.
Iumperus flammis vsta, venena fugat.
41 L. Hyacinthus Orientalis G. Zac^^te d'Or^^ut A. ^ew Jacinth Ge. ^erezen
bl^men.

42 L. Juniperus G. G^^^ure A. Juniper Ge. ^lter.

depiction of plants

XLIII. LYCHNIS SILVESTRIS.
LYchnis silvestris geniculatis caulibus, folijsque mollibus coronariae satis
similis, minus tamen cana; Folijs item angustioribus, and caulibus
tenerioribus, pluresque alas facientibus; floribus etiam minoribus, color
candidis aut rubentibus; calycibus tamen majoribus. Iuxta pratorum aruorumque
margines, and alibi sua sponte exit; transfertur etiam in hortos, in quibus
quandoque florum foliolia multiplicat; plurima aestatis part, and in Autumnum
vsque floret. Scorpionibus venenum est, adeo vt test Dioscoride haec herba
ipsis apposita, ad laedendum redduntur inefficacis.

XLIIII. LILIVM RVBRVM.
LIlium rubrum puto illud quod purpureum vel ferruginei coloris a Dodonaeo
describitur; and Hyacinthi species aliquibus videtur, eoque fere nomine a
poetis celebratur, sic n. Ovidius, Metamorph. lib: x: Ecce cruor qui fusus humo
signaverat herbas,
Desinit esse cruor, Tyrioque nitentior ostro
Flos oritur, formamque capit quam Lilia, si non
Purpureus color his, argenteus esset in illis. etc.


43 L. Lyc^i^i^ sil^estris G. Oeillet^ s^e A. Wild campion Ge. ^^^de f^ r^s^li^.

44 L. Lilium rubrum G. Lis r^^^es A. Red lilly Ge. Rote lilie^.

depiction of plants

XLV. RIBESIVM.
RIbesium fructu rubro, officinis Ribes, frutex est omnibus fere cognitus, and
in hortis frequens, hujus fructus quod circa solstitium aestiuum sit maturus
vulgo Germanorum S. Iohans bessen vocatur; spinis caret, and ramulis fruticat
multis, lentisque: cortice puniceo; folijs vitis, sed minoribus; flore^ profert
mense Majo vel etia^ Aprili, subluteum, stellatum; acinos rotundos, virides
primum, cum vero maturuerint rubentes, saporis acidi, sed non ingrati. Fructus
and folia refrigerant and exsiccant in secundo gradu, and vis ijs inest
astrictoria.

XLVI. ACANTHIVM ALBVM.
ACanthium album folio est albi Chamaeleonis, angustiore tamen, and candidiore;
subdenso, subaspero and aculeato; caul binos cubitus excedente, pollicari aut
majore crassitudine, subalbo, intus cauo; capite in cacumine aculeato, Echini
Marini similitudine, minore tamen, floribus purpureis. Nascitur in montibus and
locis silvestribus, ac etiam in hortis plantatur; dentibus adfectis medicinam
praebens.

45 L. Ribes G. Graiseilles A. red Currants Ge. S. Johan^ b^er^i^ oder tre^^ ^i^.

46 L. Acantlium album G. Chardon arg^^^in A. White cotton thistk Ge. Weisse
wegdistel.

depiction of plants

XLVII. PRVNVS DAMASCENA.
INter omnia prunorum genera prestant Damascena, de quibus Theocritus Eidil.
VIII, interpret Hesso: In terram depressi pondere rami
Prunorum, Syriae quae mittunt rura Damasci.


Haec Germani quetschen vocant, nigra magnaque and oblonga: culinis arefacta
maxim commendantur, habentque non paruum in Medicina vsum, vnde Martial: Pruna
peregrinae carry rugosa senectae.
Sum, solent duri soluere ventris onus.


XLVIII. FLOS CARYOPHYLLEVS.
CAryophyllei flores, ab aspectu and odore plurimum laudantur, etiam
magnitudine: Horum colores and mixturae fere infiniti sunt, ita vt nihil ad
nouitatem and cum ea varietatem inducendam humana industria rellinquat
intentatum, quae quotidie novos florum partus, and prioribus in visos producere
non cessat.

47 L. Prun, mirabolanus G. Prunier A. Plunnes Ge. Pfla^^en.

48 L. Caryophyllus G. Gyr^ff lees A. Jagged pincks Ge. Negeli^ oder Grasblumen.

depiction of plants

XLIX. ANAGALLIS AQVATICA.
_(...) Graecis haec herba (...), id est, concutiendo, quod excutiendi vim
habeat, siquidem calculos a renibus pellere, vrinam and menses ducere traditur.
Latinis and lauer a lauando forte, quod aquis adnatum semper eis elui gaudeat.
Anagallis etiam aquatica, quod flore Anagallidi foeminae sit similis. Frutex
est pusillus, pinguis, rectus, folijs latis and odoratis; Gaudet riuulis, mense
slorens Iunio.

L. HORDEVM.
HOrdeo nihil notius, optumum esse candidu^ purumque Dioscorides tradit,
illudque minus quam triticum alere. Plurimus ejus in decoctione vsus; atque ex
hoc frumento cereuisia nostra fere constat, vt and antiquorum ptysana Plinio
summopere probata. Panem vero ex hordeo antiquis vsitatum, delicatior inde vita
damnavit, and servorum ac quadrapedum tradidit refectibus

49 L. Anagallis aquatica G. Mo^r^ aquatique A. Water pimpernell Ge. Wasser
p^^gen.

50 L. Hordeum G. Orge A. Barlye Ge. Gerste.

depiction of plants

LI. VIOLA MARTIA.
VIola flos natus est ex ea vnde nomen habet, apud Graecos n. (...) appellatur.
Etenim Jupiter Ion puellam amauit, and ex amore co^uit, and vt Iunonem res
lateret, vnde cognosci potuit, naturae transmutationem fecit. Deprehenus n.
Jupiter, and factum caelare cupiens, hominem in buculam transmutavit. Terra
vero in honorem dilectae Iovis florem protulit, qui juvenculae pabulum esset,
and sane flos ex ipsa nomen tulit, and ejus fortuna^ coloribus suis adumbravit.
Martia haec nostra dicitur, quod Martio mense prodeat, tota purpurea, and raro
vltra illum perduret.

LII. MALA AVRANTIA.
MAla Nerantia sunt ex generibus fructuum Medicae arboris: Eadem n. fere est
arboris horum pomorum cum Medica seu citria forma, fructus vero nonnihil
differunt, qui totus est orbiculatus, absque omni callo, immaturus viridis,
maturus aureo totus color fulget. Atque hunc per aurea Hesperidum mala poetae
intellexisse videntur; vide plura in Vortumno Becani, and singulari de hoc malo
tractatu N. Monardi Bapt: Fiera sic expressit in caena.

Proxima sunt, Itali dixere Nerantia, primis,
Vincunt pelle parum, frigidus humor inest.
Verticibus miro sunt haec gratissima odore,
Dulce sapit melius pectoribusque favet
Sint folia arborihus servata virentibus ipsis.
Caetera sunt mensae commodiora tua.
51 L. Viola martia G. Violette de Mars A. march Violetts Ge. Mercz Violen.

52 L. Mala arantia G. Orenges A. Orenges Ge. Pomerantzen.

depiction of plants

LIII. MELO.
TErtium Cucumerum sativorum genus est, quod vulgo hodie Melonem vocant,
Germanice Melaus; Pepone est rotundior, mali cotonei effigy, mitior item ac
suavior: in reliquis cum eo convenit. Ex hoc genere Melopepones vocant eos, qui
non pendent, sed humi rotundantur, and sessiles procumbunt: vocabulo ex malo
and pepone facto Inflammationibus prodesse creditur; and nucleus ad
stranguriam, renum, vesicaeque mala est remedio. Veneris stimulos minuit; Quin
and semina cum ejus succo cocta and farina mixta, formata in pastillos, and in
sole exsiccata, ad facei maculas extergendas; cum vino prosunt. Add quae
Florentinus lib. VII. de Agricultura, cap: xx. scripta reliquit.

LIIII. DIGITALIS.
DIgitalis a forma florum appellatur, huic longa, lata and per ambitum crenata
sunt folia, quae hic non satis apt, expressa, Verbassi quodammodo similia,
minora tame^, minusque lanuginosa; caulis rectus rotundus, a medio sursum
versus, compluribus floribus gravidus, ab vno caulis latere supra invicem
dispositis, deorsum dependentibus, forma oblongis, intus cauis dactyliothecis
propemodum similibus, color ex rubore purpureis punctis quibusdam candidis
intercursantibis. Dodonaeus in Medicamentis nullius ee vsus scribit, florem que
sola pulcritudine sua placere.

53 L. Melo G. Mel^^s A. Musk melon Ge. Melone

depiction of melon

54 L. Digitalis G. G^^tes nostre dames A. Fox glowe Ge. Fl^ger^^t.

55 L. Napellus G. A. Helmet Ge. Te^s, Je^ ^^tlein, vnd Nar^^^kappes. It.
Napell^.

depiction of plants

LV. NAPELLVS.
NApellus Aconiti species caulem habet erectum, tres pedes altum; circumdatum
folijs vary scissis, sature virescentem, ab ejus medio sursum versus flores
apparent caerulei, qui cum galeri vel cuculli aut galeae formam referunt, apud
Germanos Eisenhutlm and Munchskaffen appellantur. Oculos quidem hi sua forma
recreant; caeterum Lethale in se venenum haec herba continet, quodmiserabili
multorum exitu comprobatum est.

LVI. PISVM SATIVVM.
PIsum a loco, vrbe videlicet pisa, vbi maximus ejus fuit prove^tus, id nominis
ee adeptum quidam tradunt. Notissimum hodie omnibus legumen, loca amat aprica
and tepida. Sunt diversa ejus genera, magnitudine color nonnihil etiam forma
differentia, sunt sativa quae magis probantur sunt and silvestria;
Mediocritatem in refrigerando and exsiccando obtinent, aliasque in re medica
vires habere creduntur.

56 L. Pis^^ satinum G. P^is domestiques A. Garden pease Ge. Gross Erbeen It.
Peso maggiore.

57 L. Cyanus G. Bluet A. blew bot^^^ Ge. K^rublumen.

depiction of plants

LVII. CYANVS.
CYanos a caeruleo floris color nomen habet, Baptiseculam vocant Itali, quod
secantibus and metentibus officiat, seculam n. veteres falcem dixere; melius
Blaptisecula a (...), id est nocendo ex opinione loniceri diceretur; Blaveolam
Galli vocant a color. In agris and frumentis passim nascitur forma omnibus vt
obvia ita and cognita. Sed and in Hortos a florum cultoribus translatus,
multiplicare in floribus, folia, and variare colores didicit.

LVIII. FICVS.
FIcus (...) Graecis nota est arbor, non admodum procera, quanquam amplissimae
etiam quaedam inveniuntur, pyri arboris aemulantes magnitudinem. Candice brevi,
medulla carnosa, leui cortice, folio perqua^ magno vmbrosoque, profunde admodum
Lacinato, sine flore; pomo quod supra folij pediculum nascitur, turbinati
molli, intus granoso, succo cum maturescit lacteo, postea melleo. Loca amat
calidiora and aprica, frigus auersatur, vnde rariores apud nos fructus profert,
qui tamen magna copia ex Hispanijs, Gallijs, alijsque locis adferuntur.

58 L. Ficus G. Figus A. Figs Ge Fe^ge.

59 L. Aquilegia G. Aucholies A. Columbine Ge. Ackeley.

depiction of plants

LXI. ROSA RVBRA.
DE Rosa, vt sanguineum colorem ex cruore veneris imbiberit vulgata est fabula:
alij tamen de Nectare effuso; haec tradunt: cum in caelo. Dij convivarentur,
and nectar multum adstaret, Amorem choream duxisse, ac saltasse, and cum ala
crateris pulcrum concussisse, eumque evertisse; atque sic Nectar in terram
effusum Rosae, florem rubicundum reddidisse. Medicam quoque vim Rosis inesse
scribunt; Nam and vnguentum inde non malum conficiunt, and dolentibus oculis
sunt auxiliares.

LXII. LYCOPSIS.
BVglossae vel Anchusae haec species ee creditur a Graecis (...) dicta, quamvis
alij Lycopsim veram, cynoglosium esse velint. Hanc Dioscorides folijs lactucae
longioribus, asperioribus, crassioribusque ad radicis caput recidentibus
describit: caul item longo recto scabro, flore purpureo, radice rubra, quae
cum oleo illita vulneribus medetur.

62 L. Lycopsis G. Bugle^se s^^^age A. Wild Buglosse Ge. Welde Oxenz^ng.

63 L. Ruseus G. Bruise A. Butchers Br^ome Ge. Meusdor^.

depiction of plants

LIII. RVSCVS.
RVscus, Dioscoridi (...) id est filvestris myrtus. Locis gaudet opacis, nec
alibi temere nascitur; folijs myrti latius tamen and in formam lanceae
mucronatis. Baccae per maturitatem rubescunt rotundae, a medio folio
dependentes, ossea intus nucleo: radicem habet graminis, gustu astringentem,
acerbum and subamarum. Folia and baccae in vino potae Vrinam cient, menses
pellunt, vesicae calculos frangunt, stillicidio vrinae medentur, dolores
capitis sanant. Caulicali recentes Asparagorum vice, in cibo sumuntur:
Venetisque haec herba ad scoparios vsus frequens est, and propter asperitatem,
ad fugandos Verspertiliones, ad carnes supenditur.

LXIIII. PAPAVER RHOEAS.
(...), Latinis Papaver fluidum seu erraticum, a flore sic dictum, qui ei
protinus decidit. Folium habet Dioscoride test Erucae; junceus ei caulis
rectus cubitalis, asper: Flos silvestris Anemones, caetera satis notum. Folia
cum calijcibus illita, inflammationes sanant. Eorundem fetu and perfusione
somnus allicitur.

L. Papa^^r Rh^^as G. Panot sanages A. Wild pepp^is Ge. Wilder ^^^^ram oder
Kl^pper r^s^^.

65 L. Faba satiua G. Feue^ A. Garden bea^^ Ge. B^^^^.

depiction of plants

LXV. FABA DOMESTICA.
FAbae sativae forma notior est, quam vt descriptionem longiorem requirat;
Graecam (...) vocant Pythagorico dicto nobilitatam. Gaudet solo pinguissimo and
been stercorato. Simeon Sethus parum videtur Fabarum esum probare, quod inflant
and totum corpus distendunt, sensusque Hebetare dicuntur. Decoctum nihilominus
Fabarum pectis lenit, sed cum aceto sumptum ventrem sistit: item calculos in
vesica and renibus ne gignantur, prohibent aliosque infuper in medicina vsus
obtinent.

LXVI. DELPHINICVM.
HAnc herbam pleriq: eruditi Consolidam vocant regalem, and Valerius Cordus
calcatrippam, quod ad calcaris veterum similitudinem tendit. Nascitur in
segetibus, caul simplici cyanus; sicut ramulis multis, tenuibus; folijs
longiusculis, lacinatis; flore violae fere purpureae nisi quod ex altera part
in acutum desinens, inde nomen invenerit. Liquor ejus stellatibus oculorum
inflammationibus ac hebetudine medetur; quin and semen calculo luborantibus
prodest.

66 L. Delphinicum G. Pied d'Alonette A. Larkes Heel G. Ritter sporen.

67 L. Morum Celsi G. Meure A. Mulberye Ge. Maulberbe^^^.

depiction of plants

LXVII. MORVS.
MOrus quasi (...) quibusdam dicitur quod nigra sit: alij a mora a. tarditate
deriuant, quod arborum postrema floreat: Vnde and prudentiae symbolum gerit.
Naturam ejus sic expressit Plinius. Novissima inquit, vrbanaru^ germinat, nec
nisi exacto frigore, obid dicta sapientissima arborum: sed cum coepit, in
tantum vniversa germinatio erumpit, vt vna nocte peragat etiam tum strepitu.
Multiplicis est in Medicare vsus; aestuanti iecori prodest, alium laxat, contra
Aconitum remedio est. Adustionibus medetur, dentium dolores mitigat; Viridibus
quoque Mori folijs Bombyces victitant, and inde materiam hauriunt; principum
olim vestimentis tantum, nunc etiam infimorum hominum luxui feruientem.

LXVIII. SESELI SECVNDVM DODON..
SEseli secundum Aethiopicum and herbaceum Dodonaei a communi seseli distat,
and nostris incognitum esse credidit lonicerus; Idem cum Theophrasti libanotide
putant: caulem habet tres quandoque pedes altum, sed herbaceum, qui non ante
hyeme^ perit; folia sunt ampla, and ad margines crenata in modum fij vel
Hipposelini; ornatur in vertice coronato floribus parvis, candidisque semen
Angelicae odorem habet: Vires vero edem ei cum Seseli Masciliensi tribuuntur.

68 Libanotis L. G. A. Herb francumsence

69 L. Tanaletum G. Tanette. A. Tanfie Ge. Reinfarn.

depiction of plants

LXIX. TANACETVM.
TAnacetum hoc nostrum, tertium esse Artemisiae genus Dioscoridis putant; quod
sic describit libro 3. cap. 108. Sunt qui in mediterraneis vnicaulis nomine
appellant, tenuem herbulam, simplici caul and minuto, floribus scatentem
tenuibus, flavo color: iucundiore caeteris odore, Belgae quoque VVormcruyt
appellant, quod Lumbricos expellat.

LXX. NVX AVELLANA MAYOR.
NVx Avellina major sativa a Germanis etiam Rotnuss, and Belgis nostris
Cuelsche Haselnoten dicitur; haec fructum fert oblongiorem silvestri, and totum
ceu barbato putamine tectum and vestitum, cujus nucleus ruffa membrana
cingitur; ejus esus parum probatur. Suspensus Avellanas nuces Scorpionem ex eo
loco arcere Plutarchus resert; vnde and Scorpionum morsibus easdem mederi aiunt.

70 L. Nux auellana G. Notiettes A. Filbird nutts Ge. Hasel Nuse.

71 L. Rosa G. Roses A. Rose Ge. Rosen.

depiction of plants

LXXI. ROSA ALABANDICA.
ETiamsi raritatis commendatione plerique hodie flores superbiant; Rosam tamen
florum fere omnium notissimam suo hactenus gradu depellere nulli potuera
prestat vero in ijs quae Praenestina vel Alabandica olim, nunc Provincialis
vulgo dicitur, sive fuavissimum eius odorem sive gratissimum etiam aspectum
expendas. Hanc diviniole natura participare sibi persuasum habuit Didymus, quod
(vt ait) vnguentum non malum componat and dolentibus oculis sit auxiliaris.

LXXII. AMYDALA:
FLoret prima omnium Amygdala mense Ianuario, Martis vero pomu^ muturat test
plinio; vnde Alciatus Emblema suum 208 desumsit, and ad praecocia detorsit
ingenia: Cur properans folijs praemittis amygdale flores?
Odi pupillos praecocis ingenij,


Nucem Graecam vocat Cato, tam arborem, quam fructum: Masius alij nuces
appellari volunt. Duplicis est differentie: alia n. dulces fert Amygdalas, alia
amaras. Temperamentum eis est calidum; magis tamen amaris. Diocles eas tradit
alere, and ventrem been habere; recentes tamen aridis minus esse noxias: vnde
and ad bellaria exijs placentque quas panes Martios pharmacopoles vocant,
conficiuntur. Vulpes autem Amydalarum esu mori tradit antiquitas: quod and in
feel, Vergiluis Marcellus observatu^ esse, annotavit.

72 L. Amygdalum G. Amandes A. Almondes Ge. Amandelbaum.

73 L. Paralysis G. Prime vere, ^^^la o^ses de Ceca. A. Cawslips Ge. Schlus^el
b^^^en.

depiction of plants

LXXIII. PARALYSIS MINOR.
HAec herba ab illa, quae supra posita est, vix quicquam differe videtur in
forma, nisi quod flores, minores exhibeat. Verbasculum per omni nutronem vocat
lonicerus, and little decoctum adversus rupta, luxata, and liventia valere,
tradit.

LXXIIII. RANVNCVLVS.
SEptem in vniversum Ranunculorum species numerat lonicerus. Haec vero vulgaris
est, vbique obvia; folia habens coriandro similia, sed latiora, and ad Maluae
similitudinem accedentia; florem luteum butyri fere colorem exprimentem, vnde
and Belgae nostri Botterbloemen vocant. Folia and caules scabien tollunt at
stigmata delent. Radix sicca and trista, sternutamenta, naribus admota, ciet;
dentium quoque dolores lenit, cum tamen calidi sint vehementer omnes Ranunculi
ac sicci, cavendu^ est, ne intra corpus sumantur.

74 L. Ra^^culus G. Bassinet A. Cra^fote Ge. N^^^fuse.

75 L. Acer mayor G. Sycomorus A Sycome Ge. Hagdorn.

depiction of plants

LXXV. ACER.
ARbor est Acer Tiliae non absimilis forma and magnitudine, verum cortice
scabriore quam illa vestitur, subliuidoque crasso, and flecti contumate
nascitura. potissimum in locis riguis floremque fert in Maio mense, Exiguus
Aceris in medicina vsu sest. Radix contusa jecinoris doloribus vtilissime
imponitur. Serenus laterum malis mederi testatur his virsibus.

Si latus immeritum morbo tentatur acuto,
Accensum tinges lapidem stridentibus vndis:
Hinc bibis, aut Aceris radicem tundis, and vna
Cum vino capis hoc praesens medicamen habetur.
LXXVI. NVX IVGLANS.
IVglans quasi Iouis glans dicitur; Graecis (...) hoc est nux regia, etiam
persica a regione vnde primum est aduecta Gravis est foliorum ejus halitus, and
cubantibus sub co arbore molestus. Fructu^ magnitudine differt and frigidis
gaudet locis non tame^ aquosis. Lignum vtensilibus lautis and mensis dicatur.
Habet and suam in medicina vim, nec tamen minus nocere solet; vnde Fiera sic
cecinit: Mill nuces poteras dixisse, sed vnica iuglaus.
Nux dicta est, linguae iam nocitura tuae.
Siccior aressit, stomachum and caput improba vexat,
Mirum, si nocua sit been iuncta viae.


76 L. Nux juglans G. Noix A. Walnut Ge. Gross nuss, oder ba^^nuss.

77 L. Volubilis minor G. Liseron A. Bindweede Ge. Kleine Wind.

depiction of plants

LXXVII. VOLVBILIS MINOR.
VOlubilis minor, Dioscoridis Helxine Cissampelos esse videtur, diversa tamen
ab Helxine, quam parietariam vocant: folijs describitur ab eodem Hederae, sed
minoribus; flores autem fert punicei fere coloris candidis interdum stellis
distinctos. Oculis rubentibus and calculo medetur.

LXXVIII. PINVS.
DEpinu hoc modo fabulati sunt veteres: Pinus puella prius erat, and mutationem
naturae duplicis assumpsit. Amabat n. puellam Pan, amabat eandem etiam Boreas.
Quum autem vterque puellam alliceret, ipsa Panis amore magis afficiebatur, and
ob hanc rem Boreas aemulatione motus puellam in petras impulit, ac neci
tradidit. Terra porro miserta cladem, plantam puellae cognominem reddidit ac
produxit. At permutata vita erga eosdem priores affectus seruat, and Pana
quidem germine suo coronat. Flet a. and lamentatur arbor, vbi Boream afflantem
percipit. Hujus arboris nux lignosa, in turbinatam effigiem compacta cujus
commoda hoc descripsit tetrastico. Fiera: Ebullit nimiumque sitit, pulmonibus
imis
Debita, vex coquitur Pinea, sed been alit:
Intestina fovet, nervis regidoque lapillo
Subvenit, and Veneri grata, fugit Cybelen.


78 L. Pinus cum comis G. Pin A. Pine apples Ge. ^^t^b^^ It. Pi^^.

79 L. Borrago G. Borraches A. Borage Ge. Oxen^ung.

depiction of plants

LXXIX. BVGLOSSVM SEV BORAGO.
BVglossum describente Dioscoride, herba est verbasco similis, folio in terram
depresso, aspero, nigriore, and bubuli linguae simili: flore caeruleo, stellae
effigy. Locis nascitur planis and sabulosis and in hortis passim. Mense
carpitur Iulio. Melancholicis ac languentibus in cibo cum Spinachia Buglossum
est saluberrimum, flore in potum etiam injecto. Hujus sic meminit Bapt: Fiera:
Si tibi Buglossa est succi and Borrago tepentis,
Loetus eris, siccum nec tibi pectus erit.


LXXX. AQVILEGIA FLORE PLENO.
HAec Aquilegia multiplici tantum foliorum in floribus conjunctione a simplici
ac vulgari differt, nec multa descriptione indiget cum vbique sit obvea and
nemini ignota. Calida est mediocriter ac modice digerit. Stillatitia florum
aqua, est praecipuum contra syncopen confortatinum. Dodonaeus tamen tradit ejus
vires incompertas, cosque temere agere qui Centaurij vires huic tribuunt.

80 L. Aquilegia duplex G. A^chobes douple A. Double columbine Ge. Doppel
Ackeley.

81 L. Pomicon G. Pome A. Apples Ge. Apffel.

depiction of plants

LXXXI. MALVS PVMILA.
MAlus Humilis and nana, poma fert vt caetera omnia minora Commoda atque
incommoda malorum in genere sic exprimit in abundanti sua coena Fiera: Plurima
sunt, minimique madentia mala caloris,
Dulcia, sed stomacho commodiora meo.
Corda iuvant flammis agitata, at noxia ventri
Turgebunt, neruis and nocuisse volent.
His caveas, mala sunt, dirasque mouentia febres.
Forma placet nitidi corticis, esca nocet.


LXXXII. MALVS PVNICA.
MAlus Punica (...) Graecis, arbor est haud ita procera, folio angusto
intidique viroris, flore puniceo, oblongo, calathe effigy; pomo, quod corio
and membrana tegitur, numerosis intus acinorum granis fareto; vnde and Granatum
est appellatum. Differentia hujus ex sapore triplex Quaedam n^hujus generis
poma sunt dulcia, quaedam vinosa, quaedam prorsus acida, de quibus sic Bapt:
Fiera: Dulcia sunt madidi roris, sicci acria poma
Punica, pulmoni haec sunt mala at illa bona.
Cuncta nocent stomacho, feruentes acria flammas
Extingunt, cunctis mensa secunda datur.
Saepe remorbescit dulci si vescitur aeger.
Vtraque cum distent, meiere cur faciunt?


82 L. Nahun Granatum G. Pommes de granade A. Pe^ce granates Ge. Granat apffel.

83 L. Gramen marimu^ G. Herb de Mer A. Thrift Ge. Meergras.

depiction of plants

LXXXIII. GRAMEN MARINVM.
GRamen hoc Clusius Amerium tenui folium montanum vocat, flores habet in summo
caulis plures, conjunctos in orbem, and purpurascentes vel caeruleos. Lonicerus
videtur appellare gramen aquaticum quod Germanis Entengrass dicitur, ex eo quod
anates maxim silvestres Hyemali tempore hoc victitent. Nascitur in aquis
stagnantibus graminis forma. Decoctum radicis in potu tumoribus and vrinae
difficultatibus meditur.

LXXXIIII. GLADIOLVS PALVSTRIVS.
GLadiolus palustris folia habet oblonga, tenua; caulem tres pedes Altum,
aequalem, and sine internodijs, in cujus vertice plures flosculi apparent,
color subpurpureo, vel vt pictura indicat rubescente, quorum in centro,
noduli, ex crocei vel miniata, in quibus semen latet perexiguum. Contra
venenosos morsus valere medicamenta hinc confecta, tradit Dioscorides.

84 L. Gladiolus palustris G. Iouc de ri^ere A. Water gladioll Ge. Wasier
biesen.

85 L. Hor^^i^^ Syluestre G. Oruale Sonnage A. Wild Clarie Ge. Wild Scharley.

depiction of plants

LXXV. HORMINVM SILVESTRE.
HOrminum (...) Graecis dictum placet Ruellio, quod Venerem stimulet, Semen n.
ejus bibitur ad Venerem stimulandam; Officinis Gallitricum est. Folia habet
Saluiae forma rugosa asperitate praedita; caulem sesquipedalem leniter
hirsutum, in quadrangulum striatum; flores e caerulaeo in purpureum vergentes,
ad Aquilini rostri effigiem falcatos; In pratis sponte nascitur. Floret and
semine in Iulio est praegnans. Aculeos corpori in fixos per se ex aqua illitum,
extrahit. Folia ex aceto imposita, panos per se vel cu^ melle discutiunt.
Dodonaeus tamen avestre hoc nullius esse facultatis putat.

LXXXVI. MALVS ASSYRIA.
MAlum Assyrium Itali hodie pomum Adami vocant, quia vulgo creditur semili pomo
deceptum in paridiso Adamum protoplastum, divina mandata supergressum,
dicuntque insuper morsus in eo extare etianum reliquias, ita scilicet eius pomi
strias interpretantes. Alij nihilominus pomum Arabis Musam dictum, vetitum
illum esse arbitrati sunt; quod and Thevetus ex Iudaeorum relatione credidit.
Est autem quarta species citrij pomi vel medici Dodonaei.

86 L. Malum Asiyrium G. Pomme d'Assirie A. Asyrian apple Ge. Assyrischer
apffel

87 L. Calendula G. Sousy A. Marigold Ge. Ringelbl^nen.

depiction of plants

LXXXVII. CALENDVLA.
CAltha officinis Calendula dicta, quod singulis calendis mensium florere
conspiciatur; Belgae Goutbloemen ab auri aemulo floris color dicunt. Locis
cultis, ac hodie nusquam non in hortis provenit, estque perinde omnibus nota.
Huius sic meminit Poetarum princeps virg: in Georgicis.

Mollia luteola pingit vacinia caltha. Pulvis florum cum Xylino dentium dolores
sedat. Aridi flores and folia suffitu mensis miro cient. Herba etiam
condime^tis and acetarijs miscetur.

LXXXVIII. RVTA.
RVta communis, cui, hic expressa herba non malu convenit, omnibus notissima
est. Veru Ruta muraria, cuius nomen notitia praefert Adianti species esse
videtur. Hujus natura and vis medicis quoque probata, eorumque in libris tam
celebrata quam plene descripta invenitur.

88 L. Ruta muraria G. Rue de Muraille A. Rue madenhare Ge. Maur rauten.

89 L. Saponaria G. Herb a sauon A. Soap worte Ge. Seipkrant

depiction of plants

LXXXIX. SAPONARIA.
HAnc herbam Saponariam dictam tradit lonicerus, quod ad mollitiem candoremque
la narum vsi ea sint veteres vnde and lanaris nomen ei tributum, quodque
eluendis vestium maculis, ex purgandisque sordibus saponis vicem praebeat.
Herba etiam fullonis ob dictos effectus est appellata. Idem lonicerus Struthion
Dioscoridis putat. Dodonaeus autem credidit Alismatis sive Damasonij quandam
esse speciem, quem plura de hac scribentem, vide in historia florum and
Herbarum odoratarum.

XC. ROSA MOSCHETTA.
HAec Rosa, quinta Rosarum hortensis species Dodonaei, ramis and virgis caninam
silvestrem Rosam quodammodo refert; florem habens simplicem, quinque folia non
excedentem, exalbido purpurascentis, venis puniceis intercurrentibus and odore
admodum fraganti gratissimum. Huius lauds inter tot veteris ac recentes
scriptores non omisit Strabus in eleganti suo hortulo, sed his inter alios
versibus expressit: tantum qui protinus omnes
Herbarum vicisse comas, virtute and odore
Dicitur, vt merito florum flos esse veratur.


90 L. Rosa moschata G. Rose muscadem A. Musk rose Ge. Muscus oder Dosems
Rosen.

91 L. Cucumis G. Concombre A. Cucomber Ge. Cucumcren.

depiction of plants

XCI. CVCVMIS SATIVVS.
CVcumis Varroni a curuitate sic dictis quasi curuinie Graecis vero (...).
Sarmentis autem Cucumis serpit praelongis, inque ramos vitis modo se diffundit,
fulcimento cui innitatur, ob infirmitatem indiget: folium habet angulosum,
florem luteum, fructum cartilagineu^ and maculosum, interdum, coloris vel
Herbacei, vel citrini, vel nigri, plures eius sunt species, sola forma and
quantitate differentes. Hunc nostrum Anguriam Aetij ee putant, frigidae ac
humidae temporaturae, quare and Simeoni Setho minus probata; plura nihilominus
ejus commoda Dioscorides recenset.

XCII. OTHONNA.
ESt Othonna, Troglodytica quaedam herba, in eo Arabiae tractu nascens, qui ad
Aegyptum spectat: folia habet (ait Dioscorides Erucae similia; foraminosa
velutis a tineis erosa, squallida, paucifolia: florem fert crocinum latifolium;
quare quidam Anemones esse speciem putaverunt. At quamvis iste flos aspectu non
sit ingratus, odore tamen est adeo gravi, adeoque inamaeno, vt ne gustare
quidem ipse Galenus ausus fuerit, sed lethalem esse conijceret: veteres vero
eadem herba (quam idem Galenus Lycopersium esse arbitratur) vsi sunt ad
vrgentes articulorum dolores. Convenire cum hac florem Aphricanum in perisque
omnibus Dodonaeus scriptum reliquit.

92 L. Othonia G. Othonne A. French Marigold

93 L. Cicer satinum G Peis cices A. Cicke pease Ge. Kichern.

depiction of plants

XCIII. CICER SATIVVM.
CIcer vnde nobile illud Ciceronis nomen. Graecis (...), amat solum crassum,
pullumque; ejusque in medicamentis quam in cibis potior est vsus. Dioscorides,
Cicer, inquit, sativum aluo idoneum est, vrinam ciet, inflationem parit,
colorem commendat, mensas ac partus expellit, lac angel. De Cicere sic in sua
coena Baptista Fiera: Feruet and aiescit cicer omne, sed ignea vincunt
Subnigra pulmoni prima alimenta tuo,
Haec reduci formae, and vocum concentibus apta,
Si data sint mensas inter vtrasque tibi.
Cortice non posito, renes, iecur, atque lienem,
Vesicamque fovent, and Venerem faciunt.


XCIIII. VIOLA TRICOLOR.
FRequentissima in Hortis nostris haec Viola, ac perinde cognitissima, a floris
maxim pulcritudine commendatur: Hic autem longiusculis pediculis insidet,
purpureae Violae forma similis, vt and magnitudine; triplici color splendet
purpureo videlicet Luteo, candidoque vel caeruleo; adeo vt semper noua colorum
varietate gaudeat, odorem tamen nullum aut perexiguum habet. In summis duobus
flosculi foliolis, and subinde in inferiores, and quandoque etiam in mediorum
extima part purpureus color violae nigrae relucet. Medijs vt plurimum ac
nonnunquam inferiori candidus aut caeruleus insidet. Luteus non raro inferius
foliolum vel magnam ejus partem, semper autem flosculi medium intercursantibus
vna nigris aliquot radiolis, occupat prodest, vt recentiores aiunt,
febricitantibus maxim pueris, quorum connulsionibus ac comitialis morbi
accessionibus subuenire creditur.

94 L. Viola tricolor Dod. G. Penrees A. Hearts ease Ge. Freisiam ^^^t.

95 L. Ma^^m carbonarium G. P^^^e Charb^^ier A. Po^^e water Ge. Apffel

depiction of plants

XCV. MALVM CARBONARIVM.
MAlorum nomina, a forma, ab inventoribus a Color, a sapore, a locis sunt fere
insinita; eaque quotidie immutantur, ita vt nihil difficilius sit quam nostra
ad veterum nomina accommodare. Anglicum a. huius mali nomen indicat aquosum
esse prae caeteris, and ex ijs quae frigidum ac terreum habent succum; quibus,
Setho test, vti convenit, quoties ob distemperantiam calidam vel humidam, male
affectus est ventriculus.

XCVI. TAMARIX.
TAmarix seu Myrica, frutex est hominis plerumque aequans altitudinem, ramulis
puniceis, folijs Ericae vel Sabinae arboris lignosis, ex viridi pallentibus.
Florem sert verno tempore villosum, qui in pappos tandem evanescit. Fructus est
Galle similis. Lignum, folia, radix, and succus Tamaricis, in vino cocta and
sumta, pulmonis, lienis, renum and vesicae obstractiones aperiunt;
melancholiamque valide purgant. Eiusdem cinis ma nantia hulcera siccat,
adustionesque igni factas sanat.

96 L. Tamarisone G. Tamaris A. Tamariske Ge. Tamarisken.

97 L. Linaria G. Li^ sa^age A. Tods fax Ge. Karubrant.

depiction of plants

XCVII. LINARIA.
LInaria silvestris a lini folijs sic dicta, Osyridis species esse videtur,
flavos fert flores, thalictro similes instar vmblici autcavini capitis acutos:
in medio luteos qui in capitula mutantur, in quibus semen Gentianae simule
Proximam habet cum Esula minore similitudinem, differentiam nihilo minus
vulgatus hic ostendit versiculus.

Esula cum lacte, sine lacte Linaria crescit. Aridi flores vestes a blattis ac
tineis conservare credunti.

XCVIII. BELLIS HORTENSIS.
HAec quibusdam etiam primula veris dicta est, quod vere inchoante mox
procedat: folia habet pinguia, interram jacentia, in rotundum oblonga and
levissime crenata florem vero pluribus barbulis densissime circinatum, Color
rubicundo, odoris millius. Succus Bellidis vulneratis, polus prodest. Folia
oleribus addita, facilem aluum faciunt eadem Trita tumorem sedant.

98 L. Bellis flori rubro G. N^gueri^es, en P^squette a floe^r ra^e A. red
Double daisie Ge. rode Nas^lebon.

99 L. Quercus G. Chesie ^^g. Acornes Ge. Eichlame^.

depiction of plants

XCIX. QVERCVS.
QErcus notissima arbor, Iovi olim sacra, adeoque, vt persuasum sibi olim
habuerit caeca Gentilitas eum inde oracula petentibus reddere, Corona quoque,
ex quernis frondibus facta servali civis praemium fuit: hinc Alciati Emblema
confictum hoc versu explicatur: Grata Iovi est quercus, qui nos servatquee
fovetquee:
Servanti civem querna corona datur.


Eius quippe commoda infinita sunt, quae humano generi adfert, nec a medicinae
vsu aliena.

C. GELSEMINVM.
GElseminum sive Iasminum hortorum ornatui plurimum servit: Cauliculos habet
teneros, geniculatos, virides, quibus inest medulla spumea ceu spongiosa; ex
singulis nodis vel geniculis oriuntur gemina folia, septem conjunctis foliolis
aequalibus, sature virentibus, and mucronatis, constantia: In vertice
cauliculorum flores apparent oblongi, odoris gratissimi; Coloris vero
subalbidi, nonnihil tamen calyces rubentis. Est and alia Iasmini species
floribus caeruleis, quae ex clematidum genere esse videtur.

100 L. Gelsemi^^^ G. Gelsemin A. Jasmin

101 L. Pyra G. Poires A. Peartre Ge. Biren.

depiction of plants

CI. PYRA.
PYrorum vt malorum multa sunt genera, plurima inter se varietate distincta.
Cum vero pyrum arborem supra descripserum, eaque sit insuper vulgatissima plura
de ea dicere hic supersedeam, si addidero tantum Scolae Salernitinae hos versus.

Cum cognis antidotum pyra sunt, sed cruda venenum
Cruda gravant stomachum, relevant pyra cocta gravatum.
Post pyra da pottum, etc.
CII. LILIVM.
LIly los bicet nemini hodie incognitus, omnibus nihilominus gratissimus
exstit. De eo fabulantur poetae in hunc modum. Quum Jupiter Herculem ex Alemena
genuisset, essetque mortalis quippe qui matris conditionem sequeretur,
immortalitatis participem facere cupiebat, and propterem ipsum adhuc infantem
Iunonis dormientis vberibus admovit infans itaque lacte satur ob a papilla
amovit, lac tamen nihilominus vbertim fluebat, etiam puero amoto, and quicquid
eius in caelo diffusum est, lacteum circulum effecit, quod vero in terram
dilapsum est eiusque glebas tinxit, id ipsum florem Lily produxit, quod
similitudine lactis colorem exprimit: quem inde Rosam Iunoniam posteri
appellavere. Aqua stillatitia ad amissam vocem and syncopen plurimum
commendatur.

102 L. Lilium album G. Lis blanch A. White lilly Ge. Weisie G^lgen.

103 L. Fragaria G. Fraises A. Strabo berries Ge. Erdbeer.

depiction of plants

CIII. FRAGARIA.
FRagaria exilis est herba passim obvia, neque caules neque ramulos habens, sed
solum folijs, floribus and fructu constans. Hujus tria faciunt genera: primum
haec nostra est fragaria, multis a radice lanuginosis pediculis, quorum alij
flore candido corenantur, alij trigemino comantur folio, per ambitum crenato
and venoso, alij fructum gerunt exiguis moris haud dissimilem cum maturuit
rubentem cum gustu tum odore suavissimum. Succus foliorum vulnera ardentia
sanare and glutinare traditur.

CIIII. PSEVDO-MELANTHIVM.
PSeudo-Melanthium herba est inter segetes nascens folijs, allij modo
acuminatis, sed brevioribus pilosisque; florem fert menso Iunio ex vasculo
hispido purpureum, paruae and quinque foliae rosae similem, quo decidente
capitulum ceu vasculum manet, longiusculum, angulosum, hirsutumque in quo semen
nigrum. Folia cum semine Chirurgis sunt in vsu. Videtura esse Hippocratis
Melanthium ex tritico, ac Octavij Horati any Since, quibus fere in omnibus
convenit.

104 L. Pseudo melanthium G. Nielle de blede A. Cookle Ge. Rodra.

105 L. Cerasa G. Cherisses A. Cheryes Ge. Kierssen.

depiction of plants

CV. CERASA.
ESt hic fructus multiplici varietate Colorum, magnitudinis ac etiam formae
notissimus, and supra cum sua quoque arbore descriptus; De hoc sic Simeon
Sethus in Sytagmate de libariorum facultatibus: Cerasia, quae and sic Graecis
dicta frigida sunt and humida, malique succi, ventrem subducunt, stomacho parum
idonea, humidum ventriculum laedunt, praesertim cum matura non sunt: sed
calidis and siccis ventricalis and temperaturis prosunt. Gummia arboris cum
vino sumptum, calculosos sanat.

CVI. MALVS PERSICA.
PErsica malus sic dicta, quod ex persica primum sit allata: gaudet locis
aquosis, folia fert Amydalae, sed maiora: floret primo statum vere cum
Amygdalis, flore subpuniceo, pomum producit carno, succulentum, foris
lanuginosum dura intus and scabra nuce, in qua nucleus quilas in Amygdalis.
Persica m^la in arde^tibus febribus sumi possunt; sed frequens eorum vsus
multum phlegmatis gignit, horum sic meminit Fiera. Rosa sumus pluuio mox
putrenscentut, ventri
Fida calescenti, si modo prima damur.
Mollia laxamus ventres, siccata tenemus;
Nos timuit Persis, sed tibi grata sumus.
postremum hunc versum quoque hec sequenti disticho expressit Martial.

Vilia maternis pueramus praecoqua ramis:
Nunc in adoptinis Persica cara sumus.
106 L. Mi^^ ^e s^^ G. Pesches A. Peches Ge. Pfirsing.

107 L. Lychins Chalerdonica G. A. flowr of Constantinople

depiction of plants

CVII. FLOS CONSTANTINOPOLITANVS.
BElgae nostri florem vocant Constantinopolitanum; Germani vero Hierosolymorum:
Aldroandus Creticum. Herbae ventem e radice caules sunt plures geniculati,
cavi; folia nonnihil aspera and hersuta: flores in latis vmbellis, multi simul
congesti, aspectu pulcri, caeterum inodori, color Lilij purpurei, sine maturi
mali Aurantij corticis. In Iunio Iulio ac sequentibus mensibus, apparent. Quos
habet in medicina vsus Dodonaeus sibi incognitum esse tradit, quamvis non
minimam in hortis ac coronis gratiam eius flores sint assecuti.

CVIII. NARDVS GERMANICA.
SPseudo-Nardi species est, quam Lauendulam appellant, quod in balneis and
Lanacris expetatur ob odoris paestantiam. Odorata haec and coronaria stirps
est, sed humilis, ramulos ceu virgas proferens tenues; folia oblonga, carnosa,
vtraque part albicantia, and in summo spicas oblongas tenues, floribus
refertas caeruleis: Habetque insuper radices lignosas in fibras divisas.
Dodonaeus Casiam veterum, esse putat cuius Virgilius his verbis meminit in
Georgicis: Haec circum Casiae virides, and olentia late
Serpilla, and graviter spirantis copia Thymbre
Floreat.


Caeterum calefacit and siccat ordine secundo, tenu^umq: est partiu^. Discutie
and ^ducit.

108 L. Spica lauendula G. Lauendule A. Lauender Ge. Lauendelen.

109 L. Armeiaca malus G. Abricos A. Aprecocke Ge. S. Johans Pfersic^.

depiction of plants

CIX. MALVS ARMENIACA.
MAlus Armeniaca persicae species est. Ejus fructus test Dioscoride minor est,
atque stomacho vtilior quam persicae, totus quoque flammis and precox. Baptista
Fiera poma Armeniaca hoc disticho describit.

Poma eadem quae persica, si tamen amplum
His corpus, nobis aurea forma datur.
Latini, autem test Lonicero, Trecacina haec mala vocare solent, eaque
reliquis persitis prestare idem tradit.

CX. CARIOPHYLLEVS MAXIMUS.
INter coronarias herbas, familiam ducere creditur Caryophylleus flos; hic vero
expressus inter alios ejus generis flores, insigni magnitudine, Colorum
eleganti mixtura, and odoris gratissimi fragrantia praestat. In hortis hodie
frequens est haec herba; sed speciosissimi flores fere in fictilibus vasis
habentur, vt a frigoris injuria hybernis mensibus tutari, and ad caliodiora
loca transferri possint.

110 L. Gary^op^hyllus maximus G. Gyrofflees grand A. Cornations deuble Ge.
Gross doppele Negel ^der Gras bl^men.

111 L. Genista G. Genest A. Broom Ge. Gi^steren oder Pfri^men.

depiction of plants

CXI. GENISTA.
GEnistam dictam censent, vel quod genu instar ad nexus sit flexilis, vel quod
genuum dolori medeatur, Germanis Ginst, videtur Dioscoridis Spartion vel eius
species. Locis gaudet aridis and arenosis; ramos autem fert herbaceos, scabros,
folia minuta, florem pisi, luteum tamen and apibus gratissimum. Differt a
Genista minore hodie Genistella dicta, quod non sit aculeata, and minus
exsiccet. Tenera Genistae germina, vel flores tusos, serpentum morisibus
vtiliter imponi ferunt.

CXII. SALVIA:
SAlvia (...) ab (...) seu (...), quod syderationem significat, quia, vt
Ruellius inquit, herba retorrida and exucca videtur, quasi in tabem sit versa.
Salvia dicta quod sit salutaris ejus vsus, vnde Schola salernitana.

Cur moritur homo, cui salvia crescit in hortis? etc. Sativa haec Salvia in
hortis frequens and omnibus nota, frequentissimi in quotodiana vita and etiam
medicina vsus, quod and Baptista. Fiera. in sua coena non ignoravit, vbi sic
cecinit: Vix sicca est calido, stomachum and cerebella iuuabit,
Certa salus tremulis Salvia poplitibus.
Dentibus, vrinae reclusae, menstrua ducens,
Salvia and in fluidis ventribus apta satis.


112 L. Saluia G. Sauge A. Sage Ge. Saluey.

113 L. Castanea G. Chastaign^ A. Chesnu^^e Ger. Kesten

depiction of plants

CXIII. CASTANEA.
CAstanea a Castano Magnesiae oppido, vnde primum advecta; Glans Sardiana a
loco similiter and Iovis glans Lonicero test dicitur, quam vis Bekanus in
vertumno, vnde sic dicta a nemine Graecorum aut latinorum traditum esse
scribat. Arbor est nota, puram terram desiderans, fructumque ferens nucem
castaneam dictum Ethynato tegmine tectum; quem sic describit Fiera: Quae tibi
grata licet posito mollescat echinno
Sicca est, and nimio Castanea igne calet.
In caput and ventres inflata asperrima saevit,
Ni spolia apportet mellis arundinci.


CXIIII. POMVM.
ALiquoties poma descripsimus mira varietate luxuriantia, and a nemine satis
expressa; tu tibi lector cum sapore finge colorem, ac nomen ex ipsa re tribue:
ego hic tantum addam meliora per insitionem reddi Palladij versu.

Insita proceris pergit concrescere ramis,
Et sociam mutat malus amica pyrum.
Seque feros silvis hortatur linquete mores,
Et partu gaudet nobililiore frui, etc.
114 L. Pomum G. Pommes A. Apple Ge. Apfel.

115 L. Rosa canina odorata G. Esglantine A. Sweet Brier Ge. Wild
^robriechende hegk rosen.

depiction of plants

CXV. ROSA CANINA ODORATA.
HAec vulgaris notitiae planta, spinosa admodum, tam fronde quam flore odorem
spira gratissimum. Virgus fert aculeis humatis munitas, folia asper
nigricantias, incisuris tenuibus divisa. Flos ex calycibus erumpit
dehiscentibus ex puniceo color pallescens, quinque foliorum, ima vero part
vnguis humani colorem referens, qui pandens sese, apices in medio sui fert
flavos, ac stamina capillamentis, insidentia, quibus decidentibus fructus
oblongus and subrubescens sequitur, interius lanuginosus.

CXVI. TRITICVM.
FRumentum hoc quod in suo genere principatum obtinet Graecis (...), Latinis
vero triticum dicitur, quod e spicis tritum sit, nimis communi vocabulo, and
Varroni vix digno. Tria hujus numerantur genera: primum culino nascitur quam
hordeum altiore, tribus geniculis constante, folio arundineo, spica folijs
remotiore; Secundum in eo differt, quod spicam multis aristis vallatam obtinet:
Tertium priori per omnia simile, nisi quod genicula habet quaterna. Multiplex
ejus in Medica re, and quotidiana vita est vsus: Sed quando vtiliter seratur
elegantissimis suis versibus indicat Maro Georg: lib. 1.

Atsi triticeam in messem robustaque farra
Exercebis humum, solisque instabis aristis.
Ante tibi Eoae Atlantides abscondantur,
Gnossiaque ardentis dicedat stella Coronae,
Debita quam sulcis committas semina, quamque
Invitae properes anni spem credere terrae,
116 L. Triticum G. Ele, fourment A. Wheat Ge. Weitz.

117 L. Caryophyllus duplex sieve multipl^^ G. Gyrofflees doubles A. Double
gilloflower Ge. D^bbel negeli^ eder graskkeuen.

depiction of plants

CXVIII. FLOS CARYOPHYLLEVS MVLTIPLEX.
FLos hic pulcherrimus, multiplici foliorum textura and color puniceo
insignis, hortorum delitium, and coronarum decus audit; puellarum assiduo
manibus carpitur; and nunc sponsarum festinis crinibus adaptatur, nunc infantum
tristia funera exornat, diverso vitae mortisque Honestamento.

CXVIII. CYDONIA MALVS.
MAlus Cotonea Cydonia a Cydone Cretae oppido dicta creditur. Cotoneam vero
primus eam Cato vocavit, quod nimirum mala ejus tenera lanugine tegantur; vnde
Virgilius optime cecinit.

Ipse ego cana legam tenera lanugine malu. Haec Veneri olim gratissima fuisse
leguntur: and Solon test Plutarcho, jubebat sponso concubituram; prius edere
malum Cydonium, quod and eleganti emblemate expressit Alciatus: Poma novis
tribui debere Cydonia nuptis
Dicitur antiquus constituisse Solon,
Grata ori and stomacho cum sint, vt and halitus illis
Sit suavis, blandis manet and ore lepos.


118 L. Malum Cotoncum G. Pome de Coing A. Quinces Ge. Kutten oder Quidden.

119 L. Leucoium G. Girefflees A. Wall flower Ge. Garten veiel.

depiction of plants

CXIX. LEVCOIVM LVTEVM.
LVteo Leucoio a floribus sic dicto, ramosi sunt caules folia oblonga in virore
nigricantia, minora folijs Leucoij candidi: flores lutei perquam odorati;
floret Aprili and Majo, etsi Hyems clemens fuerit etiam Martio. Totus frutex
lignosus est, and Hyemis rigorem facile sustinet; in ruderibus and saxosis
locis libentius nascitur, vnde nostri Muerbloemen vocant. Est autem Leucoij
frutex vniversus, vt Galenus ait, extergentis facultatis, ac tenuium partium,
plus tamen flores: Dioscorides etiam lutea Leucoia praecipui in medicina vsus
esse scribit; Et Hippocrates ad secundas educendas ejus semen valere tradit.

CXX. VITIS.
VT vitis infinita vuarum differentia luxuriare solet, sic and vinorum inde
expressoru^, tot fere sunt genera quot loca vbi nascuntur, ex quibus and nomina
variare, and formas, didicere. Plinius, vino, inquit, modico nervi juvantur,
copiosiore laeduntur; sic and oculi, stomachus recreatur, appetentia ciborum
invitatur, tristitiae cura hebetatur, vrina and algor expellitur, somnus
conciliatur: contra si nimius adhibeatur vini vsus, belluina cornua capessimus
etc. Atque ita ejus vel commoda, vel damna in modo consistere docemur. At hujus
demum lauds and simul librum eleganti finiam Bapt: Fierae carmine: Dulcis and
apricis delecta in collibus vua,
Terreus huic cortex, feruidus humor inest.
Excipe de nigris quae sit tibi gratior albam,
Neue inflet, soles sit remorata duos.
Bacche quid hoc maius potuisti munere? nutrit
Hac been* visi^ae sed male sana nocet.


120 L. Botrys, Vua G. Grappe de raisin A. A Grabe Ge. Wein traube.

depiction of plants

FINIS CORONAT OPUS.
Rembertus Dodonaeus
portrait of Rembertus Dodonaeus

Carolus Clusius
portrait of Carolus Clusius

HORTUS FLORIDUS In quo rariorum and minus vulgarium florum Icones ad vivam
veramque formam accuratissime delineatae.

Et secundum quatuor anni tempora divisae exhibentur Jncredibili labor ac
diligentia Crisp: Passaei junioris Delineatae ac suum in ordinem redactae Ao.
1614.

Extant Arnhemij. Apud Ioannem Ianssonium Bibliopolam ibid.

engraved title page


