THE Return of the renowned Caualiero Pasquill of England, from the other side
the Seas, and his meeting with Marforius at London upon the Royal Exchange.
Where they encounter with a little household talk of Martin and Martinisme,
discovering the scabbe that is bredde in England: and conferring together about
the speedy dispersing of the golden Legende of the lives of the Saints.

If my breath be so hot that I burn my mouth, suppose I was Printed by Pepper
Allie. Anno. Dom. 1589.

PASQVILS RETVRNE TO ENGLAND. Pasquill and Marforius.
PAS QVILL. Thou art the man MARFORIVS, I looked for, though I little thought
to meet thee so suddenly upon the Exchange.


MARFORIVS. Ever since you took shipping at Grauesende, I have had the disease
of a Merchants wife, so love sick in your absence, that mine eye was never
pulde from the Wethercocke, and longing like a Woman for your return, I never
saw gale of wind blow merrily out of the East, nor heard any Ship shoot off
her Ordnaunce in the Thems, but I ran presently to the water side to discover
your coming in; I wonder how I missed you?


PASQVILL. Never marvel at that, I have learned to mask it; while some of
Martins good friends stood watching for me at Lambith bridge, I came to an
Anchor in Sandwich Haven. But of fellowship tell me, how has my Countercuffe
been entreated?


MARFO. It requires a Summers day and a Winters night to tell you all. It was
very welcome to the Court, thankfully received in both Universities, the
Cities of the Land do give you good speeches, as for the Country, after the
plainest manner, with heart and good will they are ready to greet you with a
Cake and a cup of Ale in every Parrish. This only is the thing that greeueth
them, they know not what Pasquill is. They desire in all places of the Realm
to be acquainted with you, because they would bring you intelligence thick and
threefolde, to further your volume of the lives of the Saints.


PASQ. I think I shall prove a state man, my packets come in so fast
already, that I begin to swell in Books as big as Surius. If any desire
to know what I am, tell them that I was once a Harbor in Rome (as some
report) and every chair in my shop, was a tongue full of news. Whatsoever was
done in England, France, Germany, Spain, Italy, and other Countries, was
brought to me. The high and secret matters of Lords, Ladies, Kings,
Emperors, Princes, Popes, and Monarchs of the world, did ring every day as
shrill as a Basin about my doors. In memory whereof, as Mercury turned Battus
to a stone for bewraying his theft, it is thought that one Pope or other,
mistrusting the slipprines of my tou^g, blessed me into a stone to stop my
mouth. Others affirm, that the City of Rome, to requite me with honor when
I dyed, erected me a little monument of stone, with a body, head, and hands
thick and short, answerable to my stature, and set it up in the open street,
where I assure you I have stood many years in the rain, my face is so tand
with the Sun, and my hyde so hardened with the wether, that I neither blush
when I byte any man, nor feel it when any man byteth me.


MARFO. I wonder how you were able to continue there?


PASQ. To hear every man's talk that passed by, was better then meat and
drink to me. In steed of apparel, in Summer I wore nothing but paper
liveries, which many great men bestowed upon me to their great cost, in
Winter, I care for no cold, because I am a stone.


MAR. I beseech you Sir tell me, how came you into England?


PAS. Being once somewhat busy with Signor Iacomo, about a pretty wench kept
at Frescata for the Pope his Fathers tooth. Gregory the thirteenth, terque
quaterque, shook his white head at me with such a terrible look, that I was a
feared he would have smytte my head into Tyber with a Thunderbolt.
Nevertheless, the old man being of a mylde disposition, and very merciful,
I received a pardon for that fault. At the last, hearing the Scholars of the
English Seminary merry, as they returned from their Vineyarde, and full of
fine tauntings when they talked of the Sects and opinions spronge up in
England, I stole out of Rome by night, to make trial my self of the truth of
their reports. When I came to England, for the good will I carried to my old
occupation, I entered at London into Sprignols shop, where the first news I
heard among two or three Gentlemen, as they were a trimming, was, of a
Martinist a Broker, the next door by, which with a face of Religion, having
gotten other men's goods into his hands, was but new run away, and left his
wife to the charity of the Parrish. With this ridings, I grew very
inquisitiue to know what Martin was? A knave quoth one; a thief quoth another;
he teaches the Court a Religion to rob the Church. And some of the City
that favor him, apt Scholars to take such an easy lesson, begin to practice
their cunning upon their neighbors. Having gotten this thread by the end, I
never left winding til I came to the paper that made the bottom. I frequented
the Churches of the Pruritane Preachers, that leap into the Pulpit with a
Pitchfork, to teach men, before they have either learning, judgment, or wit
enough to teach boys.


MAR. I pray you Sir, why do you call them Pruritanes?


PAS. A pruritu. They have an itch in their ears* that would be clawed with
new points of doctrine never dreamed of and an itch in their fingers, that
would be noynted with the golden Aenulatum of the Church. I know they are
commonly called Puritans, Three marks of a Puritan. 1.
and not amiss, that title is one of the marks they bear about them. They
have a mark in the head, PRO. 30. 12. 2. 3.
they are self conceited, They take themselves to be pure, when they are
filthy in Gods sight; They have a mark in the eye, their looks are haughty;
They have a mark in the mouth, a yerie black tooth, they are A generation
that curse their father.


MAR. How now Caualiero* are you com to Scripture?


PAS. Do thou think, Marforius, that Pasquill having stood so many years
in the streets of Rome, heard so many famous Clarks; especially father Swear
the Spaniarde, and the sifted Greek wit of Father Augustine, and having
spent so much time in private reading the best Books that night stir up my
devotion, I would skippe over the Book of all Books, the holy Bible? No, no,
I have that volume in my hands, when many a Martinist hugges a drabbe in his
arms, as you shall perceive by the lives of the Saints. I tarry but for one
packet of information from Essex side, and that work shall come out of the
Press like a bryde from her chamber, spangled and trapt, with a full caparizon
of the ornaments of this present age.


MAR. The Owls Almanac is expected at your hands as well as that.


PAS. That is a piece of service not to be neglected in his time. I have there
set down all the vpstart Religions in this Land. The Anabaptists, the Family
of Love; the seven capital haeresies for which some have been executed of late
years in Suffolk; the diversities of Puritans and Martinists, with a number
more which you shall hear of when that Book is Printed. A lamentable
spectacle it will be, to see so many faces in one hoode. But GOD knows,
(before whom I stand) I desire not to cast it out as a block in the ways of
men, for any to stumble at, or to stand at defiance with all Religion; but as a
Sea-marke to discover the quicksands of new Religions.

I have heard that Bernardin Ochin, a man of great learning, whom I knew in
Rome to be the first founder of the order of the Capuchines, being once tucht
with the finger of Gods spirit, began to detest the superstitions of the
Church of Rome, and fled to Geneua. The same man had a desire also to visit
England, and during the time of his remaining here, he found so many blind
Sects and Religions within the land, that he turned back like a dog to his
own vomit, and in some sort he fell into the biace of the Church of Rome
again. Unhappy man, that being once lightened, looked back to that Scicilian
Aetna, that spues up sinoake and sulpher into the world, to put out the eyes of
men; Unhappy England, that by the diversities of opinions in Religion, set
so many hands to his shoulders to thrust him down, that was so ready with a
turn, to ouerturne. How these new pampred factions at this day, have shaken
the hearts of many of her Majesty's loving people, and made them Chamaelion
like, capable of any faith save the right, I leave it to them that look into
it.


MAR. Take heed what you say, it is a common report that the faction of
Martinisme has mighty friends.


PAS. That's a brag Marforius, yet if there be any such, I shall find them in
the end, and against the next Parliament, I will pick out a time to pepper
them. Though they were as high as the maste, as sure as the tackling, as
profitable as the fraught, and as necessary as the sails, when the ship is
in danger, ouerboorde withal. What meaning soever some men have in it, I am
assured, that it can neither stand with policy nor with Religion, to nourish
any faction in civil matters, much less in matters belonging to the Church.
Quid prodest si vos contineat vna domus, DIVISION.
et separet diuersa voluntas? What avails it, (says one) for men to be
shrouded under one rooffe, if they be not of one heart? One secret faction in a
Realm does more hurt, then any general plague or open war. The pestilence
and the sword are two heavy scourges in Gods hand, that devour many thousands
of men in a little time, yet they reach no further then the body, but a
faction deuours more, and sweepes away both body and soul together. Though
the Jews at the siege of Jerusalem, were pressed by their enemies without the
walls, One of these factions was the faction of the zealous reformers.
and punished with such a mortality within, that the carkases of the dead did
dunge the ground, yet they never went to the wall, till they grew to be
factious, and fell to taking one another by the throat. Give me leave a little
Marforius, to shift my sails, and come toward Italy. They that were wise
prophesied long before of the state of Rome, that it should never decay but by
division Which came to pass. For when the factions of Sylla and Marius, Caefar
and Pompey, Anthony and Lepidus brake forth, the flourishing City began to
cast her lease. The great Empire of great Alexander, like a flame of fire in a
heap of flax, when it was at the highest, did shed it self suddenly in the
air, and came to nothing by the dissentio^s of those that succeeded him. The
proud neck of the Graecians, for all their wisdom, was after the like manner
brought under the Persians and Macedonians. If we roll our eyes at one side
into the bosom of our neighbor France, we shall perceive, that although it
were many times invaded in the skyrts of the Country, by the Romans, yet it
remained invincible, till Caesar took hold of the discords within the Realm.
My head is full of water, and my cheeks be wette, when I think upon
Constantinople, whose particular iarres, laid her gates open to the Turk,
under whose captivity she groneth to this day.

A faction in a Kingdom may well be compared to a spark of fire, Note
it catches hold at the first in some obscure corner, in a Shop, in a
Stable, or in a ricke of Straw, where it lies covert a little time, but by
little and little it gathers strength, till it rear it self up to great
houses, Palaces, and Princes Courts, and at last it rages and ouerruns whole
Cities and Countries, without quenching, before they be utterly overthrown.
In the time of Justinian the Emperor, about the credit and advancement of two
colors, Blewe and Green, there grew in Constantinople two mighty factions,
which made such a head the one against the other, that in one day it cost many
thousands of men their lives, and the Emperor himself was brought in great
hazard, both of his Empire and his own person. Upon as light an occasion in
the Dukedom of Florence, for the two colors of Black and White, very
pestilent quarrels began there, and the factions of the Bianchi and the Neri,
breaking forth like a lightning out of the Clouds, scourde and wasted the
Country where they went. These were but little sparks in the rushes, Note gentle
Martin.
that every man treads on, and very trifles at the first, yet you see how
foul a Cockatrice may be hatched of so small an egg. If I should rip up the
stomachs of some in England, when we consider the brawles, the Garboyles, the
tragical exclamations for Church apparel, may we not say that England is
fallen into that fantastical faction of Florence for Black and White? Where had
this brable his first beginning, but in some obscure corner, in the tippe of
the tongue of some blind Parlor-preacher in the land, in shoppes, in stalles,
in the Tynkers budget, the Tailors sheares, and the Sheepheardes Tarboxe? I
doubt not Marforius, but it will wither where it sprang, and end at where it
began, in shame, and ignorance. Thou know that the surest proppe of all
Princes, is to promote true Religion, and to keep it inviolable when it is
established, for this is the well tempered Mortar that builds up all estates.
He that honors me, (says God) I will honor him. But this chopping and changing
of the Religion of the land (which was acquitted of accusations in the time of
the famous K. Edward the fixed, and now advanced by the happy reign of the
Queens most excellent Majesty, and approved by the wisdom both spiritual and
temporal, of the whole Realm, and confirmed by a general consent in the high
Court of Parliament) is nothing else, but to pick out the Mortar by little and
little, that at the next pushe, Martin and his companions, might overthrow the
state, and make the Imperial crown of her Majesty kiss the ground.

Where there is a division fostred, there can be no continuance of the present
state, MATH. 12.
GOD himself has taught it us. Martins chief practice, in the Provinces of
England where I have wandered, is, to persuade the simple, that her Majesty
lays such a logge upon their consciences, as they ought not bear,
whereupon they presume to make a shrewde scruple of their obedience, and begin
to bound like a Colt that would cast his ryder. Has God powered so many
blessings, upon the Church of England, by the very often, and very miraculous
preseruations of her sacred Majesty's royal person, and thereby given
testimonies out of Heaven to the Religion of the Land, and dares Martin
attempt to make a doubt both of it, and her? Credit me Marforius, this
bursting the sinew of peoples obedience to their natural Prince, cannot be
done, but for a mischiuous intent, what visor soever they set upon it. I
would feign know what should be the reason, that so many hundreds of
thousands in this Realm, have hitherto humbled themselves at the feet of one
person? can it be because she is mightier then all they, she being but one,
and they many millions; she a woman and they men? Is it any terror, think you,
of the big bodied Holberders that guarde her Majesty? No Marforius, if there
were not some wonderful matter that withhelde them also, even they might be
given over to a reprobate sense, to bend every man the point of his Holberd at
her. If we search it till the worlds end, we shall find no other cause of this
sweet harmony of peoples hearts, that remain faithful and flexible to the
shaking of her princely finger, but only this, the Religion of the Land.
When Martin shall be suffered to displace GOD, that now dwelles in the bosom
of her Majesty's loving people, and buz slanders of Religion into their ears,
whereby they may conceive, that her highness by the maintenance of the
Gospel, has shut up their salvation in close prison, and that it mooues God
in his wrath to draw the Sword against her and the Realm, (as Martin
himself avouches) what other consequent may we look for, but that every
Pruritane transported with the heat and the ignorance of his zeal, will be as
ready as a Papist, to lift up his hand against her, which mischief I beseech
God to return into their bowels. How odious and how dangerous innouations of
Religion are, Secretary Machiauell, a politic not much affected to any
Religion, discloseth by the example of Friar Sauanaroll. He was a man like
Martin, sprung up in such a time as Martin, when Spain, France, Rome,
Arragon, and the Emperor, entered a league to make war altogether upon the
Venetians. Sauanarola boasted of Revelations, and secret conferences, held
between the holy Ghost and him; Martin brags he is a special man, raised up
on a sudden by the spirit of God for the good of England, as if GOD had been
a stranger to us all this while. Sauanarola made a bragging proffer, which he
never performed, that he would pass through the fire, for the confirmation of
his doctrine; Martin has vaunted he will seal his opinions with his heart
blood, but you may see by the starting holes he seeks, that he never meant
to keep his promise. Sauanarola brought himself and his followers to
confusion at last; and so will Martin. I muse how any state man can abide to
hear of innouasions in Religion where the truth is preached? There is but one
God, which cannot be divided, if he could, he were not GOD. All his graces
tend to a gathering together of Gods people in a unity of Faith, 1. COR. 2.
12.
not to a scattering into diverse Faythes, wherein the principal grace of a
Martinist consists. Look unto the Heathen, the accusers of Socrates, made
choice of this accusation above all others, as a matter very worthy of death in
him: that he was a fellow that sought to set a new stamp of his own upon
their Religion. One of the first Laws that Romulus laid, as a ribbe of iron
into his government, was, Deos peregrinos ne colunfo.

Take a pattern if you will, from private Families. What a pitiful thing is
it to see, two Religions in one house? where the Father and the Son, the
Husband and the Wife, the Master and Servant, are of diverse faythes, the
joints of that house begin to gape, and the fall of that house is to be feared.
The diversity of opinions in so high a degree as is Religion, cannot choose
but diminish the love and respect, that the one of them should carry unto the
other. The Son will be careless of his duty to his Father, whom he takes
to be a reprobate; the Father will make but slender reckoning of the Son, that
believes not as he believes. The Wife will give little reverence to that
Husband, whom she imagines to be damned; The Husband will be rough and
rigorous to such a Wife as obeyes not him; The Servant will never give due
honor to his Master, when he judges him to be the bondslaue of the devil;
The Master will as hardly protect that Servant, whose heart he perceiues not
to be with him.

As then the government of Commonweals, was first drawn from the government
of private houses, so that which is the ruin of private houses, grows in time
to be the ruin of Commonweals. I have taken a little pain to visit diverse
of the Courts, Benches, Sessions, that are held in this Land in her
Majesty's name, by virtue of her authority, but I never saw so bold, so-open,
so-barbarous contempt of magistracy, in any other part of the whole world, as
I have seen here. Such canuaces made, such stales set, such traynes laid,
such platformes drawn by the factious, to bring their Superiors into
contempt, and yet they prove so ridiculous in every step they tread, that I
am ready to stand on my nose when I trace them out.

I was once in Antwerpe, when great suit was made to the Masters of the English
house, (by a Gentleman then employed in the Queens affairs) for the
entertaining a Preacher among them, both to teach and to minister the
Sacraments there unto the^. The request was soon granted, and Trauars, a
fellow that delights in obliquitie, was the man that was brought thither,
when he came, he had neither taken the Orders of the Ministry, nor any
license to preach, according to the government of the Church of England, but
ran into a corner among the French to receive it there. At last, one of the
Ministers of those Churches, came with him to the company, and made a sollemne
protestation before the^ all, that he found Mast Trauars a fit man for the
dividing of the word, and delivery of the Sacraments. Hac oratione finita.
Sweet Master Trauars, quem oneris causa nomino, for I bear him on my back
till my tale be ended, at the first iumpe read a Statute made in Scotland (for
Church government) to the natural Subjects of the Queen of England, and
told them he would follow that. I would gladly be resolved in this place,
whether Trauars did not begin very prettily to play the Pope, in taking upon
him to discharge her Majesty's Subjects of the allegiance they owe to their
natural Prince, and in stealing away from the crown of England, as many
english hearts as would harken to him, to translate them at his pleasure to a
foreign power? As he laid his foundation in dissension when he began to be a
builder in Gods house, so has his work unto this day prospered, the whole
frame I perceive is fallen upon him. They that were discreet, ventured
courageously to set a leauer at him, and never gave over till he was removed.

The Chronicles of England, and the daily enclosures of Commons in the Land,
teach us sufficiently, how inclinable the simpler sort of the people are to
rowtes, ryots, commotions, insurrections, and plain rebellions when they grow
brainsicke, or any new toy takes them in the head: they need no Trauars nor
Martin to increase their giddines. It should seem that the graund Prior of
France, (a man now dead) had gotten some taste of their disposition, when in a
Sonet that he made for his own pleasure, to paint out the natures of all
Nations, he touched the pride, the wantonness, the mutabilitie, and the mutinies
of the Spaniard, the Italian, the French, and the Scotchman, and to the shame
of this Nation, he gives the English a dash over the face with a black
coal, and says: Traistre Angloi the English man is a Traitor. This is the
ground, the Popes and the King of Spain, these many years have chosen to
themselves to work upon, and used the English in nothing more, then in matters
of high treason. Therefore I would wysh the whole Realm to judge uprightly,
who deserves best to be bolstred and vpheld in these dangerous times, either
they that have religiously and constantly preached obedience to her Majesty's
loving people, or they that with a mask of Religion discharge them of their
obedience?


MAR. Speak softly Caualiero, I perceive two or three lay their heads at one
side, like a ship under sail, and begin to cast about you, I doubt they have
ouer-heard you. This Exchange is vauted and hollow, and has such an Echo, as
multiplies every word that is spoken by Arithmaticke, it makes a thousand of
one, and ympes so many feathers into every tale, that it flies with all speed
into every corner of the Realm.


PAS. All the better for me, when I lack matter to talk of, I may resort
hither to take up a little news at interest.


MAR. I marvel Caualiero, that you press not the Martinists with much
Scripture, they are great quoters of common places if you mark them.


PAS. Therein they are like to a stale Curtizan, that finding herself to be
worn out of credit, borrows the gesture of a sober Matron, which makes her
to every one that knows her, the more abominable; for the common sort
whistle at her for her pride, and the grauer sort spyt at her for her
impudency. How whorishlie Scriptures are alleged by them, I will discover
(by Gods help) in another new work which I have in hand, and entitled it,
The May Game of Martinisme. Very defflie set out, with Pompes, Pagents,
Motions, Maskes, Scutchions, Emblems, Impreases, strange tricks, and devises,
between the Ape and the Owl, the like was never yet seen in Paris-garden.
Penry the welchman is the foregallant of the Morris, with the treble belles,
shot through the wit with a Woodcocks bill, I would not for the fairest
horne-beast in all his Country, that the Church of England were a cup of
Metheglin, and came in his way when he is oue^r-heated, every Bishopric
would prove but a draught, when the Mazer is at his nose. Martin himself is
the Mayd-marian, trimly dressed up in a cast Gown, and a Kercher of Dame
Lawsons, his face handsomely muffled with a Diaper-napkin to cover his beard,
and a great Nosegay in his hand, of the principalest flowers I could gather
out of all his works. Wiggenton daunces round about him in a Cotten-coate, to
court him with a Leatherne pudding, and a wooden Ladle. Paget marshalleth the
way, with a couple of great clubbes, one in his foot, another in his head, and
he cries to the people with a loud voice, Beware of the Man whom God has
marked. I can not yet find any so fit to come lagging behind, with a budget on
his neck to gather the devotion of the lookers on, as the stocke-keeper of the
Bridewel-house of Canterbury; he must carry the purse, to defray their
charges, and then he may be sure to serve himself.


MAR. Peace, Caualiero, your tongue will be slitte if you take not heed, I
have heard some say, you should wringe for this gear if the Queen were dead.


PAS. Tushe, thou art but a crauin Marforius, if thou-feare that; had thou
but one drop of that water in thine eye, which the Servant of Elisha the
Prophet had, when he discovered so many Chariors of fire about his Master,
thou should see the Prayers of the Church of England, fly up into heaven
for her Majesty, and return again with Oliue-branches in their mouths (like
the Dooue that was sent out of the Arc) to bring tydinges of peace and long
life unto her highness. These wonderful preseruations of her royal person,
which the eyes of this Land every day behold, are evident tokens, that GOD has
a work for her to do; there is a nail to be knocked into Siseraes head,
before she be called from the earth. But when extremity of age shall end her
dales, I am of the mind of many thousands in this Land.


MAR. What is that?


PAS. He shall do me a pleasure that cuts my throat.


MAR. I perceive your abode in England, has made you participate with the
nature of an Englishman, where you set down your rest, you are very
resolute, and it appears by your conceit, you were able to range a fair
battle of Scriptures to charge your enemies, if you were driven to lead your
forces out.


PAS. It greeues me Marforius, to behold, that by reason of this new faction,
crept into the hearts of the most unlearned of all the Ministry, the Preachers
of England begin to strike and agree like the Clocks of England, that never
meet iumpe on a point together. Whereby either the hearers of these
contentions, should say, as the Auditors of the Philosophers did in times past,
that the truth is buried in a pit where it cannot be found; or else be
persuaded at the last, that GOD has mocked them, and left the way of salvation
unto men, as uncertain, as the way of Hanniball in the Alps. It is very
strange, that the Gospel having been planted in this Land by those reverend
By shops that are gone to GOD, men that watered their labors with their own
blood, Christ seeing this pernicious impugning of all that, which by his Saints
and holy Martirs he has left unto us, he should be now compelled to come over
our shinnes with the same rebuke that he gave to Phillip and the rest of his
Disciples, JOHN. 14. 9.
Have I been so long with you, and have you not known me? Has Christ been so
long so freely, so learnedlie, so zealously preached in this Land; and must
we now on a sudden, (as if God had showed us a iuggling cast) grope for him
again in a Puritans budget, stuffed full of railing and reuiling Pamphlets? I am
sure the Apostle teaches me, IAME. ^. 17.
that the wisdom which is of God, is Pure and Peaceable: if it be pure, it
cannot communicate with that taste of the devils tongue, which is a slaunderer
by his occupation. If it be peaceable, it is without faction, and never runs
into the dangerous gainsaying of Core, whose sin could not choose but be very
great, because the punishment thereof was very great. But I feel by the pulse
of a Puritan when I touch him, that his disease is the very Apoplexy of the
Donatistes, Quod volumus sanctum est. What soever they like, is Apostolical,
be it never so bad: and and what they mislike is Diabolical, be it never so
good.

I shall never forget that man of God, Master John Fox, who though he neither
sought Benifice nor Bishopric in the Land, yet when some of the faction came
unto him with a Scottish Minister, and brought him certain Articles of
Religion, (coined in a Mint among themselves) desiring him to set his hand unto
them, the tears rolling down plentifully upon his face, he rejected them all
with a sharp reproof. An other time, when Paget fawned upon him, full of
play, like a wanton whelpe, whose worm was not taken out of his tongue, the
good Father, enccuntered him in London in an open street with this geeting,
God send thee a right mind to thy crooked gate. A good Prayer believe me for
this dogged generation, that is ever barking against the Moon, and as men that
are troubled with sore eyes, they think any light or Religion better and
wholsomer then that they have, because they want learning to discern and judge
of that they have. Yet they think I warrant you, to carry all away with
censoricall looks, with gogling the eye, with lifting up the hand, with
vehement speeches, when the Wine which they broach unto the people, is the very
poison of Dragons, and the gall of Aspes, pressed from a bitter Grape that never
came out of Gods Vintage.

Aquitanicus Prosper found this to be the cause of all contention in the
Schools of Philosophers and Rhethoritians Seipsis ducibus vtebantur. Every one
that had a whirlegig in his brain, would have his own conceit to go current
for as good payment, as any infallible ground of Art; And I perceive the
privy train that gives fire unto all this Gunshot, that has been so lately
discharged at God, and good men in the Church of England, is an ouerweening
that Martin has of himself, when he would have that to be the meaning of the
holy Ghost, that his mastership imagins. It pleases his worship, in his Proem
to his cokish conclusions, to make himself merry with the Bishop of Winchester
for saying, I am not of opinion, that, Vna semper debet esse aconomia
Ecclesiae, yet presently he fetches his seas himself, and leapes very boldly
over head and ears, when he avouches, that Christ, his Apostles and holy
Martirs, are of opinion, that the government of the Church, should always and
in all places be one etc. without setting down any one testimony of Christ,
or Apostle, or holy Martyr in that behalf. Good Bishop, his opinion must be
refused, and Martins opinion must be received; every Goose of mast Martin must
go for a Swan, and whatsoever he speaks, must be Canoniall.


MAR. But for all that, though Martin forgot himself suddenly in that
streine, being somewhat eager of his Game, when he tossed the learned Fathers
opinion like a ball with the Rackit, and made full account to bandie the whole
Bishopric away, yet in other places he quoates Scripture.


PAS. He coateth Scriptures indeed, for he is light of foot, and ouer-runs
them Marforius in every place. Qui in Euangelio quod vultis creditis, vobis
potius quam Euangelio creditis. They that believe what soever they lust in holy
Scriptures, are a generation that give more credit to themselves than to the
Scriptures; therefore it were good (says a godly father) for such people, to
tell the world plainly, that they make no reckoning at all of any
Scriptures. And I assure thee, if that man may be taken for a fugitive and a
Rebel, that runs to the enemy and forsakes his Prince, those simple
creatures may worthily be denounced to be runnagates from God, and from her
Majesty, that forsake this sweet government, under which they have many
years enjoyed the true preaching of the Gospel, to be speak them a new
fashion of Religion at Martins shop. Yet is there nothing so familiar in
their mouths, as Templum Domini, and Verbum Domini, The Temple of the Lord,
and the word of the Lord: they take the word by the nose with a pair of
Pinchers, and lead it whether soever it pleases them. But there will be a day
of account, when GOD, (by whose finger the word was written) shall revenge the
forcible entries they have made into his possessions, and punish every forrow
they have plowed upon his back. They are the very Spawnes of the fish Saepia,
where the stream is clear, and the Scriptures evidently dyscouer them, they
vomit up yncke to trouble the waters, and labor to bring Religion to this
pass, that as Appio the Gramarian reports of himself, he called forth Homer
out of his grave, only to ask him what Countriman he was, and who was his
Father? So now we must either burn all the Books and famous Libraries in the
world, and take Martins assertions for undoubted Maxims, or else fetch up the
Apostles by coniuration, to demand of them whether we be right or no?

As I came through France Marforius, I was desirous to ride from the one end
to the other of Clara Vallis, where I found the last will and Testament of S.
Bernard, standing in this form upon his Tomb. S. Bernards will standing at
this day upon his Tomb.
Tria vobis fratres, obseruanda relinquo, quae vt potui obseruaui. Primo.
Nemini scandalum feci, si quando incidit sedaui vt potui. Secundo. Minus semper
sensui meo quam alterius credidi. Tertio. Laesus de laedente nunquam vindictana
petii. Ecce charitatem, humilitatem, patientiam, vobis relinquo. Brethren
(says he) there be three things that I bequeath unto you to be observed,
which as well as I could I have observed my self. First, I never gave scandale
unto any person, if I did, I pacified the matter to my power. Secondly, I
stood upon mine own conceit less then I did upon other men's. Thirdly, when I
was wronged, I never sought revenge. Behold, Charity, Humility, and Patience
I bequeath unto you. This good Father shall rise up in judgment to condemn
Martin. Had he been fearful of giving any Scandale unto the world, his
uncharitable Pamphlets had never seen the Sun, Had he given less credit
to his own censures and opinions, than to the censures and opinions of better
men, so many good Scriptures had never been wrested, so many flowers in Gods
Garden had never been defaced. Had he been ready to suffer wrong without
wringing of revenge out of Gods hand, he would never have thundered and lightened
at so many rare men, whose learning and virtue is a prick in his eye, and a
strong watch that intercepts every passage unto his Hierarchy. Let him swell
while he burst, with the word in his mouth, so long as he breaks the rule
of Charity, and cares not whom he strike, so the edge of his tuske may have a
lighting place, we may easily see what is within him. Infaelix lolium and
steriles dominantae auenae. Scripture is often in the typ of his tongue, but
Cockle is the grain we reap with him. It is the property of Martin and his
followers, to measure Gods mouth, by their own mouth, as you shall see in the
May Game that I have promised you: for there you shall have a number of strange
Notes upon the Text, some of them gathered from William Dike at S. Albanes, in
his clarklie Paraphrases upon S. Luke and S. John, some have been brought me
from other places, and some I gathered my self, in an assembly of the
brotherhood at Ashford in Kent. I went thither with a Student of Cambridge to a
sollemne exercise, and coming in the habit of Scholars, we pressed somewhat
boldly into their company to dine with them, assuring our selves to find some
new service at their Table. When the Dinner was done, one of them read a
Chapter, every man keeping his place still; The room was full of Artificers,
men and women, that sat round about upon stools and benches to harken to
it. The Chapter was, the 1. Cor. 3. which being read. The reader began first to
utter his conceit upon the Text, in short Notes, then it came to his next
neighbors course, and so in order Glosses went a beging, and Expositions ran
a pace through the Table, till they came to me, whom they desired to open my
mouth among the rest, I utterly refused to undertake the task,
notwithstanding, I was so wonderfully urged, that I could not any way shift
the^ off, and somewhat I spoke among them. When I came to the end of my
cariere, my companion was requested to prick it for company with his friends.
I needed no Minstrill to make me merry, my heart tickled of it self, when it
came to his turn, because I knew him to be a Gentleman well studied in
Philosophy, but he had not yet meddled with Divinity. He chose the thirteenth
verse of the Chapter to discourse upon. Where the Apostle says, Every man's
work shall be tried by fire. But to see how bravely he trotted over all the
Meterors bredde in the highest Region of the air, to see how lovingly he made
the sense of the Apostle, and Ouids fiction of Phaetons firing of the world to
kiss before they parted, and then how souldierlike he made an end of his
manage with a double rest, was sport enough for us to beguile the way, as we
travailed back again from thence to Canterbury.

I have brought many a propper note out of that meeting, for every man's spirit
at the Table, had two bowts with the Apostle before he left him, and one
whilst another spoke, had a breathing time given him to whisper with the holy
Ghost, to know what should be put into his head to utter, against it came about
to his course again.


MAR. Trust me Caualiero, I take this to be the odd piece of work of all
that hitherto you have spent your time in, I travail like a woman with child,
till this be out. But have you not heard Cooper at Paul's chain, and the rest
of the men that are commended to your ears by Martin Senior?


PAS. I have followed them also, and I find them fit to preach upon
Bellows, and Bagpipes, and blown Bladders, they are so full of ventositie,
that I cannot come at their matter for wind and words.


MAR. What say you to Dike of S. Albanes, how like you him?


PAS. He is an Ass, he is an Ass, quoth a learned Gentleman of
Lyncolnes-Inne, that went thither to hear him at the last Assizes, and found
him so bald, so bare, and yet so bold to fly into heaven with a few sick
feathers, that Mouit Cornicula risum. This generation has a little smacke of
one of the plagues of Aegipt, they skippe very lustily into private houses, and
fill our ears full of croking like the Frogs of Aegipt.


MAR. What should be the cause of these new Sect-maisters?


PAS. This mischief has many fountains, which I will reduce for thy sake
into a little compass. One cause I find to be mere ignorance. CANT. 6. 9.
GODS Church is compared to an Army, well ordered and set in good array. In
an Army you have many Commanders, Corporals, Sergiants, Leiutenants,
Captains, and Coronels, yet not all of equal authority, but all under the
direction of one General, for the better leading in and out of the whole
forces: and in Gods Church, as it has grown great, companies coming daily in
unto it out of every tongue, and Tribe, and Country, and Nation, so all
Ecclesiastical and Christian Histories, and Antiquities teach us, that there
has been a diversity of learned and skillful leaders, some higher, some
lower then others in their places, and all under the controlment of one
General, Christ himself, for the greater terror of Haereticks and enemies of
the Church, and for the grace, the beauty, and order of every Cornette and
Ensign in the same, which is a thing glorious in Gods eye, because he is the
GOD of order. But the Martinists (silly wretches) ignorant and unlearned men,
unfit for any eminent charge in the Church themselves, seek to draw every
place in this Camp royal to an equality with themselves. A preposterous
humor noted in the Ecclesiastical Histories, diverse that were set beside the
Cushion when Bishoprics were a dealing, sought to make Bishops equal with
every Minister. In this dangerous attempt, I find the three plagues that GOD
threatens for peoples sins, to be powered out at this day upon the Church of
England. First. The Sword is upon the right eye, and the right hand: what
soever is right in the Church of England, is wounded by the Martinists, a
crooked generation, that loves to swym side-long with the Crabbe. Secondly.
Like people, like Priest begins now to be verified: the Preachers of the
faction, (like Puppets in a motion) begin to snappe and to turn, and to
speak, what, and when, and howsoever the people will, at whose tables they are
fed like Geese in the Capitol, to gaggle at every man that is against them.
Thirdly. Beauty and Bands: the two staves that God uses like a Shepherd to
guide his people, are knapt in sunder. Beauty is burst; for our order is
turned into confusion: Bands are burst also, for our unity is fallen into
dissension. The maine post whereupon the Bucklers, the Armor, the imaginary
Trophes of the faction, is hanged up for the simple to gaze and wonder at, is
only this, The Church of England has committed fornication with the Church of
Rome, and tript out her foot like a strumpet, to ever devise of man's brain
that has passed by her.

Herein I see the Churches case, is Susannaes case, this accusation of
incontinencie is framed against her, by such as have sought to be incontinent
with her themselves. Had Susanna prostituted her body to the Elders, her credit
had never been called into Question by her accusers: had the Church of
England, given up the keys of her Coffers, to bawdes, boggers, and
Banckroupts, the reverend Elders of Martinisme, had never put up any Bills
of endightment against her the last Parliament. But as the story says, that
Daniell was raised by GOD to acquit her, and convince every scatterer of false
reports, I think before I end, Signor Pasquill of England, will prove the
man, that must set a gagge in the mouth of Martin the great, and cut up an
Anatomy of all his knauerie. Me thought Vetus Comaedia began to prick him
at London in the right vain, when she brought forth Divinity with a
scratcht face, holding of her heart as if she were sick, because Martin would
have forced her, but myssing of his purpose, he left the print of his nails
upon her cheeks, and poisoned her with a vomit which he ministered unto her,
to make her cast up her dignities and promotions.

This indeed is the mark that Martin shootes at, whereby you may see that one
cause of Martinisme, is a collop that dropped out of Mydas nose, a desire of
Gold. This is the root of all the mischife, by this many men are fast locked in
the devils snares, many souls are thrust through with many sorrows. This
being the ground master Martin has made his choice of, when he castes his
accounts, and surueighes how little wit and how little might he has to
go thorough with his building, like a furious beast wrapped in the cords where
he cannot stir, after many a vain plunge which he gives to break away,
when he sees his labor lost, transported with a rage, he roares and he somes,
and sets himself down in the Scorners Chair.

Though Babies and fools stagger, and stand amazed to behold their new
pranckes, yet almost the meanest in Gods School knows, it is no strange
thing, that the Church should be vexed with such enemies. In the time of holy
David the King, the Church was assaulted by a kind of people, whose mouths
were as Quiuors, and their tongues as Shafts, that did shoot very secretly at
the best men. Unto this kind of people, holy men of God have given sundry
tytles, and thereby, as it were, clapped many Brandes upon their backs, to make
them known to be rotten Sheep of the devils foulde. They are termed to be
Bulls of Bashan, Foxes, Serpents, Vipers, Woolues, Spyders, Thieves,
Firie-ouens, False-ioyes, and a great many names more of like honor, they have
won in the field, and borne away the prize in every age.

A year would scarce suffer me to discover them all at large. Yet that I may
touch at every Coast which I have descried, they are called Bulls, because
they dosse out their horns against the truth; Foxes, because their
conspiracies, and incontinencies, their unchaste and disordered life, shows
them to be tied together by the tails like Sampsons Foxes, but their heads be
loose, they shake off their obedience to their natural Prince. Serpents,
because they glide upon their bellies, No sin among some of them, from the
navel downward. Vipers, to give light and estimation unto themselves, they
tear open the bowels of their own Damme, and live by the death of her that
bred them. Woolues, In outward appearaunce, they are like to the dog, and
make a show to the world they would keep the Sheep, but all their desire is
to kill the Sheep. Spyders, because they suck out their malice from very
good herbs, and spynne with great study an unprofitable web, good for
nothing but to catch Flies. Thieves, they break in by night into Gods house,
and would spoil though it were with the blood of the Saints. Firic-ouens,
they have a scorching breathe, and when they are drawn, they deliver a batch
for the devils tooth. And to wind up their virtues in a word or two, they are
False-ioyes, their substance is brittle, and their Books be Glass, give the^
but a filop, they run to a powder. What ground they have gotten by their
practices among the witless, I need not tell you, seeing Martin Senior is so
forward to tell you himself, that he has a hundred thousand in the Land,
ready to lift up a new Presbitery with private hands. Though I know that he
lies loudlie, yet it were not amiss Magna componere paruis, and to look to
his fingers, that he be not as ready when he spies his time, to lift up a
new Prince.

After GOD had once brought his Church out of Egypt, by the hand of Moses,
there wanted neither Iebusite, nor enemy a long time to fly in her face, and
to hinder her passage to the Land of promise; And since God led his Church in
this Land out of the bondage of Rome, by the conduct of her excellent Majesty,
there never yet wanted Papist, Atheist, Brownist, Barowist, Martinist,
Anabaptist, nor Family of Love to bid them battle, that their course to Gods
Kingdom might be stopped. But in all their attempts it fares with them, as it
does with the Wrastler within the Lystes, he winnes now and than, not because
he is strong or impossible to be overcome, but because the match that he
deals withal is weak; Martin has made some head, in some parts of her
Majesty's Dominions, not because his worship is invincible, but because he
has closde with the clowted shoe, and got a little credit by men's infirmites.


MAR. By your leave, Caualiero, they say Martin has great vpholders.


PAS. It may be so to, some few that are as ready as himself, to rob the
church: though he stand in they bosoms like the Grass upon the house to escape
the Clergies Sickles, Pasquill will have a hook to pull him down. In the mean
season, PSALM. 37.
his state is as the Grass upon the house, they that are wise and religious
do pass by him, but they never bless him, as men do the croppe upon the
ground. Curses I have read and heard of many that have followed their humors,
that have affected any pillage of the Church. When Simon the mutinous (upon a
particular grudge he bare to Onias the high Priest) 2. MAC. 3.
had informed Seleucus the King of Asia, of the Churches Treasure, the King
sent Heliodorus his Treasurer, to seize it to the Crown: Martins Visor.
Heliodorus came like a Fox, to visit and reform the disorders of C^elosyria
and Phaenice. When the high Priest perceived, that reformation was his errande,
but gold he sought, the grave countenance of Onias was stricken down, and the
people beholding their Father heavy, ran some to the Temple, some to the
Cittie-gates, some stood in their windows looking out, some gadded up and
down the streets, like Bacchus Froes, frantic for the time, and all jointly
lifted up their hands, their eyes, and their voice to heaven, for the defense
of the Church Treasure. Heliodorus was no sooner entered the Treasury to take
the spoil, but there appeared to him a terrible man in Complet Armor of Gold,
mounted on a barbed Horse, which ran fiercely at the Kings Treasurer, and
trampled him under foot. Therewithal appeared also, two men of excellent
strength and beauty, whipping and beating him with so many stripes, that he
was carried out of the place speechless, and without any hope of life at all.

But because Martin will say the Books of the Machabees are Apocrypha, and
Sprignols man told me (as he trimd me the other day) that there is a new Barbar
in London, about to shave the Bible, wherein he finds somewhat that he would have
clean discarded, I will deal with such Scriptures, as prevent them of all
euasions. How dangerous it is to gelde the Church goods, the end of Ananias and
Saphira shall witness for me, ACTS. 5.
for though their death was the punishment of their sin in lying, yet I trust
Martin will grant me, that they were drawn to that sin by the cord of
Sacrilege. And if a greedy desire of withholding that from the Church which
themselves had given, was of force to open such a window to the devil, that
they were presently given over as a pray to the jaws of hell, to lie and
dissemble with the holy Ghost, how many foul sins, and how many grievous
plagues are to be feared in this Land, which already hang at the end of the
line of Martinisme, and would speedily be pulled upon our heads, if we should
but begin to take that from the Church, which we never gave? It may be, Mast
Martin will flappe me in the mouth with his politic reason, that it is good
for the Realm, to maintain their wars by the Church revenues, because
foreign invasions are daily looked for. But to meet with his wisdom at the
half sword, I remember that Aegipt in the time of Joseph the Patriarche, GENE.
47. 22. 26.
felt so extreme a famine, that the fifth part of the Land was sold to
relieve the Land, yet the Patriarche in all this care he had, both of the
Country and the King, to succor the one, and enrich the Coffers of the other,
never attempted any sale of the land of the Priests, nor once diminished the
same. If the holy Patriarche in so great extreamitie, never venturde to
alienate the possessions of Idolatrous Priests, though it were to the relief
of a whole Kingdom, with what face dares any politic in the world, curtoll
the maintenance of the Church of God, and until the houses that by religious
Princes have been consecrated to Gods service?

Let us see the good that ensues of their devices, and let England be warned
by the praesidents of other Nations. Celce the Constable of Gertrund King of
Burgonie, having under the authority of the king his Master, enriched
himself with the goods of the Church, was one day in the Church at his
devotion, and as he heard the Prophet read, that proclaims a woe unto them
that join house to house, and land to land, he gave a shrike suddenly in the
congregation, and cried out, this is spoken to me, this curse is upon me, and
upon my posterite and afterward died miserably. In France, Jews the sixth,
surnamed the great, was once a protector of the privileges of the Church, for
perceiving that the Conte de Clerimont, the Lord de Roussi, the Lord de Meugn,
the Lord de Beuuieu, and others, had rifled the Bishoprics and Churches
within the Realm, he carried Arms in the defense of the Church against them,
and compelled them to restore their robberies to the Church again. The same
King L^wes the great, urged with extreme necessity in his age, began at the
last, to pull the Church himself. But S. Bernard, (one of the Lamps of the
Church of GOD in those days) solicited the King with diverse Letters,
exhorting him fatherly to give over that course: at the last, perceiving that
neither entreatie, nor reproof was able to withdraw him, he began to darte out
the thunderbolts of the Church, and to threaten him, that he should shortly
feel the judgment of God upon him, which suddailie came to pass, for by the
sudden death of the young Prince his eldest Son, the staff of his age was
broken.


MAR. You have made Signor Caualiero, a sad discourse, yet I fear all this
will not save the Bishopric of Elie, from shiuering it self into many pieces.


PAS. What remedy Marforius? Though I be but a stone, I am not so senseless
to presume like a Martinist, to teach her excellent Majesty how to wear a
Crown. Her highness being so richly furnished, with so rare and high graces
from above, and knowing which way to hold the Scepter of the defenders of the
faith, better by her own experience, than by the wisdom that is every day
powered into her bosom by the counsels of others, for Pasquil to come in now
with any advice for her, were to cast (God wot) one little drop of water into
the Sea. Therefore whatsoever I have already spoken in this behalf, or shall
utter hereafter, when Martin or his Master prouokes me to single Combat, I
cowch it here with all duty and humility at her Majesty's sacred feet.

I know the humor of a Martinist to be such, as David described long ago,
PSALM. 12. 4.
Our tongues are our own, who is Lord over us? An ambitious desire to sit in
the doors of every mouth to be seen and talked of, has made the^ surfeit,
and shaken them with many cold fittes of the Fever of Eutydimus. He was a
wrangling Logician, that had rather say any thing, then seem to be conquered
in disputation, which made him as a man mad and impudent, to maintain by
argument, that his dog was his father, and the father of all the world, he grew
so perverse and so slippery in his conclusions, that he proved as quick as an
Eele in every quirke, the harder he was griped, the sooner he slipped out of
every hand. But Pasquill is made of another temper, he acknowledges the least
Magistrate in the Land to be Lord of his tongue, and the Laws of this Country,
to be the curb that God and her Majesty have made for unruly mouths, least
her people should gore one another like brute beasts. Pasquill offers his
back to S. Bernards discipline, far from the contentions of Martin and
Eutydimus, he gives less credit and authority to his own wit, than to the
least of all those that he finds to be men of more learning and judgment then
himself.

Martin cries out (as if he had already poisoned the springs head, where the
whole Realm should fetch water) Let the Court alone, he says he knows what a
wonderful working the hope of gain and of gold has in that place, yet
Pasquill is resolved, that her excellent Majesty, (as hitherto she has done)
will continue still her princely favor to the Privileges of the Church of
England, and give the blessing to it that Moses gave to the Priesthood of the
Tribe of Leui, and pray for the^ First, That the Vrim and Thummim may be among
them, DEVT. 33. 8.
wisdom and knowledge for the peoples good, and that when they offer unto the
Lord, The work of their hands may be accepted. Next, that God in his mercy
would Bless their substance, and smite their enemies quite through the
loins, that they may never rise again.


MAR. Enough Caualiero, the Clock strikes eleven, and the Merchants come in to
the Exchange apace, I think it were best to talk no longer here. And seeing
Martins matters begin to be whust, it were good in my judgment to suppress
your volume of The lives of the Saints.


PAS. Nay Morforius, I must have three courses of the Lance with Th.
Cartwright, before I leave. Has Martin made him his God, and thinks he to
escape my fingers? I will be with him to bring, from the very first rocking of
his cradle, to the last penny that he paid for purchasing. What? shall I never
take the faction without hypocrisy? would a man think this companion were
persecuted by the Church of England, that in the heat of his persecution is so
brave a purchaser? Go toe bother Thomas, tell your neighbors about you, Rogers
of Bifielde, Fen of Couentry and the rest, that I keep a Register of all the
Puritan purchasers in the Realm, and I mean to be Clarke of their Audit for
these seven years, my Paten is already sealed.


MAR. Seeing you will forwards with the works you have taken in hand, give me
some direction for the privy dispersing them when they come out.


PAS. I would have thee principally, to drop some of the^ down at Penrie the
Welch-mans haunt.


MAR. Where is that?


PAS. Tut, I perceive you know nothing. At the sign of the silver forke and
the tosted cheese, where the Painter to bewray both his abuse of the
Scriptures, and his malice against the Church, has drawn him his word with a
Text-pen, Zelus domus tuae comedit me. A speech holy David did use, when the
zeal of the Church did eat up the Court, and a speech now describing the
spirit of Penrie, that would feign turn the Church of the Land to a tosted
cheese, that the zeal of the Court might eat up her.


MAR. You said in the end of your Countercuffe, that you would send us a
Comentarie upon Martin Junior, I forgot till now to ask you what is become of
that?


PAS. I fell that night into a trance, wherein me thought I saw a very golden
wit perform that matter, with so keen a tooth, and such a pleasant grace,
that I gave over to him, and farthered The lives of the Saints, as much as my
leisure would give me leave. And credit me, when I came to the life of the
myncing Dame of Rochester with the golden locks, whose conceit was so quick,
that she caught a child whilst her husband was from her, as her clappe was
so sudden, that no body knows how it came, or how it went, for since she was
delivered, (pass and repasse) the child was never heard of: so my pen was as
swyfte as the post-horse of the Town, I ran a great deal of ground in a little
time about her causes. But who comes yonder Marforius, can you tell me?


MAR. By her gate and her Garland I know her well, it is Vetus Comaedia. She
has been so long in the Country, that she is somewhat altered, this is she that
called in a counsel of Physicians about Martin, and found by the sharpnes of
his humor, when they had opened the vain that feeds his head, that he would
spit out his lunges within one year. And I promise you she prophesied very
truly of him, you may see by the Books that he set foth last, that his
strength is spent.


PAS. I have a tale to tell her in her ear, of the slye practice that was used
in restraining of her. In the mean season Marforius, I take my leave of thee,
charging thee upon all our old acquaintance, and upon my blessing, to set up
this bill at London stone. Let it be done sollemnly with Drom and Trumpet, and
look you advance my colors on the top of the steeple right over against it,
that every one of my Soldiers may keep his quarter.


PASQVILS PROTESTATION UPON LONDON STONE.
I Caualiero Pasquill, the writer of this simple hand, a young man, of the age
of some few hundred years, lately knighted in England, with a beetle and a
bucking tub, to beat a little reason about Martins head, do make this my
Protestation unto the world, that if any man, woman, or child, have any thing
to say against Martin the great, or any of his abettors, of what state or
calling soever they be, noble or ignoble, from the very Court-gates to the
Cobblers stall, if it please them these dark Winter-nights, to stick up their
papers upon London-stone, I will there give my attendance to receive them,
from the day of the date hereof, to the full term and revolution of seven
years next ensuing.

Dated 20. Octobris. Anno Millimo* Quillimo, Trillimo, Per me venturous
Pasquill the Caualiero.


MAR. Brauamente Signor. This device (I persuade me) will have his working,
assure your self I will put it in execution. Is there any thing else you would
have me do?


PAS. Yes, if I thought you were at leisure, you have been very busy I
perceive about Martins death, and though he live yet, it may be you prophecy
of his end. Yester-night late, old Martins Protestation in Octauo was brought
unto me, I see by the volume, he languisheth every day more and more, the
pride of his flesh is so much fallen, that you may tell every bone in his body
now. I pray thee Marforius, after the Soldatescha bravura of displaying my
Banners upon London-stone, send this Pistle to Martin by the next Post.


Caualiero Pasquill of England, to Martin the great, wishes more wit and
learning, and a better mind.
MAy it please your Masterdom to understand, that by the last Butterfly you
sent abroad, you tell me a tale of a dry Summer, and protest that you seek not
to stannch the hot thyrst of any covetous Courtier, with the Bishoprics of
the Land, but to share the^ amongst the Ministry. Fie, fie, do not you know
that a liar must have no shetle memory? If you look either to your former
works, where you urge the spoil of the Church for the maintenance of wars, or
to your son Martin Senior, a man that has slept in his fathers bosom and
knows your mind, in exhorting his younger brother, to resign the care of
Church revenues to the Court, you shall find your self taken with an ouerture.
Pasquill is not so blind, but he sees Martin to be a man, that goes two manner
of ways: and peradventure he followed your last pack of Books to the very
Gates where they were carried in. A chip of ill chance, you have lost your
iugling stick, your conueighance is such, that you shatter, and carry not
half so clean as your friends would have you. You say this quarrel will
never be determined but by blood. All the better say I, Pasquill will be the
first that will lay down his life upon the cause. God has hardened my face
against the faces of men. I have already made up my reckoning of every danger
that may ensue. It is neither loss of living nor life, nor so blind a bob as
BLIND ASS, that will scare a Caualiero from this honorable fight he has
undertaken. The wise and learned (to whose judgments I appeal) shall censure
us both. To meet with your affixes at every great post and place of co^course,
by Gods help, I will hang such a pair of pendents at both your ears, before
it be long, that whosoever beholds you, shall say, Don Diego di Martin, has an
idle brain. You brag you have given M. D. Bancroft such a sliue over the
shoulders, as the credit of his Chaplenship shall not recover. Thongh the
learning and honesty of the man do very much credit him, with all that are
either learned or honest of themselves, yet seeing you come to his Chaplinship,
I cannot forbear you, but tell you plain, that half a look of his
honorable Master, shall give hime more credit in England in one day, then
Martin or all his crew shall be able to rob him of while the world stands,
though they swell at him with envy like a nest of foul Toades, till their
bodies splyt, and pour out their bowels upon the earth. I have many other
things to lay to your charge, which I purpose to wink at, until your Dialogue
be ended, but then Sir, because you tell me you are yet unmarried, I will take
down your breeches for altogether.

Caualiero Pasquill.



