THE Complete Gentleman Fashioning him absolute in the most necessary
Commendable Qualities concerning Mind or Body that may be required in a Noble
Gentleman.

By Henry Peacham. Mr. of Arts Sometime of Trinity Coll: in Cambridge.

-- inutilis olim Ne videar vixisse -- Anno 1622

Imprinted at London for Francis Constable and are to be sold at his shop at
the white lio^ in Paul's churchyard

The Complete Gentleman, whose Titles are contained in these Chapters following.
Chap. 1. OF Nobility in General. Chap. 2. Of the dignity and necessity of
Learning in Princes and Nobility. Chap. 3. The time of Learning, etc. Chap. 4.
The duty of Parents in their Childrens Education. Chap. 5. Of a Gentleman's
carriage in the University. Chap. 6. Of style in speaking, writing, and reading
History. Chap. 7. Of Cosmography. Chap. 8. Of memorable observation in survey
of the Earth. Chap. 9. Of Geometry. Chap. 10. Of Poetry. Chap. 11. Of Music.
Chap. 12. Of Drawing and Painting in Oil. Chap. 13. Of Armory or Blazing
Arms. Chap. 14. Of exercise of the body. Chap. 15. Of reputation and carriage.
Chap. 16. Of Travail.
Ad optimae spei, generosissimaeque indolis adolescentem, D. Gulielmum Howard,
illustriss. ac vere honoratiss. Thomae Comitis Arundeliae, summi totius Angliae
Mareschalli, etc. filium tertiogenitum.
Ingenio, genio, dum vis Generosus haberi,
Ingenua haec discas, ingeniose puer.
Stemma nihil, cultis animum nisi moribus ornes,
Et studeas studijs nobilitare genus.
TO THE TRVLY NOBLE AND MOST HOPEFVLL MR. WILLIAM HOWARD, third and youngest
Son to the Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Earl
Marshall of England, etc.
WHat Motive (Noble Sir) may induce others in their Dedications, I know not:
sure I am none other has incited me, then the regard of your own worth, and
that native ingenuitie and goodness of Spirit, I have ever perceived in you,
since it was my good hap to enjoy your acquaintance, and to spend some hours
with you at your Book in Norwich; where at this present you have your
education under the Reverend, Religious, and my Honorable good Lord, the now
Lord Bishop of Norwich. And indeed, to whom rather of right should appertain
these my Instructions, in regard of their subject, which is the fashioning of
Nobility after the best Presidents, then to your self every way so Nobly
descended. Beside, it is affirmed, that there are certain sparks and secret
seeds of virtue innate in Princes, and the Children of Noble personages; which
(if cherished, and carefully attended in the blossom) will yield the fruit of
Industry and glorious Action, not only above the strength of the vulgar, but
even in the scient, and before the time Nature has appointed. Pindar. in
Ne^sis, Ode 3.
So Achilles, while he was yet very young, undertook to shoot the fiercest
Lions and Boares, and was so nimble on foot, that he was able to take a wild
Beast without either ^oyle or Dog. Io^^es Monach. in vita Alexandri.
Alexander also, when an Egyptian Priest saluted him, being very young, by the
names of Son and Child, replied; But you shall find me a Man before the walls
of Athens. But to omit Heathenish examples, Regum 1. cap. 3. ver. 9.
Solomon we read, when he was but even a child, begged wisdom of God, and
grace to govern well: and Ignatius, Ignatius lib. Epist. cap. 3.
that holy Martyr writes, Solomon was scarce 12. years of age, when he decided
that hard controversy between the two Harlots: so Josias was but eight years
old, when he walked religiously before God. And me thinks (Sir) as in that
Cornelian Stem (whereof Scipio was said to be the top, and In quo (vt plura
genera in vnam arborem) videtur infita multorum illuminata sapientia: Cicero.
) already you grow apace, reflecting as from a fair Glass, that Princely
Moderation and Honesty of heart, of the good Duke your great Grandfather, the
Honorably disposed mind of my Lord, your Noble Father, together with his love
and admiration, of whatsoever is honest or excellent: so that verily you need
no other pattern to the absolute shaping of your self, then the Images of
your forefathers. Arist. in E^^icis.
But as Aristotle says of the Vine, by how much it is laden with Clusters, by
so much it has need of props: so say I of Greatness and Nobility, ever
fruitful, and apt to abundance, it has hourly need of support and help, by
all timely advice and instruction, to guide and uphold it from lying along.

Wherefore, since the Fountain of all Counsel and Instruction, next to the
fear of God, is the knowledge of good learning, whereby our affections are
persuaded, and our ill manners mollified, I here present you with the first
and plainest Directions (though but as so many keys to lead you into far
fairer rooms) and the readiest Method I know for your studies in general, and
to the attaining of the most commendable qualities that are requisite in every
Noble or Gentleman. Nothing doubting, but that after you have herein seen the
worth and excellence of Learning, how much it adds to Nobility; what errors
are hourly committed through Ignorance; how sweet a thing it is to converse
with the wisest of all Ages by History; to have in-sight into the most
pleasing and admirable Sciences of the Mathematiques, Poetry, Picture,
Heraldrie, etc. (whereof I here entreat, together with the most commendable
exercise of the body, with other general directions for Carriage, Travail,
etc.) you will entertain this Discourse, as Ulysses did Minerua at his elbow^
your guide to knowledge; the ground, not only of the sweetest, but the
happiest life. And though I am assured there are numbers, who (notwithstanding
all the Books and Rules in the world) had rather then behold the face of
heaven, bury themselves in earthly sloth, and basest idleness; yet Mr.
William Howard at the least, let us recover you from the tyranny of these
ignorant times, and from the common Education; which is, to wear the best
clothes, eat, sleep, drink much, and to know nothing. I take leave, from my
house at Hogsd^n by London, May 30.

Who is, and shall be ever yours, HENRY PEACHAM.

To my Reader.
I Am not ignorant (Judicious Reader) how many pieces of the most curious
Masters have been uttered to the world of this Subject, as Plutarch, Erasmus,
Viues, Sadolet, Sturmius, Osorius, Sir Thomas Eliot, M. Askham, with sundry
others; so that my small Taper among so many Torches, were as good out, as
seeming to give no light at all. I confess it true. But as rare and curious
stamps upon Coins, for their variety and strangeness, are daily enquired
after, and bought up, though the Silver be all one and common with ours: so
fares it with Books, which (as Meddailes) bear the Pictures and devices of
our various Invention, though the matter be the same, yet for variety sake they
shall be read, yea (and as the same dishes dressed after a new fashion) perhaps
please the tastes of many better. But this regard neither moved me. When I was
beyond the Seas, and in a part of France, adiorning upon Artoise, I was inu^^ed
oftentimes to the house of a Noble personage, who was both a great Sould^er and
an excellent Scholar; and one day above the rest, as we sat in an open and
goodly Gallerie at dinner, a young English Gentleman, who desirous to travail,
had been in Italy, and many other places, fortuned to come to his house; and
(not so well furnished for his return home as was sitting) desired
entertainment into his service. My Lord, who could speak as little English,
as my Countryman French, bad him welcome, and demanded by me of him, what he
could do: For I keep none ( quoth he) but such as are commended for some good
quality or other, and I give them good allowance; some an hundred, some
sixty, some fifty Crowns by the year: and calling some about him, (very
Gentleman^ like, as well in their behavior, as apparel) This ( says he)
rides and breaks my great Horses, this is an excellent Lutenist, this a good
Painter and Surueyer of land, this a passing Linguist and Scholar, who
instructs my Sons, etc. Sir ( quoth this young man) I am a Gentleman borne,
and can only attend you in your Chamber, or wait upon your Lordship abroad.
See (quoth Monsieur de Ligny, for so was his name) how your Gentry of England
are bred: that when they are distressed, or want means in a strange Country,
they are brought up neither to any quality to prefer them, nor have they so
much as the Latin tongue to help themselves withal. I knew it generally to
be true, but for the time, and upon occasion excused it as I could; yet he was
received, and after returned to his friends in good fashion. Hereby I only
give to know, that there is nothing more deplorable, then the breeding in
general of our Gentlemen, none any more miserable then one of them, if he fall
into misery in a strange Country. Which I can impute to no other thing, then
the remissness of Parents, and negligence of Masters in their youth. Wherefore
at my coming over, considering the great forwardness and proficience of
children in other Countries, the backwardness and rawnesse of ours; the
industry of Masters there, the ignorance and idleness of most of ours; the
exceeding care of Parents in their childrens Education, the negligence of ours:
Being taken through change of air with a Quartane Fever, that leisure I had
(...), as I may truly say, by fits I employed upon this Discourse for the
private use of a Noble young Gentleman my friend, not intending it should ever
see light, as you may perceive by the plain and shallow current of the
Discourse, fitted to a young and tender capacity. Howsoever I have done it,
and if thou shall find herein any thing that may content, at the least, not
distaste thee, I shall be glad and encouraged to a more serious Piece: if
neither, but out of a malignant humor, disdain what I have done, I care not;
I have pleased my self: and long since learned, Envy, together with her
Sister Ignorance, to harbor only in the basest and most degenerate breast.

CHAP. I.
Of Nobility in General: that it is a Plant from Heaven; the Root, Branches,
Fruit.
IF we consider arightly the Frame of the whole Universe and Method of the
all-excellent Wisdom in her work; as creating the forms of things
infinitely diverse, so according to Dignity of Essence or Virtue in effect, we
must acknowledge the same to hold a Sovereignty, and transcendent
praedominance, as well of Rule as Place each over either. Among the heavenly
bodies we see the Nobler Orbs, and of greatest influence to be raised aloft,
the less effectual, depressed. Of Elements, the Fire the most pure and
operative to hold the highest place; in compounded bodies, of things as well
sensible as insensible, there runs a vein of Excellence proceeding from the
Form, ennobling (in the same kind) some other above the rest.

The Lion we say is King of Beasts, Sy^^^ in his Fairy Queen.
the Eagle chief of Birds; the Whale and Whirle-poole among Fishes, Jupiters
Oak the Forests King. Among Flowers, we most admire and esteem the Rose:
Among Fruit, the Pom-roy and Queene-apple; among Stones, we value above all
the Diamond; Metals, Gold and Silver: and since we know these to transfer
their inward excellence and virtues to their Species successively, shall we not
acknowledge a Nobility in Man of greater perfection, of Nobler form, and
Prince of these?

Can we be curious in discerning a counterfeit from the true Pearl; to choose
our siens of the best fruit, buy our Flowers at twenty pounds the root or
slip: and not regard or make difference of lineage, nor be careful into what
Stock we match our selves, or of what Parents we choose a Servant?

Surely, to believe that Nature (rather the God of Nature) produces not the
same among our selves, is to question the rarest Worke-mistris of Ignorance or
Partiality, Nobility defined.
and to abase our selves beneath the Beast. Nobility then (taken in the
general sense) is nothing else then a certain eminency, or notice taken of
some one above the rest, for some notable act performed, be it good or ill;
and in that sense are Nobilis and Ignobilis usually among the Latin Poets
taken. More particularly, and in the genuine sense, Nobility is the Honor of
blood in a Race or Lineage, conferred formerly upon some one or more of that
Family, either by the Prince, the Laws, customs of that Land or Place,
whereby either out of knowledge, culture of the mind, or by some glorious
Action performed, they have been useful and beneficial to the Commonwealths
and places where they live.

For since all Virtue consists in Action, and no man is borne for himself,
we add, beneficial and useful to his Country; for hardly they are to be
admitted for Noble, who (though of never so excellent parts) consume their
light, as in a dark La^thorne in contemplation, and a Stoicall retiredness.

And since Honor is the reward of Virtue and glorious Action only, Vice and
Baseness must not expect her favors: as the people of Rome created C. Fla^ius
from a Tribune, Senator and Aedil^ for stealing of a book of Records.
Eushicrates, Euph^rbas, and Phylagrus, were ennobled for Treason: and C^ttier
by Lewis the eleventh, the French King, unworthily advanced from a mender of
Stockings, to be Lord Chancellor of France.

Neither must we Honor or esteem those ennobled, or made Gentle in blood, who
by Mechanicke and base means, have raked up a mass of wealth, or because they
follow some great man, wear the Cloth of a Noble Personage, or have purchased
an ill Coat at a good rate; no more then a Player upon the Stage, for wearing a
Lords cast suit: since Nobility hangs not upon the aicry esteem of vulgar
opinion, but is indeed of it self essential and absolute.

Beside, Nobility being inherent and Natural, can have (as the Diamond) the
luster but only from it self: Honors and Titles externally conferred, Aentas
Siluius lib. 4. de ge^^is Alyhonsi.
are but attendant upon desert, and are but as apparel, and the Drapery to a
beautiful body.

Memorable, Georg. F^s^^llus
as making to our purpose, is that speech of Sig^smund the Empero^r, to a
Doctor of the Civil Law, This happened at the Council of Constance, where the
Doctors and Knights were (about some serious business) divided into two
several assemblies.
who when he had received Knighthood at the Emperors hands, left forthwith the
society of his fellow Doctors, and kept company altogether with the Knights:
which the Emperor well observing, smilingly (before the open assembly) said
unto him; Fool, who preferest Knighthood before Learning and thy degree; I can
make a thousand Knights in one day, but cannot make a Doctor in a thousand
years. Now for as much as the Weal public of every Estate, is preserved
Armi^ and consilio, this fair Tree by two maine branches disspreddeth her
self into the Military and Civil Discipline; under the first I place Valor
and Greatness of Spirit: under the other, Justice, knowledge of the Laws,
which ^ Consilij fons; Magnificence, and Eloquence.

For true Fortitude and greatness of Spirit were ennobled (we read)
Iphicrates, that brave Athenian, who overthrew in a set battle the
Lacedaemonians, stopped the fury of Epaminondas, and became Lieutenant General
to Artaxerxes King of Persia, yet but the son of a poor Cobbler.

Eumenes, one of the best Captains for valor and advice Alexander had, was
the son of an ordinary Carter.

Dioclesian was the son of Scriuener, or Book-binder: Valentinian, of a
Rope-maker; Maximinus, of a Smith; Pertinax, or stubborn, so sir-named,
because he came from his Father, who would have made him a Scholar, he
choosing rather to be a Wood-monger. Capitolinus ^.
Pertinax, of a Wood-monger; Seruius Tullus, son of a Bondwoman, thence his
name Seruius: Tarquinius Priscus, of a poor Merchant, or rather Peddler in
Corinth: Hugh Capet, the first of that name, King of France, the son of a
Butcher in Paris; who when Lewis the sixth, son of Lothary, was poisoned by
Blanch his Wife for Adultery, being a stout fellow, and of a resolute Spirit,
having gathered a company like himself, and taking his advantage of the time,
and distempered humor of the State, carried himself and his business so,
that he got the Crown from the true heir, See the Treasure of Times.
Charles the Uncle of Lewis.

Lamusius, the third King of the Lombards, was the son of a common Strumpet,
found laid and covered with leaves in a ditch by King Agelmond, who by chance
riding that way, and espying a thing stir in the ditch, touched it with the
point of his Lance, Ex Historia Lo^^^bard.
to see what it was: which the Infant with the hand taking fast hold of, the
King amazed, and imagining it as a presage of some good fortune toward the
child, caused it to be taken out of the ditch, and to be brought up, which
after (nursed in the lap of Fortune) by many degrees of Honor, got the Crown
of Lombardy.

Neither are the truly valorous, or any way virtuous, ashamed of their so mean
Parentage, but rather glory in themselves that their merit has advanced them
above so many thousands far better descended. And hence you shall many times
hear them freely discourse of their beginning, and plainly relate their
bringing up, and what their Parents were. I remember when I was in the
Low Countries, and lived with Sir John Ogle at Virecht, the reply of that
valiant Gentleman Colonel Edmondes, The inge^^^ous reply of Colonel Edmonds.
to a Countryman of his newly come out of Scotland, went Current: who
desiring entertainment of him, told him; My Lord his Father, and such Knights
and Gentlemen, his Couzins and Kinsmen, were in good health. Quoth Colonel
Edmondes, Gentlemen (to his friends by) believe not one word he says; my
Father is but a poor Baker of Edenbourgh, and works hard for his living, whom
this knave would make a Lord, to currie favor with me, and make ye believe I
am a great man borne, etc.

So that the valiant Soldier you see, measures out of the whole cloth his
Honor with his sword: and hence in ancient times came Rome, Athens, Carthage,
and of late the Ottoman Empire to their greatness. Honor being then highly
prized, every one aimed at Nobility, and none refused the most desperate
attempts for the good of his Country. Thus the Decij, Cato, Marcellus, with
infinite others, became ennobled, and had their Altars, Statues, Columns, etc.
and were welnigh adored with as great respect, as their Gods themselves.

From no less meanness of birth and beginning, we find many great and famous
Bishops, Ciuilians, Orators, Poets, etc. to have attained to the greatest
dignities, both of Church and Commonwealth, and to have checked with their
Fortunes, even Glory her self. Pope John the two and twentieth, was a poor
Shooe-makers son; Nicholas the fifth was son of a Poulter; Sixt^^ the fifth,
of a Hog-heard: Alphenus but a Tailors Apprentice, who running from his Master,
went to Rome, and there studied the Civil Law, and so profited, that for his
learning and wisdom, he was after created Consul. Vlpian but meanly borne,
yet Tutor to Alexander the Emperor. Cicero was borne and brought up at
Arpinum, a poor and obscure Village: Virgil, the son of a Potter; Horace, of
a Trumpeter; Theophrastus of a Botcher, with infinite others, I might allege
as well of ancient as modern times.

For doing Justice, Plutarch. in Lycurgi and Numa comp.
the Romans of a private man and a stranger, chose Numa for their King: and on
the contrary, (as Plutarch writes, comparing them together) Lycurgus of a
King, for Justice sake, made himself a private man: for, A goodly thing (says
Plutarch) it is by doing justly to obtain a Kingdom, and as glorious to
prefer Justice before a kingdom; for the virtue of the one (Numa) made him so
esteemed and honored, that he was of all thought worthy of it; of the other,
so great, that he scorned it.

In like manner, for their good Laws and doing Justice, were advanced to their
Thrones and goodly Tribunals, Minos, Rhadamantus (though subjects of Poets
fables.) Aratus, Solon, etc. And how fairly (beyond their Laurels) the name of
Just, became Aristides, Traiant, Agesilaus, with many others, I leave to
History to report.

For Magnificence, Machiauell. Hist. Floren^in. lib. 7.
and obliging the places wherein they lived, by great benefits, were ennobled,
Tarquinius Priscus, a stranger, and a banished man: and of later times, Cosmo
di Medici in Florence, upon whose virtues, as upon a fair prospect, or some
princely Palace, give me leave a little, as a traveler to breathe my self,
and show you afar off the fair Tutrets of his more then royal Magnificence,
being but a private man, as I find it recorded in his History by Machiauell.
This Cosmo (says he) was the most esteemed, and most famous Citizen (being no
man of war) that ever had been in the memory of man, either in Florence, or
any other City; because he did not only excel all others (of his time) in
Authoritis and Riches, but also in Liberality and Wisedoms. For among other
qualities which advanced him to be chief of his Country, he was more then
other men liberal and magnificent, which liberality appeared much more after
his death then before. For his son Piero found by his Fathers Records, that
there was not any Citizen of estimation, to whom Cosmo had not lent great
sums of Money: and many times also he did lend to those Gentlemen, whom he
knew to have need. His magnificence appeared by diverse his building: For within
the City of Florence he builded the Abbaits and Temples of S. Marco, S.
Lorenzo, and the Monastery of S. Verdiana, and in the mountains of Fiesole, S.
Girolamo, with the Abbey thereto belonging. Also in Mugello he did not only
repair the Church for the Friars, but took it down, and built it anew.
Besides those magnificent buildings in S. Croce, in S. Agnoli, and S. Miniato,
he made Altars, and sumptu^^^ Chapels. All which Temples and Chapels, besides
the buildings of them, were by him paued, and furnished thoroughly with all
things necessary. With these public buildings, we may number his private
houses, whereof one within the City mee^e for so great a personage, and four
other without, at Carriaggi, at Fiesole, at Casaggiuolo, and at Trebio, all
Palaces fitter for Princes, then private persons. And because his magnificent
houses in Italy, did not in his opinion make him famous enough, he builded in
Jerusalem an Hospital to receive poor and diseased Pilgrims. In which work
he consumed great sums of Money. And albeit these buildings, and every other
his actions were princely, and that in Florence he lived like a Prince; yet so
governed by wisdom, as he never exceeded the bounds of civil modesty. For
in his conversation, in riding, in marrying his Children and Kinsfolks, he was
like unto all other modest and discree^e Citizens: because he well kn^w, that
extraordinary things, which are of all men with admiration beheld, do^ procure
more envy, then those which without ostentation be honestly covered. I omit, as
follows shortly after, his great and excessive charge in entertaining of
learned men of all professions, to instruct the youth of Florence: his bounty
to Argiropolo a Gracian, and Marsilio Fi^ins, (whom he maintained for the
exercise of his own studies in his house, and gave him goodly lands near his
house of Carreggi,) men in that time of singular learning, because Virtue
reares him rather to wonder then Imitation.

To proceed, no less respect and honor is to be attributed to Eloquence,
whereby so many have raised their esteem and fortunes, as able to draw
Civility out of Barbarism, and sway whole kingdoms by leading with Described
by Lucian to be aged, b^ld, and wrinckled, brown colored, clad with a Lio^s
skin, holding in his right hand a club, in his left a bow, with a Q^^^er at his
back, and long small chains of Gold and Amber fastened through little holes to
the tip of his tongue, drawing a multitude of people willing to ^ollow after
him, only shaddowing unto us the power of Eloquence. Plato in Timaeo.
Celticke Hercules, the rude multitude by the ears. Mark Anthony contending
against Augustus for the Roman Empire, assured himself he could never obtain
his purpose while Cicero lived, therefore he procured his death. The like did
Antipater, a Successor to Alexander, by Demosthenes, aspiring to the Monarchy
of Greece. And not long since a poor Mahumetan Priest, by his smooth tongue,
got the Crown of Morocco from the right heir, being of the house of Giuseph
or Joseph. And much hurt it may do, if like a mad man's sword, it be used by a
turbulent and mutinous Orator; otherwise we must hold it a principal means of
correcting ill manners, reforming laws, humbling aspiring minds, and upholding
all virtue. For as Serpents are charmed with words, so the most savage and
cruel natures by Eloquence: which some interpret, Pi^r. Vak^^^^ lib. 6.
to be the meaning of Mercuries golden Rod, with those Serpents wreathed about
it. Much therefore it concerns Princes, not only to countenance honest and
eloquent Orators, but to maintain such near about them, as no mean props (if
occasion serve) to uphold a State, and the only keys to bring in tune a
discordant Commonwealth.

But it shall not be amiss ere I proceed further, Of bastardie. 1. Question.
to remove certain doubts, which as rubs clog the clear passage of our
Discourse: and the first concerning Bastardie, whether Bastards may be said to
be Nobly borne or not: I answer with Justinian, Sordes inter praecipuos
nominarinon merentur. Yet it is the custom with us, and in France, to allow
them for Noble, by giving them sometimes their Fathers proper Coat, with a
bend Sinister, as Reignald Earl of Cornwall, base son to the Conqueror,
bare his Fathers two Leopards passant gardant, or in a field Gules, with a bend
sinister Azure: The like Hamlin, base son to Geoffrey Plantagenet, Earl of
Surrey^ Some their fathers whole Coat, or part of the same in bend dexter; as
John Beauford, a Bastard of Somerset, bare party per pale argent and Azure, a
bend of England, with a labell of France. Sir Roger de Clarendon, base son to
the Black Prince, his fathers three Feathers, on a bend Sable, the field Or. I
willingly produce these examples, to confirm our custom of ennobling them;
and though the Law leans not on their side, yet stand they in the head of the
troop, with the most deserving: yea, and many times (according to Euripides)
prove (...) in Andr^^eda.
better ^hen the legitimate. Who are more famous then Remus and Romulus, who
laid the first stone of Rome; more courageous and truly valiant, then Hercules,
Alexander, our King Arthur of Britain, and William the first? more critically
learned then Christopher Longolius, Iacobus Faber; more modest, and of better
life, then Coelius Calgaguinus, the delight of his Ferrara, with infinite
others? and where decretals and Schoolmen may bear the bell, those two
Grandes, Gratian and Lombard?

A second question arises, Concerning vice and baseness.
whether he that is Noble descended, may by his vice and baseness lose his
Nobility or no. It is answered, that if he that is ignoble and inglorious, may
acquire Nobility by Virtue; the other may very well lose it by his Vice. But
such are the miserable corruptions of our times, that Vices go for prime
Virtues; and to be drunk, swear, wench, follow the fashion, and to do just
nothing, are the attributes and marks now adays of a great part of our Gentry.
Hence the Agrigentines expelled their Phalaris: the Romans extinguished the
memory of the whole race of the Tarquines, with those Monsters of Nature,
Nero, Heliogabalus, etc. the Sicilians Dionysins the later, with others.

Thirdly, Concerning Poverty. 3. Question.
whether Poverty impeacheth or staineth Nobility. I answer, Riches are an
ornament, not the cause of Nobility; and many times we see there lies more
worth under a thrid-bare Cloak, and within, a thatched Cottage, then the
richest Robe, or stateliest Palace. Witness the Noble Curij and Fabritij,
taken from a poor dinner of Turnips and Watercresses in an earthen dish, to
lead the Roman Army, and conquer the most potent Kings of the world.

Fourthly, Of Advocates and Physicians. 4. Question.
concerning Advocates and Physicians, whether we may rank them with the
ennobled or no. Advocates or Counselors being Interpreters of the Law, their
place is commendable, and themselves most necessary Instruments in a
Commonwealth; wherefore, says the Civil Law, Extat Lex Constantini, lib. 10.
Co^ici^.
their calling is honorable, they ought to be freed of mulcts, public charges,
and all impositions; and to be written or sent unto, as unto persons of
especial worth and dignity.

Touching Physicians, though the profession by some has been thought servile,
and in times past was practiced by servants, as Domitian (says Seneca) imper
auit medico seruo, vt venenum sibi daret; and that slouenly Epithet of (...)
be by Aristophanes Aristophanes in Pluto.
bestowed upon Aesculapius: yet it is an Art nothing servile and base, but
noble and free, since we know not only Emperors and Kings, but Saints, yea,
our blessed Savior to have cured the sick; To whom was first given, being a
devout and most religious King, the gift of curing the Kings Evil, whence it
has been derived to our Kings of England his Successors.
as Constantine, Adrian, Edward the Confessor King of England, Mithridates King
of Pontus, (whose Antidote yet bears his name,) Artemisia Queen of Caria,
who first found the virtue of Mugwort, bearing her name in Latin; Gentius King
of Illyricum (now Sclauonia) who immortally lives in the herb Gentiana: as
also Lysimachus in his Lysimachia, Achilles in Achillea, or the Yarrow: Apollo,
Podalirius, Moses, Esaias, Solomon, Ezechias. Honor the Physician, says
Ecclesiasticus: then again, All Physic or medicine is from God, and he shall
receive a reward from the King: The skill of the Physician shall exalt his
head, etc. And as Ptolomy sometime objected against Zoilus concerning Homer, so
may I unto our Lordly (...), or Physicke-haters: Which of them all, trebble
their revenues, can maintain so many as one poor Galen or Hippocrates, who
though dead many hundreds of years since, feed many thousands of families,
even at this present? I here intend no common Chyrurgians, Mountebancks,
unlettered Empericks, and women Doctors (of whom for the most part there is
more danger, then of the worst disease it self) whose practice is infamous,
Mechanique and base.

Fifthly, Of Merchants 5. Question.
concerning Merchants; the exercise of Merchandise has been (I confess)
accounted base, and much derogating from Nobility, except it be exercised and
undertaken by a general Estate, or the Deputies thereof. Aristotle therefore
says, Hippolitus a Collibus, Axiom, de Nobilitate.
That the Thebanes and Lacedaemonians had a Law, that none should be esteemed
and held capable of Honor in their Commonwealth, except they had ten years
before given over Trading and Merchandise: and Valerius Maximus reports, that
among other things the Romans had to disparage Tarquinius Priscus withal, and
make him odious to the people, was that he was a Merchants son. Chrysostom,
super Mathaeum. Francis. Pa^^icium de Repub. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Saint Chrysostom upon that place of Matthew, He cast out the buyers and
sellers out of the Temple: gathers, that Merchants hardly and seldom please
God. And certain it is, that the ancient Romans never preferred any that
exercised Merchandise, to any eminent place or office in their Commonwealthe
perhaps agreeing in one with Aristotle, Arist. politic. 7. cap. 4.
who speaking of Merchants and Mechanickes, says; Vilis est huiusmodi vita,
and virtuti aduersa, The kind of life is base, and contrary to virtue.

But some may object unto me the great Estates of Venice, Genoa, Florence,
Luca, etc. where their Nobility is nothing disparaged by the exercise of
Merchandise. I answer; as their Coins at home they may raise themselves high
or lower at their pleasure: but abroad (like City Majors) in other Countries
they fall under value, and a great deal short of their reckoning.

But if the owner of the Earth, and all that therein is, has so bestowed and
disposed of his blessings, that no one Country affords all things, but must
be beholden not only to her neighbors, but even the most remote Regions, and
Commonwealths cannot stand without Trade and Commerce, buying and selling: I
cannot (by the leave of so reverend judgments) but account the honest Merchant
among the number of Benefactors to his Country, while he exposes as well his
life as goods, to the hazard of infinite dangers, sometime for medicinal
Drugges and preservatives of our lives in extremity of sickness; Of Salomons
Merchants. See Chronicles 2. cap. 1. verse 16.
another, for our food or clothing in t^mes of scarsitie and want, happily for
useful necessaries for our vocations, and callings: or lastly, for those,
Sensus and animi oblectamenta, which the Almighty providence has purposely,
for our solace and recreation, and for no other end else created, Chron. 2. 9.
verse 21.
as Apes, Parrots, Peacockes, Canarie, and all singing Birds; rarest Flowers
for color and smell, precious Stones of all sorts, Pearl, Amber, Coral,
Cristall, all manner of sweet odou^s, fruits, infinitely differing in form
and taste: Colors of all sorts, Of Mechanical Arts and Artists. 6. Question.
for painting, dying, etc. but I proceed.

Sixth and lastly, touching Mechanical Arts and Artists, whosoever labor for
their liuelihood and gain, have no share at all in Nobility or Gentry: As
Painters, Stage-players^ Tamblers, ordinary Fiddlers, Inne-keepers, Fencers,
Iuglers, Dancers, Mountebancks, Bearewards, and the like; (except the custom
of the place determine the contrary) as Her^d^tus and Xenophon Xenophon in
Occ^^^mica.
witness to have been observed, both among the Egyptians, Scythians, and
Corinthians. The reason is, A faint and spent reason.
because their bodies are spent with labor and travail, and men that are at
their work, Assidui and accibui vmbratiles esse cogumur. Yea, if a Noble man
borne in captivity, or constrained through any other necessity, shall
exercise any manual occupation or Art, he by the opinion of some, loses his
Nobility Civil, but not Christian, ^ippolyt. a Coll. in Axiomat. Nobilis atis.
and shall at his return be restored. Where I said the custom of the
Country, I intend thus: by the law of Mahomet the Grand Signior, or great Turk
himself, is bound to exercise some manual Trade or Occupation (for none must
be idle:) as Solomon the Magnificent, that so threatened Vienna, his trade was
making of Arrow-heads; Achmat the last, horn rings for Archers, and the like.

From the root and branches, let us taste the fruit, The fruit and use of
Nobility.
which fall not (like the Apples of Sodoms) with a light touch into nothing,
but are as those of Hesperides, golden, and out of the vulgar reach.

First, Noble or Gentlemen ought to be preferred in Fees, Honors, Offices, and
other dignities of command and government before the common people.

They are to be admitted near, Which was the office of a Ba^on in ancient
times.
and about the person of the Prince, to be of his Counsel in war, and to
bear his Standard.

We ought to give credit to a Noble or Gentleman, before any of the inferior
sort.

He must not be arrested, or pleaded against upon cosenage.

We must attend him, and come to his house, and not ^e to ours.

His punishment ought to be more favorable, and honorable upon his trial, and
that to be by his Peers of the same Noble rank.

He ought in all sittings, meetings, and salutations, to have the upper hand,
and greatest respect.

They must be cited by Bill or Writing, to make their appearance.

In criminal causes, Noblemen may appear by their Arturney, or Procurator.

They ought to take their recreations of hunting, hawking, etc. freely, without
control in all places.

Their imprisonment ought not to be in base manner, or so strict as others.

They may eat the best and daintiest meat that the place affords; to wear
at their pleasure Gold, Jewels, the best apparel, and of what fashion they
please, etc.

Beside, Nobility stirs up emulation in great Spirits, not only of
equalling others, but excelling them; as in Cimon, the elder Scipio Africanus,
Decius the son, Alexander, Edward our Black Prince, and many others.

It many times procures a good marriage, as in Germany, where a fair Coat
and a Crest, is often preferred before a good reuenew.

It is a spur in brave and good Spirits, to bear in mind those things which
their Ancestors have nobly achieved.

It transferreth it self unto Posterity; and as for the most part we see the
children of Noble Personages, to bear the lincaments and resemblance of their
Parents: so in like manner, for the most part they possess their virtues and
Noble dispositions, which even in their tenderest years, will but forth and
discover it self.

Having discoursed of Nobility in General, the division, and use thereof:
give me leave in a word, to in^eigh against the pitiful abuse thereof, which
like a plague, I think, has infected the whole world. Every undeserving and
base Peasant aiming at Nobility: which miserable ambition has so furnished
both Town and Country with Coats of a new list; that were Democritus living,
he might have laughing matter for his life. In Naples, such is the pride of
every base groom, that though he be distalla, he must be termed Signore, and
scarce will ^e open a note from a poor Calz^lai^, to whom he has been a
twelve month indebted for his Boots, if D^n be not in the superscription.

In Venice likewise, every Mechanique is a Magnifice, though his magnificenza
walks the Market but with a Chequin.

In France, every Peasant and common Lacquay, is saluted by name of Mounsieur,
or Sire, the King himself having no other Title. The word Sire immediately
proceeding from Cyrus, the Persian word for a Lord or great Prince, In Lexic^.
as H. Stephanus well notes; or as it pleases some, from (...) authority, or
(...), a Lord or Governor, (...). Go but from Paris to Anjo^, Demost. Oly^th.
^.
and see if you find not all, from the Count to the Esculiers, allied either to
the King, some Prince of the blood, Noble Peer, or other.

In the Low Countries, mine old Host at Arnhem in Gildrerland, changed his
Coat and Crest thrice in a fortnight, because it did not please his young
Wife. For there ye must understand, they are all Gentlemen by a Grant, (they
say) from Charles the fifth, in consideration of a great sum of money they
lent him in time of his wars. Come into what house soever, though miju here
weert, be but a Gardener, Ropemaker, or Aqua^ita seller, you shall be sure to
have his Arms, with the Beauer full faced (allowed to none but Kings and
Princes) in his Glasse-window, with some ingenious Motto or other of his own
device. I remember one T^link there, gave for his Coat a wild Goose in the
water, with this witty one; Volans, natans. Another, three Hogs falling upon a
Dog, who was lugging one of their fellows; with this, Concord makes might
Endracht mackt macht. Another, three great drinking Bowls, Orbiquiers, with
this truly Dutch, and more tolerable then the rest, underneath, Quem non
f^^^re disertum? with infinite others of like Nature: yet the ancient Nobility
(whereof there are many Honorable families; as Hohenlo, Egment, Horn,
Brede^ode, Waggen^^r, Betsolaer, with sundry others) keep themselves entire,
and maintaining their ancient houses and reputation, free from scandal of
dishonor, as well as we laugh at these their boorish devices.

Some again, by altering letters or syllables, or adding to their names, will
insinuate themselves into Noble houses, and not stick many times to bear
their Coats.

But the most common and worst of all, is in all places the ordinary purchasing
of Arms and Honors for Money, very prejudicial to true Nobility and
politic government: for who will hazard his person and estate to infinite
dangers for Honor, when others at home may have it si^e sudore and sanguin^,
only by bleeding in the vena c^n^, called marsupium? The pure Oil cannot
mingle with the water, no more this extracted quintessence and Spirit of
Virtue, with the dregs and subsistence of unworthiness. Hippolytu^ a
Collibus.
Euripides, when his Father told him he was knighted, made him this reply; Good
Father, you have that which every man may have for his Money. And certainly,
Virtue dum petis ar du^, will not stoop to take up her reward in the street.
The French man is so bold, as to term such intruders Gentil-villaines; but I
dare not use that word, lest some that challenge the first part of it, should
return me the latter.

Lastly, to conclude, most pitiful is the pride of many, who when they are
nobly borne, not only stain their stock with vice, and all base behavior,
relying and vaunting of their long pedigrees, and exploits of their Fathers,
(themselves living in sloth and idleness) disparage and disgrace those, who
by their virtuous endeavors are rising. To these and such, I oppose Marius, and
that stout reply of his in Salust: They contemn me^ as an vpstart, I scorn^
their sloth and baseness. Again, What they idly heave and read at home,
my self has either acted or seen; if they scorn me, let them scorn their
Ancestors, who came by their Nobility as I have done: If they (...) mine
Honor, let them also envy my labors, mine innocence, my perils, etc. Now see
how equally they deal: that which they arrogate to themselves from the virtue
of others, that they deny me from mine own, because I have no Images, and my
Nobility is new, etc. Shortly after: I cannot, to prove my descent, bring
forth the Images of my Ancestors, their Triumphs, their Consulships; but if
need be, I can show Lances, my Ensign, Caparisons, and other such warlike
implements, beside a number of scarres upon my breast: these are my Images, my
Nobility, not left me by descent and inheritance, etc. And as resolute of late
years, was the answer of Verdugo a Spaniard, Commander in Friseland, to
certain of the Spanish Nobility, who murmured at a great feast, the son of
a Hangman should take place above them, (for so he was, and his name
imports:) Gentlemen (quoth he) question not my birth, or who my Father was, I
am the son of mine own desert and Fortune; if any man dares as much as I
have done, let him come and take the Tables and with all my heart.

CHAP. 2.
Of the dignity and necessity of Learning in Princes and Nobility.
SInce Learning then is an essential part of Nobility, as unto which we are
beholden, for whatsoever depends on the culture of the mind; it follows,
that who is nobly borne, and a Scholar withal, deserves double Honor, Si ad
naturam eximiam eruditi^ accesseris (...) singular quoddam existere sole^,
Cit. ^te A^chia Po^ta.
being both (...) and (...): for hereby as an Ensign of the fairest colors,
he is a far discerned, and wins to himself both love and admiration,
heigthing with skill his Image to the life, making it precious, and lasting to
posterity.

It was the reply of that learned King of Arragon to a Courtier of his, who
affirmed, that Learning was not requisite in Princes and Nobility, Questa e
voce d'un but, non d'un Huom^. For if a Prince be the Image of God, governing
and adorning all things, and the end of all government the observation of
Laws, that thereby might appear the goodness of God in protecting the good,
and punishing the bad, that the people might be fashioned in their lives and
manners, and come near in the light of knowledge unto him, who must protect
and defend them, by establishing Religion, ordaining Laws; by so much (as the
Sun from his Orb of Empire) ought he to out-runne the rest in a virtuous
race, and outshine them in knowledge, by how much he is mounted nearer to
heaven, and so in view of all, that his least eclipse is taken to a minute.

What (tell me) can be more glorious or worthy the Scepter, Nic^phorus, lib.
17. cap. 40.
then to know God aright; the Mysteries of our salvation in Jesus Christ, to
converse with God in soul, Regum. 1. cap. 4. 33.
and oftener then the mere natural man, to advance him in his Creatures; to
be able with Solomon to dispute, from the loftiest Cedar on Libanus, to the
lowest Hysop upon the wall; to be the Co^duit Pipe and instrument, whereby (as
in a goodly Garden) the sweet streams of heavens, blessings are conveyed in
piety, peace and plenty, to the nourishing of thousands, and the flourishing
of the most ingenious Arts and Sciences.

Wherefore, says the Kingly Prophet, Psalm. ^.
Erudimini Reges, etc. as if he should say; How can you Kings and Judges of the
earth understand the grounds of your Religion, the foundation and beginnings of
your Laws, the ends of your duties and callings; much less determine of such
controversies, as daily arise within your Realms and circuits, define in
matters of Faith public Justice, your private and Oeconomicke affairs, if
from your cradles ye have been nursed (as Solomon's fool) with ignorance,
brutish Ignorance, Prou. 15. Plato, lib. 5. de Re^ub.
mother of all misery, that infecteth your best actions with folly, ranketh
you next to the beast, makes your talk and discourse loathsome and heavy to
the hearer, as a burden upon the way, Ecclesiast. 15.
your selves to be abused by your vassals, as blind men by their Boys, and to
be led up and down at the will and pleasure of them, whose eyes and ears you
borrow.

Hence the royal Solomon, above all riches of God, desired wisdom and
understanding, that he might govern, and go before so mighty a people. And
the ancient Romans, Vo^isc^i^ Taci^.
when their voices were demanded at the Election of their Emperor, cried with
one consent, Quis melior quam^ literatus? Hence the Persians would elect none
for their King, except he were a great Philosopher: and great Alexander
acknowledged his, (...) from his Master Aristotle.

Rome saw her best days under her most learned Kings and Emperors; Plutarch
in Corialano.
as Num^, Augustus, Titus, Antoninus, Constantino, Theodosius, and some others.
Plutarch gives the reason, Learning (says he) reformeth the life and
ma^^ers, and affoordeth the wholesomest advice for the government of a
Commonwealth. I am not ignorant, but that (as all goodness else) she has
met with her mortal enemies, the Champions of Ignorance, Eutropiu^^
as Licinius gave for his Mot or Poesy: Posts Reipublica literae; and Lewis
the eleventh, King of France, would ever charge his son to learn no more
Latin then this, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare: but these are the
fancies of a few, and those of ignorant and corrupted judgments.

Since learning then joined with the fear of God, is so faithful a guide,
that without it Princes undergo but lamely (as Chrysostom says) their
greatest affairs; they are blind in discretion, ignorant in knowledge, rude
and barbarous in manners and living: the necessity of it in Princes and
Nobility, may easily be gathered, who howsoever they slatter themselves, with
the favorable Sunshine of their great Estates and Fortunes, are indeed of no
other account and reckoning with men of wisdom and understanding, then
Glowormes that only shine in the dark of Ignorance, and are admired of Idiots
and the vulgar for the outside; Plutarch. Alcia^. in Emblem.
Statues or huge Colossos full of Lead and rubbish within, or the Egyptian
Ass, that thought himself worshipful for bearing golden Isis upon his back.

Sigismund King of the Romans, Jacob. Wimphe (...).
and son to Charles the fourth Emperor, greatly complained at the Council
of Constance, of his Princes and Nobility, whereof there was no one that could
answer an Ambassador, who made a speech in Latin; whereat Lodouicke, the
Elector Palatine took such a deep disdain in himself, that with tears
ashamed, he much lamented his want of learning; and presently hereupon
returning home, began (albeit he was very old) to learn his Latin tongue.
Eberhard also, the first Duke of Wirtenberge, at an assembly of many Princes in
Italy (who discoursed excellently in Latin, while he stood still and could say
nothing) in a rage struck his Tutor or Governor there present, for not applying
him to his Book when he was young. I gladly allege these examples, as by a
public Council to condemn Opinion of Heresy, believing to teach, and
teaching to believe, the vnnecessitie of Learning in Nobility; an error as
prejudicial to our Land, as sometime was that rotten Chest to Aethiopia, whose
corrupted air vented after many hundreds of years, brought a plague not only
upon that Country, but over the whole world.

I cease to urge further, the necessity and dignity of Learning, Appian.
having (as Octaui^s said to Decius, a Captain of Anthonies,) to the
understanding spoken sufficient; but to the ignorant too much, had I said less.

CHAP. 3.
Of the time of Learning, Duty of Masters, and what the fittest Method to be
observed.
AS the Spring is the only fitting seed time for grain, setting and planting
in Garden and Orchard: So youth, the April of man's life, is the most natural
and convenient season to scatter the Seeds of knowledge upon the ground of the
mind, Plato p^litic. 6.
(...), says Plato, It behooves in youth out of hand, to desire and bend our
minds to Learning: neither as good Husbands, while time serves, let slip one
hour; for, says he, elsewhere, Our ground is hard, In Ph^^dre.
and our horses be wild; withal, if we mean to reap a plentiful harvest,
take we the counsel of Adrastus in Euripides, To look that the seed be good.
For, in the foundation of youth, well ordered and taught, consists (says Plato
again) the flourishing of the Commonwealth. This tender Age is like water
spilt upon a table, which with a finger we may draw and direct which way we
list; or like the young Hop, which, if wanting a pole, takes hold of the next
hedge: so that now is the time (as Wax) to work it plyant to any form.

How many excellent wits have we in this Land, that smell of the Caske, by
neglecting their young time when they should have learned! Horace his Quo
semel, once fit for the best Wine, since too bad for the best Vinegar, who
grown to years of discretion, and solid understanding, deeply bewail their
misspent, or misguided youth, with too late wishing (as I have heard many) that
they had lost a joint, halte their estates, so that they had been held to
their Books when they were young. The most (and without cause) lay the fault
upon bad Masters; to say truth, it is a general plague and complaint of the
whole Land; for, for'one discreet and able Teacher, you shall find twenty
ignorant and careless, who (among so many fertile and delicate wits as England
affoordeth) whereas they make one Scholar, they mar ten.

The first and maine Error of Masters, The first and maine errors of Masters.
is want of discretion, when in such variety of Natures as different as their
countenances, the Master never labors to try the strength of every capacity
by it self, In E^bi^.
which (as that Lesbian stone Aristotle speaks of) must have the rule fitted
to it, not that brought to the rule: for as the self same medicines have
several operations, according to the complexions they work upon; so one and
the selfsame Method agrees not with all alike: some are quick of capacity,
and most apprehensiue, others of as dull; some of a strong memory, others of
as weak; yet may that dullard, or bad memory, (if he be observed) prove as
good, yea (in Aristotle's opinion) better then of the other. But we see on the
contrary, out of the Masters carterly judgment, like Horses in a teame, they
are set to draw al alike, when some one or two prime and able wits in the
School, (...) (which he culs out to admiration if strangers come, as a
Costardmonger his fairest Pippins) like fleet hounds go away with the game,
when the rest need helping over a style a mile behind: hence being either quite
discouraged in themselves, or taken away by their friends (who for the most
part measure their learning by the form they fit it) they take leave of their
books while they live.

A second ouer-sight nigh a kin to the former, is indiscretion in correction,
in using all Natures alike, and that with immoderation, or rather plain
cruelty: true it is, Quo quisque est solertior and ingeniosior, Cicero pro
Rose. Comaedo. Quintilian, lib. inst^ti^. 1. cap. 3.
hoc docet iracundior. But these fellows believe with Chrysippus in
Quintilian, that there is no other Method of making a Scholar, then by beating
him, for that he understands not through their own fault; wherein they show
themselves egregious Tyrants, for, Correction without instruction is plain
tyrannis.

The Noble, generous, and best Natures, are won by commendation, enkindled by
Glory, Virgil.
which is fax mentis honestae, to whom conquest and shame are a thousand
tortures. Of which disposition for the most part, are most of our young
Nobility and Gentlemen, well borne, inheriting with their being, they virtue
of their Ancestors, which even in this tender greenness of year will bewary it
self, as well in the School as abroad at their play and childish recreations.

Quintilian above all others, desires this disposition to make his Orator of,
and whom chiding greeueth, to be tenderly dealt withal; yet have I known
these good and towardly Natures, as roughly handled by our Plagosi Orbilij, as
by Dionysius himself taking revenge upon the buttockes of poor Boys for the
loss of his kingdom, and railed upon by the unmannerly names of block-heads
(often by far worse then block-heads) asses, dolts, etc. which deeply pierces
the free and generous Spirit; for, Senec. de moribus.
Ingenuitas (says Soneca) non recipit contemptum; Ingenuitie or the generous
mind, cannot brook contempt; and which is more vngentlemanly, nay barbarous
and inhumane, pulled by the ears, lashed over the face, beaten about the head
with the great end of the rod, smitten upon the lips for every slight offense
with the Ferula, (not offered to their Fathers Scullions at home) by these
Aiaces flagelliferi; fitter far to keep Bears, (for they thrive and are the
fatter for beating, says Pliny) then to have the charge of Noble and Gentlemen.

In Germany the School is, and as the name imports, it ought to be merely
Ludus literarius, a very pastime of learning, where it is a rare thing to see a
Rod stirring: yet I heartily wish that our Children of England were but half
so ready in writing and speaking Latin, which Boys of ten and twelve years
old will do so roundly, and with so neat a phrase and style, that many of our
Masters would hardly mend them; having only for their punishment shame, and
for their reward praise. Cauendum a plagis (says Quintilian) sed potius laud
aut aliorum praelatione vrgendus est puer: that is, we must hold our hands,
and rather bring a Child forward with praise, and preferring of others. Beside,
there ought to be a reciprocal and a mutual affection betwixt the Master and
Scholar, which judicious Erasmus and Lodouicus Viues, Erasm. in Epist. ad
(Christianum Iubece^sem. Pl^^. epist. l^b. 4.
(sometimes teacher to Queen Marie, and a Spaniard, who came into England with
Queen Katherine her mother) do principally require, Patris in illum in duendo
affectum, by putting on a Fathers affection toward him: and as Pliny says,
Amore, non artifice docente, qui optimus Magister est: To win his heart and
affection by love, which is the best Master, the Scholar again the contrary.
So may a discrect Master, with as much or more case, both to himself and his
Scholar, teach him to play at Tennise, or shoot at rouers in the field, and
profit him more in one month, beside his encouragement, then in half a year
with his strict and severe usage. But in stead hereof, many of our Masters for
the most part so behave themselves, that their very name is hateful to the
Scholar, who trembles at their coming in, rejoices at their absence, and
looks his Master (returned) in the face, as his deadly enemy.

Some affect, and seuerer Schools enfore, a precise and tedious strictness,
in long keeping the Scholars by the walls; as from before six in the morning,
till twelve, or past: so likewise in the afternoon; which beside the dulling
of the wit, and deiecting the Spirit, (for, Clcero pr^ Plan^.
Otij non minus quam negotij ratio extare debes) breeds in him afterward, a
kind of hate and carelessness, of study when he comes to be sui i^ris, at
his own liberty, (as experience proves by many, who are sent from senere
Schools unto the Universities:) withal, ouer-loading his memory, and taking
off the edge of his invention, with over heavy taskes in Themes, Verses, etc.
To be continually poring on the Book (says Socra^^s) hurts and weakeneth
the memory very much; Conue^se with the learned better the reading.
affirming learning to be sooner attained unto by the ear in discourse and
hearing, then by the eye in continual reading. I verily believe the same, if
we had Instructors and Masters at hand, as ready as Books. For we see by
experience, those who have been blind from their birth, to retain more by
hearing, then others by their eyes, let them read never so much: wherefore
Fabius would have, Istud ediscendi taedium protinus a pueris deuorari, this
same toil or tediousness of learning by heart, to be presently swallowed or
passed over by Children.

Wherefore I cannot but commend the custom of their Schools in the Low
Countries, where for the avoiding of this tedious sitting still, and irksome
poring on the book all day long; after the Scholar has received his Lecture,
he leaves the School for an hour, and walks abroad with one or two of his
fellows, either into the field, or up among the trees upon the rampire; as in
Andwerpe, Breda, Vtrechs, etc. where they confer and recreate themselves till
time calls them in to repeat, where perhaps they stay an hour; so abroad
again, and thus at their pleasure the whole day. For true it is, that Lipsius
says, Iipsius in epist.
ingenia vegeta, must have suos re^essus, strong and lively wits must have
their retrait or intermission of exercise, and as Rams (engines of war in
old time) recoyle back to return with the greater force; which the mind does
unto study after pause and rest, not unlike a field, which by lying fallow,
becomes far more fat and fruitful.

A fourth error, is the contrary (for, Stulti in contraria currunt,) too much
carelessness and remissness in not holding them in at all, or not giving them
in the School that due attendance they ought: so that every day is play-day
with them, bestowing the Summer in seeking Birds-nests, or haunting Orchards;
the Winter, in keeping at home for cold, or abroad all day with the Bow, or the
Birding-peece: they making as little conscience in taking, as their Master in
giving their learning, who forgetreth belike, Plutarch. ad Trasanum.
that Rumor lays each fault of the Scholar upon his necks. Plato remembers
one Protagoras, a Bird of the same feather, who when he had lived threescore
years, made his boast, he had spent forty of those threescore, in corrupting
and undoing youth. We have, I fear, a race of those Protager-asses even yet
among our common Schoolmasters in England.

But the diseases whereunto some of them are very subject, are Humor and Folly
(that I may say nothing of the gross Ignorance and in-sufficiency of many)
whereby they become ridiculous and contemptible both in the School and abroad.
Hence it comes to pass, that in many places, especially in Italy, of all
professions that of Peda^eria is held in basest repute; the Schoolmasters
almost in every Comedy being brought upon the Stage, to parallel the Zani, or
Pantaloun. He made us good sport in that excellent Comedy of Pedantius, acted
in our Trinity College in Cambridge: and if I be not deceived, in Priscianus
vapulans, and many of our English Plays.

I knew one, who in Winter would ordinarily in a cold morning, whip his Boys
over for no other purpose then to get himself a heat: another beat them for
swearing, and all the while swears himself with horrible oaths, he would
forgive any fault saving that.

I had I remember my self (near S. Albanes in Hertforshir^ where I was borne)
a Master, who by no entreatie would teach any Scholar he had, farther then his
Father had learned before him; as if he had only learned but to read English,
the son, though he went with him seven years, should go no further; his
reason was, they would then prove saucy rogues, and control their Fathers;
yet these are they that oftentimes have our hopeful Gentry under their charge
and tuition, to bring them up in science and civility.

Beside, most of them want that good and direct Method, whereby in shortest
time and with least labor, the Scholar may attain unto perfection; some
teaching privately, use a Grammar of their own making; some again, none at
a^^: the most Lillies, but praeposterously posted over, that the boy is in his
Quantity of Syllables, before he knows the Quality of any one part of
speech; for he profits no more then he mastereth by his understanding. Nor is
it my meaning that I would all Masters to be tied to one Method, no more then
all the Shires of England to come up to London by one high way; there be many
equally alike good. And since Method, as one says, Phil^^^^^, 1 Physic^rum.
is but (...), let every Master if he can, See M. Doctor Web his Appeal to
Truth.
by pulling up styles and hedges, make a more near and private way to
himself, and in Gods name say with the diuinest of Poets: -- deserta per avia
dulcis, Georgio. 3.

Raptat amer, invat ire iugi^, qua nulla priorum
CAST ALIAM molli diuertitur orbita clive.
With Sweet Love rapt, I now by Desart's pass,
And over hills, where never track of yore:
Descending easily, yet remembered was,
That led the way to CASTALIE before.


But in stead of many good they have infinite bad, and go stumbling from the
right as if they went blindfold for a wager: hence comes the shifting of the
Scholar from Master to Master, who poor boy (like a hound among a Company of
ignorant hunters hollowing every decre they see) misseth the right, begets
himself new labor, and at last by one of skill, but well rated or beaten for
his pains. They cannot commonly err, if they shall imitate the builder, first
to provide the Scholar with matter, then cast to lay a good foundation, I
mean a sollide understanding of the Grammar, every rule made familiar and
fast, by short and pleasant examples, let him bring his matter into form, and
by little and little raise the frame of a strong and well knit style both in
writing and speaking; and what does harm in all other building, is here most
profitable and needful, that is, Translation. For I know nothing that
benefiteth a Scholar more then that; first by translating out of Latin into
English, which laid by for some time, let him translate out of English into
Latin again varying as often as he can both his words and Phrases. Dosetus who
has gathered all the Phrases of Tullie into one volume, Manutius, Erasmus his
Cop^a, and Drax his Callipo^a with others, will help him much at the first;
let him after by his own reading enrich his understanding, and learn haurire
ex ipsis fontibus, next exercise himself in Theames and Declamation if he be
able. The old method of teaching Grammar, says Suetonius, was disputation in
the fore-noone, and declamation in the afternoon; but this I leave to the
discretion of the judicious Master.

I pass over the insufficiency of many of them (with ill example of life
(which Plato wishes above all things to be respected and looked into) whereof
as of Physic and ill Physicians, there is many times more danger then of the
disease it self; many of them being no Grammarians at all, much less (as
Quintilian requires in a Schoolmaster) Rhetoricians to expound with proper
and purest English, an Eloquent Latin or Greek Author, unfold his invention:
and handling of the subject, show the form and fluencie of the style, the apt
disposition of figures, the propriety of words, the weight of grave and deep
Sentences which are nerui orationis, the sinews of discourse. Musicians,
without which Grammar is imperfect in that part of Prosodia, that deals only
with Meter and Rhithmicall proportions. Astronomers to understand Authors who
have written of the heavens and their motions, the several Constellations,
setting and rising of the Planets, with the sundry names of circles and points;
as Manilius and Pontanus. And lastly, Natural and Moral Philosophers, without
which they cannot as they ought, understand Tullies Offices, or Aesops Fables,
as familiar as they seem.

Far be it that I may be thought to question the worth and dignity of the
painful and discreet teacher, who, if Learning be needful, must be as
necessary: besides, I am not ignorant, that even the Augustus and Octa^^us
Caesar. D^^ny^ius. 1. Armelius. (...) etc.
greatest Princes, with the most reverend Bishops, and most profound Scholars
of the world, have not been ashamed of tea^ching the Grammar: or that I
inueigh in the least, against the learned and worthy Masters of our public
Schools, many of whom may be ranked with the most sufficient Scholars of
Europe. I inueigh against the pitiful abuse of our Nation by such, who by
their ignorance and negligence deceive the Church and Commonwealth of
serviceable members, Parents of their Money, poor Children of their time,
esteem in the world, and perhaps means of living all their lives after.

CHAP. 4.
Of the duty of Parents in their Childrens Education.
NEither must all the blame lie upon the Schoolmaster, fond and foolish
Parents have often as deep a share in this precious spoil; as he whose cockering
and apish indulgence (to the corrupting of the minds of their Children,
disabling their wits, effeminating their bodies) how bitterly does Plato tax
and abhor? For avoiding of which, In Gorgia.
the Law of Lycurgus commanded children to be brought up, and to learn in the
Country, far from the delicacie of the City; and the Brutij in Italy, a
people bordering upon Lucania, following the custom of the Spartans, sent
their children after the age of fourteen away, to be brought up in fields and
Forests among Shepherds and Heardsmen; without any to look unto them, or to
wait upon them: without apparel, or bed to lie on, having nothing else then
Milk or Water for their drink, and their meat such as they could kill or
catch. And hear the advice of Horace: Angustam, Horac. lib. 3.
amice, pauperiem pati
Robustus acri militia puer Ode 2.

Condiscat, and Parthos feroces
Vexet eques metuendus hasta,
Vitamque sub die, and trepidis agas
In rebus, etc.
Friend, let thy child hard poverty endure,
And grown to strength, to war himself inure;
Learn bravely mounted, stern Caualeir,
To charge the fiercest Parthian with his spear:
Let him in fields without doors lead his life,
And exercise him where are dangers rife, etc.


If many of our young youths and Gallants were dieted in this manner, Mercers
might save some Paper, and City Laundresses go make Candles with their
Saffron and Eggs; Dicing houses and ten shillings Ordinaries, let their large
Rooms to Fencers and Puppit-players, and many a painted piece betake her self
to a Wheel, or the next Hospital. But now adays, Parents either give their
Children no education at all, (thinking their birth or estate will bear out
that:) or if any, it leaves so slender an impression in them, that like their
names cut upon a Tree, it is ouer-growne with the old bark by the next Summer.
Beside, such is the most base and ridiculous parsimony of many of our
Gentlemen, (if I may so term them) that if they can procure some poor
Batcheler of Art from the University to teach their Children, say Grace, and
serve the Cure of an Impropriation, who wanting means and friends, will be
content upon the promise of ten pounds a year at his first coming, to be
pleased with five; the rest to be set off in hope of the next aduouson, (which
perhaps was sold before the young man was borne:) Or if it chance to fall in
his time, his Lady or Master tells him; Indeed Sir we are beholden unto you
for your pains, such a living is lately fallen, but I had before made a
promise of it to my Butler or Bailiffe, for his true and extraordinary
service: when the truth is, he has bestowed it upon him himself, for
fourscore or an hundred pieces, which indeed his man two days before had
fast hold of, but could not keep.

It is not commonly seen, that the most Gentlemen will give better wages, and
deal more bountifully with a fellow who can but teach a Dog, or reclaim an
Hawke, then upon an honest, learned, and well qualified man to bring up their
children? It may be, hence it is that Dogs are able to make Syllogismes in
the fields, when their young Masters can conclude nothing at home, if occasion
of argument or discourse be offered at the Table. Phili^ de Commines, lib. 1.
Look upon our Nebilitie and Gentry now adays (says a wise and grave
Historian) and you shall see them bred, as if they were made for mother end
then pastime and idleness; they observe moderation neither in talk nor
apparel: good men, and such as are learned, are not admitted amongst them; the
affairs of their estates they impose upon others, Seneca ad Lucil. epist. 31.
etc. But to view one of them rightly, (says Sen^ca) look upon him naked,
lay-by his estate, his Honors, et aliae fortunae mendacia, his other false
disguisements of Fortune, and behold his mind, what and how great he is,
whether of himself, or by some borrowed greatness.

But touching Parents, a great blame and imputation (how justly I know not) is
commonly laid upon the Mother; not only for her over tenderness, but in
winking at their lewd courses; yea, more in seconding, and giving them
encouragement to do wrong, Matres omnes silys in p^ccato and Auxilio in
paterna inu^ia e^se solemn. Terms. ^ Heaut^^^.
though it wore, as Terence says, against their own Fathers.

I dare not say it was long of the Mother, that the son told his Father, he was
a better man, and better descended then he.

Nor will I affirm that it is her pleasure, the Chambermaid should be more
curious in fitting his tuffe, then his Master in refining his manners.

Nor that it is she that fills the Cisterne of his lavish expense, at the
University, or Innes of Court; that after four or five yearesspent, he
returns home as wise as Ammonius his Ass, that went with his Master every day
to the School, to hear Origin and Porphyrie read Philosophy.

But albeit, many Parents have been diligent enough this way, and good Masters
have likewise done their parts, and neither want of will or ability of wit in
their Children to become Scholars, yet (whether out of an ouer-weening
conceit of their towardness, a pride to have their sons out-goe their
neighbors, or to make them men before their times) they take them from
School, as Birds out of the nest ere they be slidge, and send them so young to
the University, that scarce one among twenty proves ought. For as tender
plants, too soon or often removed, begin to decay and die at the root; so
these young things of twelve, thirteen, or fourteen, that have no more care
then to expect the next Carrier, and where to sup on Fridaies and Fasting
nights: no further thought of study, then to trim up their studies with
Pictures, and place the fairest Books in openest view, which poor Lads, they
scarce every opened or understand not; that when they come to Logic, and the
crabbed grounds of Arts, there is such a disproportion between Aristotle's
Categories, and their childish capacities, that what together with the
sweetness of liberty, variety of company, and so many kinds of recreation
in Town and Fields abroad, (being like young Lapwings apt to be snatched up by
every Buzzard, they prove with Homers Willow (...), and as good go gather
Cockles with Calignlas people on the Sand, as yet to attempt the difficulties
of so rough and terrible a passage.

Others again, if they perceive any wildness or vnstaiednesse in their
Children, are presently in despair, and out of all hope of them for ever
proving Scholars, or fit for any thing else; neither consider the Nature of
youth, (...)
nor the effect of time, the Physician of all. But to mend the matter, send
them either to the Court to serve as Pages, or into France and Italy to see
fashions, and mend their manners, where they become ten times worse. These of
all other, if they be well tempered, prove the best metal; yea Tulli^ as of
necessity desires some abundant rankness, or superfluity of wit in that
yong-man, he would choose to make his Orator of. Vellem (says he) in
adolescente aliquod redundans and quod amputem: 1. De Oratore.
I wish in a young man something to spare, and which I might cut off. This taken
away ere degenerate with luxurious abundance, like that same rank vine the
Prophet Jeremy speaks of, Ier. 2. 21.
you shall find the heart divino sain editum: and sound timber within to make
Mercury of, qui non fit ex quouis lign^, as the proverb says.

And some of a different humor will determine, even from the A, B, C. what
calling their children shall take upon them, and force them even in despite of
Nature, like Lycurgus his whelps, to run contrary courses, and to undertake
professions altogether contrary to their dispositions: This, says Erasmus,
is, peccare in genium. And certainly it is a principal point of discretion in
parents to be thoroughly acquainted with, and observe the disposition and
inclination of their children, and indeed for every man to search into the
addiction of his Genius and not to wrest nature as Musicians say, out of her
key, or (as Tullie says) to contend with her, making the Spaniel to carry the
Asses load; which was well observed by the Lacedamonians and ancient Romans,
in laying forth instruments of sundry occupations, before their children at a
certain age, they to choose what liked them best, and ever after to take upon
them that profession whereunto they belonged.

How many are put by worldly and covetous fathers inuita Minerua, to the study
of the laws (which study I confess to be Honorable and most deserving,) who
notwithstanding spend most of their time even in Divinity at the Innes of he
Court? and how many Divines have we, (I appeal to the Courts,) heirs of their
fathers, friends, (or purchased) advousons, whom the buckram bag would not
better beseem then the Bible? being never out of law with their parishioners,
following their Suites and Causes from Court to Court, Term to Term, no
Attorney more.

In like manner I have known many Commanders and worthy Gentlemen, as well of
our own Nation as strangers, who following the wars, in the field and in
their Arms, have confessed unto me, Nature never ordained them for that
profession, had they not fallen accidentally upon it, either through death of
friends, harshnesse of Masters and Tutors, thereby driven from the University
(as an Honorable friend of mine in the Low Countries has many times complained
unto me:) or the most common mischief, miserableness of greedy parents, the
overthrow and undoing of many excellent and prime wits; who to save charges,
marry a daughter, or prefer a younger brother, turn them out into the wide
world with a little money in their purses (or perhaps none at all) to seek
their Fortunes, where Necessity deiects and besots their spirits, not knowing
what calling or course to take; enforces them desperate to beg, borrow, or
to worse and baser shifts (which in their own natures they detest as hell) to
go on foot, lodge in Alehouses, and fort themselves with the basest
company, till what with want and wandering so long in the Circle, at last they
are (upon the center of some hill) constrained to say (as Hercules between his
two pillars) Non vlterius.

Much less have parents now a days that care to take the pains to instruct,
and read to their children themselves, which the greatest Princes and noblest
personages have not been ashamed to do. Octauius Augusins Caesar, read the
works of Cicero and Virgil, to his children and nephews himself. Anna the
daughter of Alexi^ the Grecian Emperor, She is cited by B Jewel in his
Apology.
was by her father so instructed, that while she was yet a young and goodly
Lady, she wrote of her self a very learned and authentic History of the
Church. Aemilius Paulus the son (who so bravely ended his days at Cannas
when his Colleague forsook him) seeing the favor of the State not inclineable
toward him, left the City, and only spent his time in the Country, in
teaching his own children their Latin and Greek; notwithstanding he daily
maintained Grammarians, Logicians, Rhetoricians, Painters, Caruers, Riders of
great horses, and the skilfullest Huntsmen he could get, to instruct and teach
them in their several professions and qualities.

The three daughters of euer-famous Sr. In Farragine Episle larum.
Thomas Moore, were by their father so diligently held to their book
(notwithstanding he was so daily employed being L. Chauncelor of England) that
Erasmus says, he found them so ready and perfect in Liuie, that the worst
Scholar of them, was able to expound him quite through without any stop,
except some extraordinary and difficult place. Quod me (says he) aut mei
similem esset remoraturum. I shall not need to remember, within memory those
four sisters, the learned daughters of Sr. Anthony Cook, and rare
Poetresses, so skillful in Latin and Greek, beside many other their excellent
qualities, eternized already by the golden pen of the Prince of Poets of our
time; with many other incomparable Ladies and Gentlewoman in our land, George
Buchanan.
some yet living, from before whose fair faces Time I trust will draw the
curtain.

Lastly, the fault may be in the Scholar himself, whom Nature has not so
much befriended with the gift of understanding, as to make him capable of
knowledge; or else more unjust, disposed him to sloth, or some other worse
inbred vice. Marcus Cicero, albeit he was the son of so wise, so eloquent,
and so sober a father (whose very counsel and company had been enough, to
have put learning and regard of well living into the most barbarous Get:) and
had Crattippus, Cicero Offic. lib. 1.
so excellent a Philosopher to his Reader at Athens: yet by the testimony of
Pliny, Marcus Cicero, cum pater abstin^^tis simus suiras, bi^os congros haurire
^olitus est (test^ Plani^.) Temulen^^^ impegis Scyphum M. Agrippa. Valor. Max.
he proved so notorious a drunkard, that he would ordinarily drink off two
gallons of Wine at a time, and became so debauched every way, that few of that
age exceeded him. Sundry the like examples might be produced in our times, but
one of this nature is too many. Others on the contrary, are (...), and have no
other helps save God, and their own industry; we never read of any Master
Virgil ever had. S. Augustine likewise says of himself: Se didicisse
Aristotelis Categorias nemine traden^^: That he learned Aristotle's Categories,
or Praedicaments, no man instructing him; which, how hard they be at the first
to wade thorough without a guide, let the best wit of them all try. And Beda
our Countryman, (for his profound learning in all Sciences) sir-named
Venerabilis, attained to the same within the limits of his Cell in
Northumberland, though it is said he was once at Rome. Joseph Scaliger taught
privately many years in a Noblemans house, and never made abode in any
University, that ever I heard of, till called in his latter years to Leyden
in Holland: and many admirable Scholars and famous men, our Age can produce,
who never came at any University, except to view the Colleges, or visit their
friends, that are inferior to few Doctors of the Chair, either for Learning
or Judgment, if I may so say, Pace matris Academiae.

CHAP. 5.
Of a Gentleman's carriage in the University.
Having hitherto spoken of the dignity of learning in general, the duty and
quality of the Master, of a ready Method for understanding the Grammar, of
the Parent, of the child: I turn the head of my Discourse, with my Scholars
horse, (whom me thinks I see stand ready brideled) for the University. And
now, M. William Howard, give me leave (having passed that, I imagine, Limbus
puerorum, and those perilous pikes of the Grammar rules) as a well willer unto
you and your studies, to bear you company part of the way, and to direct
henceforth my Discourse wholly to your self.

Since the University whereinto you are embodied, is not untruly called the
Light and Eye of the Land, in regard from hence, as from the Center of the
Sun, the glorious beams of Knowledge disperse themselves over al, without
which a Chaos of blindness would repo^^esse us again: think now that you are
in public view, and nucibus reliclis, with your gown you have put on the man,
that from hence the reputation of your whole life takes her first growth and
beginning. For as no glory crowns with more abundant praise, then that which
is here won by diligence and wit: so there is no infamy abaseth the value and
esteem of a Gentleman all his life after, more then that procured by Sloth
and Error in the Universities; yea, though in those years whose innocence
have ever pleaded their pardon; whereat I have not a little meruailed,
considering the freedom and privilege of greater places.

But as in a delicate Garden kept by a cunning hand, and ouerlooked with a
curious eye, the least disorder or rankness^ of any one flower, puts a
beautiful bed or well contrived knot out of square, when rudeness and
deformity is borne withal, in rough and undressed places: so, believe it, in
this Paradise of the Muses, the least neglect and impression of Errors foot, is
so much the more apparent and censured, by how much the sacred Arts have
greater interest in the culture of the mind, and correction of manners.

Wherefore, your first care, even with pulling off your Boots, let be the
choice of your acquaintance and company. For as infection in Cities in a time
of sickness, is taken by concourse, and negligent running abroad, when those
that keep within, and are wary of themselves, escape with more safety: So it
falls out here in the University; for this Eye has also her diseases as well
as any other part of the body, (I will not say with the Physicians more) with
those, whose private houses and studies being not able to contain them, are so
cheap of themselves, and so pliable to good fellowship abroad; that in mind
and manners (the tokens plainly appearing) they are past recovery ere any
friend could hear they were sick.

Entertain therefore the acquaintance of men of the soundest reputation for
Religion, Life, and Learning, whose conference and company may be unto you
(...), (...)
a living and a moving Library. Euripides in Andromache.
For conference and converse was the first Mother of all Arts and Science, as
being the greatest discouerer of our ignorance, and increaser of knowledge,
teaching, and making us wise by the judgments and examples of many: and you
must learn herein of Plato, (...), that is, To be a lover of knowledge,
desirous to hear much; and lastly, to inquire and ask often.

For the companions of your recreation, consort your self with Gentlemen of
your own rank and quality; for that friendship is best contenting and
lasting. To be over free and familiar with inferiors, argues a baseness of
Spirit, and begets contempt: for as one shall here at the first priz:
himself, so let him look at the same rate for ever after to be valued of
others.

Carry your self eeuen and fairly, Tanquam in statera, with that moderation
in your speech and action, (that you seemed with Vl^sses, to have Minerua
always at your elbow:) which should they be weighed by Envy her self, the
might pass them for current; that you be thought rather leaving the
University, then lately come thither. But hereto the regard of your worth, the
dignity of the place, and abundance of so many fair presidents, will be
sufficient Motives to stir you up.

Husband your time to the best, for, Seneca de breuitate vitae, Cap. 1. and 3.
The greedy desire of gaining Time, is a covetousness only honest. And if you
follow the advice of Erasmus, and the practice of Plinius secundus, Diem in
operas partire, to divide the day into several taskes of study, you shall
find a great case and furtherance hereby; remembering ever to refer your most
serious and important studies unto the morning, Which sin sheth alone (say the
learned) three parts of the work. Julius Caesar having spent the whole day in
the field about his military affairs, divided the night also, for three
several uses; one part for his sleep; a second, for the Commonwealth and
public business; the third, for his book and studies. So careful and
thriftie were they then of this precious treasure, which we as prodigal lavish
out, either vainly or viciously, by whole months and years, until we be
called toan account by our great Creditor, who will not abate us the vain
expense of a minute.

But for as much as the knowledge of God, is the true end of all knowledge,
wherein as in the boundless and immense Ocean, all our studies and endeavors
ought to embosome th^selues: remember to lay the foundation of your studies,
The fear and service of God, by often frequenting Prayer and Sermons, reading
the Scriptures, and other Tractates of Piety and Devotion: which howsoever
profane and irreligious Spirits condemn, and contemn, as Politian a Canon of
Florence, D. Pezel 2. Post^ll.
being upon occasion asked if he ever read the Bible over; Melan^^l on.
Yes once (quoth he) I read it quite thorough, but never bestowed my time worse
in all my life. Preferring ^ o^ eouer wickedly and profanely the Odes of
Pindar, before the Psalms of David.
Believe you with Chrysostom, that the ignorance of the Scriptures, is the
beginning and fountain of all evil: That the word of God is (as our Savior
calls it) the key of knowledge; which given by inspiration of God, is
profitable to teach, to convince, to correct and to instruct in righteousness.
And rather let the pious and good King Alphonsi^s, Chrysoft. in epist. ad
Celoss. cap. 3.
be a president unto you, and to all Nobility, who read over the Bible nor
once, nor twice, but fourteen times, Luke 11. 52. 2. Tim. 2. 3. In vita
Alphonsi.
with the Postils of Lyra and Burgensis, containing thrice or four times as
much in quantity, and would cause it to be carried ordinarily with his Scepter
before him, whereon was engraven, Pro lege and Grege.

And that worthy Emp. and great Champion of Christendom, Charlemaigne, who
spent his days of rest (after so mnay glorious victories obtained of the
Saracens in Spain, the Hunnes, Saxens, Goths and Vandals in Lumbardie and
Italy, with many other barbarous Nations, whereof milions fell under his Sword)
in reading the holy Scriptures, and the works of the Fathers, especially S.
Augustine, Eginardue in vita Caroli magni.
and his books De Ciuitate Dei, in which he took much delight: Whom besides,
it is recorded, to have been so studious, that even in bed, he would have his
Pen and Ink, with Parchment at his Pillow ready, that nothing in his
meditation, nothing might ouer-slip his memory: and if any thing came into his
mind, the light being taken away, a place upon the wall next him, was thinly
ouer-laid with^Waxe, whereon with a brazen pin he would write in the dark. And
we read, as often as a new King was created in Israel, he had with the ornaments
of his kingly dignity, the Book of the Law delivered unto him; signifying his
Regal authority, was lame and defective, except swaied by Piety and Wisdom,
contained in that book. Whereunto alludeth that device of Paradine, an Image
upon a Globe, with a sword in one hand, and a book in the other, with, Ex
vtroque Caesar; and to the same purpose, another of our own in my Minerua
Britann^, which is a Serpent wreathed about a Sword, placed upright upon a
Bible, with the word, Initium Sapiemia.

CHAP. 6.
Of style in speaking and writing, and of History.
SInce speech is the Character of a man, Cicero 1. de Orato^e.
and the Interpreter of his mind, and writing, the Image of that; that so often
as we speak or write, so often we undergo censure and judgment of our selves:
labor first by all means to get the habit of a good style in speaking and
writing, as well English as Latin. I call with Tully, that a good and eloquent
style of speaking. Ci^. in prolog. R^^tor.
Where there is a judicious fitting of choice words, apt and grave Sentences
unto matter well disposed, the same being uttered with a comely moderation of
the voice, countenance and gesture. Not that same ampullous and Scenical pomp,
with empty furniture of phrase, wherewith the Stage, and our petty Poeticke
Pamphlets sound so big, which like a net in the water, though it feels
weighty, yet it yields nothing; since our speech ought to resemble, wherein
neither the curiousness of the Picture, or fair proportion of Letters, but
the weight is to be regarded: and as Plu^arch says, when our thirst is
quenched with the drink, then we look upon the ennameling and workmanship of
the boule; so first your hearer coueteth to have his desire satisfied with
matter, ere he looks upon the form or vinetrie of words, which many times
fall in of themselves to matter well contrived, according to Horace: Rembe^^
dispositam vel verba invita feq^untur. An Art Po^t.

To matter well disposed, words of themselves do fall.


Let your style therefore be furnished with solid matter, and compact of the
best, choice, and most familiar words; taking heed of speaking, or writing such
words, as men shall rather admire then understand. Herein were Tiberiu^, M.
Ante^ie, and M^cenas, much blamed and iested at by Augustus, himself using
ever a plain and most familiar style: and as it is said of him, Verbum
insolens tanquam scopulum effugiens. Then sententious, yea better furnished
with sentences then words, and (as Tully wills) without affectation: Hen^icus
Oilauus Angliae Rex in cysstola quadam ad Erasmum Ro^crod. in Farragi^^ Epist.
for as a King said, Dum tersiari studemus eloquendi formula, subterfugit nos
clanculum, apertus ille and familiaris dicendi modus. Flowing at one and the
self same height, neither taken in and knit up too short, that like rich
hangings of Arras or Tapistry, thereby lose their grace and beauty, as
Themistocles was wont to say: not suffered to spread so far like soft Music
in an open field, whose delicious sweetness vanishes, and is lost in the
air, not being contained within the walls of a room. In speaking, rather lay
down your words one by one, then power them forth together; this has made
many men naturally slow of speech, to seem wisely judicious, and be iudiciously
wise; for, beside the grace it gives to the Speaker, it much helps the
memory of the hearer, and is a good remedy against impediment of speech. Sir
Nicholas Bacon, sometime Lord Chancellor of England, and father to my Lord of
S. Alb^n^s, a most eloquent man, and of as sound learning and wisdom, as
England bred in many Ages: with the old Lord William Burgbley, Lord Treasurer
of England, have above others herein been admired, and commended in their
public speeches in the Parliament house and Star Chamber: for nothing
draws our attention more then good matter, eloquently digested, and uttered
with a graceful, clear, and distinct pronuntiation.

But to be sure your style may pass for current, as of the richest alloy,
imitate the best Authors as well in Oratorie as History; beside the exercise
of your own Invention, with much conference with those who can speak well: nor
be so foolish precise as a number are, who make it Religion to speak
otherwise then this or that Author. As Longolius was laughed at by the learned,
for his so apish and superstitious imitation of Tully, in so much as he would
have thought a whole Volume quite matred, if the word Possibile had passed his
pen; because it is not to be found in all Tullie: or every Sentence had not
sunk with, esse posse videatur, like a peale ending with a chime, or an Amen
upon the Organes in Paul's. For as the young Virgin to make her fairest
Garlands, gathers not altogether one kind of Flower; and the cunning Painter,
to make a delicate beauty, is forced to mix his Complexion, and compound it
of many Colors; the Arras-worker, to please the eyes of Princes, to be
acquainted with many Histories: so are you to gather this Honey of Eloquence
Exodus 4.
, A gift of heaven, out of many fields; making it your own by diligence in
collection, care in expression, and skill in digestion. But let me lead you
forth into these all-flowrie and verdant fields, where so much sweet variety
will amaze, and make you doubtful where to gather first.

First, Cicero.
Tullie (in whose bosom the Treasure of Eloquence seems to have been locked
up, and with him to have perished) offers himself as Pater Romani eloquij:
whose words and style (that you may not be held an Heretic of all the world)
you must prefer above all other, as well for the sweetness, gravity,
richness, and inimitable texture thereof; as that his works are throughout
seasoned with all kind of Learning, and relish of a singular and Christianlike
honesty. There wanted not in him (says Tacitus) knowledge of Geometry, Tacitus
in Oratore.
of Music, of no manner of Art that was commendable and honest; he knew the
subtlety of Logic, each part of Moral Philosophy, and so forth. How well he
was seen in the Civil Laws, his Books De legibus, and his Actions in
Verrem, will show you: which are the rather worthy your reading, because you
shall there see the grounds of many of our Laws here in England. For the
integrity of his mind, though his Offices had lien suppressed, let this one
saying (among many thousands) persuade you to a charitable opinion of the same:
Ad Atticum, lib. 13.
Arecta conscientia transuerfum vnguem, non oportet quenquam in omni sua vita
discedere. Whereto I might add that tale of Gyges ring in his Offices, which
book let it not seem contemptible unto you, because it lies tossed and torn
in every School; but be precious, as it was sometime unto the old Lord
Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England, before named; who, to his dying day,
would always carry it about him, either in his bosom or pocket, being
sufficient (as one said of Aristotle's Rhetoriques) to make both a Scholar and
an honest man. Imitate Tullie for his phrase and style, especially in his
Epistles Ad Atticum; his Books De Oratore: among his Orations, those Pro M.
Marcello, Pro Archia Poeta, T. Annie Milone, Sext. Rose. Amerino, Pub.
Quinctio: the first two against Catiline; and the third Action against Verres.
These in my opinion are fullest of life, but you may use your discretion, you
cannot make your choice amiss.

After Cicero, I must need^ bring you Caesar, Caesar.
whom Tullie himself confesses of all Orators, to have spoken the most
eloquent and purest Latin; Cicero, lib. 4. de claris Oratoribus.
Et have been loquendi laude^^ (says he) (...) uteris, and ijs quidem
reconditis and exquisith, summoque studio and diligentia est consequ^tus. And,
Quintilian. lib. 10. a^ filium.
In qu^o (says Quintilian) ^anta vis, id acumen, ea concitatio, vt illum codem
animo dixisse appareat quo bellauit. In whom there was so great vehe mency,
that fine iudement, that courage and motion, that it seems he wrote with the
same Spirit he fought. To read him as you ought, you must bring with you an
able judgment, beside your Dictionarie; by reason of the diversity of
Countries. Tracts, Places, Rivers, People, names of ancient Cities and Towns,
to be sought out, in modern, strange, and unknown names: of materials in
buildings (as in his bridge over the Rhine framed, Ex tignis, trab^bus,
fibulis, sublicis, longurijs, etc.) which, except you were seen in
Architecture, you would hardly understand: then strange names and forms of
warlike Engines and weapons then in use: sundry forms of fortification,
water-workes, and the like; which notwithstanding, since have been made known
and familiar unto us, by the painful labors of those all-searching wits,
Lipsius, Ramus, Gionanni de Ramellis, and others: and may be read in English
excellently translated and illustrated, by that learned and truly honorable
Gentleman, Sr Clement Edmondes Knight, Clearke of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Counsel, my worthy friend: though many excellent works of Caesar's, as
his Epistles, his Astronomy, etc. through the iniquity of envious Time, are
utterly lost and perished.

Now offers himself Cornelius Tacitus, Corn. Tacitus.
the Prince of Historians; of who^ I may not untruly say (as Scaliger of
Virgil) and euius ore nil tomere excidit, as well for his diligence as
gravity; so copious in pleasing brevity, each Sentence carrying with it a
kind of loftic State and Majesty, such as should (me think) proceed from the
mouth of Greatness and Command; in sense retired, deep, and not fordable to
the ordinary Reader. He does in part speak most pure and excellent English,
by the industry of that most learned and judicious Gentleman; whose long labor
and infinite charge in a far greater work, have won him the love of the
most learned, and drawn not only the eye of Greece, but all Europe to his
admiration.

But there being, as Lipsius says, Suus cuique lingua genius: Let me advise
you of this by the way, that no Translation whatsoever will affect you, like
the Authors own and proper language: for to read him as he spoke, it
confirms our judgments with an assured boldness and confidence of his intent
and meaning; removing that scruple of Jealousy we have commonly of ignorant
and unfaithful pens, which deal many times herein, sublesta fide. Besides, it
is an injury to the Author, who hereby loses somewhat of his value: like a
piece of rich stuff in a Brokers shop, only for that it is there at a second
hand, though never worn, or newly translated but yesterday.

The next Titus Liuius, T. Liuius.
whom like a milky Fountain, you shall every where find flowing, with such an
elegant sweetness, such banquetlike variety, that you would imagine other
Authors did but bring your mouth out of taste. In his first Decade, you have
the coming of Aeneas into Italy, the building of Rome, the first choice of the
Senate, the religious rites of Numa, the brave combat of the Horatij and
Curiatij, the tyranny of Tarquine, the rape of Lucrece by Sextus his son, and
first Consuls created.

In the third, the History of the second Punicke war, Hannibals passage
against the league over the River Iberus, who after eight months siedge; took
Saguntum; his passage over the Pyrenean hills, his forraging of France: after
ascending the Alps, with his overthrow of the Romans, with his Horse troop^s
at the River T^cin^, where Scipi^ (after A^ricanus) rescued his father, being
very grievously wounded. His second overthrow of the Romans, at the River
Trebia, his hard passage in cruel weather and tempests, over the Apponin^, etc.

In the fourth, is recorded the occasion of the war, against Philip King of
Macedonia (concerning the coming in of two young men of Acarnania, into the
Temple of Ceres at Athens:) Against whom Sulpitius was sent, by whom the
Macedonians were overthrown in a^ horse battle: how L. Furius subdued the
rebellio^s Gauls, overthrew Hamilcar with thirty five thousand Carthaginians;
with many other expeditions of Philip of Macedon, and Sulpitius.

In the fifth, the going out of the fire in the Temple of Vesta; how Titus
S^mpronius Gracch^^, Subdued the Celtiberian Spaniards, and built a Town in
Spain called Gracchuris, after his name; Posthumous Albinius triumphed over
the Portugals: the number of the Citizens of Rome reckoned by the poll, with
the Law of Volu^^^ius Saxa, by which no woman was to inherit, etc.

Be then acquainted with Quintus Curtius, Q. Curtius.
who passing eloquently with a faithful pen and sound judgment, writes the
Life and Acts of Alexander; in whom you shall see the pattern of a brave
Prince, for Wisdom, Courage, Magnanimity, Bounty, Courtesy, Agilitie of
body, and whatsoever else were to be wished in Majesty; till surfeiting (in
the best of his age) on his excessive Fortunes, and even burdensome to
himself: by his ouer-greatnesse, T^liad 6.
he became (...), an unprofitable burden of the earth, and from the darling of
heaven, to be the disdain of all the world.

After him (whom indeed I should have preferred before, Salustius.
as being honored with the Title of Historia^ (...)) follows Salust,
commended most for brevity; as also for the richness of his speech and
phrase; but wherein his brevity consists, the most are ignorant. Our
Grammarians imagine, because his Discourses (as they say) are only of the
matter and persons barely and nakedly described, without circumstance and
preparation, counsels and deliberations had before, effects and events after:
which is quite contrary; as may be seen by the Conspiracy of Catilin^, which
he might in a manner have set down in three words. But how amply, and with
what ado does he describe it? what circumstances more open, more abundant,
then where he says; The Roman Soldiers being amazed with an unwonted uproar,
betook them to their Weapons: some hid themselves, others advised their
Companions to stand st^^tly to it: they were afraid in every place, the
multitude of Enemies was so great. The heaven was obscured with night, and
thick Clouds, the peril wis doubtful: and lastly, no man knew whether it
were safest for him to fly, or to stay by it? And let them now see their
error, who affirm his Discourse to be unfurnished of Counsels, Deliberations,
Consultations, etc. Is not the reason set down, why Iugurth assaulted Cirtha
at the arrival of the Ambassadors? the intent and preparation of the war by
Metellus the Consul, laid open in an ample manner, wherein consists the
richness of his Discourse? His brevity indeed, worthy your observation and
imitation, consists in shutting up whole and weighty Sentences in three
words, fetching nothing afar, or putting in more then needs; but in quick
and stirring Asyndeta's after his manner: Scaliger Pe^t. lib. 4 cap. 24.
as the most learned have out of him observed.

And since it is Tullies advice, as was his own use (as himself testifies)
Non in Philosophia solum, sed etiam in dicendi exercitatione, cum Gracis Latin^
con^^ngere: By this time acquaint your self with that golden Cyri p^dia of
Xenophon, Xenophon.
whom here you shall see a courageous and brave Commander, marshalling an
Army: there a most grave and eloquent Philosopher, in the person of Cyrus,
shaping out unto us with Ink of Nectar, a perfect and absolute Prince, (to the
example of all Princes and Nobility) for his studies, his diet, his exercise,
his carriage, and every way manner of living: insomuch, as the Noble Scipio
Africanus, as well in his wars abroad, as in peace at home, above all other
held Xenophon in highest regard, ever saying, he could never commend him
sufficiently, or read him over often enough.

Hitherto have I given you a taste (at your own choice) as well for universal
History, as your imitation in writing and speaking. That I account universal,
which entreats of the beginning, increase, government, and alterations of
Monarchies, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths: and to further you herein, you may
read Iustine, Diodorus Siculus, Zonaras, Oresius; of more later times,
Sabellicus, Carrion, with some others.

For special History, Special History.
that reports the affairs and government of particular Estates; you have the
most ancient Herodotus, the Noble and eloquent Thucydides, Arrianus,
Halicarnassaeus, Polybius, Suetonius, and others.

All History divides it self into four branches: History, how divided.
the first spreads it self into, and over all place, as Geographie: the
second, grows and gathers strength with tract of time, as Chronology: the
third, is laden with descents, as Genealogy: the fourth and last (like the
golden Bow Proserpins gave Aeneas) is that, A^^^id. 6.
truly called by Cicero, Lux veritatis, which tells us of things as they were
done, and of all other most properly is called History. For all History in
times past, Cic. 2. de Oratore.
says Tullie, was none other then Annalium Confectio, the making of Annals,
that is, recording of what was done from year to year. But while I wander in
foreign History, let me warn you, nefis peregrinus domi: that you be not a
stranger in the History of your own Country, The old Lord Treasurer
Burleigh, if any one came to the I. I. of the Counsel, for a License to
travail, he would first examine him of England; if he found him ignorant,
would bid him slay at home and know his own country first.
which is a common fault impoted to our English Travelers in foreign
Countries; who curious in the observation and search of the most memorable
things and monuments of other places, can say (as a great Peer of France told
me) nothing of their own our Country of England, being no whit inferior to
any other in the world, for matter of Antiquity, and rarities of every kind
worthy remarke and admiration. Herein I must worthily and only prefer unto
you the glory of our Nation, M. Camden, as well for his judgment and
diligence, as the purity and sweet fluence of his Latin style; and with him
the rising Star of good letters and Antiquity, M. John Seldom of the Inner
Temple. His Britannia with the Life of Queen Elizabeth.
As for Giraldus, Geoffrey, Higden, Ranulph of Chester, Walsingham a Monk of
S. Athanes with the rest, they did cum saculo caecutire, and took upon credit
many a time more then they could well answer; that I may omit Polydore Virgil
and Italian, His lanus Angl.
who did our Nation that deplorable injury, Titles of Honor.
in the time of K. Henry the eight, for that his own History might pass for
current, he burned and embezeled the best and most ancient Records and
Monuments of our Abbeies, Together with his Ma^e clausum, though not yet
printed. The injury Polydore Virgil, did to our Nation.
Priories, and Cathedral Churches, under color (having a large Commission
under the Great Seal) of making search for all such monuments, manuse.
records, Legier books, etc. as might make for his purpose; yet for all this he
has the ill luck to write nothing well, save the life of Henry the seventh,
wherein he had reason to take a little more pains then ordinary, the book
being dedicated to Henry the eight his son.

No subject affects us with more delight then History, imprinting a thousand
forms upon our imaginations, from the circumstances of Place, Person, Time,
Matter, manner, and the like. And, what can be more profitable (says an
ancient Historian) then sitting on the Stage of humane life, Diodorus Sicula.
to be made wise by their example, who have trod the path of error and danger
before us? Bodin tells us of some, who have recovered their healthes by reading
of History; and it is credibly affirmed of King Alphonsus, that the only
reading of Qui^^. Curtius, cured him of a very dangerous fever. If I could have
been so rid of my late quartane ague, I would have said with the same good
King: Valeat Avicenna, vi^at Curtius; and have done him as much honor, as ever
the Chians their Hippocrates, or the Sun-burnd Egyptians their Aesculapius.

For Morality and rules of well living, delivered with such sententious
gravity, weight of reason, so sweetened with lively and apt similitudes,
Plutarch, how highly valewed among the learned.
entertain Plutarch; whom according to the opinion of Gaza the world would
preserve (should it be put to the choice to receive one only Author (the
Sacred Scriptures excepted) and to burn all the rest) especially his Li^es and
Morals. After him, the virtuous and divine Seneca, who for that he lived so
near the times of the Apostles, and had familiar acquaintance with S. Paul (as
it is supposed by those Epistles that pass under either their names) is
thought in heart to have been a Christian; The just praise of Seneca.
and certes so it seems to me, by that Spirit, wherewith so many rules of
Patience, Humility, Contempt of the world, are refined and exempt from the
dregs of Paganism. Some say that about the beginning of Neroes reign, he
came over hither into Britain; but most certain it is, he had diverse lands
bestowed on him here in England, In vita Seneca.
and those supposed to have lain in Essex near to Camalodunum, now Maldon.

Again, while you are intent to foreign Authors and Languages, forget not to
speak and write your own properly and eloquently: whereof (to say truth) you
shall have the greatest use, (since you are like to live an eminent person in
your Country, and mean to make no profession of Schollership.) I have known
even excellent Scholars so defective this way, that when they had been
beating their brains twenty, or four and twenty years about Greek
Etymologies, or the Hebrew roots and Rabbines, could neither write true
English, nor true Orthographi^: and to have heard them discourse in public, or
privately at a table, you would have thought you had heard Loy talking to his
pigges, or John de Indagine, declaiming in the praise of wild geese; otherwise
for their judgment in the Arts and other tongues very sufficient.

To help your self herein, make choice of those Authors in prose, who speak
the best and purest English. I would commend unto you (though from more
Antiquity) the life of Richard the third written by Sir Thomas Moore, the
Arcadia of the noble Sir Philip Sidney, whom Du Bartas makes one of the four
columns of our language; The late published life of Henry the seventh.
the Essays and other peoces of the excellent Master of Eloquence, my Lord of
S. Albanes, who possesses not only Eloquence, but all good learning, as
hereditarie both by Father and Mother. You have then M. Hooker his Polity;
Henry the fourth well written by Sir John Hayward; that first part of our
English Kings by M. Samuel Daniel. There are many others I know, but these will
taste you best, as proceeding from no vulgar judgments: the last Earl of
Northampton in his ordinary style of writing was not to be mended. Procure
then, if you may, the Speeches made in Parliaments frequent learned Sermons, in
Term time resort to the Star Chamber, and be present at the pleadings in
other public Courts, whereby you shall better your speech, enrich your
understanding, and get more experience in one month, then in other four by
keeping your Melancholy study, and by solitary meditation. Imagine not that
hereby I would bind you from reading all other books, since there is no book
so bad, even Sir Be^is himself, Owleglasse, or Nashes herring, but some
commodity may be gotten by it. For as in the same pasture, the Ox finds
fodder, the Hound a hare, the Stork a lizard, the fair maid flowers; so we
cannot, except we list our selves (says Seneca) but depart the better from any
book whatsoever. Seneca Epist. 109.


And ere you begin a book, The Epistles of Books, often times the best piece of
them.
forget not to read the Epistle; for commonly they are best labored and
penned. For as in a garment, whatsoever the stuff be, the owner (for the most
part) affects a costly and extraordinary facing; and in the house of a
country Gentleman, the porch of a Citizen, the carved gate and painted posts
carry away the Glory from the rest: So is it with our common Authors^ if they
have any (...) at all, they set it like velvet before, though the back, like
(a bankerupts doublet) be but of poldauie or buckram.

Affect not as some do, that bookish Ambition, to be stored with books and
have well furnished Libraries, yet keep their heads empty of knowledge: to
desire to have many books, and never to use them, is like a child that will
have a candle burning by him, all the while he is sleeping.

Lastly, How to keep your books.
have a care of keeping your books handsome, and well bound, not cas^ing away
overmuch in their gilding or stringing for ostentation sake, like the prayer
books of girls and gallants, which are carried to Church but for their
outsides. Yet for your own use spare them not for noting or interlining (if
they be printed) for it is not likely you mean to be a gainer by them, when
you have done with them; neither suffer them through negligence to mold and be
moath-eaten, or want their strings and couers.

King Alphonsus about to lay the (...) at Naples, The answer of King Alphonsus,
concerning Vitru^ius.
called for Vitr^vius his book of Architecture; the book was brought in very
bad case, all dustie and without couers: which the King observing said, He that
must cover us all, must not go uncovered himself: Then commanded the book to
be fairly bound and brought unto him. So say I, suffer them not to lie
neglected, who must make you regarded; and go in torn coats, who must
apparel your mind with the ornaments of knowledge, above the roabes and
riches of the most magnificent Princes.

To avoid the inconvenience of moathes and moldinesse, Mappes and Pictures.
let your study be placed, and your windows open if it may be, toward the
East, for where it looks South or West, the air being ever Subie^t to
moisture, moathes are bred and darkishnesse increased, whereby your mappes and
pictures will quickly become pale, loosing their life and colors, or rotting
upon their ^loath, or paper, decay past all help and recovery.

CHAP. 7.
Of Cosmographic.
THat like a stranger in a foreign land, ye may not wander without a guide,
ignorant of those places by which you are to pass, and stick amused, amazed
in the Labyrinth of History: Cosmography a second Ariadne, bringing Meridians,
Paralels, etc.
lines enough is come to your delivery, whom imagine standing on a fair hill,
and with one hand, pointing and discoursing unto you of the Celestial
Sphaere, the names, uses, and distinctions of every circle, whereof it
consists, the situation of Regions according to the same, the reason of
Climates, length and shortness of days and nights, motion, rising and setting
as well of fixed stars, as erratique, elevation of the Pole, Paralells,
Meridians, and whatsoever else respects that Celestial body.

With the other hand downward, she shows you the globe of the earth,
(distinguished by Seas, Mountains, Rivers, Rocks, Lakes and the like,) the
subject of Geographie, which defined according to Ptolomey and others, is an
imitation of the face (by draught and picture) of the whole earth, and all the
principal and known parts thereof, with the most remarkable things (...)
belonging.

A science at once both feceding the eye and mind with such incredible
variety, and profitable pleasure, that even the greatest kings and
Philosophers, have not only bestowed the best part of their time in the
contemplation hereof at home, but to their infinite charge and peril of their
persons, have themselves travailed to understand the Situation of far
countries, bounds of Seas, qualities of Regions, manners of people and the like.

So necessary for the understanding of History (as I have said) and the fables
of Poets, The necessity of Cosmography.
(wherein no small part of the treasure of humane learning lies hid) that
without it we know not how the most memorable enterprises of the world have bin
carried and performed; we are ignorant of the growth, flourish and fall of the
first Monarchies, whereat History takes her head and beginning: we conceive
nothing of the government, and commodities of other nations, we cannot judge
of the strength of our enemies, distinguish the limits between kingdom and
kingdom, names of places from names of people: nay (with Mounsier Gaular^) we
doubt at Paris whether we see there the same Moon we have at London or not:
on the contrary, we know this and much more, without exposing (as in old time)
our bodies to a tedious travail, but with much more ease, having the world at
will, or (as the saying is) the world in a string, in our own chamber. How
praeiudiciall the ignorance of Geography has been unto Princes in foreign
expeditions against their enemies, unfortunate Cyrus will tell you, ^h^ being
ignorant of Oaxis and the Streights, was ouerthro^ne by Thomiris the Scythian
Queen; and of two (...) thousand Persi^ns in his army, not one escaped
through his unskillfulness herein, as Iustine reports.

And at another time what a memorable victory to his perpetual glory carried
L^onidas from the Persians, only for that they (...) unacquainted with the
Streights of Thermopylae that long hill of Greece through which there is a
straight and a narrow passage environed with a rough sea and deep senne; so
called from the wels of who^ waters which are there among the rocks.
Thermopylae?

And the foul overthrow that Crassus received by the Parthians, was imputed to
nothing else, ^hen his ignorance of that Country, and the passages thereof.

Alexander, therefore taking any enterprise in hand, would first cause an exact
map of the country to be drawn in colors, to consider where were the
safest entrance, where he might pass this River, how to avoid that Rock, and
in what place most commodiously give his enemy battle.

Such is the pleasure, such is the profit of this admirable knowledge, which
account rather in the member of your recreations then seuerer studies, it
being beside quickly, and with much ease attained unto. Prince Henry of
eternal memory, was herein very studious, having for his instructour that
excellent Mathematician, Cosmography a sweet and pleasant study.
and (while he lived) my loving friend Master Edward Wright.

To the attaining of perfection herein, The principles of Geometry first to be
learned.
as it were your first entrance, you are to learn and understand certain
Geometrical definitions, which are first Punctum, or a prick; a Line, a
Superficies either plain, Convexe or Concave, your Angels right, blunt and
sharp, Figures, Circles, Semicircles, the Diameter, Triangles, Squares of all
sorts, paralells and the like, as Master Blundevile in his first book of the
Sphaere will show you; for you shall have use of many of these, to the
understanding thereof. Cosmography contains Astronomy, Astrology, Geography
and Chorography. Vide clerian. in Sacr^bos^^, ed^t^ ^l^.
Astronomy considers the magnitude and motions of the celestial bodies.

The Celestial bodies are the eleven heavens and Sphaeres.

The eleventh heaven is the habitation of God and his Angels.

The tenth the first mooouer.

The ninth the Christall^ne heaven,

The eight the starry firmament.

Then the seven Planets in their order, The Planets in their order.
which you may remember in their order by this verse. Post Sim SVM sequitur,
vltima LVN Asub^st:
Would you count the Planets soo^e,
Remember SIM SVM and the MOON.


The first Letter S for Saturn, I for Jupiter, M for Mars, S for the Sun, V
Venus, M Mercury; lastly the Moon.

The Imperial Heaven is immovable, most pure, immense in quantity, and
clear in quality.

The tenth Heaven or first moouer, is also most pure and clear, and makes his
revolution in four and twenty hours, carrying with the swiftness the other
Heavens violently from East to West, from their proper reuolutions, which is
from West to East.

The ninth, or Christalline heaven, moves by force of the first mouer, first
from East to West, then from West to East upon his own poles, and
accomplisheth his revolution in 36000. years. And this revolution being
finished, Plato was of opinion, that the world should be in the same state it
was before; I should live and print such a book again, and you read it in the
same apparel, and the same age you are now in.

Two Scholars in Germany having lain so long in an Inn, A merry tale of two
poor Scholars and their Host.
that they had not only spent all their Money, but also ran into debt some two
hundred Dollers; told their Host of Plat^s great year, and how that time six
and thirty thousand years the world should be again as it was, and they
should be in the same Inn and Chamber again, and desired him to trust them
till then: Quoth mine Host, I believe it to be true; and I remember six and
thirty thousand years ago you were here, and left just such a reckoning
behind to pay, I pray you Gentlemen discharge that first, and I will trust you
for the next.

The eight Heaven or glorious starry Firmament, has a threefold motion, (
viz:) from East to West in four and twenty hours, secundism primum Mobile;
then from West to East, according to the motion of the ninth Heaven; then
sometimes to the South, and sometime toward the North, called motus
trepidationis.

Touching the motions of the Planets, since you may have them in every
Almanacke, I willingly omit them.

The Sphere of the world consists of ten Circles, the Aequinoctiall, the
Zodiac, the two Colures, the Horizon, the Meridian, the two Tropiques, and
the two polar Circles. Division of the Sphere.


The Aequinoctiall, The Aequinoctiall line.
is a circle dividing the world, as in the midst equally distant from the two
poles: it contains three hundred and sixty degrees, which being multiplied
by sixty, (the number of miles in a degree) make one and twenty thousand and
six hundred miles, which is the compass of the whole earth. The third part of
which (being the Diameter) about seven thousand and odd miles, is the
thickness of the same. Those who dwell under the Aequinoctiall, having no
Latitude either to the North or South, but their days and nights always of an
equal length.

The Zodiac is an oblick circle, The Zodiac.
dividing the Sphere athwart the aequinoctiall into points, ( viz:) the
beginning of Aries and Libra: In the midst whereof is the Eclipticke line; the
utmost limits thereof are the two Tropiques, Cancer and Capricorn: the length
thereof is three hundred and sixty degrees, the breadth sixteen. It is divided
into twelve signs, six Northerly, and six Southerly: the Northern are,
Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Gemini, Leo, Virgo; Southern, Libra, Scorpio,
Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces: he turns upon his own poles from
West to East.

The two Colures, The Colures.
are two great moveable Circles, passing through both the poles of the world,
crossing one another with right Sphearicall Angles: so that like an Apple cut
into four quarters, they divide into equal parts the whole Sphere: the one
passes thorough the aequinoctiall points and poles of the world, and is called
the aequinoctiall Colure: the other passes through the Solstitiall points, and
is called the Solstitiall Colure.

The Horizon, The Horizon
is a Circle immovable, which divides the upper Hemispheare, or half part of
the world from the nether: it has the name of (...), which is termin^, or to
bound or limit; because, imagine you stood upon High-gate, or the Tower hill at
Greenewich, so far as you can see round about as in a circle, where the
heaven seems to touch the earth, that is called the Horizon: The poles
whereof, are the point just over your head, calls Zenith in Arabian; and the
other under your feet, passing by the Center of the world, called Nadir.

The Meridian is an immovable circle, The Meridian
passing through the poles of the world: it is called the Meridian of Meridies
Noonetide, because when the Sun rising from the East, touches this line with
the Center of his body, then it is noone to those over whose Zenith that Circle
passes, and midnight to their Antipodes, or those who are just under them in
the other world.

The number of Meridians, are 180. (allowing two to every degree in the
Aequinoctiall) which all concenter in either pole, and are the utmost bounds of
Longitude.

By the Meridian, the Longitude of all places is gathered, and what places lie
more Easterly or Westerly from either.

The Longitude of any place, Longitude.
is that distance you find upon the Aequinoctiall, between the Meridian of the
place, whose Longitude you desire; and the first Meridian which directly
passes over the Canarie, or Fortunate Islands: which distance or space you must
account by the degrees, purposely set upon the Brazen Circle; or if you please
by miles, allowing sixty to every degree. Longitude is only taken East and
West.

Latitude is the distance of the Meridian, Latitude.
between the vertical point (or pole of the Horizon) and the Aequinoctiall,
being ever equal to the height, or elevation of the pole above the Horizon: or
more plainly, the distance of any place, either North or South from the
Aequinoctiall, which you are to take (upon the standing Globe) by the degrees
of the brazen Meridian, that Country or place in the Globe, whose Latitude you
desire, being turned directly under it.

The Tropicke of Cancer is an imaginary Circle, Of the Tropickes.
betwixt the Aequinoctiall and the Arcticke Circle; which Circle the Sun
makes about the thirteenth day of June, declining at his farthest from the
Aequinoctiall, and coming Northerly to usward; then are our days at the
longest, and nights shortest. Capricorn the like to the Antarcticke Circle,
making our days the shortest about the twelfth of December.

The Arcticke Circle The Arcticke Circle.
(anciently accounted the Horizon of Greece) is a small circle: the Center
whereof is the North pole of the world, which is invisible; It is so called
from Arctes the Bear, or Charles W^ine, the Northern Star, being in the tip
of the tail of the said Bear.

The Antarctike, The Antarcticke Circle.
which is near to the South pole, and answering the other under us.

But I had rather you learnd these principles of the sphere by demonstration,
and your own diligence (being the labor but of a few hours) then by mere
verbal description, which profits not so much in Mathematical
demonstrations.

We will therefore descend to Geographi^, which is more easy and familiar,
(the definition I gave you before.) I come to the Subject, the Terrestrial
Globe, which is composed of Sea and Land.

The Sea is a mighty water, The Sea.
ebbing and flowing continually about the whole Earth, whose parts are diversely
named according to the places whereupon they bound. In the East it is called
the Indian Sea; in the West the Atlanticks, so named from the Mount Atlas in
Mauritania: in the North, the Hyperborean; in the South, the Meridionall, or
South Sea, commonly called Mar del Zur.

The Mediterranean sea, is that which stretches it self by the midst of the
earth from West to East, dividing Europe, Asia, and Africa.

Sinus (or a Gulf) is a part of the sea, A Gulf.
insinuating and embosoming it self within the land, or between two several
lands: as the gulf of Venice, the Persian gulf, the Red Sea, Sinus
Mexicanus, Vermilius, Gangeticus.

Fretum (or a Straight) is a narrow passage between two lands, A Straight.
as the Straight of Magellan, Anian, Gibralterre, etc.

An Haven, A Haven.
is the entrance of the sea within the land, at the mouth of some River or
Creek, where ships may ride at Anchor.

A Lake, A Lake.
is a great and wide receptacle of water, ever standing still, and not moving
out of the place; as the Lake Asphal^i^es, Lacus Larius, or Lago di Como,
Lansann^ by Geneva, etc.

The Earth, Of the Earth.
is either Continent or Island.

A Continent is the land, A Continent.
continued without any division of Sea, as the Low Countries to Germany, that
to Austria, Austria to Hungary, etc.

An Island, An Island.
called Insula, quasi in Sale, is a land encompassed round with the Sea, as
Great Britain, Ireland, Corsica, Candia, etc.

An Isthmus, An Isthmus.
or Chersonesus, is a Straight or neck of land between two Seas, as Cimbri^a,
Chersonesus, Taurica, Aurea, and Achaica.

Peninsula Peninsula.
(quasi pene Insula) is a Land environed with the Sea, except at some narrow
place or entrance; as that vaste Continent of Peru and Brasil in America, were
an Island, but for that Straight or Neck of Land, between Panama and Nombre de
dies: which Philip the second, King of Spain, was once minded to have cut for
a shorter passage for ships into the South Sea, but upon better deliberation he
gave over his project.

A Cape A Cape.
or head of Land, is the utmost end of a Promontorie, or high Land, standing
out into the Sea, as the Cape De Bu^na Speranza, Cape Mendozi^^, S. Vincene,
Cape Verde, the great Cape S. Augustine in America, etc.

Proceeding now to understand the several parts and Regions of the world, with
their situation (as it is meet, dwelling in an house, you should know all the
rooms thereof) you may if you please, observe Ptolomi^s Method, Ptolo^i^s
Method best to be observed.
beginning first with Europe; and herein with our Northern Islands of Great
Britains, Ireland, the Orchades, and Thule, which are the Contents of his first
Table, and so forth into Europe: but he was erroneous in his descriptions,
obscure by reason of his Antiquity, the names of places since changed;
Navigations by the benefit of the Lodestone, perfected; the want whereof
heretofore has been occasion of infinite errors among the ancients, as well
Divines as Historiographers and Geographers: as Lactantius and S. Augustine,
could never be persuaded, that there were Antipodes, or people going feet to
feet under us; the contrary whereof experience has taught us. The sundry
errors of Historians and others, for want of skill in Geography
Arrianus, that much esteemed Greek Author, affirmed the situation of
Germany to be very near to the Ionique Sea. Stephanus also, another
Countryman of his, says that Vienna was a City of Galilie. Strabo says,
that Danubius has his head near to the Adriatique Sea, which indeed (being
the greatest River of Europe) rises out of the hill Arnoba in Germany, and by
Hungaria, and many other Countries, runs into Sclauonia, receiving
threescore other Rivers into his Channel: it is therefore far more safe to
follow our later Writers.

In every Country (to give one instance for all) in your observation you are
to follow this Method; What to observe in a strange Country.
first to know the Latitude, then the Longitude of the place, the temperature
of the Climate, the goodness or barrenness of the ground, the limits of the
Country, how it is bounded by Sea or Land, or both; by East, West, North, or
South: into what Provinces it is divided within it self, the commodities it
affoordeth, as what Mines, Woods or Forests; what Beasts, Fowls, Fishes,
Fruits, Herbs, Plants; what Mountains, Rivers, Fountains and Cities: what
notable matter of wonder or Antiquity: the manners, shape, and attire of the
people; their building, what Ports and Havens; what Rocks, Sands, and such
like places of danger, are about the place: and last of all, the Religion and
Government of the Inhabitants.

You shall have drawn upon your Globe or Map, Of the Mariners Compass.
upon the vastest Seas (where most room is to be spared) a round figure,
representing the Mariners Compass, with the two and thirty winds; from every
of which there runs a line to the Land, to some famous City, Haven, or
either; to show you, in that Sea and place what course you are to keep to go
thither, whether full North, North-east, South, or South-west, and so forth.
These winds, of the Spaniards are called Rombes: and for that, Columbus and
Vesputius, Italians, with others, first discovered the East and West Indies;
the eight principal winds, are commonly expressed in the Italian. This
Compass has the needle in manner of a Flowre-deluce, which points still to
the North,

I could wish you now and then, Washing of Mappes and Globes in colors, very
profitable to a learner.
to exercise your Pen in Drawing, and imitating Cards and Mappes; as also your
Pensill in washing and coloring small Tables of Countries and places, which at
your leisure you may in one fortnight easily learn to do: for the practice of
the hand, does speedily instruct the mind, and strongly confirm the memory
beyond any thing else; nor think it any disgrace unto you, since in other
Countries it is the practice of Princes, as I have showed heretofore; also many
of our young Nobility in England exercise the same with great felicity.

I have seen French Cards to play withal, the four suites changed into Maps
of several Countries, of the four parts of the world, and exactly colored
for their numbers, the figures 1. 2. 3. 9. 10. and so forth, set over the
heads; for the Kings, Queens, and Knaves, the Pourtrai^s of their Kings and
Queens, in their several Country habits; for the Knaves, their Peasants or
Slaves; which ingenious device, cannot be but a great furtherance to a young
capacity, and some comfort to the unfortunate Gamester; when, what he has
lost in Money, he shall have dealt him in land or wit.

CHAP. 8.
Observations in Survey of the Earth.
FIrst, how Almighty God by his Divine providence so disposed the Earth in the
first Creation (not falling out by chance, as some have thought) that one
Country, Countries had not their scituations by chance.
in one place or other, is so nearly joined to the next; that if after it
might happen to be over peopled, as well man as beast, by some small straight or
passage might easily be provided of a new habitation: which Acosta has well
observed, resolving us that doubt, how wild beasts, as Wolves, Foxes, Bears,
and other harmfull beasts, should swim over so vaste Seas, and breed in Islands.

Secondly, The wit and constitution of men, according to the temper of the body.
how the wit, disposition, yea, devotion and strength of man, follows the
quality and temperature of the Climate; and many times the Nature of the soil
wherein he lives: as we see the Eastern people of the world, very quick in
their inventions, superstitious unto Idolatry, as in Chin^, Calecut, Ia^a, and
other places. On the contrary, those as far North in Lapla^d, ^^eland, and
other places, as dull, and in a manner senc^lesse of Religion, whereupon they
are held the most notorious Witches of the world.

We see those that inhabit Mountains, Mountainers more barbarous, then those
of the valleys.
and mountainous places, to be far more barbarous and uncivil, then those
that live in the plains: witness the Inhabitants of the huge hills Sierras,
and the Andes in America, the mountainous North part of N^ua Franci^, the
Nararrois in Spain, and the Highland men in Scotland.

We see and find it by experience, that where the soil is dry and sandy, the
air is most pure; and consequently, the spirits of the Inhabitants active and
subtle, above those who inhabit the Fens and Marshes.

Thirdly, consider the wonder of wonders, Of the Ocean, the diverse and
wonderful motions thereof.
how the Ocean so far distant, holds motion with the Moon, filling our
shoares to the brim from the time of her appearing above the Horizon, until
she has ascended the Meridian: then decreasing as much until she touches the
line of midnight, making his tide twice in four and twenty hours and odd
minutes: how the Atlantic or Western Ocean is most rough and dangerfull, the
South Sea, And so swift, that from Moabar to Maedagascar (or the I Will of S.
Laurence) they may come in twenty days, but are not able to re^nne in 3.
months. So from Spain into America in thirty days, but cannot return in
three months.
or Del Zur, albeit of infinite vastness, on the contrary so calm and quiet,
that you seemed rather to sail upon dry Land then water.

How in the Sea of Cal^cut it is high water, but at every full Moon: in the
Sea by the shore of Indus, but at every new Moon: how in the maine Ocean the
current runs from East to West, toward the straight of Magellan, but from
West to East in the Med^erranean.

Fourthly, how in one place the North Wind, as upon the Coast of Scythia, near
the mouth of the great River Duin^, blows in a manner perpetually, so that
the West or South-west winds are scarce known.

In another, Iul. C. Scaliger, excre. 37.
the East: in the Indian Sea the winds keep their turns, observing the course
of the Sun, which being in Aries and Libra, the Western winds blow
perpetually.

Neither less admirable are the inland stoods, The strange properties of
Floods and Lakes.
and fresh waters for their properties, as Nilus, who only by his ouerflowing,
makes Egypt fertile (where it never raineth.) Eur^pus an arm of the Sea by
Eub^^^ (an Island of the Sporades in the Aegean Sea) which ^bbeth and flows
seven times in a day. Likewise, much may be said of our Lakes and Fountains
in England, Scotland, and Ireland, of turning Wood into Stone, Iron, and the
like.

Fifthly, Beasts and Birds useful to man, live in herds and flocks.
it is worthy the consideration, how the Divine wisdom for the behoof of
mankind, has set an enmity between Birds and Beasts, of prey and rapine, who
accompany not by herds: as Lions, Bears, Dogs, Wolves, Foxes, Eagles,
Kites, and the like; which if they should do, they would undo a whole
Country: whereas on the contrary, those which are necessary and useful for
mankind, live gregatim, in herds and flocks, as Kin^, Sheep, Dear, Pigeons,
Partridges, Geese, etc.

Sixthly, Of the creatures in hot and cold Countries.
how Nature has provided for the Creatures of the Northern parts of the
world, as Bears, Dogs, Foxes, etc. not only thick skins, but great store
of hair or feathers, to defend them from the extremity of the cold there: on
the other side, to those in Guiena, by reason of the extreme heat, none at
all; as you may see by the Guiney Dogs, which are daily brought over.

Seventhly, Of Rivers.
how God has so disposed the Rivers, that by their crookedness and winding,
they might serve many places.

Let us then consider, how the most fruitful places and beautiful Cities,
have become the dwellings and homes of the most slaves, as Spain overrun by
the Moor^s, Italy by the Goths and Vandals; and at this day, a great part of
Europe by the Turk.

How the Earth like an aged mother, is become less fruitful, as we see by the
barrenness sometime of the most fertile places, the decay of the stature and
strength of men within these few years.

It is also worthy observation, to see how the Earth has been increased by
the access of Islands, and again been diminished by inundation and Gulfes
breaking again into the same.

The Islands of the Echinades, Of certain Islands cast up by Seas and Rivers.
were cast up by the River Achelous, and the greatest part of Egypt by Nilus,
so were the Rhodes and Delos. Of lesser Islands beyond Melon Anaphe, between
Lemnos and the Hellesp^nt Nea, (as one would say new-come) and elsewhere
Alone, Thera, Therasia, and Hiera, which also from the event was called
Automate.

And that sundry goodly Countries on the contrary, have been eaten up by the
Sea, our neighbor Zeland, Many Countries again lost by inundation.
and many other places will give lamentable testimony: beside the face of the
Earth has since the Creation, been much altered by avulsion or division of the
Sea, as Sicily was divided and severed from Italy; Cyprus, from Syria; Eub^^
from Boetia, Atlas and Macris from Eub^^^, Barbycus from Bythinia, Lencosia
from the Promontorie of the Syrenes: and as some suppose, Le^bos from Ida,
Prochyta and P^th^^usa from Misena; and which is more, Strabo lib. 1.
Spain, from Barbary, as Strabo is of opinion.

Again, Great Britain supposed to have been one continent with France.
it is affirmed by Volseus, that our Great Britain has been one Continent
with France, and that tract between Dover and Calais, has been gained by the
Sea, there called Mare Gess^riacum.

Excellent is that contemplation, to consider how Nature (rather the Almighty
wisdom) by an unsearchable and stupendous work, shows us in the Sea, the
likeness and shapes, not only of Land Creatures, as Elephants, Horses,
Dogs, Hogs, Calves, Hares, Snailes, etc. but of Fowls in the Air, as
Hawks, Swallows, Vultures, and numbers the like; yea, it affords us men and
women, and among men, even the Monk: but hereof see Iu^tius in his Batania,
See Olaus Magnus his description of the Northern parts of the world. At
Swartwale near Brill in Holland, is to be seen a Mermaides dead body hanging
up.
and if you please Alex: ab Alexandris with some others.

Moreover what inestimable wealth it affoordeth in pearls, Coral, Amber, and
the like.

By reading you shall also find what strange Earthquakes, remoouing of whole
Towns, Hills, etc. have been upon the face of the Earth, raising of it in
one place, leaving gulfes, and Vastitie in another: and Lucius Marcius, and
Sextus Julius being Consuls in Rome, in the Country of Mutinum, two mountains
met and joined themselves together.

In the reign of Nero, Vectins Marcellus being ouerseer of Nero's affairs,
and Steward of his Court, Meadows and Olive trees were removed from a Common
high way side, and placed a good way off on the contrary side; so whereas they
stood before on the right hand, as one traveled, they were now on the right
hand. The like happened within these few years to Pl^^rs a town of the
Grisons among the Alps.

Lastly, let us take a view of the Earth it self, which because it was divided
with the Sea, Rivers, Marshes, etc. yet making one absolute Circle, Homer
calls it (...) and for this cause Numa Pompilius dedicated a Temple to Vesta
in a round form: The roundnesse of it is proved of Mathematicians by shadows
of Dials, and the Eclipses; also by descent of all heavy things to the Center,
it self being the Center of the universe, A^ist. lib. Me^^or. 1. cap. 4.
as Aristotle and Ptolomey affirm. Ptolom. cap. 6. Alphrag (...) disert. 14.


Now in respect of heaven, it is so small a point, that the least star is not
darkened with the shadow thereof: for if the smallest star, albeit in
judgment of our sense, seems but a prick or point, yet far exceeds the
body of the Earth in greatness, it follows in respect of heaven, that the
earth must seem as little.

Beside, if the earth were of any quantity in respect of the higher orbs, the
stars should seem bigger or less in regard of those Hypsomata (Altitudes)
or the Climes: but it is certain that at the self same time, sundry
Astronomers find the same bigness and elevation of the self same star
observed by their calculation, to differ no whit at all; whereby we may see if
that distance of place which is on the Earth (in respect of the Heavenly orbs)
exceeds all sense, it follows that the Earth (poor little point as it is)
seems the like, if it be compared with Heaven: yet this is that point, which
with fire and sword, is divided among so many Nations, the matter of our
Glory, our seat; here we have our Honors, our Armies, our Commands; here
we heap up riches, at perpetual war and strife among our selves, who (like
the Toad) shall fall asleep with most earth in his paws: never thinking how of
a moment of time well spent upon this poor plot or dunghill common to beasts
as well as our selves, depends Eternity, Augustine.
and the fruition of our true Happiness in the presence of Heaven, and court
of the King of Kings for ever and ever.

Now I must take leave of our common Mother the Earth, so worthily called in
respect of her great merits, of v^i for she receives us being borne, she
feeds and cloatheth us brought forth, and lastly as forsaken wholly of Nature,
she receives us into her ^^p, and couers us until the dissolution of all,
and the last judgment.

Thus have I only pointed at the principles of Cosmographie, having as it were
given you a taste, and stopped up the vessel again, referring the rest to
your own diligence and search. And herein you shall have your helps, M.
Blund^^ile in his treatise of Cosmographie and the Sphaere, D. Deo, M. Cook in
his principles of Geometry, Astronomy and Geographie: Ge^^^ Frisins, M.
Hughes de vs^ Globiyr. at Frankford, Amsterdam, and turned into French. M.
Edward Wright de vs^ Sphera.
Ortelius, Copernicus, Cl^nius the Jesuit, Ioannes de Monte Regis, Mercator,
Munster, Hunter, and many others; of ancient writes Ptolomey, Dionisius Halicar
nasseus. For mappes I refer you wholly unto Ortelius and those set last forth
by Hondius being later then Plancius, and more perfect by reason of the late
discovery, made by Scho^ten, unto the 57. and 58. degrees of Southerly
latitude beyond the straight of Magellan; and of late M. Henry Hudson, to the
61. or 62. to the North-west, beyond Terra de Labrador: to omit that terrible
voyage of Barentson and his company, for the discovery of the North-east
passage, by the backe-side of Noua Z^mla, which out of a Dutch translation you
may read in English.

CHAP. 9.
Of Geometry.
SInce Plato would not suffer any to enter his School, which was (...), or not
entered into Geometry; and Xenocrates turned away his auditors, if unfurnished
with Geometry, Lacrius lib. 4.
Music and Astronomy, affirming they were the helps of Philosophy: I am
also bound by the Love I bear to the best arts and your studies, to give it
you also in charge. Philo the Jew calls it the Princess and mother of all
Sciences, and excellently was it said of Plato, that God did always (...); but
more divinely of Solomon: Wisdom chap. 11.
That God did dispose all his creatures according to measure, number and
weight; that is, by giving the Heavens their constant and perpetual motion,
the elements their places and praedominance according to lightness or
gravity, and every creature its number and weight, without which, it were
neither able to stand upright or move. To the consideration of which depth of
wisdom let us use the help of this most ingenious and useful Art, worthy
the contemplation, and practice of the greatest Princes, a Science of such
importance, Petrach de regno lib. 2. ^. 14.
that without it, we can hardly care our bread, lie dry in our beds, buy,
sell, or use any commerce else whatsoever.

The subject of Geometry is the length, breadth, and height of all things,
Protiu in Eucl^d. lib. 2. c. 14.
comprised under the figures of Triangles, Squares, Circles, and Magnitudes of
all sorts, with their terms or bounds.

It has properly the name from measuring the earth, being first found out in
Egypt; for when Nilus with his ouer-flowing drowned and confounded the limits
of their fields, certain of the inhabitants more ingenious then the rest,
necessity compelling, found out the rules of Geometry, by the benefit whereof,
after the fall of the water, every man had his own portion of ground lotted
and laid out to him: so that from a few poor and weak principles at the
first, Martianus Capellain Geem. Precleses in Euclid. lib. 2. c. 4.
it grew to that height that from earth it reached up to the heavens, where it
found out their Quantities, as also of the Elements and the whole world beside.

Out of Egypt, Thales, brought it into Greece, where it received that
perfection we see it now has.

For by means hereof are found out the forms and draughts of all figures,
greatness of all bodies, all manner of measures and weights, the cunning
working of all tools, with all artificial instruments whatsoever.

All engines of war, for many whereof (being antiquated) we have no proper
names; as Exosters, Sambukes, Catapultes, Testudo's, Scorpions, etc. Petardes
Grenades, great Ordnance of all sorts.

By the benefit likewise of Geometry, See the Hungarian History.
we have our goodly Ships, Galleies, Bridges, Milles, Charriots and Coaches
(which were invented in Hungary and there called Cotzki) some with two
wheels, some with more, Pulleies and Cranes of all sorts. Whence Couch had the
name


She also with her ingenious hand reares all curious roofes, and Arches,
stately Theaters, the Columns simple and compound, pendant Galleries, stately
Windows, Turrets, etc. and first brought to light our clockes and curious
Watches (unknown to the ancients:) lastly our kitchen Iackes, even to the
wheele-barrow. Beside whatsoever has artificial motion either by Air, water,
wind, sinews or chords, as all manner of Musical instruments, water works
and the like.

Yea, moreover such is the infinite subtlety, and immense depth of this
admirable Art, that it dares contend even with natures self, in infusing life
as it were, into the senseless bodies of wood, stone, or metal: witness the
wooden dove of Archytas, so famoused not only by Agellim, but many other
authors beyond exception, which by reason of weights equally peized within the
body, Agellius l. 10 cap. 12.
and a certain proportion of air (as the Spirit of life enclosed) flew
cheerfully forth as if it had been a living Dove.

Albeit Iul. Calls. Scaliger Scaliger ^uercis. 326. ad Cardanum.
accounts this Dove no great piece of workmanship, when he says, he is able
to make of his own invention with no great labor, a ship which shall swim,
and steer it self, and by the same reason that Architas his Dove was made,
that is, by taking the pith of rushes covered over with bladders, or those
thin skins, wherein gold-beaters beat their leaves, and wrapped about with
little strings of sinews, where when a Semicircle shall set one wheel on
going; it mooning others, the wings shall stir and move forward. This
Archytas was a most skillful Mathematician, as it may be gathered out of
Horact, Horat. lib. 1. C^rm. Ode ^8.
who calls him Mensorem, a Measurer Et marie and terra, numeroque carentis
arena,
Of sea and land, and number-wanting sand.


And not inferior to the aforesaid Dove of Archytas was that wooden Eagle,
Bartas le 6 (...) du 1. Semain.
which mounted up into the air, and flew before the Emperor to the gates of
Norimberg of which, as also of that iron fly, that flew about a table, Salust
lord of Bartas makes mention. Ramus attributes the invention of either of
these, in the preface of his 2. book of his Mathematical observations, to
Ioannes Regiom^ntanus.

Callicrates, if we may credit Pliny, Plin. l. 7. c. 21. and lib. 36. c. 5.
made Antes and other such like small creatures of Iuorie, that their parts and
joints of their legs could not be discerned.

Myrmecides Milesius also among other monuments of his skill, made a Coach or
Wagon with four wheels, which together with the driuer thereof, a fly could
easily hide and cover with her wings: Besides a Ship with her sails, which a
little Be could ouerspread. Varr^ Varr^ de ling^ a Latin. lib. 6.
teaches how small pieces of this nature and subtilest workmanship, may be
discerned, that is, says he, by laying close about them, black horse hairs.
Of later times, Hadrian Iunius Iunius lib. animad cap. 6.
tells us that he saw with great delight and admiration, at Mechlin in Brabans,
a cherrie stone cut in the form of a basket, wherein were fifteen pair of
dice, distinct each with their spots and number, very easily of a good eye to
be discerned.

And that the Ilias of Homer written, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 21.
was enclosed within a nut, Cicere tells us he saw it with his eyes, though
Alexander thought it worthy of a far better case, the rich Cabinet of Darius.
By the statue of Homer the ancients usually set a nightingale (as by Orpheus a
Swanne) for the manifold variety and sweetness of his voice, or the
continuance or holding out to the last the same sweetness: for some are of
opinion, that the perfection of Musical sounds are to be discerned in the
Nightingales notes. Pliny Pliny lib. 10. cap. 29.
reckons up sixteen several tunes she has, and fitteth them to Latin
words very properly as unto Ditties, which the translator of Pliny has
nothing near so well fitted in the English which might surely have been as
well done, as I have observed in their notes. But to return, Ex^rcitat. 326
Scaliger (whether in jest or earnest I know not) tells Cardanus of a flea he
saw with a long chain of gold about his neck, kept very daintily in a box,
and being taken forth, could skip with his chain, and sometime suck his
mistresses white hand, and his belly being full, get him to his lodging again,
but this same (...) Alexander wittily scoffed, when he gave a fellow only a
bushel of pease, for his pains of throwing every time a pease upon a needles
point standing a pretty way off.

Archimedes to the wonder of all the world, framed a brazen heaven, wherein
were the seven planets with their motions. Hereof Claudian wrote a wittle
Epigram.

Sap^r King of Persia (as Du Bartas in the sixth day of his divine week
mentions) had an heaven of glass, which, proudly sitting in his estate, he
trod upon with his feet, contemplating over the same, as if he had been
Jupiter, and upon this occasion calling himself brother to the Sun and
Moon, and partner with the Stars; for in his letter to the Emperor
Constantius he begins thus: Rex regum Sap^r, Carl. Rhodigin. lib. 8. cap. 3.
particeps Syderum, frater Soli^ and Luna, etc.

Nor must I forget that heaven of silver sent by Ferdinand the Emperor, P.
^onius and Sabellicus is Suppleme^: Hist. lib. 24.
to Solomon the great Turk, wherein the motions kept their true courses with
those of the heavens, This Heaven was carried by 12. men before Solomon, and
taken to pieces and set up again by the maker.
the stars arising and setting, the Planets keeping their oblique motion, the
Sun Eclipsed at his just time, and the Moon duly changing every Month with
the same in the Heaven. By these see the effects of this divine knowledge, able
to work wonders beyond all belief, in so much as Archimedes affirmed, he
would move the whole Earth, might a place be given him whereon to stand. But I
rather believe him, who says, The Foundation thereof shall never be moved.
Plutarch in Marcello. (...) Psalm. 24.
Much was it, that with his left hand only, he could by his skill draw after him
the weight of five thousand bushels of grain, and devise (at the cost of
Hier^) those rare engines, which shot small stones at hand, but great ones a
far of; by benefit of which device only, while the stones fell as thick as
hail from heaven among the enemies, Syracusa was preferred from the fury of
Marcellus ready to enter with a resolute and most powerful Army. The Oracle
of Apollo being demanded when the war and misery of Greece should have an
end, replied: If they would double the Altar in Delos, which was of a cubique
form; which they tried by adding another cube unto it, but that auailed
nothing. Plato then taking upon him to expound this riddle, affirmed the
Greeks, were reproved by Apollo because they were ignorance of Geometry. Nor
herein can I blame them, since the doubling of the Cube in Solides, and
Quadrature of the Circle in plain, has ever since so troubled our greatest
Geometricians, that I fear except Apollo himself ascend from Hell to resolve
his own problem, we shall not see it among our ordinary Stone-cutters
effected.

But in brief, the use you shall have of Geometry, will be in suruaying your
lands, affoording your opinion in building anew, or translating; making your
milles as well for grinding of corn as throwing forth water from your lower
grounds, bringing water far off for sundry uses. Seeing the measure of
Timber, stone and the like (wherein Gentlemen many times are egregiously abused
and cheated by such as they trust) to contriue much with small charge and in
less room. Again, should you follow the wars (as who knows the bent of
his Fate) you cannot without Geometry fortify your self, take the advantage
of hill or level, fight, order your Battaglia in square, triangle, cross
(which form the Prince of Orange has now alate taken up) cres^entwise (and
many other forms Iovius shows) level and plant your Ordinance, undermine,
raise your half Moons, Bulwarks, Casamates, Rampires, Rauesins, with many
other means as of offense and defense, by fortification. So that I cannot see
how a Gentleman, especially a Soldier and Commander may be accomplished
without Geometry, though not to the height of perfection, yet at the least to
be grounded and furnished with the principles and privy rules hereof. The
Authors I would commend unto you for entrance hereinto are in English. Cooks
Principles, and the Elements of Geometry, written in Latin by P. Ramus, and
translated by M. Doctor Hood, sometime Mathematical Lecturer in London. M.
Blundeuile, Euclide translated into English. In Latin you may have the learned
Jesuit Clauius, Melancthon, Frisius, Valearius his Geometry Military. Albert
Durer has excellently written hereof in high Dutch, and in French Fercadell
upon Euclide, with sundry others.

CHAP. 10.
Of Poetry.
TO sweeten your seuerer studies, by this time vouchsafe Poetry your respect:
which howsoever censured and seems fallen from the higest Stage of Honor, to
the lowest staire of disgrace, let not your judgment be infected with that
pestilent air of the common breath, to be an infidel; in whose belief, and
doer of their contrary Actions, is to be religious in the right, and to merit
if it were possible by good workers.

The Poet, as that Laurel M^i^ dreamed of, is made by miracle from his mothers
womb, and like the Diamond only polished and pointed of himself, disdaining
the file and midwifery of sorraine help.

Hence Tullie was long ere he could be delivered of a few verses, and those
poor ones too: and Ovid, so backward in prose, that he could almost speak
nothing but verse. And Experience daily affords us many excellent young and
growing wits, as well from Plow as the Palace, endued naturally with this
Divine and heavenly gift, yet not knowing (if you should ask the question)
whether a Metaph^re be flesh or fish.

If bare saying Poetry is an heavenly gift, be too weak a proppe to uphold
her credit with those buzzardly poor ones, Plato in P^^dro.
who having their feathers moulted can creep no farther then their own
puddle, able only to envy this Imperi^ll Eagle for sight and flight; let them
if they can look back to all antiquity, and they shall find all learning by
divine instinct to breathe from her bosom, (...)
as both Plato and Tullie in his Tusculanes affirm.

Str^^^ says, Poetry was the first Philosophy that ever was taught, nor were
there ever any writers thereof known before Musaus, Hesiod and Homer: by whose
authority Plato, Aristotle and Gale^, determine their weightiest
controversies, and confirm their reasons in Philosophy. And what were the
songs of Linus, Orphens, Amphi^^, Olympus, and that dittie I^pa^ sang to his
harp at Did^'s banquet, but Natural and Moral Philosophy, sweetened with
the pleasaunce of Numbers, that Rudeness and Barbarism might the better taste
and digest the lessons of civility? according to Lucretius (Italianized by
Ariosto) and englished by Sir John Harrington, Sed veluti putri^ (...) hia
tetra medentes,
Cum dare conantur, prius or as pocula circum
Contingunt mellis, dulci flavoque liqu^re,
Vt puerorum at as impr^vida Iudificetur, etc.
As Leaches when for children they appoint,
Their bitter worme-wood potions, first the cup
About the brimme with honnie sweet they anoint,
That so the child, beguild may drink it up, etc.


Neither has humane knowledge been the only subject of this Divine Art, but
even the highest Mysteries of Divinity. What are the Psalms of David (which
S. Hillari^ Hill. in Prologo Psalm.
so aptly compares to a bunch of keys, in regard of the several doors,
whereby they give the soul entrance, either to Prayer, Rejoicing, Repentance,
Thanksgiving, etc.) but a Divine Poem, going sometime in one measure, sometime
in another? What lively descriptions are there of the Majesty of God, Psalm. 80.
the estate and security of Gods children, Psalm. 90.
the miserable condition of the wicked? What lively similitudes and
comparisons, as the righteous man to a bai^ tree, Psalm. 1.
the Soul to a thirsty Heart, Psalm. 104.
v^itie to ointment, and the dew of Hermon? What excellent Allegories, as the
vine planted in Egypt; what Epiphonema's, prosopopoca's and whatsoever else
may be required, to the texture of so rich and glorious a piece?

And the song of Solomon (which is only left us of a thousand) is it not a
continued Allegory of the Mystical love betwixt Christ and his Church?
Moreover the Apostles themselves have not disdained to allege the authority
of the heathen Poets, Aratus, Me^ander and Epimenides; as also the fathers of
the Church, Nazianzen, S. Augustine, Bernard, Pr^demius, with many others,
beside the allowance they have given of Poetry, they teach us the true use and
end thereof, which is to compose the Songs of Sion, and address the fruit of
our invention to his glory who is the author of so goodly a gift, which we
abuse to our loves, light fancies, and basest affections.

And if Mechanical Arts hold their estimation by their effects in base
subjects, how much more deserves this to be esteemed, that holds so
sovereign a power over the mind, can turn brutishness into Civility, make
the lewd honest (which is Scaligers opinion of Virgils Poem) turn hatred to
love, cowardice into valor, and in briese, like a Queen command over all
affections?

Moreover the Muse, Mirth, Graces, and perfect Health, have ever an affinity
each with either. I remember Plutarch tells us of Telesilla, a noble and
brave Lady, who being dangerously sick, and imagined past recovery, was by
the Oracle, advised to apply her mind to the Muse and Poetry; which she
diligently observing recovered in a short space, and withal grew so sprightly
courageous, that having well fortified Argos with diverse companies of women
only, her self with her companions sallying out, entertained Cleomenes K. of
the Lacedamonia^s with such a Camisade, that he was feign to show his back,
leaving a good part of his people behind, to fill ditches; and then by plain
force of Arms drove out Demaratus another king, who lay very strong in
garrison within.

Alexander by the reading of Homer, was especially moved to go thorough with
his conquests.

Leonidas also that brave King of the Spartanes, being asked how Ti^taus (who
wrote of war in verse) was esteemed among Poets, replied excellently^ For my
soldiers, quoth he, moved only with his verses, run with a resolute
courage to the battle, fearing no peril at all.

What other thing gave an edge to the valor of our ancient Britons, but their
Bard^s (remembered by Athenaus, Lucan and sundry other,) recording in verse the
brave exploits of their nation, and singing the same unto their Harpea at their
public ^easts and meetings? amongst whom Taliessi^ a learned Bard, and Master
to Merlin, sung the life and acts of King Arthur.

Hence has Poetry never wanted her Patrones, and even the greatest Monarchs
and Princes, as well Christian as Heathen, have exercised their Invention
herein^ as that great Glory of Christendom Charlemaine, who among many other
things, wrote his Nephew Roulands Epitaphe, after he was slain in a battle
against the Sarracens, among the The place to this day is called Rowlands
vallie, and was in times past a great pilgrimage, there being a Chapel built
over the tomb, and dedicated to our Lady, called commonly but corruptly our
Lady of Rouceuall.
Pyrenaan hills: Alphonsiu King of Naples, whose only delight was the reading
of Virgil: Robert King of Sicilie; and that thrice renowned and learned French
King, who finding Petrarchs Toombe without any inscription or Epitaphe, wrote
one himself, (which yet remains) saying; Shame it was, that he who sung his
Mistress praise seven years before her death, and twelve years should want
an Epitaphe. Among the Heathen are eternized for their skill in Poesy,
Augustus Caesar, Octanius, Adrian, Germanicus. Panormitan, lib. 1. de geslis
Alphensi.


Every child knows how dear the works of Homer were unto Alexander,
Euripides to A^yntas King of Macedon, Virgil to Augustus, Theocr^us to Ptolomey
and ^^v^nic^, King and Queen of Aegyp^: the stately Pindar to Hiere King of
Sicilie, Ennius to Scipie, Ausonius to Gratian, (who made him Pro-consull:) in
our own Country, Who gave him, it is thought, his Manor of Ewhilme in
Oxfordslhire. To Charles the eight and Lewis the twelfth.
Chaucer to Richard the second, Gower to Henry the fourth, with others I might
allege.

The Lady Anne of Bretaign^, who was twice French Queen, passing through the
Presence in the Court of France, espying Chartier the Kings Secretary, and a
famous Poet, leaning upon his elbow at a Tables end fast asleep, she stooping
down, and openly kissing him, said; We must honor with our kiss, the mouth
from whence so many sweet verses and golden Poems have proceeded.

But some may ask me, How it falls out, that Poets now adays are of no such
esteem, as they have been in former times? I answer, because virtue in our
declining and worser days, generally finds no regard: Or rather more truly
with Aretin^ (being demanded why Princes were not so liberal to Poesy, and
other good Arts, as in former times) Because their conscience tells them, how
unworthy they are of the praises given them by Poets; as for other Arts, they
make no account of that they know not.

But since we are here (having before overrun the Champaigne and large
field of History) let us a while rest our selves in the garden of the Muses,
and admire the bounty of heaven, in the several beauties of so many divine
and fertile wits.

We must begin with the King of Latin^ Poets, whom Nature has reared beyond
imitation, and who above all other only, deserves the name of a Poet; I mean
Virgil. In him you shall at once find (not elsewhere) that Prudence, Prudence.
Efficacy, Variety, and Sweetness, which Scaliger requires in a Poet, and
makes his prime virtues. Under Prudence is comprehended out of general
learning and judgment, that discreet, apt suting and disposing, as well of
Actions as Words in their due place, time and manner; which in Virgil is not
observed by one among twenty of our ordinary Grammarians, Who (to use the
words of the Prince of learning hereupon) only in shallow and small Boats, In
Poetie. lib. 3. qui and Idea, ca. 25.
glide over the face of the Virgilian Sea. How divinely, according to the
Platonickes, does he discourse of the Soul? how properly of the Nature, number
of winds, seasons of the year, qualities of Beasts, Nature of Herbs? What
in-sight into ancient Chronology and History? In brief, what not worthy the
knowledge of a divine wit? To make his Aentas a man of extraordinary aspect,
and comeliness of personage, he makes Venus both his mother and Lady of his
Horoscope. And forasmuch as grief and perpetual care, are inseparable
companions of all great and noble atchieuements, he gives him Achates quasi
(...), his faithful companion? What immooued constancy, when no tears or
entreaty of Eliza could cause him stay? What Piety, Pity, Fortitude, beyond
his companions. See how the Divine Poet gave him leave to be wounded, lest his
valor in so many skirmishes might be questioned, and that a far off, not at
hand, that rather it might be imputed to his Fortune, then his rashness or
weakness; then by one who could not be known, to give the enemy occasion
rather of fear, then of challenging the glory. And whereas he brings in
Camilla, a courageous Lady, and invincible at the Swords point in encountering
other; yet he never brings her to try her valor with Aeneas. Aeneid, 11.
Again, that Tarchon and she might show their brave deeds he makes Aeneas
absent: as also when Turnus so resolutely brake into his Tents. Lastly, what
excellent judgment shows he in appropriating the accidents and Histories of
his own times, to those of the ancient, as where he brings in Venulus
plucked by force from his Horse, and carried away with full speed? The like
Caesar confesses to have happened to himself. Aene as with his right arm
naked, commands his Soldiers to abstain from slaughter. The like did Caesar
at the battle of Pharsalie, Par^ise ciuibus.
and with the same words. But thus much out of the heap and most judicious
observations of the most learned Scaliger.

Efficacy is a power of speech, which represents a thing after an excellent
manner, neither by bare words only, but by presenting to our minds the lively
Idea's or forms of things so truly, as if we saw them with our eyes; as the
places in Hell, the fiery Arrow of Acesta, the description of Fame, the flame
about the Temples of Ascanius: but of actions more open, and with greater
Spirit, Aneid. 4.
as in that passage and passion of Dido, preparing to kill herself. At trepida
and coeptis immanibus effera Dido,
Sanguineam voluens ac^em, m^^ulisque trementes
Interfusa genas, and pallida mart futura,
Interior a domus irrumpit limin^, and altos
Conscendit furibunda rogos, ensemque recludie
Dardanium, etc.


Which for my English Readers sake, I have after my manner translated, though
assured all the translations in the world must come short of the sweetness and
Majesty of the Latin. But she amazd and fierce by cruel plots,
Rouling about her bloody eye, her cheeks
All-trembling and arising, full of spots,
And pale with death at hand, perforce she breaks
Into the in-most rooms. --
Enraged then she climbes the lofty pile,
And out of sheath the Dardane sword does draw:
Never for such end ordained; when a while
The Trojan garments, and known couch she saw,
With trickling tears her self thereon she cast,
And having paused a little, spoke her last.
Sweet spoils, while Fates and Heavens did permit,
Receive this soul, and rid me of my cares;
What race my Fortune gave I finished it, etc.


Moreover, that lively combat between Nisus and Volscens, with many other of
most excellent life.

A sweet Sweetness.
verse is that, which like a dish with a delicate Sauce, inuites the Reader to
taste even against his will; the contrary is harshnesse: hereof I give you an
example in the description of young Pallas (whom imagine you see laid forth
newly slain upon a Biere of Crabtree and Oken rods, covered with Straw, and
arched over with green boughs) then which no Nectar can be more delicious.
Qualem virgine^ demessum pollice florem, Aeneid. 11.

Seu mollis viola, seu languent is Hyacinthi,
Cui nec sulger adhuc, nec dum sua ferma r^cessit,
Non iam matter alit tellus viresque ministrat, etc.
Even as the Flower by Maidens finger mowne,
Of th'drooping Hy'cinth, or soft Violet,
Whose beautie's fading, yet not fully gone;
Now mother Earth no more does nourish it, etc.
The like of fair Eurialus breathing his last. Purpureus veluti cum flos
succisus aratro, Aeneid. 9.

Languescit moriens, lassove papauera collo
Demisere caput, pluvia cum forte gravantur.
Look how the purple Flower, which the Plow
Has shorn in sunder, languishing does die;
Or Poppies down their weary necks do bow,
And hang the head, with rain when laden lie, etc.


This kind, (...)
Plutarch terms Flowery, as having in it a beauty and sweet grace to
delight, as a Flower.

Varistie, is various, and the rules of it so difficult, that to define or
describe it, were as to draw one picture which should resemble all the faces in
the world, changing it self like Pr^tens into all shapes: which our Divine
Poet so much, and with such excellent art affects, that seldom or never he
utters words, or describes actions spoken or done after the same manner,
though they be in effect the same; yea, though the conclusion of all the Books
of his Aeneides be Tragical, save the first; yet are they so tempered and
disposed with such variety of accidents, that they bring admiration to the
most divine judgments: among them all not one like another, Pale Scal. lib. 3.
P^c^ cap. 27.
save the ends of Turnus and Mezentius. What variety in his battles,
assailing the enemies Camp, besieging Cities, broils among the common people,
set battles in fields, aides of horse and foot? etc. Never the same wounds,
but given with diverse weapons, as here one is wounded or slain with a piece
of a Rock, a Flint, Firebrand, Club, Halberd, Long pole: there another with a
drinking Boule or Pot, a Rudder, Dart, Arrow, Lance, Sword, Phalari^a.
Bals of Wildfire, etc. In diverse places, as the throat, head, thigh, breast,
hip, hand, knee, before, behind, on the side, standing, lying, running, flying,
talking, sleeping, crying out, entreating. Of place, as in the field, in the
Tents, at Sacrifice, upon the guard, in the day time, in the night. To proceed
further, were to translate Virgil himself; therefore hitherto of variety. I
forbear his most lively descriptions of persons, times, places, and manner;
his most sweet and proper Similitudes, as where he resembles Aeneas, who
could not be moved by any entreatie or tears of Dido, or her Sister Anna, to
a stubborn Oak after this manner. At veluti annosam valido cum robore quercum,
Alpini Borea nunc hinc, Aeneid. 4.
nunc flatibus illinc,
Eruere inter so certant; it strider, and alte
Consternunt terram concusso stipite friends, etc.
As when the Alpine winds with each contend,
Now this, now that way, with their furious might,
Some aged Oak up by the roots to rend,
Loud whistling's heard, the earth bestrewed quite
(The body reeling) all about with leaves:
While it stands firm, and irremoued cleaues
Unto the Rock; for look how high it heaues
The lofty head to heauen-ward, so low
The stubborn root does down to hell-ward grow.


Again, that elegant comparison of Ar^^ns (having cowardly slain the brave
Lady Camilla, and retired himself for feare^ into the body of the Army) to a
Wolf that had done a mischief, and durst not show his head. At velut ille
prius que^^tela inimica sequantur, Aeneid. 11.

Continuo in montes sese anius abdidit altos
Occiso pastore Lupus, magnove iuvenco
Conscius audacis facti, caudamque remulcens
Subiecit pauit antem vtero, sylvasque petiuit, etc.
And as a Wolf that has the Shepherd slain,
Or some great beast, before the Country rise,
Knowing him guilty, through by-waies amain
Has got the Mountains, lee^ing where he lies,
Or clapped his tail betwixt his legs, in fear
Taken the next Coppise, till the Coast be clear.


After Virgil, I bring you Ovid, Ovid.
as well because they lived in one time, (yet Ovid confesses he saw Virgil
Virgilium (...) v^di.
but once in all his life) as that he deserves to be second in imitation, for
the sweetness and smooth current of his style, every where seasoned with
profound and antique learning: among his Works, his Epistles are most worthy
your reading, being his neatest piece, every where embellished with excellent
and wise Sentences; the numbers smoothly falling in, and borrowing their luster
and beauty from imitation of native and antique Simplicity: that of Acontius
is somewhat too wanton; those three, of Ulysses, Demophoon, and Paris to
O^none, are suspected for the weakness of conceit, in regard of the other, to
be none of Ouids.

Concerning his books, Amorum and de Art amandi, the wit with the truly
ingenuous and learned will bear out the wantonness: for with the weeds there
are delicate flowers in those walks of Venus. For the Argument of his
Metamorphosis, he is beholden to Parthenius, and diverse others, and those who
long before wrote of the same subject.

About the year 1581. when the King of Poland made war in Moscouia, Vide
Surium, in Commentari^ retum in orb gestarum.
certain Polonian Ambassadors travailing into the in-most places of Moscouia,
as far as Podolia and Kiouia: Anne 1581. fol. 1026.
they passed the great River Boristhenes, having in their company a certain
young Gentleman, very well seen in the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew tongues;
withal, an excellent Poet and Historian: he persuaded the Polonians to well
horse themselves, and ride with him a little further; for he would (said he)
thew them Ouids Sepulcher; which they did: and when they were gone six days
journey beyond Boristhenes, through most vaste and desolate places, at last
they came into a most sweet and pleasant valley, wherein was a clear running
Fountain, about which the grass growing very thick and high, with their
Swords and Fauchions they cut it down, till at last they found a Stone, Chest,
or Coffin, covered over with sticks and shrubs, whereon, it being rubbed and
cleansed from Moss and filth, they read Ouids Epitaph, which was this: Hic
situs est vates, quem Diui Caesaris ira
Augusti, Latia cedere iussit hume:
Sape miser voluit Patrijs occumbere terris,
Sed frustra: hunc illi fata dedere locum.


This his Sepulcher (says mine Author) remains upon the borders of Greece,
near to the Euxine Sea, and is yet to be seen.

Of Lyricke Poets, as well Greek as Latin, hold Horace Horace.
in highest account, as the most acute and artificial of them all, having
attained to such height, that to the discreet judgment, he has cut off all
hope of equalizing him: his Style is elegant, pure and sinewie, with most
witty and choice sentences, neither humili contentus Stylo (as Quintilian
says of him) sed grandil^quo and sublimi. Yea and if we believe Scaliger, more
accurate and sententious then Pindar. His Odes are of most sweet and pleasant
invention, beyond all reprehension, every where illustred with sundry and rare
figures, and ve^ses so sluent, that the same Scaliger Scaliger Poet. lib. 6.
protests he had rather be a composer of the like, then be King of whole
Arragon. In his Satyrs he is quick, round and pleasant, Totius T^^aco^^^usis
Rex.
and as nothing so bitter, so not so good as Iuvenal: his Epistles are near;
his Poetica his worst piece, for while he teaches the Art, he goes
vnartificially to work, even in the very beginning.

Iuvenal of Satyrists is the best, Iuvenal.
for his Satyrs are far better then those of Horace, and though he be
sententiously tart, yet is his phrase clear and open.

Persius, Persius.
I know not why we should so much affect him, since with his obscurity he
labors not to affect us; yet in our learned age he is now discovered to
every Schoole-boie: his style is broken, froward, unpleasing and ha^sh.

In Martial Martial.
you shall see a divine wit, with a flowing purity of the Latin tongue, a
true Epigrammatist: his verse is clear, full, and absolute good, some few too
wanton and licentious, being winked at.

Lucane Lucane.
breathes with a great spirit, wherefore some of our shallow Grammarians, have
attempted to equal him with Virgil: but his error is, while he does
ampullare with big sounding words, and a conceit unbounded, furious and
ranging, and cannot with Virgil contain himself within that sweet, humble
and unaffected moderation; he incurreth a secret envy and ridiculous contempt,
which a moderate and well tempered style auoideth.

Seneca, Seneca.
for Majesty and state yields not to any of the Grecians whosoever, Cultu
and ni^ore, to use Scaligers words, far excelling Euripides: and albeit he
borrowed the Argument of his Tragaedies from the Graecians, yet the Spirit,
loftiness of sound, and Majesty of style is merely his own.

Claudian, Claudian, Ignobili subject oppressus. Statius.
is an excellent and sweet Poet, only ouerborne by the meannesse of his
subject, but what wanted to his matter he supplied by his wit and happy
invention.

Statius is a smooth and a sweet Poet, coming nearest of any other to the
state and Majesty of Virgils verse, and Virgil only excepted, is the Prince
of Poets as well Greeks as Latin; for he is more slowery in figures, and
writes better lines then Homer. Of his works his Sylue are the best.

Propertius Propertius.
is an easy clear and true Elegiacke, following the tract of none save his
own invention.

Among Comicke Poets, how much antiquity attributed to Plautus Plautus.
for his pleasant vein (to whom Volcatius gives the place next to Cacilius,
and Varro would make the mouth of Muses) so much do our times yield to
Terence, Terence.
for the purity of his style: wherefore Scaliger wills us to admire Plautus
as a Comoedian, but Terence as a pure and elegant speaker.

Thus have I in brief, comprised for your behoof, the large censure of the
best of Latin Poets, as it is copiously delivered by the Prince of all
learning and Judge of judgments, the divine Iul. Cas. Scaliger. But while we
look back to antiquity, let us not forget our later and modern times (as
imagining nature has heretofore extracted her quintessence, and lest us the
dregs) which produce as fertile wits, as perhaps the other, yea and in our
Britain.

Of Latin Poets of our times in the judgment of Beza and the best learned,
Buchanan Buchanan.
is esteemed the chief: who albeit in his person, behavior, and fashion, he
was rough hewn, slouenly and rude, seldom caring for a better out side then a
Rugge-gowne girt close about him, yet his inside and conceit in Poesy was
most rich, and his sweetness, and facility in a verse, vnimitably excellent,
as appears by that Master piece his Psalms; as far beyond those of B.
Rhenanus, as the Stanza's of Petrarch the times of Skeleton: Iul. Cas. Scaliger.
but deserving more applause (in my opinion) if he had fallen upon another
subject; for I say with one, Mihi spiritus diuinus eiusmod^ places quo scipsum
ingessit a Patre, and illoru^ piget qui David Psalmos suis calamistris inustos
sperarant efficere plausibiliores. And certain in that boundless field of
Poetical invention, it cannot be avoided, but something must be distorted
beside the intent of the Divine enditer.

His Tragedies are lofty, the style pure, his Epigrams not to be mended, save
here and there (according to his Genius) too broad and bitter.

But let us look behind us, and we shall find one English-bred (whose
glory and worth, although Cineri supposta doloso) is inferior neither to
Buchanan, Joseph of Exeter.
or any of the ancients, and so much the more to be valued, by how much the
brighter he appeared out of the fogges of Barbarism and ignorance in his time;
that is, Joseph of Exeter, who lived under Henry the 2. and Richard the first,
who wrote that singular and stately Poem of the Trojan war, after the
History of Dares Phrygius, which the Germans have printed under the name of
Cornelius Nepos. He died at Bourdeaux in France, where he was Archbishop, where
his monument is yet to be seen.

After him (all that long tract of ignorance, until the days of Henry the 8.
(which time Erasmus calls, the Golden Age of learning, in regard of so many
famously learned men, it produced more then ever heretofore) flourished Sir
Thomas More, Sir Thomas More.
sometime Lord Chancellor of England: a man of most rich and pleasant
invention: his verse fluent, nothing harsh, constrained or obscure; wholly
composed of conceit, and inoffensiue mirth, that he seems ad lepores fuisse
natum. How wittily does he play upon the Arch-cuckold Sabinus, scoff at
Frenchified Lalus, and Herney a French cowardly Captain, beaten at the Sea by
our English, and his ship burned, yet his victory and valor to the English
disgrace, proclaimed by Brixius a Germane Pot-aster? What can be more lofty
then his gratulatorie verse to King Henry upon his Coronation day? more witty
then that Epigramme upon the name of Nicolaus an ignorant Physician, that had
been the death of thousands, and Abyngdons Epitaph? more sweet then that
nectar Epistle of his, to his daughters Margaret, Elizabeth, and Cicelie? But
as these ingenious exercises bewraied in him an extraordinary quickness of wit
and learning, so his Vtopia his depth of judgment in State-affaires, then
which, in the opinion of the most learned Budaus in a preface, before it our
age has not seen a thing more deep and accurate. In his younger years, there
was ever a friendly and virtuous emulation, for the palm of invention and
poesy, between William Lilly William Lilly.
the author of our Grammar, and him, as appears by their several
translations of many Greek Epigrammes, and their invention tried upon one
subject; notwithstanding they loved and lived together as dearest friends.
Lilly also was beside, an excellent Latin Poet, a singular Grecian; who
after he traveled all Greece over, and many parts of Europe beside, and lived
some four or five years, in the I Will of the Rhodes: he returned home, and by
John Collet Deane of Paul's, was elected Master of Paul's School, which he had
newly founded.

Shortly after, began to grow eminent, as well for Poesy as all other general
learning, Sir Thomas Challoner Sir Thomas Challoner.
Knight (father to the truly honest, and sometime lover of all excellent parts,
Sir Thomas Challoner, who attended upon the late Prince) borne in London,
brought up in Cambridge; who having left the Vniuer sitie, and followed the
Court a good while, went over with Sir Henry Knyuet, Ambassador to Charles the
fifth, as his friend and companion: what time the Emperor being preparing a
mighty fleet against the Turks in Argier, the English Ambassador, Sir
Thomas Challoner, Henry Knowles, M. Henry Isam, and others, went in that
service as voluntaries with the Emperor. But the Galley wherein Sir Thomas
Challoner was, being cast away by foulness of weather, after he had labored
by swimming for his life as long as he was able, and the strength of his arms
falling him, he caught hold upon a cable thrown out from another galley, to
the loss and breaking of many of his teeth, and by that means saved his life.
After the death of King Henry the 8. he was in the battle of Muskleborough,
and knighted by the Duke of S^mmerset. And in the beginning of the reign of
Queen Elizabeth, he went over Ambassador into Spain, where at his hours of
leisure, he compiled ten elegant books in Latin verse. de Ropub. Anglorum
instauranda; superuised after his death by Malim, and dedicated to the old Lord
Burghley, Lord Treasurer. Being sent for home, by her Majesty, he shortly
after died in London, and was buried in Paul's near to the steps of the
Quire, toward the South-doore, under a fair marble; but the brass and
epitaphe written by Doctor Haddon, by sacrilegious hands is since torn away.
But the Muse and Eternal Fame have reared him a monument more lasting and
worthy the merit of so excellent a man.

Of English Poets of our own Nation, esteem Sir Geoffrey Chaucer Sir Geoffrey
Chaucer.
the father; although the style for the antiquity, may distaste you, yet as
under a bitter and rough rind, there lies a delicate kernel of conceit and
sweet invention. What Examples, Similitudes, Times, Places, and above all,
Persons, with their speeches, and attributes, do as in his Canterburie-tales
(like these threads of gold, the rich Arras) beautify his work quite thorough?
And albeit diverse of his works, are but merely translations out of Latin and
French, yet he has handled them so artificially, that thereby he has made
them his own, as his Troilus and Cresseid. The Romant of the Rose, was the
Invention of Ithan de Mehunes, a French Poet, whereof he translated but only
the one half: his Canterburie-tales without question were his own invention,
all circumstances being wholly English. He was a good Divine, and saw in those
times, without his spectacles, as may appear by the Plough-man, and the
Parsons tale: withal an excellent Mathematician, as plainly appears by his
discourse of the Astrolabe to his little son Jews. In brief, account him
among the best of your English books in your library.

Gower Gower.
being very gracious with King Henry the 4. in his time carried the name of
the only Poet, but his verses to say truth, were poor and plain, yet full of
good and grave Morality: but while he affected altogether the French phrase
and words, made himself too obscure to his Reader; beside his invention comes
far short of the promise of his Titles. He published only (that I know of)
three books, which at S. Marie Oueries in Southwarke upon his monument lately
repaired by some good Benefactor, lie under his head; which are, Vox clamantie,
Speculum Meditantis, and Confessio Amantis. He was a Knight, as also was
Chaucer.

After him succeeded Lydgate, Lydgate.
a Monk of Bury, who wrote that bitter Satyr of Peirs Plowman. He spent
most part of his time in translating the works of others, having no great
invention of his own. He wrote for those times a tolerable and smooth verse.

Then followed Harding, Harding, Skeleton.
and after him Skeleton, a Poet Laureate, for what desert I could never hear;
if you desire to see his vein and learning, an Epitaph upon King Henry the
seventh, at West-minster will discover it.

In the latter end of King Henry Henry Batle of Surrey.
the 8. for their excellent faculty in Poesy were famous, the right noble
Henry Earl of Surrey (whose Songs and Sonnets yet extant, are of sweet
conceit:) and the learned, but unfortunate, Sir Thomas Wyat. Sir Thomas Wyat.


In the time of Edward the sixth lived Sternhold, whom King Henry his father, a
little before had made groom of his Chamber, for turning certain of David's
Psalms into verse: and merry John Heywood, Northmimmes in Herford-shire near
to S. Albanes.
who wrote his Epigrammes, as also Sir Thomas More his Vtopia, in the parish
wherein I was borne; where either of them dwelt, and had fair possessions.

About Queen Mary's time, flourished Doctor Phaer who in part translated
Virgils Aeneids, after finished by Arthur Golding.

In the time of our late Queen Elizabeth, which was truly a golden Age (for
such a world of refined wits, and excellent spirits it produced, whose like are
hardly to be hoped for, in any succeeding Age) above others, who honored
Poesy with their pens and practice (to omit her Majesty, who had a singular
gift herein) were Edward Earl of Oxford, the Lord Buckhurst, Henry Lord Paget;
our Phoenix, the noble Sir Philip Sidney, M. Edward Dyer, M. Edmund Spencer, M.
Samuel Daniel, with sundry others; whom (together with those admirable wits,
yet living, and so well known) not out of Envy, but to avoid tediousness I
ouerpasse. Thus much of Poetry.

CHAP. XI.
Of Music.
Music a sister to Poetry, next craves your acquaintance (if your Genius be
so disposed.) I know there are many, who are adeo (...), and of such
disproportioned spirits, that they avoid her company; as a great Cardinal in
Rome, did Roses at their first coming in, that to avoid their sent, he built
him an house in the champaigne far from any town: or as with a Rose not long
since, a great Ladies cheek in England, their ears are ready to blister at
the tendrest touch thereof. I dare not pass so rash a censure of these as
Pindar does, or the Italian, having fitted a proverb to the same effect, Whom
God loves not, that man loves not Music: but I am verily persuaded, they are
by nature very ill disposed, and of such a brutish stupiditie, that scarce any
thing else that is good and sauoureth of virtue, is to be found in them. Never
wise man (I think) questioned the lawful use hereof, since it is an immediate
gift of heaven, bestowed on man, whereby to praise and magnify his Creator; to
solace him in the midst of so many sorrows and cares, wherewith life is
hourly beset: Deuteronomy. 32.
and that by song, as by letters, the memory of Doctrine, and the benefits of
God might be for ever preserved (as we are taught by the Song of Moses, and
those divine Psalms of the sweet singer of Israel, who with his It was an
instrument three square, of 72. strings, of incomparable sweetness.
Psalterie so lowdly resounded the Mysteries and innumerable benefits of the
Almighty Creator,) and the service of God advanced, as we may find in 2.
Samuel 6. verse. 5. Psalm 33. 21. 43. and 4. 108. 3. and in sundry other
places of Scripture, which for brevity I omit.

But, say our Sectaries, the service of God is nothing advanced by singing and
instruments, as we use it in our Cathedral Churches, that is, by Answering one
another in the Quire.
Antiphonie, Restes, Repetitions, Varietis of Moodes and Proportions with the
like.

For the first, that it is not contrary, but consonant to the word of God, so
in singing to answer either: the practice of M^riam the Prophete^se, and Sister
of Moses, when she answered the men in her song, will approve; For repetition,
nothing was more usual in the singing of the Levites, and among the Psalms of
David, the 136. is wholly compounded of those two most graceful and (...)
figures of repetition, Symploce and Anaphora.

For Resting and Proportions, the nature of the Hebrew verse, as the meanest
Hebrician knows, consisting many times of uneven feet, going sometime in
this number, sometimes in that; one while (as S. Hierome says) in the numbers
of Sappho; another while of Alcaus, does of neoessitie require it: and wherein
does our practice of singing and playing with Instruments in his Majesty's
Chapel, and our Cathedral Churches, differ from the practice of David; the
Priests and Levites. Chron. 2. ca. 5. ver. 12. and 13.
Do we not make one sound in praising and thanking God, with voices and
instruments of all sorts. D^^^e (as S. Hierome says) reboet laquear ^empli:
the roof of the Church ecchoeth again, and which lest they should cavil at
as a Jewish Ceremony, we know to have been practiced in the ancient purity
of the Church; but we return where we left.

The Physicians will tell you, that the exercise of Music is a great
lengthner of the life, by stirring and reviving of the Spiri^s, holding a
secret sympathy with them; Besides, the exercise of singing, opens the breast
and pipes; it is an enemy to melancholy and deiection of the mind, I^ lib. de
A^gore animi.
which S. Chrysostom truly calls, The Devils Bath. Yea, a curer of some
diseases: in Apugli^, in Italy, and therea bouts, it is most certain, that
those who are stung with the Taramula, are cured only by Music. Beside, the
aforesaid benefit of singing, it is a most ready help for a bad pronunciation,
and distinct speaking, which I have heard confirmed by many great Divines: yea,
I my self have known many Children to have bin helped of their stammering in
speech, only by it.

Plato calls it, (...)
A divine and heavenly practice, profitable for the seeking out of that which
is good and honest.

Homer says, Musicians are worthy of Honor, and regard of the whole world;
(...) Odyll. 8.
and we know, alb^it Ly^urgu^ imposed most straight and sharp Laws upon the
Lacedaem^ni^ns, yet he ever allowed them the exercise of Music.

Aristotle Arist. Politic.
auerreth Music to be the only disposer of the mind to Virtue and Goodness;
wherefore he reckons it among those four principal exercises, wherein he
would have children instructed.

Tulli^ says, there consists in the practice of singing, and playing upon
Instruments, great knowledge, and the most excellent instruction of the mind:
and for the effect it works in the mind, he terms it, Sta^ilem, Thesaurum,
Cicero T^sc. quast. lib. 1.
qui moros instituit, componi^que, ac mo^tit ^rarum ardores, etc. A lasting
Treasure, which rectifieth and orders our manners, and allayeth the heat and
fury of our anger, etc.

I might run into an infinite Sea of the praise and use of so excellent an
Art, but I only show it you with the finger, because I desire not that any
Noble or Gentleman should (save his private recreation at leasurable hours)
prove a Master in the same, or neglect his more weighty employments: though I
avouch it a skill worthy the knowledge and exercise of the greatest Prince.

King Henry the eight could not only sing his part sure, but of himself
compose a Service of four, five, and six parts; as Erasmus in a certain
Epistle, Erasm. in Farragine Epist.
testifies of his own knowledge.

The Duke of Venosa, D. of Venosa
an Italian Prince, in like manner, of late years, has given excellent proof
of his knowledge and love to Music, having himself composed many rare songs,
which I have seen.

But above others, who carries away the Palm for excellency, The just praise
of Maurice Lan^graue of Hessen.
not only in Music, but in whatsoever is to be wished in a brave Prince, is
the yet living Maurice Landgraue of Hessen, of whose own composition I have
seen eight or ten several sets of Morets, and solemn Music, set purposely
for his own Chapel; where for the greater honor of some Festival, and many
times for his recreation only, he is his own Organist. Besides, he readily
speaks ^en or twelve several languages: he is so universal a Scholar, that
coming (as he does often) to his University of Marpurge, what questions
soever he meets with set up, (as the manner is in the Germane and our
Universities) he will Extempore, dispute an hour or two (even in Boots and
Spurs) upon them, with their best Professors. I pass over his rare skill in
Chirurgeri^, he being generally accounted the best Bonesetter in the Country.
Who have seen his estate, his hospitality, his rich furnished Armorie, his
brave Stable of great Horses, his ^^tesie to all strangers, being men of
Quality and good parts, let them speak the rest.

But since the natural inclination of some men, drives them (as it were)
perforce to the top of Excellency: examples of this kind are very rare, yea
great personages many times are more violently carried, then might well stand
with their Honors, and necessity of their affairs: yet were it to these
honest and commendable exercises sauouring of virtue, it were well: but many
neglecting their duties and places, will addict themselves wholly to trifles,
and the most ridiculous and childish practices. (...).
As Eropus King of Macedonia, took pleasure only in making of Candles:
Domitian, his recreation was to catch and kill flies, and could not be spoken
with many times in so serious employment. (...).
P^olomans Philadelphus was an excellent Smith and a Basket maker. Alphonso
Atestino Duke of Ferra^ra, delighted himself only in turning and playing the
Ioyner. Rodolph the late Emperor in setting of Stones, and making Watches.
Which, and the like, much eclipse State and Majesty, bringing familiarity,
and by consequence contempt with the meanest.

I desire no more in you then to sing your part sure, and at the first sight,
withal, to play the same upon your Violl, or the exercise of the Lute,
privately to your self.

To deliver you my opinion, whom among other Authors you should imitate and
allow for the best, there being so many equally good, is somewhat difficult;
yet as in the rest herein you shall have my opinion.

For Mo^^^s, and Music of piety and devotion, as well for the honor of our
Nation, as the merit of the man, I prefer above all other our Phoenix, M.
William Byrd, M. William ^yrd.
whom in that kind, I know not whether any may equal. I am sure, none excel,
even by the judgment of France and Italy, who are very sparing in the
commendation of strangers, in regard of that conceit they hold of themselves.
His Cantiones (...), as also his Gradualia, are mere Angelical and Divine;
and being of himself naturally disposed to Gravity and Piety, his vein is
not so much for light Madrigals of Canzonets, yet his Virginella, and some
others in his first set, cannot be mended by the best Italian of them all.

For composition, I prefer next Ludouico de Victoria, Ludouice de Victoria.
a most judicious and a sweet Composer: after him Orlando di Lasso, a very
rare and excellent Author, who lived some forty years since in the Court of
the Duke of Baueir. He has published as well in Latin as French many sets,
his vein is grave and sweet: among his Latin Songs, his seven poenitentiall
Psalms are the best, and that French Set of his wherein is Susanna un jour.
Upon which Dittie many others have since exercised their invention.

For delicious Air and sweet Invention in Madrigals, Luca Mar^^zio Luca
Mar^nzio.
excels all other whosoever, having published more Sets then any Author
else whosoever; and to say truth, has not an ill Song, though sometime an
ouer-sight (which might be the Printers fault) of two eights, or fifts escape
him; as between the Tenor and Base in the last close, of, I must depart all
hapless: ending according to the nature of the Dittie most artificially, with
a Minim rest. His first, second, and third parts of Thyrsis, Veggo dolca (...)
ben chi fa hoggi mio Sole Cantava, or sweet singing Amaryllie, are Songs, the
Muses themselves might not have been ashamed to have had composed. Of stature
and complexion, he was a little and black man: he was Organist in the Popes
Chapel at Rome a good while, afterward he went into Poland, being in
displeasure with the Pope for overmuch familiarity with a kinswoman of his,
(whom the Queen of Poland, sent for by Luca Marenzio afterward, she being one
of the rarest women in Europe, for her voice and the Lute:) but returning, he
found the affection of the Pope so estranged from him, that hereupon he took
a conceit and died.

Alphouse Ferabosco the father, while he lived, Horatio (...).
for judgment and depth of skill, (as also his son yet living) was inferior
unto none: what he did was most elaborate and profound, and pleasing enough in
Air, though Master Thomas Morley censureth him otherwise. That of his, I saw
my Lady weeping, and the Nightingale (upon which Dittie Master Bird and he in
a friendly aemulation, exercised their invention) cannot be bettered for
sweetness of Air, or depth of judgment.

I bring you now mine own Master, Horatio Vecchi Horatio Vecchi.
of Modena; beside goodness of Air most pleasing of all other for his
conceit and variety, wherewith all his works are singularly beautified, as
well his Madrigals of five and six, as those his Canzonets, printed at
Norimberge: wherein for trial, sing his Viuo in fuoco amoroso Lucretia mia,
where upon I^ catenat^ more, with excellent judgment, he drives a Crotchet
thorough many Minims, causing it to resemble a chain with the Linkes. Again,
in S^is potessi raccor'i m^i Sospiri, the breaking of the word Sospiri with
Crotchet and Crotchet, rest into sighs: and that, fa mi un Canzon^, etc. To
make one sleep at noone, with sundry other of like conceit, and pleasant
invention.

Then that great Master, Giou (...) Croce
and Master not long since of S. Marks Chapel in Venice; second to none, for
a full, lofty, and sprightly vein, following none save his own humor: who
while he lived, was one of the most free and brave companions of the world. His
Poenitentiall Psalms are excellently composed, and for piety are his best.

Nor must I here forget our rare Countryman, Peter Phillips, Peter Phillips.
Organist to their Altezza's at Bruxels, now one of the greatest Masters of
Music in Europe. He has sent us over many excellent Songs, as well Motets as
Madrigals: he affects altogether the Italian vein.

There are many other Authors very excellent, as Boschett^, Boschett^ his
Motets of 8. parts, printed in Rome 1594.
and Clandie de Monte Verde, equal to any before named; Gimmoni Ferreti,
Stephano Felis, Giulis Rinaldi, Phillipe de Monte, Andrea Gabrieli, Cyprian de
Rore, Pallaui ceno, (...), with others yet living; whose several works for me
here to examine, would be over tedious and needless; and for me, please your
own ear and fancy. Those whom I have before mentioned, have been ever
(within these thirty or forty years) held for the best.

I willingly, to avoid tediousness, forbear to speak of the worth and
excellency of the rest of our English Composers, Master Doctor Douland, Tho:
Morley, M. Alphonso, M. Wilbie, M. Kirbie, M. Wilkes, Michael East, M. Bateson,
M. Deering, with sundry others, inferior to none in the world (how much soever
the Italian attributes to himself) for depth of skill and richness of
conceit.

Infinite is the sweet variety that the Theorique of Music exercises the
mind withal, as the contemplation of proportions, of Concords and Discords,
diversity of Moodes and Tones, infiniteness of Invention, etc. But I dare
affirm, there is no one Science in the world, that so affects the free and
generous spirit, with a more delightful and in-offensiue recreation, or better
disposes the mind to what is commendable and virtuous.

The Commonwealth of the Cynethenses in Arcadia, Polyb. lib. 4. cap. 7.
falling from the delight they formerly had in Music, grew into seditious
humors and civil wars, which Polybius took especially note of: and I
suppose, hereupon it was ordained in Arcadia, that every one should practice
Music by the space of thirty years.

The ancient Gauls in like manner (whom Julian Julian Imperat. in Epist. ad
Antioch.
termed barbarous) became most courteous and tractable by the practice of
Music.

Yea, in my opinion, no Rhetoric Rhetorique and Music their affinity.
more persuades, or has greater power over the mind; nay, has not Music
her figures, the same which Rhetorique? What is a Reuert but her Antistrophe?
her reports, but sweet Anaphora's? her counterchange of points,
Antimetabole's? her passionate Aires but Prosopopoe's? with infinite other of
the same nature.

How does Music amaze us, when assures of discords she makes the sweetest
Harmony? And who can show us the reason why two Basins, Bowls, Brass pots, or
the like of the same bigness; the one being full, the other empty, The
strange effects and properties of Musical proportions.
shall, stricken, be a just Diapason in sound one to the either; or that there
should be such sympathy in sounds, that two Lutes of equal size being laid
upon a Table, and tuned Unison, or alike in the Gamma, G sol re vt, or any
other string; the one stricken, the other untouched shall answer it?

But to conclude, if all Arts hold their esteem and value according to their
Effects, account this goodly Science not among the number of those which Lucian
places without the gates of Hell, as vain and unprofitable: but of such which
are (...), the fountains of our lives good and happiness: since it is a
principal means of glorifying our merciful Creator, it heigthens our
devotion, it gives delight and ease to our travails, it expels sadness and
heaviness of Spirit, preserves people in concord and amity, allaieth
fierceness and anger; and lastly, is the best Physic for many melancholy
diseases.

CHAP. 12.
Of Drawing, Limning, and Painting: with the lives of the famous Italian
Painters.
SInce Aristotle numbreth Graphice generally taken, for whatsoever is done with
the Pen or Pencill (as writing fair, Drawing, Limning and Painting) amongst
those his (...), or generous practices of youth in a well governed
Commonwealth; I am bound also to give it you in charge for your exercise at
leisure, it being a quality most commendable, and so many ways useful to a
Gentleman. For should you (if necessity required) be employed for your
Countries service in following the war, you can describe no plot, manner of
fortification, form of Battaglia, Situation of Town, Castle, Fort, Haven,
Island, course of River, passage through Wood, Marish, over Rock, Mountain,
etc. (which a discreet General does not always commit to the eye of another)
without the help of the same. In all Mathematical Demonstrations nothing is
more required in our travail in foreign regions. The manifold use of painting
or l^^ning.
It brings home with us from the farthest pa^ of the world in our bosoms,
whatsoever is rare and worthy the observance, as the general Map of the
Country, the Rivers, harbors, havens, promontories, etc. within the Landscap,
of fair hills, fruitful valleys: the forms and colors of all fruits,
several beauties of their flowers, of medicinable Simples never before seen
or heard of: the orient colors, and lively pictures of their Birds, the shape
of their beasts, fishes, worms, flies, etc. It presents our eyes with the
complexion, manner, and their attire. It shows us the rites of their Religion,
their houses, their weapons, and manner of war. Beside, it preserves the
memory of a dearest friend, or fairest Mistress. And since it is only the
imitation of the surface of nature, by it as in a book^ of golden and
rare-limmed letters, the chief end of it, we read a continual Lecture of
the wisdom of the Almighty Creator, Job: 9. 16.
by beholding even in the feather of the Peacocke a (...).
miracle, as Aristotle says.

And that you should not esteem basely of the practice thereof, let me tell
you that in ancient times painting was admitted into the first place among the
liberal arts, and throughout all Greece taught only to the children of Noble
men in the schools, and altogether forbidden to be taught to servants or
slaves.

In no less honor and esteem was it held among the Romans, as we find in
Pliny and many others who every where advance the professors; and the dignity
of the practice thereof nothing base or servile, since one of the most Noble
families in Rome, the Fabij thought themselves much honored by the addition of
that Surname Pictor. For the first of that name, although he was most
honorably descended, honored with many Titles, Consulships and Triumphs,
excellently learned in the laws, and beside accounted in the number of the
Orators of his time; yet he thought his skill in painting added to these
Honors, and his memory would hear the better of posterity, for that he was
endued with so excellent and quality: for after with his own hand he had
painted the Temple of Salus round about within, and finished his work, he
wrote in fair letters in an eminent place, Quintus Fabius pinxi.

Neither was it the exercise of Nobility among the ancients only, but of late
days and in our times we see it practiced by the greatest princes of Europe,
without praeiudice to their Honors. Francis the first, king of France, was very
excellent with his pencill; and the virtuous Margaret Queen of Navarre beside
her excellent vein in Poesy could draw and limne excellently; the like is
reported of (...) Duke of Savois. Lomazi^e


Nor can I ouerpasse the ingenuitie and excellency of many Noble and Gentlemen
of our own nation herein, of whom I know many; but none in my opinion, who
deserves more respect and admiration for his skill and practice herein then
Master Nathaniel Bacon of Broom in Suffolk (younger son to the most
Honorable and bountiful minded Sir Nicholas Bacon, Knight, and eldest
Barronet,) not inferior in my judgment to our skilfullest Masters. But
certainly I know not what favorable aspect of Heaven that right noble and
ancient family, which produces like delicate fruits from one Stem so many
excellent in several qualities, that no one name or family in England can say
the like.

Painting is a quality I love (I confess) and admire in others, because ever
naturally from a child, I have been addicted to the practice hereof; yet when
I was young, I have been cruelly beaten by ill and ignorant schoolemasters,
when I have been taking, in white and black, the countenance of some one or
other (which I could do at thirteen and fourteen years of age: beside the
map of any town according to Geometrical Proportion, as I did of Cambridge
when I was of Trinity College, and a Junior Sophister,) yet could they never
beat it out of me. I remember one Master I had (and yet living not far from
S. Athanes) took me one time drawing out with my pen that peare-tree and boys
throwing at it, at the end of the Latin Grammar^ which he perceiving, in a
rage struck me with the great end of the rod, and rent my paper, swearing
it was the only way to teach me to rob Orchard as beside, that I was placed
with him to be made a scholar and not a painte^, which I was very likely to
do; when I well remember he construed unto me the beginning of the first Ode
in Horace, Edite, set ye forth, (...), the sportes, atavit R^gib^^, of our
ancient kings; but leaving my ingenious Master, to our purpose.

For your first beginning and entrance in draught, make your hand as ready as
you can (without the help of your compasses) in those general figures of the
Circle, ovall, square, triangle, cylinder, etc. for these are the foundation of
all other proportions. As for example, your ovall directs you in giving a just
proportion to the face. Your Square or Cube for all manner of ground plots,
forms of fortification, wherein you have no use of the Circle at all. Your
Circle again directs you in all orbicular forms whatsoever, and so forth of
the rest.

Having made your hand fit and ready in general proportion, learn to give all
bodies their true shadows according to their eminence and concauity, and to
heigthen or deep as your body appears nearer or farther from the light;
which is a matter of great judgment, and indeed the soul (as I may say) of a
picture.

Then learn all manner of draperie, that is, to give garments and all manner
of stuffes, as cloth, silk, and linen their natural and proper soldes; which
at the first will seem strange and difficult unto you, but by imitating the
choicest printes and pieces of the most judicious masters, with your own
observance you will very easily attain the skill. But since I have already
published a book of Drawing and Limming; wherein I have discovered whatsoever
I have thought necessa^ie to perfection herein, I will refer you for farther
instruction to it, and only here give you the principal Authors for your
Imitation.

Since, as I said, proportion is the principal and chief thing you are first
to learn, I commend unto you that Prince of Painters and Graund-master Albert
Durer, Alber^. Durer.
who beside that his pieces for proportion and draperie are the best that are,
he has written a very learned book of Symmetrie and proportions, which has
been since translated out of high Dutch into Latin. And though his pieces
have been long since worn out of press, yet you may happen upon them among
our skillful painters, which if you can get reasonably keep them as jewels,
since I believe you shall never see their like: they seem old, and commonly
are marked with a great D in an A.

For a bold touch, ^ub Gol^^ius.
variety of posture, curious and true shadow: imitate Goliziu^, his printes
are commonly to be had in Popes head alley. Himself was living at my last
being in the low Countries at Harl^^; but by reason of the loss of one of his
eyes, he has given over a Hinge in copper, and altogether exercises his
pencill in oil.

The pieces of Michael Angelo Michael Angelo.
are rare and very hard to be comeby. Himself lived in Rome, and was while he
lived esteemed the best painter in Europe, as verily it seems by that his
famous piece, of the last judgment in the Popes Chapel, being accounted one
of the best in the world.

Hans Holben Ha^ns Holben.
was likewise an excellent Master, he lived in the time of King Henry the
eight, and was employed by him against the coming of the Emperor Charles the
5. into England. He painted the Chapel at white Hall, and S. James Joseph of
Arimathia, Lazarus rising from the dead, etc. were his.
I have seen many pieces of his in oil, and once of his own draught with a
pen a most curious chimney-peece K. Henry had bespoke for his new built
palace at Bridewell.

Of later times and in our age the works of Shadan, Witrix, Joan. Sha^^^,
Witrix.
and my honest loving friend Crispin de Pas Crispin de Pas^e
of Vtrecht are of most price; these cut to the life, a thing practiced but of
late years: their pieces will best instruct you in the countenance, for the
natural and (...) dowes thereof, the cast and form of the eye, the touch of
the mouth, the true fall, turning and curling of the hair, for ruffes, Armor,
etc.

When you are somewhat ready in your draught (for which you must provide pens
made of ravens quils, black lead, dry pencils made of what color you please by
grinding it with strong wort, and then rolling it up pencilwise and so let it
dry) get my book, entitled the Gentleman's Exercise, which will teach you the
use and ordering of all manner of colors for limning, as how to make any one
color what you please by the composition of many, as a scarlet, carnation,
flame color, all manner of greenes for leaves or banckes, purples for the
break of the morning, the violet, the hyacinth, etc. all manner of changeable
colors in garments of silk; brownes and blackes for hair colors, the colors
of barks of trees, the sea, fou^tains, rocks, flesh colors or carnations for
the face and complexio^, with the manner of preparing your card, and inbriefe
whatsoever is needful to be known of a practitioner. Now having your colors
in their shells finely ground and washed, and variety of pencills great and
small, begin first to wash over some plain printes, then after to imitate to
the life (according unto my directions in that book:) wherein by degrees you
will take incredible delight, and furnish your conceits and devices of
Emblems, Anagrams, and the like with bodies at your pleasure, without being
beholden to some dear and nice professed Artist.

Painting in Oil Of painting in oil.
is done I confess with greater judgment, and is general of more esteem then
working in water colors; but then it is more Mechanique and will rob you of
over much time from your more excellent studies, it being sometime a fortnight
or a month ere you can finish an ordinary piece. I have known Michael lanss of
Delf in Holland, the most excellent painter of all the Low Countries, to have
been (at times,) a whole half year about a picture, yet in the end to have
blurred it out (as it is his manner) for some small disresemblance, either in
the eye or mouth; so curious is the workemanshippe to do it well: beside oil
nor oil colors, if they drop upon apparel, will not out; when water colors
will with the least washing. But lest you should think me ignorant or envious,
I will not conceal from you the manner of working herein, and though it may be
you shall not practice it, it may profit others. Of preparing your table for an
oil picture.


First for your table whereupon to draw your picture, plane it very even, and
with Size (made of glue sodden long in fair water, till the glue be quite
dissolved) mingled and heat with Spanish white finely ground, white it over;
then let it dry, then white it over again, and so the third time, when being
dry, scrape it very even with a sharp knife till it be smooth, then prime it
with red lead or some other color, which being dry, draw your picture out
upon it with a piece of chalk, pencill of coal, lastly, with black lead; so
lay on your colors.

Grind all your colors in Linseede oil, ^aue when you grind your white for
ruffes and linen; then use the oil of walnuts, for The fi^^er for our yealow
ruffes.
linseede oil will turn yeallowish.

Having all your colors ready ground, with your pallet on the thumb of your
left hand, and pencills for every color, in the same lay your colors upon
your pallet thus: first, your white Lead, then Lake, Iuorie, black, Seacoale
black (as you see the complexion) lamp black, vmber for the hair, red lead,
yealow oaker, verdigreace; then your blewes, Masticot and Pinke, the rest at
your pleasure, mixing them on the other side of the pallet at your pleasure.

To begin a picture, first draw the Eye, the white thereof make of white lead
with as little char-coale black; having finished it, leave from the other Eye
the distance of an Eye, then draw the proportion of the nose, the compass of
the face, after that make the mouth, the ear, the hair, etc.

After you have made the white of the eyes and proportion of the nose, etc. lay
your carnation or flesh color over the face, casting in here and there some
shadows which work in with the flesh color by degrees. Your flesh color is
commonly compounded of white lead, lake, and vermilion, but you may heighthen
or decpen it at your pleasure.

Then shadow the face all over as you see cause, and finish the nose,
compassing the tippe of it with some dark or light reddish shadow.

The shadows for your face are compounded commonly, of Iuory, black, white
lead, vermilion, lake, Sea-coale black, etc.

Then shadow your cheeks and lips (with the mouth stroke, which make of
lake only) with vermilion and lake as you list mixed together.

Now make the Circles of the Eyes. For the gray eye, take charcoale black and
white lead heighthened or deepened at your pleasure.

For the black Circle of the Eye, take Vmber, Sea-cole-blacke, and a little
white, and mix them as you think fit.

For the round ball in the eye take lampe-blacke and verd-greace, for
lampe-blacke will hardly dry without it.

For the hands and the shadows between the fingers use the same
flesh-colours and shadows as in the face for heighthening or deepening.

If you would make a flesh-colors of a swarthy complexion, mingle white Lead,
Lake, and yealow oker together, and in the shadodwes, put in some vmber and
Sea-coale black.

For black hair, take lampe^ black only, and when you will have it
brighter, mix it with a little vmber, white, and red Lead.

For flaxen hair, take vmber, and white lead; the browner you will have it,
put in the more vmber, the whiter more white; but if darker, yet add to a
little sea-coale black.

For yealow hair, take masticote, vmber, yealow oker, and a little red lead;
if you will have it redder, put in the more red lead and vmber.

For a white hair, take half Iuorie black, and half of vmber, and with your
knife temper them well upon your pallet with white lead, with more white, or
vmber, or I^ory, raising or deepening it at your pleasure.

For the teeth, take white Lead, and shadow it with char-coale black.

For Ruffes, Lawnes, and Linen.
For Linen, take white Lead mingled with char-coale black, so making it whiter
or darker at your pleasure; for your sine Lawnes, put a little oil smalt in
amongst it, and with a fine little bag of Taffata stuffed with wool or the
like, take up the color and press it hard down where you would have it.

For Veluets of all colors.
For blacke-veluet, take Lampe-blacke and verdigreace, for your first ground;
but when it is dry, lay it over with Iuory black and Verdigreace, (to help it
to dry) and for the shadow use white Lead, with a little Lamp black.

For Green Velvet, take Lamp black, and white Lead, and work it over like a
Russet Velvet; then being dry, draw it only over with Verdigreace, and a
little Pinke, and it will be a perfect Green Velvet.

For a Seawater Green Velvet, lay on the aforesaid mingled Russet Verdigreace
only, if you will have it more grassy, put to more Pinke.

For a Yellowish Green, put a little Masticot among your Verdigreace at your
pleasure: but note this, al your shaddowing must be in the Russet, and these
Greens only drawn lightly over.

For Red Velvet, take Vermilion, and shadow it with Brown of Spain, and
where you will have it darkest, take Sea-cole black mingled with Spanish
Brown, and shadow where you will, letting it dry, then glaze it over with
Lake, and it will be a perfect Red Velvet.

For a Crimson or Carnation Velvet, put the more or less white Lead to the
Vermilion, as you shall see cause.

For Blew Velvet, take Oil Smalt, and temper it with white Lead; ^he brighter
you will have it, put in the more White; the sadder, the more Smalt.

For Yellow Velvet, take Masticot and yellow Oker, and deepen it for the
shadow with Vmber.

For Tauny Velvet, take Brown of Spain, white Lead, and Lamp black, mixed
with a little Verdigreace to shadow it, where you see occasion; and when it is
dry, glaze it over with a little Lake, and red Velvet added unto it.

For Purple Velvet, take Oil Smalt, and temper it with Lake, half Lake, half
Smalt; then take white Lead and order it as bright or as sad as you list.

For Ash-colored Velvet, take Char-cole black, and white Lead, and make a
perfect Russet of the same, deepning it with the black, or heigthening it with
your white at your pleasure.

For Haire-coloured Velvet, grind Vmber by it self with Oil, and lay it on
your picture, and heigthen with white Lead and the same Vmber.

For Sattens in Oil Colors.
For Black Satin, grind Lamp black with Oil, then mix it with some white
Lead; where you will have it shine most, mingle some Lake with your white Lead.

For White Satin, take white Lead ground with Oil, then grind Iuorie black
by it self, and where you will have it sad, add more of the black.

For Green Satin, take Verdigreace and grind it by it self, then mix some
white Lead with it; and where you will have it bright, add some Pinke: if more
inclining to a Popingiay, add more Pinke to your white Lead; and to deepen it
more, add more Verdigreace.

For yellow Satin, grind Masticot by it self, yellow Oker by it self, and
Vmber by it self; where you will have it lightest, let the Masticot serve;
where a light shadow, let the Oker serve, where the darkest or saddest, Vmber
only.

For Blew Satin, take Oil, Smalt, and white Lead, ground by themselves; white
Lead for the heigthening, and Smalt for your deepening, or darkest shadow.

For Purple Satin, mix Oil, Smalt, with Lake, and white Lead: heigthening
with white Lead.

For Orange Tauny Satin, take red Lead and Lake, where you will have it
brightest take red Lead by it self, and where made sad, Lake.

For Red Satin, grind Brown of Spain by it self, mingling Vermilion with
the same; where you would have it light, put in a little white Lead.

For Hair colored Satin, take Vmber and white Lead; heigthen with your white
Lead, and for the dark shadow of the cuts, add to your Vmber a little
Sea-cole black.

For Taffata's.
Make your Taffata's all one as you do your Sattens, but you must observe the
shaddowing of Taffata's; for they fall more fine with the solds, and are
thicker by much.

For changeable Taffata's take sundry colors, what you please, and lay them
upon your garment or picture one by another; first casting out the solds, then
with your Pencill driving and working them finely one into another.

For Cloth.
Cloth likewise is as your Sattens, but that you must not give so shining and
sudden a gloss unto it.

For L^^ther.
As Buffe, take yellow Oker, and some white Lead mixed with it: and where you
will have it darker by degrees, mix Vmber with it, and when you have wrought
it over, take a broad Pencill and frieze it over with Vmber and a little
Sea-coale black.

For yellow Leather, take Masticot and yellow Oker, shadow it with Vmber at
your pleasure.

For black Leather for shoes, Lamp black, shaddowed with white Lead.

For white Leather, white Lead, shaddowed with Iuorie black.

To express Gold and Silver.
To express Gold upon Armor, or the hilt of a Sword or Rapier, take Vmber,
Red Lead, and Masticot; lay your ground only Red Lead, if you please, mixed
with a little Pinke, and where you will have the shadow dark, use Vmber,
where the light, Masticot.

For Silver, take Char-coale black and white Lead; where you will have it
dark, use more Char-coale, and for the light, give it a bold and sudden
stroke with your white. And thus you make your Pearl. Note, that you must
grind your Sea-coale and Char-coale (of a sallow, if you can get it) in fair
water first, and when it is dry, grind it in Oil.

For Sky and Landscape.
For a Sky or Landscaps, that seem a great way off, take Oil Smalt, or Bice
if you will, and with Linseed Oil only temper it on your pallet (for in
grinding Smalt or Bice, they utterly lose their color) with white Lead, and
where it looks red as the morning, use Lake, etc.

Of Wood colors, Barks of Trees, etc.
Your Wood colors are compounded either of Vmber and White, Char-coale and
White, Sea-coale and White, Vmber black and white, or with some green added.
Sometime add a little Lake or Vermilion.

Of sundry Greenes in Oil.
For a deep and sad Green, as in the in-most leaves of trees, mingle Indico
and Pinke.

For a light Green, Pinke and Masticot: for a middle and Grasse-greene,
Verdigreace and Pinke.

Remember ever to lay on your Yellowes, Blewes, Reds, and Greenes, upon a white
ground which gives them their life.

To make clean your Pencils, rub Soape hard into them, and lay them by a
while, after wash them in warm water.

To make clean your grinding stone and Mullar, rub it over with crumbs of bread.

To keep your Colors from drying in the heat of Summer, set them in the
bottom of a basin of water.

If you would get farther experience, acquaint your self with some of our
excellent Masters about London, where there are many passing judicious and
skillful.

The only and most esteemed Piece in the world for Judgment and Art, is the
battle (commonly called, the Battle of Doomes day) fought in the night
between S^lym the first, Emperor of the Turks, and Ishma^l Sophi King of
Persia. It is a night piece done by Bellino, the famous Venetian Painter, by
the commandment of S^lym, after his victory, and sent as a present to the
Duke and State of Venice, where it yet hangs in their Counsel Chamber.

There is likewise a very rare and admirable piece in And warpe, done by a
Blacksmith upon this occasion. This Smith falling in love with a Painters
Daughter, (who vowed never to marry any, but of her fathers profession) gave
over his Trade of a Smith, and sell to painting some four or five years: in
which time, the hope of gaining a fair maid guiding his hand, he became so
cunning, that he not only obtained his Wench, but a mass of wealth by his
Pencill; there being offered for this one piece alone, seven thousand Crowns.
It hangs in one of the great Churches there, S. Georges or our Ladies, I
remember not well which. But thus much of Drawing and Painting in general.

Now it shall not be amiss, for the advancement of this excellent skill, which
none can love or admire more then my self (that I may omit the lives of the
ancient Grecian and Roman Painters) to come nearer our times, and acquaint
you with the best Masters Italy alone has affoorded.

Ioannes Cimabus.
Italy being overrun, and miserably wasted with wars, what time all good
learning and Arts lay neglected, about the year 1240. Painting and Painters
were there so rare, that they were feign to send into Greece for men skillful
herein. Of whom the Italians learned the rudiments and principles of this Art,
in a manner quite lost amongst them. So that while certain Grecian Painters,
sent for by some of the Nobility of Florence, were painting a Church in
Florence, one Ioannes Cimabus a young man, and naturally affecting this Art,
grew so far into familiar acquaintance with them, that he learned the manner
of their draught, and mingling colors, that in a short time he excelled the
best Masters among them; and was the first that I can find among the Italians,
that brought Painting into credit, and got a name by his skill herein. For some
of his pieces for the raritie, were carried out of his house into the new
Church in Florence, with Musical Instruments of all sorts, and solemn
procession^ others being uttered at great rates over all France and Italy; in
so much, as Charles the French King moved with his fame, came to Florence to
see his Work. He died in the year 1300. leaving behind him his Scholar
Giotto, who by the opinion of Dantes in his Purgatory far surpassed him: He
was so humorous, says the Interpreter of Dantes, that if himself or any other
espied any fault in his work, he would (like Mishael Ianss, now living at Delft
in Holland) deface and break it in pieces, though he had bestowed a
tweluemoneths pains thereon.

Andrea Taffi.
About this time also, the Graecians brought the Art of working in Musiue, or
Mosaique to Venice, where in S. Marks Church they wrought it; with whom Taffi
falling acquainted, he drew one of the best Masters among them, named
Apoll^^^m, to Florence, who taught him to bake Mosaique Glasses, and to temper
the size for them: so they wrought together; but the rudeness of that age was
such, that neither they nor their works were in that esteem as they deserved.

Gaddo Gaddi.
About this time also lived Gadde Gaddi, a very rare Master, a Florentine borne
(for the fine and subtle air of Florence, has produced men of more sharp
and excellent spirits, then any other place of Italy) who excelled in Mosaique,
and wrought it with better judgment then any before him; insomuch as he was
sent for to Rome, Anno. 1308 the year after the great fire, and burning of the
Church of S. John Lateran^, and the Palace of Pope Clement the fifth: whence
well rewarded, he returned back into Tuscane, where he dyed Anno 1312.

Margaritene.
Margarit^n^^ was borne in Arezz^, a very skillful Master: he was the first
that devised laying Gold or gilding upon Bole Armoniacke to be burnished, as we
see it in knops now adays upon the Valences and Canopics of beds; and to make
a Glue for Picture Tables, that should never decay.

Giotto.
Giotto was not only a rare Painter, but also an excellent Architect, for all
manner of curious conceit in building: and to say truth, was the first who of
latter times in Italy brought picture into admiration, and her true height. He
was borne at Vespign^^^, a village fourete^ne Italian miles from Florence: his
father was an husbandman, and Gi^tt^ being a Boy of some twelve years of age,
was set by him to keep sheep: but Nature having ordained him for another end;
the Boy while he was tending his sheep, would be practicing with a stick
upon the sand, or dustie highway, or upon void places upon walls with a Coal,
to draw whatsoever sorted with his fancy. It fortuned on a time, while he was
drawing the picture of one of his sheep, Cimabus to pass by, who admiring
such Art in the Boys draught, (who had never any other direction save out of
his natural inclination) demanded of him if he would dwell with him: who
answered, Yea, if his father were so contented. The father agreed, and placed
him with Cimabus, who in short time so excelled, that he far surpassed the
rusticke Greek manner of working, bringing forth a better Modern Art, and the
true working by the life, which had not been known in two hundred years
before. He was very inward and familiar with Dantes the Poet, whose picture he
drew: he was of all others famous for his skill and conceit in expressing
affections, and all manner of gesture, so that he might be truly called Natures
Scholar. His workmanship is especially seen at Acesi, a City of Vmbria, in
the Cloisters of S. Francis, where the body of S. Francis lies buried: where
among other rare inventions of his, is to be seen a Monk kneeling before
Obedience, who puts a yoke upon his neck, he holding up both his hands to
heaven, and she laying her forefinger upon her mouth, casts up her eyes
toward Christ, from whose side the blood issues in great abundance. On either
hand of her stand wisdom and humility, to show where true obedience is, there
is wisdom and humility, which help to finish every good work: on the other
side is an history where chastity stands upon a strong and high rock, as
not to be won, or moved by the force of kings, though they seem to offer
Crowns, Scepters, and Palms. At her feet lies purity, in the shape of a
child washing it self, and by chastity stands penance, having diuen away
with her discipline winged Love: in a third place stands poverty barefooted,
treading upon thorns, a dog barking at her; at one side, a child throwing
stones at her, on the other, another child with a stick putting the thorns
toward her legs. This poverty is married to Saint Francis, whom Christ gives
by ioying their hands: in a fourth place is Saint Francis, praying with such
great devotion, and inward affection expressed in his countenance, that it
detaineth the beholder with singular admiration. From thence returning toward
Florence, he wrought in distemper (as we call it) or wet with size, six
histories of patient I^b, wherein are many excellent figures: among others the
positures and countenances of the messengers bringing the sorrowful news unto
him, which are not to be mended: withal a servant, with one hand keeping off
the slies from his sore master, and with the other stopping his nose: the
countenances and draperies of the standers by done with such grace and
judgment, that the same hereof presently went over all Italy. Insomuch that
Pope Benedict sent a messenger from Rome into Tuscany to know what manner of
man Giotto was, and what his works were; being purposed to beautify Saint
Peter's Church with sacred Histories by the hand of some excellent master. This
Messenger or Courtier from the Pope, taking his journey to Florence, passed by
Siena, and still enquiring out the best masters, took a draught of something
from every one of them to carry back to the Pope, to choose as he thought best:
coming to Florence in a morning betimes, he came to the shop of Giotto,
desiring (as he had done of others) to give him a touch with his pencill, or
some piece to show his Holiness. Giotto being merrily disposed, took a sheet
of paper, upon which, with a pencill (setting one arm under his side) he drew
so absolute a Circle, that by no compass a truer could be drawn; having done,
smiling he gave it to the Cour^^ier, saying, There is my draught. The Cour^ier
imagining he had flouted him, said, is this all? Giotto replied, it is all, and
more then enough. When the Pope with others of judgment saw it, and heard the
manner how carelessly he did it, he admired and confessed, he passed all men of
his time in excellency it this being known, it grew a proverb in Italy, M^re
round then Giotto's Circle. The Pope after this, did him much honor, and very
liberally rewarded him. He had painted upon a certain wall the picture of the
Virgin Mary, and when this wall was to be mended, such care (by reason of the
excellency of his Art) was had of this picture, that it was cut square and
taken down whole out of the wall with a great deal of pain and cost. He made
in Mosai^^^, in the fore court of Saint Peter, the ship wherein Peter and the
Apostles were in danger of drowning, their actions and gestures full of fear,
the sails full of wind, with the behavior of Fishermen in such extremity. At
Avag^^^, he wrought for Pope Cle^^^^ the fifth; and in many other places of
France his works are yet remaining. Anno 1316. he was at last sent for by
Robert king of Naples, for whom there (in the Church of the Cloister of Saint
Clare) he made many histories both of the old and new Testament, with the whole
history of the Revelation: it is said that herein his invention was admirable,
and that he was much helped by his dear and ingenious friend Dan^es the Poet.
The King was not only pleased with the excellency of his hand, but with his
many witty answers and conceits; wherefore sometime he would sit by him half
a day together to see him work. Once the King said unto him, Giotto I will
make thee the foremost man of my Court; I believe it (quoth Giotto) and that (I
think) is the reason why I am lodged in the Porters lodge at your Court gate.
Another time also the King said thus unto him, Giotto, if I were as thou, the
weather is so exceeding hot, I would give over Painting for a while; whereunto
Giotto replied, Indeed Sir, if I were as you, I would let it rest indeed.
Another time, being at work in the great Hall of the Court, the King merrily
requested him, to paint him out his kingdom; Giotto made no more ado, but
presently painted an Affe with a Saddle on his back, and smelling at another
new saddle that lay before him at his feet, as if he had had a mind to that,
rather then the other upon his back; and upon each saddle a crown and a
Scepter: the King demanded what he meant thereby; Giotto replied, Such is your
Kingdom and Subjects, for they desire new Lords daily. In his returning to
Fl^rence, he made very many rare pieces by the way, devised many excellent
Models for building; beside other his works in Caruing, Plaistique, etc. The
City of Florence not only Roially rewarded him, but gave him and his
posterity a Pension of an hundred crowns a year, which was a great sum in
those times.

He died to the grief of many, in the year 1336. and was buried at Florence,
upon whom Angelus Politianus wrote this Epitaph worthy so excellent a man. Ille
ego sum per quem pictura extincta re^ixis,
Cui quam recta manu^, ^am fuit and facilis.
Natura decrat, nostra quad defuit arti,
Plus licuit nulli pingere necmeli^^.
Miraris The Model of the steeple of the chief Church in Florence
^turri^ egregiam sacre are sonantem,
Hac qu^que de module cre^it ad astra (...);
Denique sum Iottus, quid opus suit illareferre?
Hoc nomen lengi carminis instar erit.


Stephano Fiorentino.
This Stephano being Giotto's scholar, what with his masters furtherance, and
his own industry, became not only equal to his master, but in some respects
excelled him, as many of his works do manifest, namely the Virgin Mary in the
Church called Camp^ Sante at Pisa, which to say truth, excelled that of his
Masters in the Cloister of Sant^ Spirit^ in Florence. He painted the
transfiguration of our blessed Savior in the Mount with Moses and Elias, where
the light was seen to shine down upon the Apostles, who with such a fair
action lay so wrapped in their mantles that ye might perceive all the foldings
upon the ioints, and made the nakedness to shine through their thin clothes,
which was never seen before or vsedby Giotto. In another Chapel he made the
fall of Luci^er, wherein he showed many excellent foreshortnings of bodies,
arms, and legs; wherefore by the Artists of his time. He was named Occhi^ di
Natura, the eye of nature, he wrought at Rome, Milane, and many other places:
Many excellent pieces of his are yet to be seen in Florence, which for
breuity I omit the dyed Anno 1350.

Petro Laurati of Siena.
Petro Laurati was famous in his time, especially for making of Glories,
wherein he surpassed all others before him. At Arezze with excellent skill he
painted upon a ^eeling Angels dancing as in a ring about Mary, seeming to sing
and play on instruments; where in their eyes and countenances you may see
expressed a true godly joy: another troop of Angels with various and delicate
action carrying her up into heaven. He dyed, 1350.

B^namic^ Buffalmacco.
Buffalmacco was scholar to Taffi, and as excellent in his profession, so was
he merry and of pleasant conceit: wherefore he was familiar with Brun^ and
Calandrin^, rare Artists and of his own humor, many of whose iestes are
recorded by Boccace. Buffalmacco being a young youth while he dwelt with Taffi,
was called up by his master by two or three of the clock in winter mornings to
his work, grinding of colors or the like, which grieved him much; and
bethinking himself how to make his master keep his bed, he got up in the
fields some thirty or forty Dorres or Beetles, and a little before his master
should rise, fastening little wax candles upon their backs, puts them in
lighted, one by one into his masters chamber; who seeing the lights moving up
and down, began to quake for fear, committing himself to God with hattie
prayer, and covered himself over head and ears in his bed, having no mind to
work or awake Buffalmacco. In the morning ^ee asked Buffalmacco if he had not
seen a thousand Devils as he had; who answered no, for he was asleep, and
wondered he called him not: Called? said Taffi, I had other things to think
of then to paint, I am fully resolved to go dwell in another house. The night
following though Buffalmacco had put in but only three lights into his
chamber, yet could he not sleep for fear all that night: it was no sooner day
but Taffi, left his house with intent never to come into it again. Buffalmacco
hereupon went to the priest of the parish to desire his advice, telling him
that in his conscience the Devil next unto God hated none more then painters,
for that, said Buffalmacco, we make him odious in the peoples eyes by painting
him terrible and in the vgliest shape we can devise; and more to spite him,
we paint nothing but Saints in Churches to make the people more devout then
otherwise they would, wherefore the devils are very angry with us, and having
more power by night then by day, they play these prankes, and I fear they will
do worse except we gine over this working by candle light. This he spoke so
confidently, and in so deniure a manner to the priest, that the priest anouched
it to be true, and with great reasons persuaded Taffi ever after to keep his
bed; which being published about, working by candlelight was left through the
town ever after. The first proof of his skill he showed at a Nunnery near
Pisa now wholly ruined, being the birth of Christ, where Herod killed the
children of Bethlem; where the affections and looks of the murderers,
Mothers, Nurses resisting with biting, scratching, tearing, pulling, etc. are
excellently expressed. Moreover, he drew the four Patriarchs, and the four
Evangelists, where he expressed Saint Luke with great art, blowing the ink in
his pen to make it run. He was in his time one of the merriest and finest
companions of the world: he died, Anno 1340.

Ambrosio Lorenzetti of Siena.
This Ambrosio was a painter of Siena, he was chiefly commended for that grace
he had in contrining postures and accidents of History: he was the first that
most lively could resemble tempests, storms, rain, etc. He was very moderate,
and went rather like a Philosopher then a painter. He dyed at Siena.

Petro Cavallini of Rome.
This was scholar unto Gi^tt^, and wrought with him in the ship of Mosaique in
the front of Saint Peter's in Rome. There is yet a Crucifixe of his yet to be
seen at Arezzo, and another in the Church of Saint Paul in Rome, of admirable
life and skill. He was wondrous devout and Religious. He dyed 1363. and lies
buried at Paul's without Rome with this Epitaph. Quantum Romana PETRVS decus
addidi^ vibi,
Pictur^, tartum da^ decus ipse P^l^.


Simon of Siena.
Simon of Siena was a rare Artist, and lived in the time of the famous and
Laur^ate Poet Francis Petrarch, in whose verses he lives eternally, for his
rare art and judgment shown, in drawing his Laura to the life. For invention
and variety he was accounted the best of his time.

Andreas Orgagna.
Andreas Orgagna was a Fl^rentine, and both a Painter, Poet, Architect and
Caruer, though he began first with caruing. One of his best pieces he wrought
in Pisa, which was all sorts of worldly and sensual Epicures, rioting and
banqueting under the shadow of an Orange tree, within the branches and bows
whereof, sly^ little Amorettos or Cupids, shooting at sundry Ladies
lasciuiously dancing and dallying amongst them; which Ladies were then living,
and all discerned by their several countenances: as also many Gallants and
Princes of that time drawn in the same table. On the other side of the table,
he made an hard Rock, full of people, that had left the world, as being
Eremites, serving of God, and doing diverse actions of piety, with exceeding
life; as here one prays, there another reads, some other are at work to
get their living, and among the rest, there is with admirable art and judgment,
an Eremite milking of a Goat. Withal, Saint Macharius, who shows the
miserable estate of man to three Kings riding on, hunting in great state with
their Queens, and shows the^ a grave wherein lie three dead Kings, whose
bodies are almost rotten; whereon they look with a great fear, lively
expressed in their countenances, and one wishly looking down into the grave,
stops his nose, etc. Over this flies death in black with a Since in his
hand: all about on the earth lie people along of all ages, sex, and condition,
slain, and dying by sundry means. He also painted the Judgment, where he
placed in hell most of his foes that had molested him, and among the rest a
Scrivener, whose name was Cecehode Ascol^, and known for a notable knave in
his profession, and a Coniurer beside, who had many ways molested him: He was
by children and boys discerned to be the same man, so well had he expressed him
to the life. He dyed aged 60. years, 1389. and lies buried at Florence.

Thomas Masaccio.
This Thomas, surnamed Masaccio or the Slouen (for that he never cared how he
went in his clothes) was borne in the Castle of Saint John de Valderno; and
being a youth, so much addicted his mind unto painting, that he cared in a
manner for nothing, not so much as to demand money of his debtors where it was
due, but when mere necessity drove him thereunto; yet was he courteous unto
all. He excelled in Perspectiue, and above all other masters labored in
Nakeds, and to get the perfection of foreshortning, and working over head to
be viewed standing under. Amongst other his works, that of Saint Peter taking
a penny out of the fishes mouth, and when he pays it for tole, is famous. In
brief, he brake the Ice to all painters that succeeded for Action in Nakeds
and foreshortnings, which before him were known but of few. For by his pieces
and after his practice, wrought Friar John of Ficsole, Friar Phillip
Phillipine, Alessan: Baldovinetti, Andrea del Caslagna, Verochio Dominico de
Grillandaio, di Botticello, Leonarde de Vinci, Pedro di Perugia, Friar
Bartholome ^ of Saint Marks, Mariotte, Albertinell, the rare and ever admired
Michael Angelo, Bonarotti, Raphael d' V^bine, and sundry others. He dyed it was
suspected of poison in the 26. year of his age. His Epitaph was written in
Italian by Hannibal Coro.

Leon Baptista Alberti.
This Alberti was an excellent linguist, having his Latin tongue very exactly.
He was borne in Florence, and was both an excellent Painter and Architect; he
wrote ten books of Architecture in Latin, which he published in print,
Anno. 1481. Moreover he wrote three books of the Art of Painting, a Treatise
of measuring heigthes, besides certain books of Policy, with many other
discourses. He was descended of a Noble house, and was very inward with pope
Nicholas the fi^t. He was excellent for the descriptions of Battles, night
works, glittering of weapons, and the like.

Friar Phillipo Lippi.
Phillipo Lippi borne in Florence, was a poor Child, and left fatherless and
motherlesse, was brought up by an Aunt; at eight years of age, placed in a
Monastery of the ^^cobines, where out of his natural inclination, he
practiced Drawing and Painting; and in short time grew to that excellence, that
he was admired of all: making in his Cloister many Histories in we^, after
Masaccio's manner. At seventeen years of age he forsook his order. Being in
La Marcad' Ancona, he put himself with some friends to Sea, but were in short
time taken by the Pirates of Barbaris, and sold into the Country for slaves,
wearing heavy chains about their legs. In this estate lived Phillipo
eighteen months, but growing familiar with his Master, one day, when he saw
his time and his Master in a good humor, took a coal, and upon a white wall
drew him from head to foot: this being seen of his fellow slaves, and showed
unto his Master, who had never seen a picture before, was cause of his
deliueance: for making his escape, or at least his Master winking thereat, he
made shift to come to Naples, where he wrought in colors a most curious
Altar-table for King Alphonsus. Hence he went to Florence, and made another
Altar-table, which pleased Cosmo de Medicis wondrous well; whereupon he was
employed by Cosmo in making many small Pictures, whereof some were sent unto
Eugenius the fourth, whereupon he grew in great favor with the Pope. He was so
addicted unto Women, that what ever he got, he bestowed and spent it among
them: whereupon Cosmo shut him up into a Chamber in his house, that he might
follow his work close; but having been thus mewed up by the space of two
days, the humou^ of gadding took him again in the head; and one evening
cutting his sheets, made ropes of them, and so gat out at a window. But shortly
after, found and brought to Cosmo again, he had liberty to go and come at his
pleasure, and was better attended and served then before. For said Cosmo. The
excellence of rare Spirits are heavenly forms, and no burden-bearing Mules.
Many excellent pieces he made in Florence, admired and applauded by the best
Masters. At Pr^t^o by Florence, where he was acquainted, the Nuns of Sancta
Margarita procured him to make their high Altar-table, where being at work,
he espied a beautiful virgin, a Citizens daughter of Florence, whose name was
Francisco Bati: This maid was there kept to be made a Nun; she was most
beautiful, her name was Lucretia, and so he wrought with the Nuns, that he
obtained leave to draw her Picture; but by continual gazing upon her
countenance, he became so enamoured of her, that what by close messengers and
other means, he got her out of the Nunnerie: he got her away and married her,
and by her he had a son, named also Phillip, who became an excellent Painter.
This Friar Phillips works are to be seen at Prato. And amongst other S.
Bernard laid out dead, his brethren mourning about him, and many Cripples and
diseased persons, which (as it was said) with touching the Hearse and his body,
were healed. Then he most excellently wrought the Martyrdom of S. Stephen,
the beheading of S. John Baptist, with many others. He died aged fifty seven,
Anno 1438. He had a stately Monument of Marble erected over him; his Epitaph
was written by Angelus Politianus, which for the elegancy I will set down.
Co^ditus his ego sum, picturae fama Philippus,
Nulli ignota mea est, gratia mir a manus.
Artifices, potui digitis animare colores:
Sperataque animos fallere voce di^.
Ipsa mess stupuit Natura expressa figuris,
Meque, suis fassa est artibus esse parem.
Marmorco tu^ulo Medices Laurentius hic me
Condidit; ante humil^ p^l^ere tectus eram.


Antonello de Messino.
Antonello borne at Messino, ought not to be forgotten, who was the first that
brought painting in Oil into Italy. For certain Oil pieces being sent by the
Merchants out of Flanders to Alphonsus, the first King of Naples, which the
King had in great admiration, for that they could not be washed out with water:
coming to the view of Antonello, Antonello could never be in quiet until he
had found out the Inuentor, whose name was John Van Eyck, who entertained
Antonello very courteously, and showed him his Art what he could; but at last,
John van Eyck dying, Antonello returned unto Venice, where his works of the
Magnifici were much admired, and for that he brought the working in Oil the
first into Italy; he was honored with this Epitaph. D. O. M.
Antonius pict^r, pracipuum Messan^ and t^tius Siciliae ornam^ntum, hac hum^
contegitur, non sol^m suis picturis in quibus singular artificium, and
venustas fi^t, sed and quod coloribus el^^ miscendis splendorem and
perpetuitatem primus Italica pictura con^ulit, summo semper artificum, ^^^di^
celebratus.



Dominico ^irlandaio.
This Dominico was a Florentine, by profession at the first a Goldsmiths, but
falling to Painting, he became a great Master therein. His first work was a
Chapel for the family of the Vespucci, wherein he drew in his Sea habit, and
standing upon an unknown shore, Americus Vesputius, who gave America her
name. His best pieces are to be seen at S. Maria N^vella in Florence. He died
Anno 1493.

Raphaell D'Vrbine.
I ouerpasse for brevity sake, many other excellent and famous Artists of
Italy, equalling the former, as Bellino, Pallaiuoli, Botticello, Verrocchio,
Andreas Mantegna of Mantua, so highly esteemed and honored of Duke Luduvico
Gonzaga; Francesco Francia, Michael Angelo: and will comprise them in the
excellency of one only Raphaell D'Vrbine, who was borne at Vrbine; whose
fathers name was Gi^vanni de Santi, a Painter also. This Raphaell was brought
up under Petro Perusini in Perusia, where he so gave his mind from a child unto
Drawing and Painting, that in short time he contended for the Palm with the
greatest Masters of Europe, and was for his admirable invention, surnamed the
Wonderful. There was a great aemulation between Raphaell and the before named
Francesco Francia, who lived and wrought at B^logna, till at the last through
mere admiration, by report of each others skill, they grew most loving
friends, greeting each either by letters continually; yet had Francia neither
seen Raphaell Vrbine, nor any of his works (by reason he was old and could
not travail, abiding always in Bologna) until it fortuned that Raphaell
Vrbine having made a S. Cicilia in a fair Altar-table, for the Cardinal De
Pucci Santi quatro, which was to be set at Bologna, at S. Giovanni Sopra Monte
(or on the Hill:) which Table he shut in a Case, and sent it to Francia, as
unto a dear friend, that if any thing were amiss, or it happened to be
defaced or injured in the carriage, he would amend it: and beside, so much
befriend him, as to set it up in the place appointed, and to see it want
nothing fitting. When he understood thus much by Raphaels Letter, he opened
the Case with great joy, and set the piece in a good and fair light; which
when he had thoroughly viewed, he was so amazed, and grew so out of conceit of
himself and his own work, confessing his work to be nothing, in respect of
Raphaell Vrbines: which so struck him to the heart, that he died (presently
after he had set the piece in his place) Anno 1518. The fame of Raphael Vibine
at this time was so great, that he was sought for and employed by the greatest
Princes of Europe, as namely, the Popes Adrian and Leo; Francis the first, King
of France, Henry the eight, King of England; the Dukes of Florence, Vrbane,
Mantu^, and diverse others. Those stately hangings of Arras, containing the
History of S. Paul out of the Acts (than which, eye never beheld more absolute
Art, and which long since you might have seen in the banquecting house at
White Hall) were wholly of his invention, bought (if I be not deceived) by King
Henry the eight of the State of Venice, where Raphaell Vrbine dyed. I have no
certainty, but sure I am, his memory and immortal Fame, are like to live in
the world for ever. If you would read the (...) at large of the most excellent
Painters, as well Ancient as Modern, I refer you unto the two volumes of
Vasari, well written in Italian (which I have not seen, as being hard to come
by; yet in the Libraries of two my especial and worthy friends, M. Doctor
Mountford, late Prebend of Paul's, and M. Inigo lones, Surueyer of his Majesty's
works for building) and Calvin Mander in high Dutch; unto whom I am beholden,
for the greater part of what I have here written, of some of their lives.

CHAP. 13.
Of Armorie, or Blazon of Arms, with the Antiquity and Dignity of Heralds.
IT is meet that a Noble or Gentleman who bears Arms, and is well
descended, be not only able to blazon his own proper Coat; derive by
pedigree the descent of his family from the original, know such matches and
allies as are joined to him in blood: but also of his Prince, the Nobility,
and Gentry where he lives, which is not of mere ornament, as the most
suppose, but diversely necessary and of great consequence: as had I fortuned to
have lived in those times, when that fatal difference of either ROSE was to be
decided by the sword; with which party in aequitie and conscience could I have
sided, had I been ignorant of the descent and pedigree Royal, and where the
right had been by inheritance of Blood, Match, or Alliance.

How should we give Nobility her true value, respect, and title, without
notice of her Merit: and how may we guess her merit, without these outward
ensigns and badges of Virtue, which anciently have been accounted sacred and
precious; withal, discern and know an intruding vpstart, shot up with the
last nights Mushrome, from an ancient descended and deserving Gentleman, whose
Grandsires have had their share in every foughten field by the English since
Edward the first? or my self a Gentleman know mine own rank; there being at
this instant the world over, such a medley (I had almost said Motley) of
Coats, such intrusion by adding or diminishing into ancient families and
houses; that had there not been within these few years, a just and
commendable course taken by the Right Honorable the Earls Marshals, for the
redress of this general and insufferable abuse, we should I fear me within
these few years, see Yeomen as rare in England, as they are in France.

Besides, it is a contemplation full of pleasing variety, and for the most
part, sympathizing with every Noble and generous disposition, in substance the
most refined part of Natural Philosophy, while it takes the principles from
Geometry, making use almost of every several square and angle. For these and
other reasons, I desire that you would bestow some hours in the study of the
same: for a Gentleman Honorably descended, to be utterly ignorant herein,
argues in him either a disregard of his own worth, a weakness of conceit,
or indisposition to Arms and Honorable Action; sometime mere Ideotisme, as
Signeur Gaulart, a great man of France (and none of the wisest) inuiting on a
time many great personages and honorable friends to his Table, at the last
service a March-pane was brought in, which being almost quite eaten, he
bethought himself, and said; It was told me, that mine Arms were bravely set
out in Gold and Colors upon this March-pane, but I have looked round about it
and cannot see them: Your Lordship (said one of his men) eat them up your
self but now. What a knave (quoth Mounsieur Gaulart) art thou? thou did
not tell me before Ieate them, I might have seen what they had been.

The dignity and place of an Herald, among the ancient Romans was very great;
Lib. 1.
that same lus Feciale, or Law of Arms, being first instituted by Ancus
Martius, as Liuis testifies, though some ascribe it to Numa Pompilius, who
ordained a College of Heralds.

The office of an Herald, was to see that the Romans Dionysius Halicarna^
antiquit. Romans lib. 2
made not war iniustly with any of their confederates; to determine of war,
peace, leagues, agreements, wrongs taken or offered by them or their enemies,
and the like.

Now if the enemy had offered them wrong, or taken away any thing from them by
violence, they first sent Messengers to demand their right, and the restoring
of that they had taken away; which was done in a soleanmne^sorme, and the words
pronounced distinctly, and with a loud voice: and this manner of delivering
their message, was called Clarigatio. The form was this, Ioucn^^egotestem
facio, siego impie iniusletque, illas res dedier populo Romano mibique exposco,
^unc patriae compotem nunquam sinas esse. If they refused their demands, or to
make ^^stiitution: first all league and friendship (if any were betwixt them)
being renounced and broken, after thirty days, (which they solemnly observed)
they proclaimed open war, and with fire and sword invaded the enemies
Country, and by force recovered their own.

Neither was it lawful, for either Consul or Senate, or any of the common
people, to take up Arms against an enemy, without the consent and approbation
of the Heralds.

Among the Heralds, Bal^asar Ayala de^nic and off^^s Bell. lib. 1.
there was one the cheese and above the rest, whom they called Pater Patratus;
and he was chosen one who was to have children, and his own father alive: him
one of the inferior Heralds, crowning his head and Temples with Veruaine, made
him the cheese or King, either in concluding peace, or denouncing war.

The most ancient form of denouncing war, is set down at large by Liuie.
I^n. lib. 1. and (...). lib. 16 cap. 4. and Dion. Halicarn. lib. 2. antiquit.
Romans
The Tybarens are reported to have been so just in their making war, and
defiance of their enemies, that they would never meet them, but first they
would send them word of the day, place, yea, and very hour they meant to fight.

Moreover, if any complaint by the enemy were made of breach of the league, the
Heralds examined the truth, and having found out the Authors, they delivered
them up to the enemy to do with them as he listed: or if any without the
consent of the people, Senate and Heraldes, either fo^ght or made peace, entered
league, etc. the Romans freede themselves again, by delivering up the Authors
to their enemies. So were the Consuls T. Veturi^s. and Sp. Postumius for their
error at Caudium, and making peace with the Samnites contrary to the will of
the people and Senate, together with T. Numicius and Q. Aemilius Tribunes,
delivered to the enemy. The words of Postumius himself, (who made request that
himself with the rest, who had offended, might be delivered to the enemy) are
thus recorded by Livie. Livi^^ l. ^. 9.
Dedamur per ficiales, nudi vinctique ex^lvamus religions populu^, fi qua
obligavimns: ne quid divini bum^^ive obstet, quo minus instuns piun. qu^ de
integreine (...) bellum. The form and words on their delivery to the enemies
hands, were these: Quandoquidem hice homines iniussu populi Romani, Quiritum
soedus ictu^ iri sposponderunt, atque ob ^am rem noxam nocuerunt: ob eam rem
quo populus Romanus Seelere impio sit solutus, bos^e homines vobis dedo. And
so, many years after was C. Mancinus delivered to the Numantines, with whom
he had entered into league contrary to the will, and without the knowledge of
the Senate. Cicero Offic. lib. 3. Flor. l. 2. cap. 18.


Heraldes also examined and determined of wrongs and injuries done unto
Ambassadors, Vide No^^um Marecellum. lib. 3.
and punished them by delivering up in like manner, the parties offending, unto
the nation or State offended.

They looked also to the strict observing of every branch of the league, or
truce; in brief their Authority was comprised in these few words, Cicero lib.
2. delegitus.
'Belli, pacis, foederum, induciarum, oratorum feciales indices sunte.

Spurius Fusius was the first Herald that cuer was created among the Romans,
and had the name of P^ter Patratus in the war which Tullus Hostitius made
against old Latins.

Their privileges were great and many, and too long for me here to reckon up.
And to conclude, for farther search of their institution, privileges, and
Office, I refer you to Iehan le Feron, De laprimitive Institution d^s ^^ys,
Herauldz et poursus vans d' arms.
a French Author.

I purpose not here to enter into a large field and absolute discourse of
Blazonry with all the laws and terms thereof, having been already prevented
by Bara, Vpton, Gerrard Leigh, Master Ferns, Master Guillim (late Portculleis
pursuiuant) in his Methodicall Display of Heraldry, with sundry others. So
that, in a manner, more cannot be said then has been: my self besides
having written something of this subject heretofore, but only to point unto
you as a stranger upon the way, the fairest and shortest cut unto your iournies
end in this Art.

The word Blazon is from the French E^blasonner; and note that we in England
use herein the same terms of Art with the French: because the ancients of our
Nobility for the greater part, acknowledge themselves to be descended out of
Normandy, and to have come in with the Conqueror, many retaining their ancient
French names, and Charges unto this day; as Beauchamp, Beaumont, Sacuill,
Neuill, with many others.

Your A. B. C. in this Art, let be the knowledge of the sundry forms of
Shieldes or Escotcheons which are, and have been ordinarily borne in ancient
times. Among all nations we of Europe have only two kinds in use (the Lozen^s
excepted) viz. that we use in England, France, Germany, etc. and the Ouall they
bear in Italy: which form they yet (from the old Romans) hold in use.

The word Escotcheon is derived from the French un esci^, that from the Latin
Scutam, and that again from (...) in Greek, which is leather; because the
ancients had their Shieldes of tanned leather, the skins laid thick one over
another, as appears by that of Ulysses, vpbraiding Ajax: Quae nisi fecissem,
frustra Telamone creatus,
Gestasset laeva taurorum tergora septem.


And Caesar (says Ca^brensis) fighting hand to hand with Nennius, Girald. Camb.
a British King fast had his sword, nailed into Nennius his shield (being of
hard leather,) at which advantage Nennius had slain him, had not Labienns the
Tribune stepped in between, and rescued his master.

Now the ancient shields by reason that they were long, and in a manner of that
form as some of the Knights Templers had theirs, as appears upon that their
monument in the Temple Church, differed much from the buckler or target which
was round, as it may appear out of Livie. ^iv. lib. 8.
Clypeis a^tem Romani vsi sunt (says he) deinde postquam facti sunt
stipendiarij, scuta pro clypeis fectre. And Virgil compares the great eye of
Cycl^ps to an Argolican Target, for who will deny but that an eye is round?

That their shieldes (as I have said) were long, and in a manner covered the
whole body, he says elsewhere, Scutis protecti corporalongis.

Hereupon Scutum was called in Greek (...), because it resembled a door, which
is ever more long then broad.

The Carthaginians made their shieldes of gold. M. Aufidius tells us that his
ancestors (being Romans) had theirs of Silver.

Alexander king of the Jews opposed against Prolomy 8000. fighting men, which
he termed H^catomachi, Josephus.
as much to say as, fighting each man against an hundred, because they used
brazen shields.

The Numidians used shieldes made of Elephants hides impenetrable to any dart,
yet on the other side they had this discommoditie, that in rainy weather they
would like a sponge so soake in the water, and become hereby so heavy, the
soldiers could hardly bear them.

The shield in times past was had in such honor, that he who lost or alienated
the same, was accounted as basely of as he that with us runs from his
colors, and was severely punished: and the Graecians fined him at a greater
rate who lost his shield, then he who lost his sword or spear. Plutarch in
vita Pelop^^a.
Because that a soldier ought to take more care that he receives not a
mischief, then he should do it of himself.

Bitter was that jest of Scipio, when he saw a soldier bestow great cost in
trimming and glazing his shield: I can not blame thee (quoth he) that thou
bestewest so much cost upon thy shield, because thou trustest more to that then
to thy sword.

The Lacaeademonians of all other the most warlike, by the laws of Lycurgus,
brought up their children to the use of shields from their infancy; and famous
is that Lacaedemonian mother for that her speech to her son, when she delivered
him a shield going to the war (...), Son either bring back this shield, or
be thou brought back thy self (dead) within it. But thus much of the shield
or Escotcheon.

Arms or Ensigns at the first had their chief use for distinction of Tribe
from Tribe, army from army being composed of two or more colors, whereof one
was ever white or yealow, which we now term Metals, and that of necessity;
for without the mixture of one of these, the other as too dark of themselves,
could not be discerned far, neither of white and yealow only, as
participating too much of the light. Hence they say (though not generally true)
where there is wanting color or metal, it is false armorie.

I will not stand here to dispute over philosophically, as some have done, of
the praeeminence of one color above another, or out of profound ignorance
affirm black to be the most ancient color, because darkness was upon the
face of the earth in the Chaos; as if color were not qualitas visibilis
luminis beneficio, and privati^ were formarum susceptibilis; and white the
next, because God said fiat Lux, as if light were a quality resulting of an
lementarie composition, it being created before all mixed bodies: yea with
Aristotle I rather affirm black properly to be no color at all, as partaking
of the pure Elements nothing at all, for he says (...), Arist (...) lib. (...).
of the Elements mingled together, as earth, water, air, not yet reduced to
their proper substance, as we may see in charcoales, all bodies consuming but
not consumed, whereupon it is called Niger, of the Greek (...), which
signifies dead, as a color proper to dead things. The colors, to say truth,
immediately proceeding from the Elements, are yellow and white: yellow being
an effect of the fire. and all heat (as we may see in gold) begotten by the
heat of the Sun, by the mixture of the clearest and most pure quicke-siluer,
and the finest red brimstone, in fruit and corn ripened by the heat of the
same, in choler, urine, lie boiled, the bellies of hot venomous Serpents and
the like. The white is proper to the water and earth, as we way see in all
watery bodies congealed, as Ice, Snow, Crystal, glass, precious stones
beaten into to powder: also the most roots, the pulpe of apples, pears, and
the like of watery substance, of earth in the ashes of wood and stones burned,
all which turn white, being by the fire purged from water and air. Concerning
the air it self, it has no color at all.

Now after your two Metals, yealow and white, Gold or Silver, which in Armory
we call Or and Argent, you have four principal colors, viz. Sable or black,
Azure or Blew, Gules or Red, Verd or Green. There are others, as Purpure
sanguine Tenn^, which are in more use with the French and other Nations then
with us in England.

From simple colors and division by bare lines, they came to give their
charges quick and living things, such as sorted best with their fancies and
humors, neither without reason. The Alani a warlike people, and extreme
lovers of their liberty, gave in their Ensign a Cat, a beast which of all
other cannot brook bo^^^ge. The Goths to express their cruelty with their
ranging resolution, gave a Bear; the Romans gave the Eagle, which every
Legion severally bare. The reason whereof Josephus gives, Josephus lib. 3.
Quod and vniuersarum anium regnum habeat, and sit valentistima, So did the
Thebans and Persians, as Forcatulus reports; beside, Xenophon (says he,)
remembers he saw in the army of Cyrus a golden Eagle displayed, borne upon a
long spear, Xenophon. de Cyri. paed. lib. 7. Curtius lib. 3.
as his ensign. Yet generally Pliny says, the charges of their ensigns were
of Silver, because that metal was most suitable to the day light, and was to
be discerned farther: so Portius Latro tells Catiline of his silver Eagle
borne before him as the ensign of his rebellion and fury. Besides the Eagle,
the Romans used to bear in their banners the Wolf, Martij pueri.
in memory of Remus and Romulus, fed by the milk of a shee-wolfe, as Livie
shows. When they undertook any expedition wherein great secrecy was to be
used, then they advanced the Minotaure in their standards, to show that the
counsel of Commanders ought to be no less kept secret then the Labyrinth
which was the abode of the Minotaure. Withal they bare the Horse, as the most
Martial beast, and serviceable in the war, being full of fury, and desirous
of victory; and in the Ides of December, a Horse was sacrificed to him who had
broken the right wing of his enemies battle: Lastly, they bare a Hog in
their ensigns, because the war being finished, they used to make a truce by
sacrificing a young Swine; which whosoever violated or went back from, ought
forth with as a Hog to be stoned to death: hereupon they had a form of
Battaglia which they termed the Hogs face. Porcina srons, pitrius lib. 9.
Hierog. (...).
But all these (the Eagle only excepted) were by Caius Marius turned out of
use: but I shall have elsewhere occasion to write more at large of these and
the like Imperial badges.

The kings of Portugal bare in a field Argent five escotcheons Azure, The
corte of Portugal.
each charged with as many Plates; on a bordure Gules ten Castles, or, in
remembrance of five kings, whom (each severally leading a mighty army)
Alphonsus the first, king of Portugal overthrew near to the City of Scallabis
in Portugal now called Trugill^; Osorius de R^gis institutions.
there appearing at the same time (says Osorius) Christ crucified in the
heaven, whose five wounds those five plates represent. Those Castles are his
holds in Barbary which he won from the Moors.

The Dukes of Bavaria D. of Bavaria.
have anciently borne their Arms Palie Bendy arg. and Azure, for that it
resembled the party colored Cassocks of the ancient B^ij, M Freeherus in
origin, Palasina^.
who were those Gauls that attempted the Surprise of the Capitol, whom Virgil
describing as by night, says, Virgatis lucens Sagulis, which he understands
by the white, as most easily to be discerned in the night time.

The town of Dort or Dordrecht in Holland, from a civil broile that long
since occasioned much slaughter, staining the streets (being only two above a
mile in length, (the river running in between) with blood, bare in a field
gules a pale argent.

The City of Collen, in regard it can show the monuments of the three kings who
offered to our Savior, bears Argent, on a chief gules three crowns Or.

The City of Andwarpe in Brabant, Verslegan.
for that sometime a Tyrant Prince was Lord of that place, and punished
offenders in cruel manner, by cutting off their hands (whose pourtraiture cut
in stone to the life, stands erected over one of the Ports toward the Sceld,
with a sword in one hand, and a man's hand smitten off in the other) bears
four hands, Coupte in Salteir, an Eagle double necked, displaied in chief, to
signify that it is an imperial City; and hence had it the name of Antwerpe,
as much to say as Hand^werpen, which in Dutch signifies to cast or throw away
the hand.

The Stout and warlike Henry Spencer Bishop of Norwich, who suppressed by his
courage and valor, that dangerous rebellion, and about Nerthwalsham, overthrew
Litster the Captain, has (as it is to be seen upon his monument in the body
of the Qui^e of Christ-Church in Norwich) over his proper coat of Spencer,
upon an helmet, his Episcopal Miter, and upon that Michaell the Arch-Angell
with a drawn sword.

Marie Coats are conferred by the Prince or State upon merit and desert, for
some honorable act performed to the Commonwealth, or honor of the Prince; as
that device upon Sir Francis Drake (which was Q. Elizabeth's own) now usurped
and borne (the color of the field changed sio^ Sable into Azure) by Oliver a
Noert of Vtrecht, who also of late years sailed about the earth. And at my
last being in the Low Countries, was Captain of a foot Company of Dutch in
Huysden. The said Coat fairly cut in stone, stands over a Porch at the
entry of his house there.

The Mound or Ball with the Cross, (...). Freherus. Dr Origin yala^.
was by Charles the fifth, added by way of augmentation, to the Armories of the
Palsgraue of the R^ine, in regard of Vienna, so bravely defended by Phillip
Earl Palatine, together with the Count Solmas, against the fury of Solomon,
Solymans opinion of the Emperor Charles.
who laid siedge to it with above 300000. men; yet glad (at the rumor of the
Emperor Charles his coming) to show his back. For Solomon, (as himself was
wont to say) seared not Charles as he was Emperor of Germany, but that good
fortune which ever attended him in his greatest enterprises. And no doubt but
the blessing of God was upon him, as being one of the most religious, just and
worthiest Princes that ever lived.

The family of the Haies in Scotland, Holinshead in the T^^le of Scotland.
bare Arg. three Escotcheons Gules, upon this occasion. At what time the Danes
invaded Scotland, and in a set batraile had put the Scots to the worst: one Hay
with his two sons being at plow not far off, The original of the Noble
Family of the Ha^es in Scotland.
and seeing his Contrymen flying from their enemies, to come up a narrow
Lane walled with stone on both sides, toward him; with their Plowbeames in
their hands, meeting them at the lanes end, in despite beat them back to
charge their enemies afresh, reuiling their cowardice, that now hazarded the
whole kingdom: whereupon with a stout resolution they put themselves again
into array, and returning back upon the Danes (who were both disordered, and
in a fear lest a new supply had come down to the Scots succor) overthrew
them utterly, and regained a most memorable victory. He^eupon Hay was by the
King ennobled, and had given him for his bearing, in a field Silver, three
Escotcheons Gules: the rest a Plowman with his Plowbeame on his shoulder: and
withal for his maintenance, as much Land as a Faulcon put off from hand could
sly over erc she did alight, which Land in Scotland is to this day called Hay
his Land; and the Faulcon alighting upon a stone, about seven miles off, gave
it the name of the Falcons stone, even to this day.

Arms again are sometimes taken from professions, and those means by which
the bearers have raised themselves to honorable place; as the Dukes of
Florence, for that they are descended from the family Di Medic^, or Physicians,
bare in a field Azure, six Lozenges.

Sometimes they are won in the field from Infidels, (for no Christian may
directly bear another Coat by his sword) as was the Coat of Millan from a
Sarace^; it being an Infant naisant, or issuing from the mouth of a Serpent.
Aluares de violla.
And after the winning of Granad^ from the Moors, in the times of Ferdin (...)
and Is^bell, Kings of Castile, the Pomgranate the Arms of that kingdom, was
placed in the bast of the Escotcheon Royal; and in regard it was gained
principally by the means of Archerie, the Bow and Quiver of Arrows was
stamped upon the Spanish sixpence, which remains at this day to be seen.

Coats sometimes are by stealth purchased, shuffled into Records and
Monuments, by Painters, Glasiers, Caruers, and such: But I trust so good an
order has been lately established by the Right Honorable, the late
Commisioners for the Office of the Earl Marshalship, and careful respect of
the Heralds with us, that all hope of sinister dealing in that kind, is quite
cut off from such mercenary abusers of Nobility.

Many times gained at a cheaper rate, by bearing, as the Boores in Germany, and
the Netherlands, what they list themselves; neither can their own Inventions
content them, but into what land or place soever they travail, if they espy a
fairer Coat then their own (for they esteem Coats fair or good, as our
Naturals, according to the variety of colors) after their return they set it
up in Glass for them and their heirs, with the Crest and open Beauer, as if
they were all Princes; as at Wodrichom or Worcom, hard by Louestein, I found
over a Tradesman Coat, no worse Crest then the three Feathers in the Crown,
and in many other places whole Coats of the French Nobility. Hereof examples
in those parts are so frequent, that I must say, Inopem me copia fecit.

Now being acquainted with your colors, the points and every place of the
Escotchcon, which the Accidence of Armorie of Master Guillims Display, will at
large instruct you in, begin to practice the Blazon of those Coats which
consist of bare and simple lines, without charge, as that ancient Coat of
Waldgra^^, who bears only party per pale Arg. and Gules; and the City of
Virecht party per bend of the same.

Then your fields equally compounded of more lines, Fields of equal composition.
as Quarterly, B^ndey, Barrey, Gyronned, Checkey, Masculie, etc. Withal, know
the names and use of all manner of your crooked lines, as Endemed, Embat^elled,
Nebule, or Vndee, Dannce^^^e, etc. Know then those Honorable and prime places,
or Ordinaries, with their Species, as the cheese, so called of Chef in French,
that of (...), because it possesses the head, or upper third part of the
Escotcheon.

The Fesse holding the middle third part of the shield, The Fesse.
contains under it the Bar, Barrulet, Cost, Barresgemells, etc. The Bend,
the Bendlet, single and double Cotize.

Next know the Furs, Counterchangings, Bordures, Tressures, Orles, Frets; all
forms of Crosses, differences of Brothers, Roundles of every kind; as
Beasan^s, Pla^es, Pommices, etc.

Then proceed to the blazon of all vegetable things, as Flowers, Trees, etc.

Then to all quick and living things, as Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Serpents, and
the like.

When you have done, know Honorable additaments, whether they be by way of
augmentation, or marks and differences of alliance.

Coats of augmentation, as those of Queen Katherine Parre, Queen Katherine
Howard, and Queen Jane Seymor, conferred by King Henry the eight.

By Cantons, as Ferdinand King of Spain, Remains. M. Guillim in his Display.
honored Sir Henry Guilford with a Canton of Granado: and King James, Molin^,
the V^ne^ian Ambassador, with a Canton of the Rose of England, and Thistle of
Scotland empaled.

Then ensue differences of alliance, by Bordures, Labels, Bends, Quarterings,
and the like.

By the Bordure, Of difference by the Bordure.
no where more frequent then in the Sovereigns Coat, when the blood Royal
was derived into so many veins, to the distemper of the whole body, under the
dissension of York and Lancaster.

Thomas of Woodstocke, as also Humphrey Duke of Gloucester (who lies buried in
the Abbey of S. Albanes, upon the South Side of the Quire, and not in Paul's)
bare the Sovereign Coat within a Bordure Argent.

Richard Plantagenet (son and heir of Richard Earl of Cambridge) Duke of
York, and father to Edward the fourth, bare quarterly France and England,
within a Bordure Argent, charged with Lionceeaux purpure.

Edmund of Hadham, son of Owen Tuder, by Queen Katherine, the Sovereign
Coat within a Bordure Azure, with Martlets and Flower-de-luces Or.

John Beaufort, son of John of Gaunt, and his posterity, the same within a
bordure Componee, Argent and Azure.

Charles the seventh, Tillet.
King of France, in the year 1436. gave leave unto Nicholas Duke of Ferrara,
to bear the Arms of France in a Shield, within a Bordure Componee Or and
Gules, before the Arms of Ferrara, in recognisance of the league and
fidelity, wherein he promised to stand bound to serve the King at his own
charges.

And for the like respect, Lewis the eleventh, in May, 1465. allowed Pietro de
Medici, to bear three Flower-de-luces in his shield, which I have seen borne
in chief, upon one of his six Lozenges.

Of Difference by the Labell.
A second difference is by the Labell, borne chieefely as the difference of the
elder Brother. As Edward the black Prince, and all our Princes of Wales,
eldest sons to the King, bear their Fathers Sovereign Coat, with a Labell
of three points, Silver.

John of Gauns had his Labell Ermin.

Edmond of Langley Duke of York, on his Labell Silver, nine Torteauxes.

Edmond Plantagenes, son and heir of Richard Duke of York, Earl of
Ru^land, (who being a Child scarce twelve years of age, was stricken to the
heart with a Dagger by the Lord Clifford at the battle of Wakefield) had upon
his Labell of five points Argent, two Lionceaux Gules, with nine Torteauxes.
The Coat of Vls^er and Mortim^r being ^mpaled with his own, as may be seen
in the windows of F^deringhay Castle, the mansion house of the Duke of York,
where by his father Richard Duke of York, and Cicely Nevill his mother, he
lies buried; whose bodies removed out of F^deringhay Churchyard, (for the
Chancell, in the Quire wherein they first were laid, in that fury of knocking
Churches and sacred Monuments in the head, was also felled to the ground)
lapped in Lead, were buried in the Church by the commandment of Queen
Elizabeth, and a mean Monument of Plaster wrought with the Trowell, erected
over them, very homely, and far unfitting so Noble Princes.

I remember Master Creuse, a Gentleman, and my w^rthy friend, who dwelt in the
College at the same time, told me, that their Coffins being opened, their
bodies appeared very plainly to be discerned; and withal, that the Duchess
Cicely had about her neck, hanging in a Silk riband, a pardon from Rome,
which penned in a very fine Roman hand, was as fair and fresh to be read, as
it had been written but yesterday.

Of Difference by the Bend.
A third difference, is by the Bend Baston, etc. as the house of Bur^^^ bears
Fr^^^^, with a B^tune Gules, though the proper and true Coat of (...) is Of, a
Lion Gules, within an Orle of Escallops Azure.

Lewis Earl of Eureux in Normandy, brother to Philip le B^ll, bare Seem de
France, with a Batune Componee, Argent and Gules.

John Earl of L^^^aster, and Brother to Richard the first (afterward King)
bare for his difference a Batune Azure.

If the mother be of the ligne Royal, many times her Coat is preferred into
the first quarter; as H^nry Earl of D^^^nshire, and Marqu^sse of Exeter, ^^re
his mother K^tharines Coat, who was daughter to King Edward the fourth. And
the like Humphrey Stafford, who was the first Duke of Buckingham by Anne
Platag^n^^: his mother, ^ the Coat of Thomas of Woodstocke, whose daughter she
was. This Coat, I remember, stands in the great Chancell window in the
Church of Kimbalt^n.

In France it has been, Tillet.
and it yet a custom among the Nobility, to (...) their own proper Coats,
and take others; as perhaps their Wi^es, or the Arms of that Srig^^^^, whereof
they are Lords: or whence they have their Titles, as Mons. Hugues, brother to
King Philip, marrying the daughter and heir of Herbere Earl of Ver^^^d^^^s,
forsook his proper Coat, and bare his Wives, which was Checky, Or, and Azure,
only three Flower-de-luces added in chief, to show he was of the blood. And
Robert Coun^ de Dreux, albeit he was brother to King Lewis (...), bare Checky,
Azure and Or, with a Bordure Gules.

Robert Duke of Burgogne, brother to Henry the first, took for his bearing,
the ancient Arms of the Dukes of Burgogne, which was bendy Or and Azure,
within a Bordure Gules, given by Charlemaigne to Sanson Duke of Burgogne.

And whereas we in England allow the base son his Fathers Coat, with the
difference of a bend Batune, sinister, or bordure engrailed, or the like: it
was in France a long time forbidden (I think under the Capets) to the Princes
of the blood; as (...) Earl of M^mfort, base son to King Robert, was forced
to leave his Fathers Coat, and bear Gules, a Lion a la queue fourchee Or,
passee per a lentour, Argent; for, Le maison de France ^^^^tant les bastardes,
no leur endure son armeire, etc. says Tillet.

The last and least observation is of Crests, the Helmet, the Mantle, and
doubling thereof, which according to the manner of diverse Countries, are
diversely borne. In Germany they bear their Beauers open with Bars, which we
allow in England to none under the degree of a Baron: in some places they have
no Crests at all. If you would farther proceed in Nobility or Heraldry, I
would wi^h you to read these books of (...) ob^^itie in gener^^^:

Simon Simonius de N^^ilit^^e, (...) at Leipsig. 1572.

Chassan^^^^, his Catalogus Gloria mun^^.

Hippolitus a Collibus, his Axumata Nobilitatis.

Conclusiones de Nobilitate and Doctorain. published by one of Meckleburg, who
concealeth his name, printed 1621. dedicated to the Archbishop of Breme.

Petrus Eritzius, Coun^^^^er to the Elector of Brandenburge, published
Conclusiones de Nobilitate, in quarto.

Lionellus De pracedentia ^omi^um.

Of the Spanish Nobility these Authors have written.
Ioannes ab Arce Offalora, in folio.

Priuilegios y Franquezas y libertades des bijos d^algos De Senniorio de
Vizcaia, etc. in fol.

Ludovicus de Moll^^a, De primog^nior^m Hispanicorum iure, etc. in fol.

Josephus de Sesse, in Decis. Aragon. Decis. 8. 9. 10. etc.

Gonzales de C^rte, his Nobliza del Andaluzia, in fol.

Of Italy, Sicily, Naples, etc.
Scipie Mazzella nelle Neapoli Illustrata, in quarto.

Paulus Merula in Cosmograph. lib. 3. pt. 3. in Italian.

Of France.
The Works of Tillet, Fer^^, Charles L'Ois^^^, Choppin, Theater d'Honneur.

Of Germany, or the Empire.
Fran. Contzen, his Politiques, in fol.

The Collections of Goldastus, with some others.

The practice of Blazonrie.
HE bears Azure, a Salteir Or. This was the Coat of the pious and devout Off
a King of the Mercians, who lived about the year of Christ 793. and in the
three and thirtieth year of his reign, builded the goodly Monastery of S.
Albanes in H^rtfordshire, upon the way of Watlingstreet, to entertain Pilgrims:
the King himself laying the first stone of the foundation thereof, with these
words; Ad Honorem D^i Patris, Filij, and Spiritus Sancti, and Martyris sui
Albani^ terra me^ Protomartyris. He ordained it a Convent of an hundred Monks
of the order of S. Benedict, electing Willegod who was his Kinsman, to be the
first Abbot; he endowed it with goodly revenues, as here appears. After he
had begun this magnificent work, Ex M^^bas. S. Alban^.
within four or five years, he dyed, and was buried in a little Chapel hard
without the town of Bedford, upon the bank of the river of Ouse or Use, which
by the river long since has been eaten and worn away.

Willeged the first Abbot dyed the same year that Off a did, of very grief it
was thought, for the death of his king and kinsman, whom he dearly loved.

Anno 8^8. After him succeeded these in order.

Eadricke. Vulsigus. Wul^^^us. Eadfrithus.
Wulsinus, Who built Saint Peter's Church, Saint Michaels and Saint Stephens,
and made a fair market place in the town.

Alfricke.
Aldredus, Who dug up and searched the ruins of Verlam-cesire, which in his
time were dens of thieves and whores; saved all the tile and stone for the
repair of the Church, and in digging upon the North side in the vale found
oaken plankes pitched, Shelles pieces of oars, and a rusty Anchor or two.

Eadmer, after his death (being a religious and a good man) imitating his
predecessor, saved all the ancient coins, vrnes and other antiquities he
could find there.

Leofricke, was son to the Earl of Kent, and after being chosen to be
Archbishop of Canterbury, he refused it: this Abbot in a time of dearth sold
all the Jewels of his Church to buy bread for the poor. After him succeeded
Alfricke. Leostan. Fr^theric.


Paul. In this Abbot were given to the Monastery of Saint Albanes, the Celles
of Wallingford, of Tinnemuth, of Bealvare, of Hertford and Binham.

Richard, who lived in the time of William Rusus, when the Cell of Saint Marie
de Wymonaham or Windham in Norfolk was given unto this Abbey, being sounded
by William de Albeney, father to William de Albeney first Earl of Arundell.

Gaufridus, who founded the Nunnery of Sopwell thereby on the other side of the
river, founded and so called upon this occasion: two poor women having built
themselves a small cabben, lived in that place a very austere life, praying,
and serving God with great devotion; and for that they lived for the most part
with no other sustenance, save bread and the water of a Well there, wherein
they used to soppe or dippe their bread, it had (says mine Author (a Monk
sometime of that Abbey) the name of Sopwell. Then Radulphus. Robert. Simon.
Garmus. John. William etc.


Off a gave to this his Abbey of Saint Albans, these towns following, viz.
Theil, Edel^^^^^, Wiclesfield, Cages^o cum suis, Berechund, Rike^aresworth,
Bacheworth, Crok^leie, Michelfield, Britchwell, Watford, Bilsey, Merdell,
Alduham.
Haldenham, Spr^t, Enefeild, St^^^^^^, H^^^^^ted, Winelesham, Biscopsco^,
C^d^^^dune, and Mild^^dune.

Egelsride his son and successor gave Sandrige.
Sandruge and Penefield.

Alfrick^ Abbot of this Church, (after Archbishop) and Leofrick his brother
gave Kingesbury, C^ealdwich, Westwic, Flamsted, Nort^^^, R^^^^hang W^^^^field,
Birstan, and Vpton.

AEthelwold Bish. of Dorchester gave Girshuna, Cuicumba, Time, Aegelwin,
Redburne, Thuangna^, Lingley, Grenburga.

One Tholfe gave Estune and Oxaw.

One Sexi gave H^chamsted.

One Ha^dh gave Newha^ and Beandise.

Therefeld, a religious woman gave (...)
Sceanl^a and Bridel.

Aegelwina another gave Batesden, Offal and Standune.

One Aegelbert gave Craniford.

A^^an, Cutesham.

Winsimus gave Esenden.

Osulsus and his wife gave St^dham and Wilsin^^: others Walden, Cudicote,
Scephal, Bethell, with sundry other Celles, Churches, and goodly possessions of
me unnamed. If I should set you down the inestimable wealth consisting in
Plate, Jewels, Books, costly Hangings, Altarcloathes, and the like, which by
our English Kings, Nobility and others have from the foundation unto the
dissolution, with the sundry privileges this Abbey had, I should weary my self
with writing, and you with reading; but I omit them, having only proposed a
mirror to the eyes, not of the Church pillars of ancient, but the Church
pillars of our times.

He bears quarterly Or and Gules, over all a bend Vaire. This is the Coat
Armor of the Right Honorable, Richard Sackuill Baron of Buckh^rst, and Earl
of Dorset, none of whose Ancestors (nor yet himself) did ever desire to
quarter any other Coats with it, (although of Right they may (for it is a very
ancient Coat Armor, as appears by the book of Knights of King Edward 1.
as also by diverse Seals of these very Arms, fixed to sundry deeds, made by
this family in the time of King Henry the third, about which time they were
painted and set up in the windows of their Manor house, called Sackuills, and
in the Churches of Bergholt and Mount Bures in Essex, where they yet remain,
as also in the Abbey of Begham in Kent, sometime of their foundation in the
Reign of King John: and in Withyham Church in Sussex, where successively they
have been buried more then 300. years, with several Tombs.

The Ancestors of this Noble family were Frenchmen borne, taking their Surname
of a Town in Normandy called Sackuill, whereof they were Lords, and came into
England, to the aid of Duke William the Conqueror, as appears by an
ancient Manuscript or Chronicle of Britain, now in the Custody of Mr. Edward
Gwinn, where he is called a Chiefetaine, and is the seventh man ranked in a
Catalogue of names there; for as it may be observed out of Mr. Camdens
Remains, that the better sort about the time of the Conquest began to take up
Surnames, so again they were not settled amongst the common people until the
Reign of King Edward the second. He moreover affirms, that the most ancient
and of best account, were derived from places, whereof this name of Sackuill is
one, and to add yet more unto it, Ordericus Vitalis the Monk, in his Normane
story says, that Herbrann de Sackuill, was living in the time of William the
Conqueror, being father of three Noble Knights, Jordan, William, and Robert de
Sackuill, and of a virtuous and beautiful Lady, named Auice, who was married
to Walter Lord of Alfage and Hugleuill, by whom she had issue; Jordan L. of
Alfage and Hugleuill, that married Julian the daughter of one Gods^all, who
came into England with Q. Adelize, of Lo^^ine, the Wife to King Henry the
first: After whose death, the said Queen married to William de Albency Earl
of Arundell, from whom the now Right Honorable, Thomas Earl of Arundell, and
Surry, and Earl Marshall of England is descended. S. Jordan de Sackuill
Knight, the eldest son, was Sewer of England by the gift of the said
Conqueror, but lived and died in Normandy. S. Robert de Sackuill Knight, the
younger son lived in England, and gave together with his body the Manor of
Wickham in Suffolke^ to the Abbey of S^. John Baptist in Colchester, leaving
issue a son named S^. Jordan de Sackuill, a very eminent man in the time of
King Richard the first, as appears by a Charter of the said King, made to the
Monks of Bordes^ey in Buckinghamshiere. S^. Jordan de Sackuill, that obtained
of King John a Friday Market weekly, and a Fair once a year in his Town of
Sackuill in Normandy, as says the Kings Public Records in the Tower of
L^^don. Holiinshed, fol. 186. does there rank Jordan de Sackuill, as a Baron,
calling him one of the assistants to the 25. Peers of this Realm, to see the
Liberties of Magna Charta confirmed. And for further proof, that they were men
of no mean ^anke, it is apparent in the Red book of the Excheaquer in the 12.
and 13. years of the said Kings Reign, in these words, Hubertus de Anestie
tenes, 2. food. in Anestie, and parua Hornmcad, and dimid. (...). in Anestie de
Honor Richard^ de Sack^yle. Agai^e, S^. Jordan de Sackuill Knight, grand^
child to the said Jordan de Sackuill, was taken prisoner at the battle of
E^esham, for siding with the Barons against King Henry, the third, in the 49.
year of His Reign, whose son and heir, named Andrew Sackuill, being under
age at the time of his fathers death, and the Kings Wa^d, was like wise
imprisoned in the Castle of Deuer, Ann. 3. E^n. 1. and afterward by the
special command of the said King, did marry Ermyn^^de an Honorable Lady, of
the household to Queen (...) or, whereby he not only gained the Kings favor,
but the greatest part of his Inheritance again. From whom the aforesaid
Richard Earl of Dorset, with S^. Edward Sackuill Knight of the Bathe, his
brother (and others) are descended; one of whose Ancestors, by marrying a
daughter and co-heire of Raze de Denn, son of Rodbert Pincerna, that held the
Lordship of Buckhurst, with diverse other Manors and Lands in Sussex, about the
time of the Normain Conquest. In right of which marriage they have ever since
continued Lords of the said Manor of Buckhurst with diners other Manors and
L^nds in Sussex, etc.

He bears Sable 3. Hearts heads cabbaged argent, tired or, by the name of
Cavendish, and^ is borne by the right Honorable, William, Baron Cavendish of
Hardwick in the County of Derbie, Earl of Deuonshiere, and Uncle to William
Cavendish, Knight of the Bath, Baron Ogle, and Viscount Mansfield.

Which William Earl of Devonsh^ was son of S^. William Cavendish, of
Chattesworth in the said County of Derby knight, Treasurer of the Chamber to
King Henry the eight, Edward the sixth, and Queen Marie; by his wife Elizabeth,
daughter of lohn Hardwick, of Hardwick Esquire.

The Ancestors of this Noble Family, called themselves G^r^ms, whose issue in
process of time, assumed to themselves, the Surname of Cavendish, as being
Lords of the Town and Manor of Cavendish in Suffolk; out of which family
disbranched that famous Trauailer, Mr. Thomas Cavendish, who was the third that
travailed about the world, whose voyage you shall find, set down at large in
the English Discouerers, written by Mr. (...).

He bears pearl on a bend of the Diamond, three Roses of the first with a
Crescent upon a Crescent for a difference, by the name of Carey. This is the
proper coat of the Right Noble Henry Lord Carey, Baron of Hunsd^n, and
Viscount R^chford, descended from the ancient family of the Careys in the
county of Dev^n.

This form of bearing, is termed a Lozenge, and is proper to women never
married, or to such in courtesy as are borne Ladies; who though they be
married to Knights, yet they are commonly styled and called after the Surname
of their fathers, if he be an Earl;for the greater Honor must ever extinguish
the less: for example, the bearer hereof is the Lady Mary Sidney, the late
wife of Sir Robert Wroth Knight, and daughter of the right Honorable, Robert
Lord Sidney of Penshurst, Viscount Lis^e, Earl of Leicester, and companion of
the most noble Order of the Ga^ter, who seems by her late published Urania an
inheritrix of the Divine wit of her Immortal Uncle. This coat you shall blaze
thus: she bears (on a Lozenge) Or, a Pheon Azure, which is the head of a
dart (says Leigh, in his Accedence of Armo^y.)

He bears of the Rubie, three Roses pearl, on a chei^e of the first, three
Roses of the second. This coat appertains to the right Honorable Sir lulius
Caesar Knight, Master of the Roules, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
privy Counsel, who is descended of the Noble and ancient family of the
Dalmarii in ^^aly, a gentleman worthy to be honored, as well for his sincerity,
as his love to good learning and all excellent parts, unto whom I acknowledge
my self to be many ways obliged.

He bears Sable, Deux ^anches Ermine, Sur le tout vne est^^^^le a buict
ra^s, ^^raions d'or. The first institution of this Coat was with a star of
8. points, as appears by sundry Churches in N^rfolke, where this family had
its beginning, where it is as I have seen it drawn with six. It is
ignorantly mistaken, for the 8. points were fitted to the proportion of the
field, thereby adding more luster and beauty to the Coare, dispredding
themselves from the nombrill or middle part of the Escotcheon.

It is borne by the name of Hobart, and was the proper Coat of Sir James
Hobart Knight, Attorney General unto King Henry the seventh; a right good
man, withal of great learning and wisdom: he builded the Church of Lodd^n,
and Saint Olaues, commonly called Saint Toolies bridge in the County of
Norfolk.

This worthy Knight lies buried under a fair monument in the middle lle on
the Northside in Christ's Church in Norwich But it is now borne (with the Coat
of Vister by the gift of King James unto him as a Barronet) by the Honorable
and Nobly minded Sir Henry Hobart Knight and Baronet, So that James was
Attorney general unto Henry, and now Henry unto James.
Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, of Blickling in the County of
Norfolk; whose uprightness in Justice, and love to his country, has (like
his own Star communicatiue of it self) dispersed the fairer beams into all
places.

He bears Azure, an Eagle displayed Silver, by the name of Cott^n. It is thus
borne (with an Escotcheon of Vlster) by the learned and Honorable Sir Robert
Cott^n Knight and Baronet of Cunningt^n in the County of Huntingd^n, descended
anciently by a younger brother from the Bruces of Scotland; a Gentleman, unto
whom not only our Britain but Europe her self is obliged, for his industry,
cost, and care in collection of so many rare Manuscripts and other Monuments of
venerable Antiquity, being of the same most free and communicatiue, to all men
of learning and quality.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron between three Cinque soiles Ermine, a Canton
dexter of V^ster, as he is Baronet by the name of Woodhouse. This coat thus
borne belongs to Sir Philip Woodhouse, Knight and Barronet of Kimberly in the
County of Norfolk: this family is very ancient, for they were gentlemen of
good rank in the time of King lohn, as it appears by many ancient G^ants and
Evidences of theirs, which I have seen. Moreover, I ^inde out of a fair
parchment Manuscript in French, or collection of the Parliaments all the time
of Edward the third (which my Honored and worthy friend Sir Robert Cotton
has) and in the fourth year of his reign, at a Parliment to be holden at
Westminster, a writ thus di^ected to one Robert de Woodhouse, his Chaplain and
Treasurer.

R^x dilect^ (...) s^o Roberto de Woodhouse, Archidiacone de Richm^nd
Thesa^rario s^o salutem. Negotia^os and statum regni contingentia, etc. vobis
mandamus ^irmiter i^iungentes quod omnibus alijs prater^issis etc. Beside I
have s^ene the will of King Henry the fourth, and He^rie the fifth, M. John
Woodhouse.
where one was a gentleman of Henry the fourth's chamber, and by his will made
one of his executors; as also he was to Henry the fifth, who wrote his letter
to the P^ior, and Chapter of the Church of the Trinity in Norwich, to give him
leave to build himself a Chapel in their Church. So that from time to time,
they have held an Honorable place, and at this day are worthy stays and
pillars of Justice in their Countries. Nor must I here let fall the worth of
two sons of this Gentleman, Sir Thomas Woodhouse Knight (who married Blanch
Sister to the right Honorable Henry now Viscount Rochf^rt) and Master Roger
Woodhouse his brother, Gentlemen, not only learned, but accomplished in what
ever may lend Luster to worth and true gentilitie.

He bears Pearl, a Cheueron Sapphire, between three Squerrels Seiant of the
Rubi^, by the name of Louell. This Coat is thus borne by the Right Worshipful
Sir Francis Louell, Knight, in the County of Norfolk.

This was also the Coat of Sir Thomas Louell, Knight of the Garter, made by
King Henry the seventh, of whose horse he was Treasurer, and President of the
Counsel. This Sir Thomas Louell was a fifth son of Sir Ralphe Louell of
Barton Bendish, in the County of Norfolk. This his Coat with the Garter
about it, stands over Lincolnes Inn Gate. He founded the Nunnery of
Halliwell (where was also his house) on a wall of which not ma^y years since
was to be read this inscription. All ye Nuns of Halliwell,
Pray ye both day and night:
For the Soul of Sir Thomas Louell,
Whom Harry the (...) made Knight.


It appears also that Sir William Louell Lord Morley, was Knight of the
Garter: for in Morley In Norfolk.
Church the seat of his Baronnie, is yet remaining in a Glass window (which I
have seen) this Coat with the Garter about it.

He bears Argent, 3. pallets Gules, over all a Cheueron Or. This Coat is
thus borne by the Right Honorable Sir Edward Barkham Knight, now Lord Mayor of
the City of London; who for his care and wisdom, in the discharge of his so
high a place, worthily meriteth to be ranked with the most deserving.

He bears Sable, a Fesse engrailed between three Flower-de-luces Silver, by
the name of Ashfield of Stow Langton in the County of Suffolk.

This Coat Armor is very ancient, as is proved by sundry books of Arms,
Church windows, and several deeds, whereof I have seen two bearing date Anno
18. Richard the 2. with seals of this very Coat fixed thereunto, with this
inscription about the same (viz:) Sigillum Robertide Ashfield; as also another
deed bearing date, Anno 3. Henry the fixed, made from Robert the son of John
Ashfeild of Stow-Langton, Esquire, to Simon Finchan^, and John Whitlocke, with
a fair Seal of red Wax: whereupon was a Griff^^ S^iant, with his wings
displayed, over whose body is this Arms, with this inscription about the who^e
Seal (viz:) S. Robertide Ashfeild Armig. The above named Robert Ashfeild
builded the Church of Stow Langton, in the Quire whereof (which I have seen)
he lies butied under a fair Marble; he was servant unto the black Prince,
whom he followed in his wars in France. This Coat is thus borne by Sir lohn
Ashfeild, Knight, sole heir of that Family, now Gentleman of the bed Chamber
to Prince Charles.

He bears party per pale, Argent and Gules, a bend counterchanged. This was
the proper Coat of our famous Poet, Sir Geoffrey Chaucer Knight, who was
sometime Master of the Custome-housd in London, and allied by Katherine
Swinford to lohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster. He lies buried at W^stminster:
his Epitaph being made over him by Master Nicholas Brigha^.

He bears Fusilie, Ermine and Sable, on a chief of the second three Lillies.
This is the Coat of Magdalen College in Oxford, founded by that famous
Prelate William de Wainflet, surnamed Patten. He was borne in Waineflet, a
little town by the Sea in Lincolnshire, Anne 1459.

Here are two Coats impaled: and thus the husband bears his Wi^es Coat: In
the first he bears Luna, on a chief Mars, three Lions heads erazed of the
Sun, by the name of Richardson: and it is thus borne by Sir Thomas Richardson
of Hunningham, in the County of Norfolk, Knight, Serieant at the Law, and
late Speaker of the house of Commons in Parliament: the second is borne by the
name of Southwell, and appertains to Dame Vrsula his Wife, who was daughter
to Master lohn Southwell of Barham, in the County of Suffolk, Esquire, a very
good Lady: Master Serieant himself deserving much to be respected, for his
diligence and depth of judgment in his profession.

He bears quarterly, eight Coats, ( viz.) the first, quarterly Gules and
Vaire, over all a Bend Dor, by the name of Constable: the second Gules, a pale
Fusile Or, by the name of Haul^^n: the third Or, a chief azure by the name of
Lizo^rs: the 4. Checkey Or and Gules, on a chief argent, a Lion passant sable,
by the name of Comberworth: the fist, argent, tow bars in^ra^led sable, by
the name of Stains: Note that Sir John F^^^ does set down for Nigells Coat,
Or, a Lion ramp^ purpure: but o^^ learned H^^aulds deny the same, affirming it
to be La^^s Coat, Baron of (...), and have registered for Nigell true Coat,
Gules, a pale (...), Or, as (...)said.
the fixed, argent, a cheueron between three Martlets, sable, by the name of
Argum: the seventh Or, a plain cross Vert, by the name of Hussy: the eight
and last, Argent on a chief sable, two Mullets Or, peirced Gules, by the name
of Salueyne; upon the Center, an Eschocheon, with the Arms of Vlster, being an
augmentation of honor given by our Sovereign Lo. King James, to the Order of
Barroners, etc. which are the quarterings of the much respected, Sir William
Constable of Flamburgh in the County of York, Barronet. Here I can not pass,
(having occasion, but give a little touch of the Antiquity of this Family of
Constable, taking their Surname from the office of Constable of Chester, called
in Latin, Conestabilis, and Constabular^^s, si^e magister mili^um, which their
ancestors held. For King william the Conquerout presently after the Conquest,
made Hugh Lupus the first Earl Palatine of Chester, to hold the said whole
County of him, it^ libere ad gladium s^e^t ipse Rex tenebat Angliam ad Coronam;
And the said Earl Hugh, for the peaceable government of his country, etc.
ordained under him, (as the learned Camden says) eight Barons, they all being
his trusti^ friends; whereof the principallest was Nigell his cosen, whom he
created Baron of Haulten: and for the valiant courage and boldness which Earl
Hugh had often exper^enced to be in the man, he ordained him also Constable of
Chester, an office of special trust, as in whom is reposed the charge and
guiding of all the soldiers, horses, Armor, and other provision of wars,
appertaining to the said Lupus, which then was a Princely person, and of great
dignity. The said Nigell was son of Iuon, Viscount Constantyn in Normandy, by
E^^^, sister to Adam, Earl of Britain; and had issue, William the Constable
of Chester, founder of the Abbey of Norton, whose daughter Agnes heir to his
brother William, was married to Eustace Fitz-Iohn (a noble Baron) the son of
John Monoculus, This Eustace Fitz John kept the Castle of Malton against King
Stephen, as says R^g^^ Honeden, fol. 227, inno. 1137.
Lord of Knarsburgh, brother and heir of Serlo de Burg^, who in the Reign of
the Conqueror builded the Castle of Knarsburgh, in the County of York ^ the
said Serl^ and John, being the sons of Eustace a Norman; And the above named
Eustace Fitz^ John, with the consent of the said Agnes his first wife, founded
the Monastery of Watton in the County of York. After her death, he married
Beatrix, the only daughter and heir of I^^, Lord Vescy, with whom he had the
Barronies of Malton and Alnwick^; and with her consent, he also founded the
Abbeys at Malton and Alnwick, and the hospital of Broughton: and shortly
after, the said Eustace Fitz John lost all his lands; but by mediation of
friends, he recovered them all again of the King, except Knarsburgh. He was a
great man, and ^minent amongst the chiefest of the Realm, both for his great
Estate and wisdom; at last he was slain in the wars against the Welsh,
together with Robert Courcy and many others, in the first year of Henry the
second; leaving issue by the said Beatrix, William, who assumed to himself and
his posterity, the Surname and Arms of Vesey, from whom by the Attons and
Bro^^fletts, the Lady Anne Clifford, Countess of Dorset is lineally descended.
And the said Eustace Fitz John, by his first wife Agnes, had issue, Richard
Fitz Eustace, Baron of Haulton and Constable of Chester, who in the beginning
of the reign of King Henry the second, held one Knights see in S^^^th, in the
County of York. Ex libr^ rub^^^^ in Sca^^ari^ Westmonaster^ reseruat^.
The said Richard Fitz Eustace married Albred daughter and heir of Eude de
Lizours, and sister by the mother, but not by the father, of Robert de Lacy,
Baron of Pontesract, and his heir, quia non habuit aliam tam propinquam, Vt
yate^ per Inquisi^^nem tempore Regi^ Iohann^^.
as Master Camden notes: in whose right her posterity enjoyed 60. Knights Fees
of the Honor of Ponte^ract. The said Richard Fitz Eustace and Albred, had
issue John Constable of Chester, and Baron of Haulton, Lord of the Manor of
Flamburgh, who lived in the 18. year of Henry 2. and Roger Lord of Warkworth
in Northumberland, from whom the ancient Barons of Clauering, the Baron Euers,
and Sir John Clauering of Caloley in Northumberland are descended. The said
John Constable of Chester dyed in the holy land, in the first year of Richard
^. at Tire (as Roger Hou^den has) leaving issue, Roger Constable of Chester,
Baron of Haulton, etc. (father of John de Lacy, Earl of Lincoln) and Robert
Lacy, whose posterity assumed unto themselves the surname of Constable: from
which Robert in a direct line are descended, Sir William Constable of
Flamburgh, Baronet; Marmaduke Constable of Eueringham, Esquire, son of Sir
Philip Constable, Knight, late dec^ased; Christopher Constable of Hatfield,
Esquire; James Constable of Cliffe, Esquire, John Constable of Carthorpe,
Esquire; Marmaduke Constable of Kerby, Esquire, -- Constable of Wassam,
Esquire; Sir John Constable of Dromandby Knight, with many others also living
this present year, 1622.

He bears quarterly four Coats, ( viz.) the first Gules a cheueron Or,
between three Cocks Argent, beaked, combed and membred Or, by the name of
Crow: the second parted perpale Gules and azur, a Lion rampant Argent pelleted,
by the name of Stockets: the third Gules a Boar passant Argent, by the name of
Boar: the fourth and last quarterly Or and Gules, a bend Vaire distinguished
with a Cressant Sable for a difference, by the name of Sackuill. And for his
Creast on a wreath of his colors a Cock argent, beaked, combed and membred Or.

This ancient name and family of Crow, was anciently of Suffolk; for about the
time of K. Edward the 4. Thomas Crow of Suffolk the elder, purchased Bradsted
in Kent, whose son Thomas Crow the yo^ger married Ioane the only daughter
and heir of Nicholas Boar, son of John, son of Richard Boar, that married
Lora the daughter of Simon Stocket of Bradsted in Kent. The aforesaid Ioane
brought to Thomas her husband, his house called Stockets with a Chancell built
by the above named Simon Stockets, as appears by a French deed tempore Edw.
2. As also a house and certain land called Boars, by whom she had issue John
Crow the elder, father of Henry Crow, father of William Crow of Bradsted Esquire.
who married Anne the second daughter and coheire of John Sackuill of
Chiddingleigh in Sussex Esquire. The said Manor of Chiddingleigh has been in the
possession of the Sackuills above three hundred years, and at this day is part
of the inheritance of the Right Honorable Richard Sackuill Earl of Dorset and
Baron of Buck^urst; which William Crow and Ann^ his wife, has issue, Sackuill
Crow their son and heir now living, with others.

He bears Azure, two Lions endorsed Or. This is an Honorable bearing; and was
(says Ger^ard Leigh) the Coat of Achilles at the siedge of Tr^y.

He bears Pearl, a Fesse between six Annulets of the Rubie, by the name
of Lucas. This Coat belongs unto M. Thomas Lucas of Colchester in the
County of Essex, Esquire. This worthy Gentleman is much to be commended in
the education of his children, sparing neither cost not diligence to fu^nish
them with the best and most commendable Qualities. I know not (I speak freely)
whether not only Ess^x, but England, can show a young Gentleman of fifteen
years of age, more accomplished every way then M John Lucas his son, who not
only understands and speaks the Latin, French, Italian; and is well
entered into the Spanish, a good Logician, plays his part on the Violl,
daunceth, rides a great horse admirable well, yet never travailed, or saw
University: but by his Father for the languages, and the diligence of Masters
in other qualities, Intra domesticos parie^es, herein he h^th attained for his
years to no mean perfection. And if hereto personage, carriage and good
demeanor may add ought, I think him second to none of his age and rank
whatsoever. I speak the more liberally, for that I see great numbers of our
hopeful Gentry, to spend many years abroad in fruitless travail, returning
for the most part worse then they went, and to waste much time and Money to no
end in the Universities, which it had been better for some they had never
seen.

He bears Vert, fretted Or, with a Cressant for a difference, by the name of
Whitmore. This is the proper Coat of the Right Worshipful and worthy Mr.
George Whitmore, at this time one of the Sheriffs of the Honorable City of
London. Green of all colors is said most to comfort and preserve the sight,
and naturally gladdeth the heart of man; the earth in her greatest pride being
of this color: so that Vert and Gold are colors most glorious to behold, and
to the bearer imply Riches and Comfort, which I wish he may not want, being
reputed a right honest Gentleman.

He bears Ermine, a bend Gules, cotized Or, by the name of Ienney. It is a
fair and an ancient Coat, the field being Ermine, it is esteemed the richer:
the Duke of Bretaign^^ Coat being only Ermine, without any other charge, is
esteemed one of the fairest bearings of Europe. And for that the Lord Z^uch is
descended from the Dukes of Bretaigns, he bears with his Beasants a Canton
Ermine. This Coat is borne (though with a difference) by M. Arthur Ienney,
Esquire, a Gentleman in his own worth answering every way the goodness of his
Coat.

He bears Or, a Lion Rampant Sable, armed and langued Gules, between three
Flower-de-luces Azure, by the name of Faireclough. This is an ancient Family in
the County of Lancaster, whence the Fairecloughes of Weston in Hertfordshire,
and those of Bedfordshire deriuethemselues; as also my self and my brother Mr.
Richard Peacham of Le^erton, in Holland, in the County of Lincoln, our mother
being of the same name and Family. A Gentleman of this house was Standardbearer
unto the Lord Stanley at the battle of Bosworth, who came with his Lancashire
forces to the aid of the Earl of Richmond, who next under God was assuredly
the means of gaining that day.

He bears quarterly in the first quarter Gules; a Salteir between ^oure
Croslets Fitchees Silver, by the name of Brampton of Brampton. The second
Ermin, a chief endented Gules, by the name of Bro^me; the third as the second,
the fourth as the first. Either of these Coats are ancient, and borne thus
quartered by M. Henry Brampton of Blo-Norton, in the County of Norfolk,
Esquire.

He bears Or, a Dolphine hariant Azure; if he stood in Fesse he were naiant
or swimming: the Dolphine is to be reckoned among those Creatures which are
(...), or friendly to man. For he will follow a ship at sea many leagues to
enjoy the sight of men. Our Painters commonly draw him crooked and bending,
when he is as straight a Fish as any other. He is borne (of these colors)
naiant by the Dolphine of France.

He bears Gules, three keys Silver between three flowerdeluces Or, had the
field been Azure, I would have supposed it to have been the Arms of some
great City or port town in France; those keys borne as a sign of the great
trust they were put in, and as a remembrance of their fidelity.

He bears Silver, a Pine tree with the Apples propper, it is borne by the
name of Pine. The Pine grows abundantly upon the cold mountains of Norway,
in Denmark, Lies^^nd, and those countries whence we have them for Mastes for
ships. There are two sorts of them, the male and female, the one called
Pi^aster or the wild Pine, the other female, only Pinus: which has caused a
general error among our Schoolemasters in construing that in the Grammar, Mas
pinus, Mas oleaster, Lilly explaned.
whereof the most ignorant construe it Pinus, a Pine tree, Mas, the Masculine.
Those that think themselves of better judgment turn it to Spinus, (and so
many Grammars have it printed) but that is as false as the other, Spinus being
ever by consent of all Dictionaries and Authors the foeminine gender: the truth
is, Mas Pinus, the male or he Pine tree; for indeed Lilly might had said to
have put it out of question, Pinaster, Mas Oleaster, but then it had been an
harsh and unpleasing Cacemphaton, as your own ear will tell you, but this by
the way.

He bears empaled, the first Argent on a bend Gules cotized Sable, three
wings empaled of the first (with a mullet for a difference) by the name of
Wingfeild, the second pearl between three Talbots passant of the Diamond, a
Cheveron of the Rubie, by the name of Talbot. I give you more instances of
empalements: because I desire you should be better acquainted with the same.

This Coat of Talbot belongs unto the Right worshipful Master Thomas
Talbot, Doctor of the Civil Law of Miliers Hall in Wim^ndham in the County
of Norfolk, a very learned and honest Gentleman.

He bears Argent, three Pheons Sable. This coat is ancient, and borne by a
worthy Gentleman a friend to the Muses in all good parts, and now living beyond
the seas.

He bears Azure, two cressents in chief Or, and one in bast Silver. I know
not the owner of this Coat, only I found it in a Church in Braban^, and for
the raritie, (for seldom have I seen the like) placed it here to conclude the
rest.

He bears argent: a Cheueron azure between three Treyfoiles vert. The
Treyfoile is the Herald of the Spring, and the first gras^e that appears,
hereupon it was the Emblem of Hope. For Hope anciently was painted like a
young and a beautiful child of a sweet and smiling countenance, Hope, how
among the Ancients described.
standing on tiptoe, in a long and wide roabe of white and green, with a
treifoile in the hand; the tender age shows the Infancy of Hope; the smiling
cheer, the sweetness and pleasure she apprehends in her thoughts; standing
on tiptoe, shows her uncertainty and vnsteddinesse: the long and wide roabe
declares, she ^euer pincheth or binds her conceit, but allows her
imagination the largest scope: the trey foil signifies, it is always Spring
with her, whose colors white and green, she is clad in.

If you would proceed further in blazonry, and the true knowledge of the
des^^^ts of our English Nobility, I refer you to that exact, Master ^ug.
Vincent.
just and elaborate work of my singular and learned friend Master Augustine
Vincent, Rouge-croix, very shortly to be published^ which let it be unto you
(of all that have written in that kind) instar omnium. So I refer you
henceforward to your private reading and observation.

CHAP. 14.
Of Exercise of the Body.
I Now from your private study and contemplation, bring you abroad into the
open fields, for exercise of your Body, by some honest recreation, since
Aristotle requires the same in the Education of Nobility, and all youth.
Since the mind from the Ability of the Body gathers her strength and vigor.
In L. Sol^^^. ^. de Alea lusu and Ale^^^.
Anciently by the Civil Law these kinds of Exercises were only allowed of,
that is, (...), and (...), which are the exercise of Arms by single combat,
as running at Tilt-barrians, etc. coiting, throwing the hammer, sledge, and
such like. Running, iumping, leaping, and lastly wrestling: for the first, it
is the most Noble, those Epithites of (...), Of Horsemanship.
and (...), have been the attributes of Kings and Princes, whose delight in
ancient times was to ride and manage great horses. Hereby you are ennabled
for command, and the service of your Country. And what, says Tullis, can be
more glorious, then to be able to preserve and succor our country, when she
has need of our help? It is the only commendation that Saluste gives to
Iugurth, who did not (says he) giu^ himself over to be corrupted by Sloth
and Riot (as many of our Gallants now adays do) but as it is the custom of
that Nation, exercised himself by riding, throwing the dart, and running with
his equals: and though he excelled all other in the height of glory,
notwithstanding he was held dear and beloved of all men, etc. And Casar used
the exercise of ^iding so much, and hereby became so active and skillful, that
laying his hands behind him, he would put his horse to his full carreer, make
him on the sudden take hedge or ditch, and stop him, put him into a ring, and
the like. And Marius after he had been seven time ^ Consul, and fourscore
years of age, exercised himself daily in the field of Mars with the Roman
youth, instructing them to handle their weapon, to ride, etc. The like also did
Pompey even to his last expedition. And Virgil speaking (I take it) of the
Spartan youth: says, Venat^ invigilant pueri, Sylva^que, fatigans.
Flect^r^ ludis equos, and spicula tendere cornu, etc.


And at this day it is the only exercise of the Italian Nobility, especially
in Naples, as also of the French; and great pity of no more practiced among
our English Gentry.

Running at the tilt is a generous and a Martial exercise, Of Tilting and
Torneaments.
but hazardous and full of danger; for many hereby (even in sport) have lost
their lives, that I may omit Henry the French King, with many other Princes and
noble personages of whom History is full.

Tilting and Torneaments were invented by Manuel Comnenus Emperor of
Constantinople, Guide Panci^llo. in lib de reb. no viter re^ertis, tit. 20.
Nicetas, lib. 3.
as says Nicetas, who wrote about the year 1214. before his time we read
not any where that this exercise was used under the Roman Empire.

The same Nicetas reports of a solemn Iustes or Torneaments which the said
Manuel Comnenus showed unto the Latins at Antioch, what time they went to make
war in the holy land: for the Latins making a brave show in their rich
Armor well horsed, with their Lances, and presenting themselves before the
Emperor; the Emperor to show them that the Graecians were nothing inferior
unto them in bravery or courage, appointed a day when they and the Latins (for
the glory of either Empire) should so many to so many, and with lances without
points, encounter either bravely mounted, and made one of the number with his
Graecians; who, says Nicetas, so bravely carried himself, that he unhorsed
two Latin Commanders, casting them from the saddle to the ground.

In our lances now adays (of what wood soever they are made of) there is
nothing so much danger as has been in times past: neither in our moderno
practice of war have they almost any use at all. The Prince of Orange has
abandoned them, having not a Lance in his whole Army, but has Carbines in
their room. Spinola has some troops of them, yet not many, as I observed.
Those of Shertogen-bosch under Grobbendonckse, are esteemed the best horse
Spinola has.

For throwing and wrestling, I hold them exercises not so well beseeming
Nobility, Of throwing, leaping, and wrestling.
but rather Soldiers in a Camp, or a Princes guard: neither have I read or
heard of any Prince or General commended for wrestling, save Epaminondas
Achmat the last Grand Signeur and Emperor of Turkey, who took great delight in
throwing the Hammer, and was so strong that he overthrew his stoutest
Iauizaries, there being reared in Constantinople for one extraordinary cast
which none could come near, two great pillars of marble.

Running and Agility of Body have been esteemed most commendable in the
greatest Princes and Commanders that ever lived; Of running.
and the old Romans (next after trial made of their strength, and view of
their limbs and person) chose their soldiers by running, for it was an old
custom among them, to assault the enemy by running all close together in
gross to the charge. And Casar tells us that strokes are surer laid on, C.
Casar in Epistolis.
and the soldier made more nimble and ready in running and by motion. Homer
gave Achilles (which perhaps some of our great feathered gallants would
disdain, yet happily better deserve) the epithet of (...), or swiftfooted. And
To cure the smalnes^e of his voice, he would usually run up a hill, a fit
Emblem for such as when they have ascended the height of preferment, both
look and speak big.
Alexander we read excelled all his Court in running. Sertorius a brave
commander under Caesar, could nimbly run up the most steep Mountains, leap
broken and vnpasseable Rocks, and like inuious places; insomuch as Metellus
being sent with a powerful Army against him, he knew neither where to find
him, nor how to come by him, by reason of his nimble footemanship. Thereupon he
sent his Colleague Pompey, who being by Sextorius overthrown at the first
encounter, escaped very narrowly; for being unhorsed, and having received a
great wound, while the soldiers were busied in striving, some for his horse,
others for the most rich furniture (his caparison, bridle, saddle, stirrops,
being in a manner all of gold, and shining with precious stones of inestimable
value) watching his opportunity, by swiftnes of foot escaped from them all, and
returned safe to his quarter.

Leaping is an exercise very commendable, Of leaping.
and healthful for the body, especially if you use it in the morning, as we
read Alexander and Epimanondas did. Upon a full stomach or to bedward, it is
very dangerous, and in no wise to be exercised.

The skill and art of swimming Of swimming.
is also very requisite in every Noble and Gentleman, especially if he looks
for emploiment in the wars; for hereby (besides the preserving of his own
life upon infinite occasions,) he may many ways annoy his enemy. Horatius
Cocles only by the benefit of swimming saved his country, for when himself
alone had long defended, and made good the bridge over Tyber against the
Hetruscans, the Romans brake it down behind him, Live. lib. 2. Decad. 1.
wherewith, in his armor, he casthimselfe into the River, and (notwithstanding
a shower of darts and arrows were sent after him) swam with safety into the
city, which rewarded him with a statue erected in the market place, and as much
land as he could encompasse with a plough in a day.

And as desperate was the attempt of a number of Roman Gentlemen in the first
Carthaginian war, who leaping in a night from the hatches of their ships into
the Sea, by maine force thrust and drew the Carthaginian ships into the
haven, and delivered them to Luctatius their General.

And as resolute was that attempt (no whit inferior to the former) of Gerrard
and Haruey, The resolute adventure of Gerrard and Haruey in 88.
two Gentlemen of our own Nation, who in eighty eight in the fight at Sea,
swam in the night time, and pierced with Awgers, or such like Instruments, the
sides of the Spanish Gallions, and returned back safe to the fleet.

Scauola, a man of inestimable courage, and who came with Caesar in his
expedition for Britain, after he had made good a whole day together, a
mighty Rock or passage against the Britains, in the night time laden with
double Arms and an heavy shield, cast himself into the deep, and swam safe
to Caesar and his fleet.

Neither is it to be wondered at, that the Romans were so skillful in swimming:
for they were daily exercised in the same after their other exercises, and had
a place in the River of Tyber appointed unto them for the same purpose,
adjoining to the field of Mars; and another of great depth, rough and full of
whirlpits on purpose, to exercise their horses in.

Shooting also is a very healthful and commendable recreation for a Gentleman;
Of shooting.
neither do I know any other comparable unto it for stirring every part of the
body: for it opens the breast and pipes, exercises the arms and feet, with
less violence, then running, leaping, etc. Herein was the Emperor Domitian so
cunning, that let a Boy a good distance off hold up his hand, and stretch his
fingers abroad, he would shoot through the spaces without touching the Boys
hand, or any finger.

And Commodus (says Herodian) had so good an aim, that he would fix on the
brow of a Dear two shafts as euenly, and spreading in distance, as if they had
been his own horns.

But for the further excellence and use of this exercise, I refer you to that
excellent book of M. Aschams, entitled Toxophilus, wherein you shall find
whatsoever is requisite to be known of a complete Archer.

Hawking and Hunting are recreations very commendable and befitting a Noble or
Gentleman to exercise; Hunting especially, which Xenophon commends to his
Cyrus, calling it a gift of the Gods, bestowed first upon Chiron for his
uprightness in doing Justice, and by him taught unto the old Heroes and
Princes; by whose virtue and prowess (as enabled by this exercise) their
Countries were defended, their subjects and innocents preserved, Justice
maintained. For there is no one exercise that enableth the body more for the
war, then Hunting, by teaching you to endure heat, cold, hunger, thirst; to
rise early, watch late, lie and fare hardly: and Eusebius is of opinion, that
wild beasts were of purpose created by God, that men by chasing and
encountering them, might be fitted and enabled for warlike exercises. Hereupon
Alexander, Cyrus, and the old Kings of Persia, employed themselves exceeding
much herein, not to purchase Venison and purucy for the belly, but to maintain
their strength, and preserve their health, by increasing and stirring up the
natural heat within, which sloth and sitting still wastes and decaies: To
harden the bodies by labor against the enemy; and withal, to search out the
Natures of wild beasts, which known, they might leave the same recorded to
their posterity. Langius, lib. 2. Epist. 59. Quercetan. in Diatetico poly.
hist. Sect. 2. Cap. 11.
And the famous Physician Quercetan, above all other exercises commends this
as most healthful, and keeping the body sound and free from diseases.

The old Lord Gray (our English Achilles) when he was Deputy of Ireland, to
inure his sons for the war, would usually in the depth of Winter, in frost,
snow, rain, and what weather soever fell, cause them at midnight to be raised
out of their beds, and carried abroad on hunting till the next morning; then
perhaps come wet and cold home, having for a breakfast a brown loase, and a
mouldie Cheese, or (which is ten times worse) a dish of Irish Butter: and in
this manner the Spartans and Laconians dieted, and brought up their children
till they came unto man's estate.

Hawking was a sport utterly unknown to the ancients, as Blondinus and P.
Iouius in the second book of his History, where he entreats of the
Muscouitish affairs witnesses; but was invented and first practiced by
Frederick Barbarossa, Iul. Firmicus lib. 5., cap. 8.
when he besieged Rome: yet it appears by Firmicus, that it was known twelve
hundred years since, where he speaks of Falconers, and teachers of other
Birds: and indeed beyond him, I think it can no where be found that Falconrie
was known. There have been many who have written of Falconrie, Frederick the
second, Emperor of Germany (whom Melancthon worthily commends, Melancthon
lib. 5. Chron^. folio 789.
and equalleth to the ancient Heroes, for his many victories archieued by his
valor: his skill in all learning, being able to speak fourteen several
languages: his liberty, magnificence, affability, mil^nesse, etc. Insomuch,
that in him alone, says he, ended and died the remainder of Ancient Majesty)
wrote hereof two excellent books, which Ioachi^^ Camerarius (having by him
the first Coppie in a Manuscript) published together, with a Treatise of
Albertus Magnus, of the Nature of Hawks, and printed it at Norimberge. Budaus
has also written a large Discourse of Hunting and Hawking, Budaus de venatione
and Aucup^o.
part whereof is annexed to the latter end of Henry Estienn^s French and Latin
Dictionarie: in English M. Blundeuiles book is the best that I know.

By the Canon Law Hawking was forbidden unto Clergy men, Council Au^el. cap. 4.
as afterward Hunting, by reason the exercise and instruments wherewith beasts
are slain, Agath^usi. 55. Epanneusi. ^. 4 ^. Ex^^. de Clerico ^enatore.
are military, and not so well agreeing (as they give the reason) with
spiritual warfare: but I cannot see but that they (many of them being great
Princes, and pillars of the Church, daily employed and pressed with the weight
of State affairs) may have their recreatio^s as well as others. But to prevent
their pastime, there is such an order taken with their Parkes, that many of our
best Bishoprics can now adays scarce show one of ten, or twenty. Norwich had
thirteen Parkes, and of all other was most iniustly dealt withal. If they had
taken away twelve and left the odd one, it had been indifferent; but to rob
the Church of all, was more then too much.

But as allow not altogether that severe education of the old Spartan^ in their
Children, hazzarding many times the healths of young and tender bodies, by some
tedious ague; yea, also their lives, by the mischance of a leap or stumbling
of your horse: so as much do I detest that effoeminacie of the most that burn
out day and night in their beds and by the fire side, in trifles, gaming, or
courting their yellow Mistresses all the Winter in a City; appearing but as
Cuckoes in the Spring, one time in the year to the Country and their tenants,
leaving the care of keeping good houses at Christmas, to the honest Yeomen of
the Country.

Some again are so intent to their pleasure, that they never care for keeping
within, as sometime was Mithridates, that it is reported of him; Volatteran,
lib. 7. av^iq^. Ionius in Barnaba.
For seven years space together he never came within house, neither in City
nor in the Country. And Barnaby Viscount of Millan, was so carried away with
the love of Hunting, that he made a Law; whosoever should kill any wild
Boar, or had killed any in five years before that his Statute was enacted
(contrary unto an ancient Edict) or were privy to the eating of any at any
Gentleman's table, should be imprisoned and tortured after a grievous manner.
Beside, he afflicted the Country marueilously, by dispersing many thousands of
Dogs to be kept and brought up in villages and among the Paisants, to their
infinite trouble and charge. Mahomet Son to Amurath, on the contrary, when
he made war in Caramania, (...) lib. 7.
turned out of service 700. of his fathers Faulconers, and caused as many of
old huntsmen to follow Arms, and his Camp, in stead of the kennell.

CAP. 15.
Of Reputation, and Carriage in general.
THere is no one thing that sets a fairer stamp upon Nobility then
euenesse of Carriage and care of our Reputation, without which our most
graceful gifts are dead and dull, as the Diamond without his foil: for
hereupon as one the frontispice of a magnificent Palace, are fixed the eyes of
all passengers, and hereby the height of our Judgments (even our selves) is
taken; according to that of the wiseman, Ecclesiastic.
By gate, laughter, and apparel, a man is known what he is. Wherefore I call
it the crown of good parts, and loadstone of regard. The principal means to
preserve it is Temperance and that Moderation of the mind, wherewith as a
bridle we curb and break our rank and unruly Passions, keeping as the
Caspian Sea, our selves ever at one height without ebb or refluxe. And albeit
true it is that Galen says, we are commonly beholden for the disposition of
our minds, to the Temperature of our bodies, yet much lies in our power to
keep that fount from empoisoning, by taking heed to our selves; and as good
Cardinal Poole once said, to correct the malignitie of our Stars with a
second birth. For certainly under grace it is the root of our Reputation and
honest Fame; without the which, as one says, we are dead long before we are
buried. ^.

For Moderation of the mind and affections, which is the Ground of all
Honesty, I must give you that prime receipt the kingly Prophet does to a young
man, teaching him wherewith to cleanse his way, that is; by keeping, says he
(oh Lord) thy Statutes, Psalm. 1^ 9. 9.
meaning the fear of God in general, without which (he ever first striking
at the head) our Judgments are depraved, and left to our selves we are not
able to give any thing his true esteem and value. Therefore first to be truly
Honest is to be truly Religious, for if the fear of men be a great motive to
keep our selves within compass, much more will the Fear of God, recall us
from our lusts and intemperance. Hereby the mind gets the dominion and
vpperhand, wisely governing that goodly kingdom Nature has allotted her. And
if it was sometime said of Fabiu^, Citius Sole^ e sua sphara diuelli, quam
Fabium ab honestate potuisse, how heedfully ought a Christian who carries the
lantern in his hand, look to his feet, when an Heathen could go so directly
in the dark, only by the glimpse of Nature and without stumbling?

Moreover since the Civil end of our life is, v^ in Honor cum dignitate
v^vamus, you shall withal find good Learning and the Arts to confer a
great help and furtherance hereunto, being a polisher of inbred rudeness and
our informitie, and a curer of many diseases our minds are subject unto: for we
learn not to beg to ourselves admiration from other, or boastingly to lay to
view so rich and precious furniture of our minds, but that we may be useful to
others, but first to our selves; least (as some precious receipt) while we
keep that in a box which can cure another; our selves lie lame and diseased.

The first use then hereof (I mean your learning) as an Antidote against the
Common plague of our times, let it confirm and persuade you, that as your
understanding is by it ennobled with the richest dowry in the world, so hereby
learn to know your own worth and value, and in choice of your companions, to
entertain those who are Religious and Learned: for as I said heretofore,
Converse of old was the mother of skill and all virtuous endeauours, so say I
now, of all vice and base^es if regard be not had. Therefore hold friendship
and acquaintance with few, and those I could wish your betters, at the least of
your own rank, but endeare your self to none; gaud^bis minus, minies
dolebis. The best Natures I know delight in popularitie, and are pliable to
companykeeping, but many times buy their acquaintance at over dear a rate, by
being drawn either into base Actions and Places of which they are ashamed for
ever after; or to needless expense by laying out or lending to importunate
base and shameless companions, gaining loss of their moneys, time, sorrow and
grief of friends, disrepute of the better sort, and lastly contempt of the
vilest among the Common vulgar.

Anti^chus Epiphanes, King of Asia, for his popularity and delight in company,
Athenaeus lib. 5. cap. 4. Diodorus lib. 20.
was sir-named the Mad: and likewise for the same Appius Claudius was deprived
of his Office, and fearing beside shame the hatred of the Senate,
counterfeiting blindness, for ever after kept himself at home. We read also
of a certain King of the Goths, who making his Soldiers his drinking
companions, 1. Magnus lib. 7. cap. 17.
was for his free and kind heart at the last drowned by them in a Tub of Ale.

Nor mistake me that I swerue so much on this side, that I would deny a Prince
or Gentleman the benefit of discourse and converse with the meanest: for
Majesty and greatness cannot always stand so bent, but that it must have the
remission and relaxation sometime to descend from the Court to the Cottage,
which cannot choose but give it the better taste and relish. Adrian the
Emperor would most courteously confer with the meanest, Erasim lib. 6.
Apotheg. ca Spartians.
detesting those his high minded Courtiers, who under a color of preserving
his Estate and Honor, envied him this sweetness of humility and priuacie.
Xi^hilinus.
Vespasian in like manner was wont not only to salute the chief Senators of
Rome, but even private men, inuiting them many times to dine and suppe with
him, himself again going unto their houses. Plutarch. in Philo^^m.
Philopoemen was so courteous and went so plain, his Hostess in Meg^ra took
him for a s^ruing-man. And certainly this Affability and Courtesy in
Greatness, draws our eyes like flowers in the Spring, to behold, and with
admiration to love it wheresoever we find it.

There is no better sign (says one) in the world of a good and virtuous
disposition, Philip Commines, c. 34.
then when a Prince or Gentleman makes choice of learned and virtuous men for
his companions; for presently he is imagined to be such an one as those to
whom he joins himself: yea says Aristotle, it is a kind of virtuous
exercise to be conversant with good and understanding men.

Whom then you shall entertain into the closet of your breast, first sound
their Religion; then look into their Lives and Carriage, how they have been
reckoned of others. Lastly, to their Quality how or wherein they may be
useful unto you, whether by advice and Counsel, direction, help in your
studies, or serviceableness in your exercise and recreations.

There is nothing more miserable them to want the Counsel of a friend, and an
admonish^r in time of need: Ludouis Viues.
Which has been and is daily the bane of many of our young Gentlemen, even to
the utter ruin of themselves and their posterity for ever. In Emblem.
Who when like Alciates figtree upon the high and innacessible Rock, they are
out of reach and cannot be come unto by men who would dress and preserve them;
espied a far off are only preyed upon and haunted by Vultures and Dawes; and
while one adds fuel to the fire of his expense, for the which he is like to
pay twenty for two, at twenty and one; another sootheth him in play (knowing
the best fishing is in troubled waters) another te^dreth him a match of light
stuff: all at once preying for themselves, these green things of sixteen or
eighteen are quite devoured before they were ripe.

Wherefore I must next commend unto you Frugality, Of Frugalitie. Iustine.
the Mother of virtues, a virtue which holds her own, lays out profitably,
auoideth idle Expenses, Superfluity, lavish bestowing or giving, borrowing,
building, and the like: yet when reason requires can be royally bountiful, a
virtue as requisite in a Noble or Gentleman, as the care of his whole Estate,
and preservation of his name and posterity; yet as greatly wanting in many, as
they come short of the reputation and entire Estates of their forefathers, who
account thrift the object of the plow or shop, too base and unworthy their
consuleration, while they impose their fair Estates and most important
business, upon a cheating Steward, or crafty Bailiffe, who in few years
(like the young Cuckoo) are ready to devour their feeder; and themselves like
sleepie Pilots, having no eye to the compass, or sounding their Estates, are
run on ground ere they be aware.

First then as soon as you shall be able, look into your Estate, laboring not
only to conserve it entire, but to augment it either by a wise forethought,
Marriage, or by some other thriftie means: and think the more ye are laden
with abundance, the more need (like a vine) ye have need of props and your
soundest friends to advise you. Neither do I imagine you will be so rash as to
give no care to good counsel, to your ruin, as Caesar did, when he refused a
book of a poor scholar, wherein the intended plot against him was discovered.

Marcus Ca^o, who was so victorious in war, so prudent in peace, so eloquent
in the oratorie, learned in the laws, neglected not thereby his estate, but
looked, as Livi^ says of him, even into his husbandry himself: and Plutarch
writes of Philopoemen, Plutarch in Philopoemen.
a great and famous commander, that notwithstanding his great affairs and
employments, he would every morning be stirring by break of day, and either
to dressing of his vines, digging or following his plough: and Cicero to
heighthen the Honor of king D^iostar^s reports thus of him, Ci^ pro Deiotaro.
in Deiotaro sunt regia virtutes, quod i^ Ca^sar, ignorare non arbitror, sed
pr^^cip^e singularis and admiranda frugali^as. And the Romans had a law that
he who could not look into his own estate, Iulia^us (...) decura ^urio:
and employ his land to the best, should forfeite the same, and be held for a
fool or a mad man all his life after. Aristid^s, albeir he was an excellent
man otherwise, Plutarch in Aristide.
yet herein he was so careless that at his death he neither loft portion for
his daughters, nor so much as would carry him to the ground, and defray the
charge of his funeral.

Be thriftie also in your apparel and clothing, least you incur the censure
of the most grave and wisest censor, Cui magna corporis cultus cura, (...)
magna virtutis inturia: and Henry the fourth, last king of France of eternal
memory, would oftentimes merrily say, By the outside only, he could found the
depth of a Courtier: saying, Who had least in them made the fairest show
without, inviting respect with gold lace and great feathers, which will not be
won with toys. Neither on the contrary, be so basely parsunonious or
frugall, as is written of one of the kings of France, in whose accounts in the
Eschequer are yet remaining. Item so much for red Satin to sleeue the kings
old Doublet: Item a halfepenny for liquor for his boots, and so forth. Or to
be known by a hat or doublet ten or twenty years; then with some miserable
usurer curse the maker for the slightness of his felt or sluffe, murmuring it
will not last to see the Revolution of the First Moouer. But using that
moderate and middle garb, which shall rather lessen then make you bigger then
you are; which h^th been^, and is yet observed by our greatest Princes, who in
outside go many times inferior to their grooms and pages. That glory and
champion of Christendom, Charles the fifth, would go (except in times of
war) as plain as any ordinary gentleman, The modesty and humility of Charles
the fifth.
commonly in black or sad stuff, without lace or any other extraordinary
cost; only his Order of the golden Fleece about his neck in a ribband: and
was so naturally frugall, not out of parsimonie (being the most bountiful
minded Prince that ever lived) that as Guicciardin^ reports of him, if any
one of his points had chanced to break, he would tie it of a knot and make it
serve again. And I have many times seen his Excellence the Prince of Orange
that now is, in the field, in his habit as plain as any country gentleman,
wearing commonly a suite of haire-coloured slight stuff of silk, a plain
gray cloak and hat, with a green feather, his hatband only exceeding rich.
And Ambrose Spin^la General for the Archduke, when he lay in Weasell at the
taking of it in, one would have taken, but for an ordinary merchant in a plain
suite of black. And the plainnes of the Late Duke of Norfolk The Duke of
Norfol^^.
derogated nothing from his Esteem. So that you see what a pitiful Ambition
it is, to strive to be first in a fashion, and a poor pride to seek your
esteem and regard, from worms, Shells, and Tailors; and buy the gaze of the
staring multitude at a thousand, or fifteen hundred pounds, which would
apparel the Duke and his whole ^rande Consiglio of Venice. But if to do your
Prince Honor, at a tilting, employed in embassage, coming in of some great
stranger, or you are to give entertainment to Princes or Noble personages at
your house, as did Cosmo de Medici, Machiauest^ in Host. Florent.
or happily ye command in the wars, spare not to be brave with the brauest.
Philopoemen caused his soldiers to beespare in Apparel and Diet (says
Plutarch,) In Philopoem.
and to come honorably armed into the field: wherefore he commanded in
goldsmiths shoppes to break in pieces pots of gold and silver, and to be
employed in the siluering of bittes, guilding of Armours, inlaying of Saddles,
etc. Plutarch.
For the sumptuo^s cost upon warlike furniture, does encourage and make great a
noble heart: but inother sights it carries away men's minds to a womanish
vanity, and melting the courage of the mind, (as Homer says it did Achill^s,
when his mother laid new Arms and weapons at his feet.) The Spaniard when he
is in the field, is glorious in his cassocke, and affects the wearing of the
richest jewels; the French huge feathers, Scarlet, and gold lace: the English,
his arms rich, and a good sword: the Italians pride is in his Neapolitan
Courser: the Germans and low Dutch to be dawbed with gold and pearl, wherein
(say they) there is no loss except they be lost. But herein I give no
prescripon.

I now come to your diet, Of Diet. Seneca Rhet. 7. Cicero pro Caetio.
wherein be not only frugall for the saving of your purse, but moderate in
regard of your health, which is empaired by nothing more then excess in eating
and drinking (let me also add Tobacco taking.) Many dishes breed many
diseases, dulleth the mind and understanding, and not only shorten, but take
away life. We read of Augustus that he was never curious in his di^t, but
content with ordinary and common viandes. And Cato the Censor, sailing into
Spain, drank of no other drink then the rowers or slaves of his own galley.
Pluta^^h de Sanitate tuenda.
And Timotheus Duke of Athens was wont to say, (who^ Plato invited home to him
to supper,) they found themselves never distempered. Contrary to our
Feastmakers, who suppose the glory of entertainment, and giving the best
welcome to consist in needelesse superfluities and profuse waste of the good
Creatures, Plutarch. in Scylla.
as Scylla made a banquet that lasted many days, where there was such
excessive abundance, that infinite plenty of victuals were thrown into the
River, and excellent wine above forty years old spilt and made no account of;
but by surfeiting and banqueting, Sab^ll. Em^^ad. 2.
at last he gat a most miserable disease and dyed full of lice.

And Ca^sar in regard of his Lybian triumph, Su^toni^^. Every Roman penny was
about seven pence half penny of our money. C. Rh^digi^. lib. 6. cap. 35.
at one banquet filled two and twenty thousand rooms with ghests, and gave to
every Citizen in Rome ten bushels of wheat, and as many pounds of oil, and
besides three hundred pence in money.

We read of one Smyndirides, who was so much given to feasting, and his ease,
that he saw not the Sun rising nor setting in twenty years; and the
Sybarites forbad all Smiths and knocking in the streets, and what thing soever
that made any noise, to be within the City walls, that they might eat and
sleep: whereupon they banished cocks out of the city, Suidas and Politian.
lib. 15 Miscellan.
and invented the use of chamberpots, and bad women a year before to their
feasts, that they might have leisure enough to make themselves fine and brave
with gold and Jewels.

Above all, Drinking the destruction of wit, and plague of our English Gentry.
learn betimes to avoid excessive drinking, then which there is no one vice
more common and reigning, and ill beseeming a Gentleman, which if grown to an
habit, is hardly left; remembering that hereby you become not fit for any thing,
having your reason degraded, your body distempered, your soul hazarded, your
esteem and reputation abased, while you sit taking your unwholesome healthes,
-- vt iam vertigine tectum Ambulet, and geminis exsurgat mensa lucernis.
Inv^nal. Saty^.
-- Until the house about does turn,
And on the board two candles seem to burn.


By the Leuiticall law, who had a glutton or a drunkard to their Son, they
were to bring him before the Elders of the City, and see him stoned to death.
And in Spain^ at this day they have a law that the word of him that has been
convicted of drunkenness, shall not be taken in any testimony. Within these
fifty or threescore years it was a rare thing with us in England, to see a
Drunken man, our Nation carrying the name of the most sober and temperate of
any other in the world. Drunkenness not many years since very rare in England.
But since we had to do in the quarrel of the Netherlands, about the time of
Sir John Norrice his first being there, the custom of drinking and pledging
healthes was brought over into England: wherein let the Dutch be their own
Judges, it we equal them not; yea I think rather excel them.

Tricongius and the old Romans had laws and statutes concerning the Art of
drinking, Plin lib 4. Historia sub finem.
which it seems, are revived, and by our drunkards observed to an hair. It
being enacted, that he who after his drinks faltered not in his speech, vomited
not, n^yther reeled, if he drank off his cups clean^ly, seek not his wind in
his draughs, spit not, left nothing in the pot, nor spilt any upon the ground,
he had the prize, and was accounted the brauest man. If they were contented
herewith, it were well, but they daily inue^t new and damnable kinds of
carrow^ing (as that in North-holland and Frizeland (though among the baser
sort) of vpsi^ Monikedam, which is, after you have drunk out the drink to
your friend or companion, you must break the glass full upon his face, and if
you miss, you must drink again,) whence proceed quarrelling, Proverb. 23.
re^iling, and many times execrable murders, as Alexander was slain in his
drunkenness; and Domitius, Nero's father slew Liberius out right, because he
would not pledge him a whole carrowse, and hence arise most quarrels among our
gallant drunkards: unto whom if you read a lecture of sobriety, and how in
former ages their forefathers drank water, they swear water is the frogs
drink, and ordained only for the driving of milles, and carrying of boats.

Neither desire I, you should be so abstemious, as not to remember a friend
with an hearty draught, Ecclesiast. 31. verse. ^7.
since wine was created to make the heart merry, for what is the life of man if
it want wine? Moderately taken it preserves health, comfort and disperseth
the natural heat over all the whole body, allayes choleric humors,
expelling the same with the sweat, etc. tempereth Melancholy. And as one
says, Athena^s.
has in it self (...), a drawing virtue to procure friendship.

At your meat to be liberal and freely merry, is very healthy and comely, and
many times the stranger or guest will take more content in the chearelinesse of
your countenance, then in your meat. Augustus the Emperor had always his
mirth greater then his feasts. And Suctonius says of Titus, Vespasians Son,
he had ever his table furnished with mirth and good company. And the old Lord
Treasurer of England, Lord William Burghley, how employed soever in State
affairs, at his table he would lay all business by, and be heartily merry.

Charles the Great used at his meats to have some History read, whereof he
would afterward discourse. And Francis the first, King of France, would
commonly dispute of History, Cosmography, Poetry. Sleidan lib. 19
His Majesty our Sovereign, altogether in points and profound questions of
Divinity. When I was in Virocht, and lived at the table of that Honorable
Gentleman, Sir John Ogle, Lord Governor, whither resorted many great Scholars
and Captains, English, Scottish, French, and Dutch, it had been enough to
have made a Scholar or Soldier, to have observed the several disputations
and discourses among many strangers, one while of sundry forms of battles,
sometime of Fortification, of fireworkes, History, Antiquities, Heraldrie,
pronunciation of Languages, etc. that his table seemed many times a little
Academic.

In your discourse be free and affable, Affability in Discourse.
giving entertainment in a sweet and liberal manner, and with a cheerful
courtesy, seasoning your talk at the table among grave and serious
discourses, with conceits of wit and pleasant invention, as ingenious
Epigrammes, Emblemes, Anagrammes, merry tales, witty questions and answers,
Mistakings, as a melancholy Gentleman sitting one day at a table, where I was,
started up upon the sudden, and meaning to say, I must go buy a dagger, by
transposition of the letters, said: Sir, I must go dye a beggar.

A plain country man being called at an Assize to be a witness about a piece
of land that was in controversy, This happened in Norfolk.
the Judge calling, said unto him, Sirrah, how call you that water that runs
on the South Side of this close? My Lord (quoth the fellow) our water comes
without calling.

A poor soldier with his musket and rest in Breda, came one day in, Of a
Soldier of Breda.
and set him down at the nether end of the Prince of Orange his table, as he
was at dinner (whit^^r none might be privileged under the degree of a
Gentleman at the least to come:) the Gentleman-usher of the Prince demanded of
him, if he were a Gentleman: yes quoth the Soldier, my father was a Goldsmith
of Andwarpe: but what can you do in your fathers trade, (quoth he) I can set
stones in mortar, for he was a bricklaier, Pasqu^^e, a marble Image in Rome, on
which they v^e to six libels.
and helped Masons in their works.

For Epigrammes, Pasquine will afford you the best and quickest I know. You
shall have them all bound in two volumes. I remember he tells us once upon a
Sunday morning, Pasquine had a soul shirt put on, and being asked the cause,
Because an Earl in Rome had married a chambermaide.
Pasquine made answer, because my Laundresse is become a Countess.

You shall have a taste of some of my Anagram^ such as they are.

Upon the Prince. CAROLVS. o Clarus. Charles Prince of Wales. All France
cries, o help us.
Of the Queen of Bohemia and Princess Palatine of the Rhene, my gracious
Lady, ELISABETHA STEVARTA, Has Arts beata velit.


Being requested by a Noble and Religious Lady, who was sister to the old
Lord, De la Ware, to try what her name would afford, it gave me this: JANE
WEST. Entua Jesus.


And upon the name of a brave and beautiful Lady, wife to Sr. Robert
Mordaunt, son and heir to Sr. Le Strange Mordaunt Knight and Barronet in
the Country of Norfolk: Amie Mordaunt. Tumore Dianam. Tumore Dianam. Minerua,
domat. Me induat amor. Nuda, o te miram. Vi tandem amor.


Upon the name of a fair Gentlewoman this in Italian: ANNA DVDLAEIA. E^la nuda
Diana.


Upon a sweet and modest young Gentlewoman, Mistress MARIA MEVTAS. Tuame amaris


To comfort my self living in a Town, where I found not a Scholar to
converse withal, nor the kindest respect as I thought: I gave this my Poesy,
the same backward and forward SVBI DVRA ARVDIBVS.


Of M. Doctor Hall Deane of Worcester, this, added to the body of a Glory,
wherein was written Jehovah in Hebrew, resembling the Deity.

JOSEPH HALL All his Hope.
Of a virtuous and fair Gentlewoman at the request of my friend who bar^ her
good will: FRANCIS BARNEY. Bars in Fancy. And this, Theod^sia Dixon. A DEO
DIXIT HONOS: or O Dea, dixit Honos.


Of my good friend M. Doct. Dowland, in regard he had slipped many opportunities
in advancing his fortunes, and a rare Lut^nist as any of our Nation, beside one
of our greatest Masters of Music for composing: I gave him an Emblem with
this; IOANNES DOVLANDVS. Annos Iudendo hausi.


There were at one time in Rome very witty and unhappy libels cast forth upon
the whole Co^sistory of Cardinals in the nature of Emblemes. I remember
Cardinal Farnesi had for his part a storke devouring a frogge, with this,
Mordeo non morde^tes. Bellarmine a Tiger fast chained to a post, in a scroule
proceeding from the beasts mouth in Italian: Da mi mia liberta, vederete chi io
Sono: that is, give me my Liberty, you shall see what I am, meaning perhaps he
would be no longer, etc. And those were very knauish that were thrown up and
down the Court of France, the Escotcheon or Arms of the party on the one
side of a pastboard, and some ingenious device on the other; as one had the
Arms of the house of di Medici of Florence, on the one side, on the other an
inkhorne with the mouth turned downward, with this tart Pasquil: Elle faut
d'encre: and so of the whole Court.

Emblemes and Impresa's if ingeniously conceipted, are of dainty device and
much esteem. The Invention of the Italian herein is very singular, neither do
our English wits come much behind them, but rather equal them every way. The
best that I have seen, have been the devises of Ti^tings, whereof many are
reserved in the private Gallery at White Hall, of Sr. Phillip Sidn^ie's, the
Earl of Cumberland, Sr. Henry Leigh, the late Earl of Essex, with many
others, most of which I once collected with intent to publish them, but the
charge dissuaded me.

But above all, in your talk and discourse have a care ever to speak the
truth, remembering there is nothing that can more prejudice your esteem then to
be lauishtongued in speaking that which is false, and disgracefully of others
in their absence. The Persians and Indians had a law, that whosoever had been
thrice convicted of speaking untruth, should upon pain of death never speak
word all his life after. Cato would suffer no man to be praised or dispraised,
Plato says, it is only allowed, Physicians to lie for the comfort of the
sick.
but used always such discourse as was profitable to the hearers; for as one
says, Dict^ria minuum Maiestatem. Iestes and scoffs do lessen Mai^stie and
greatness, and should be far from great personages, and men of wisdom.

CHAP. 16.
Of Travail.
I Will conclude with Travail, which many disallow in Gentlemen, yea and some
great travelers themselves; but me thinks they are as one who has filled
his own belly, and denies the dish to his fellow. In my opinion nothing
rectifieth and confirms more the judgment of a Gentleman in forteine
affairs, teaches him knowledge of himself, and setleth his affection more
sure to his own Country, then Travail does: for if it be the common Law of
Nature, D^^^ys. Halicarna^^.
that the learned should have rule over and instruct the ignorant, the
experienced, the unexperienced, what concerns more Nobility, taking place
above other, then to be learned and wise? and where may wisdom be had, but
from many men, and in many places? Hereupon we find the most eminent and wise
men of the world to have been the greatest Trauailers (to omit the Patriarchs
and Apostles themselves in holy writ) as Plato, Pythagoras, Aristotle,
Theophrastus, Osyris King of Egypt, who traveled a great part of the world,
and caused to be engraven upon his Sepulcher, D^^^er. s^c. lib. 1.
Here under I lie King Osyris, eldest son of Saturn, who have left no part
of the world unsearched, whitherto I have not come, teaching again whatsoever
I have found, for the use and commodity of mankind. And Xenophon to intimate
unto us the benefit and excellent use of Travail, says that Cambyses, by his
travail learned many excellent things, which he taught Cyrus his son: and
having travailed as far as Mero^ (as a perpetual monument of his long
voyage) he built a City in the form of a Persian shield. And it was the
usual boast of Alexander (said Archelaus a Cosmographer) that he had found out
more with his eyes, Di^g L^ers. lib. 2. in vita Arthel.
then other Kings were able to comprehend in thought: and to no small
commendation of himself, Menelaus in Homer, reports that he had been in
Egypt, Cyprus, Phoenicia, and seen Thebes having an hundred gates, and at
every gate two hundred horsemen for the guard. But say some, few of our
Gentlemen are bettered by their travail, but rather return home worse then
they went in manners, and many times in Religion, therefore it were better they
^arried still at home, according to Clandian: Fulix qui patrijs avum transegit
in agris,
Ipsa domus puerum quem vid^t ipsa senem:
Qui bacule nit^^s, in qua repta^it arena,
Vni^^ numerat Sacula longa casa.
He Is blessed who in's own Country ends his days,
Whose homestead see's his old age and his birth, etc.


But this happiness is but pu^rorum bea^^tude, as one says; and the greatest
unhappiness to the truly generous and industrious mind.

If therefore you intend to travel, you must first propound unto your self;
the End, which either is ad v^luptatem vel ad vtilitatem, pleasure or profit.
For the first, every one naturally affects, and the fool himself is tickled
with the sight of strange towns, towers and habits of people. Therefore you
must hold you to the other which is profit, which again has two branches,
your own private, or the public; your private, as the recovery of your
health, by some outlandish means, as the water of the Spaw, some Physician,
famous for his cure in such and such kinds, change of air, or gaining as a
Merchant by trasique, or some profession wherein you excel others. The
public is the general good of your Country, for which we are all borne, it
challenging a third part of us.

But before you travail into a strange Country, I wish you (as I have
heretofore said) to be well acquainted with your own; for I know it by
experience, that many of our young gallants, have gone over with an intent to
pass by nothing unseen, or what might be known in other places; when they
have been most ignorant here in their own native country, and strangers to
their just reproof could discourse, and say more of England then they.

In your passage, I must give you in either hand a light, Preservation, and
Observation. Preservation of your mind, from Errors, and ill manners; of your
body from distemperature, either by over eating, drinking, violent or venereal
exercise.

For there is not any nation in the world more subject unto surfets then our
English are, whether it proceeds from the Constitution of our bodies, ill
agreeing with the hotter climates, or the exchange of our wholesome diet and
plenty, for little and ill dressed; or the greediness of their fruits and hot
wines, wherewith only we are sometime constrained to fill our bellies, I am
not certain. No less peril there is, Lipsiu^.
ab istis callidis and calidis Soli^ ^^liabus, which almost in every place will
offer themselves, or be put upon you by others.

Keep the fountain of your mind from being empoisoned, especially by those
Serpents, Error and Atheism, which you shall find lurking under the fairest
flowers: and though you hear the discourses of all, and listen to the charms
of some, discover your Religion or mind to none, but resembling the needle of
the compass, howsoever for a while moved or shaken, look Northerly, and be
constant to one. To be carried away with every fancy and opinion, is to walk
with C^i^ in the land of Nod. Gene. 4.
giddiness, the greatest punishment that God laid upon him.

Before you enter into Observation, first seek the language that you may be
fit for conference, and where the language is best spoken there settle, and
furnish your self with the discreetest and most able Masters. For as here in
England, so in other places, the language is spoken with more elegancie and
purity in some places more then others. For the French, Orleans and
thereabouts is esteemed the best. Florence for the Italian, Lipsick for the
high Dutch, and Valledolid for the Spanish.

To help you in coniugating your verbes, you may use the help a while of a
Grammar of that language, but in general you must expect your perfection from
conference; for hereby the true accent, and the native grace of pronunciation
(which no book can teach) is only attained.

Now as well for neighborhood sake, as that the French tongue is chiefly
affected among our Nobility, it being a copious and a sweet language, wherein
so many famous works by as great wits as any ever Europe bred, have been
published: I wish you first of all to see France, being seated under a
temperate and most wholesome climate, and shall not endanger your health so
much, as being sent upon the sudden from a cold Country, into the scorching
heat of another more remote.

I will not stand to make any Topographicall description of the Country, M.
Dallington.
I being herein both prevented long since by a faithful pen; beside I remember
I am to write only one Chapter, not a volume.

You shall find the French, I mean of the noblest and better sort, generally
free and courteous, unto whom even among their Princes, State and Maiesticque
retiredness are burdensome, so that sometime you shall see them familiar with
the meanest. La Noue speaking of the French Nobility, says Elle est tres
vallere^se and Courtoise: et ^ y a Estat en la Chrestiente, on elle soit (...)
si grand ^^^bre. They are exceeding valiant and courteous, and there is no
estate in Christendom where they are in so great number.

They delight for the most part in Horsemanship, Fencing, Hunting, Dancing, and
little esteem of Learning and gifts of the mind; contrary to the Custom of
the ancient Roman^s, as Cate the Cens^r, C^sar, Pa^lus Aemylius and many
others, no less famous for knowledge then action; whereof themselves and their
friends oftentimes complain. Commi^^s lays the fault upon the remissness
of parents in their education. Il^ nourissent leur enfans seulement a fair les
s^ts, en habillements et en par^lles: de nulle le^tre ils n'ont cognoissance,
They breed their children to play the wa^ton fools, both in apparel and
words, but as for learning they know nothing.

The French are full of discourse, quick witted, sudden in action, and
generally light and inconstant; which C^sar found long since, writing of them,
quod sunt in consilijs capiendis mobiles, and nouis plerumque rebus student,
Casar Com. 3.
and elsewhere, he calls Galloru^ subita and repentina consilia, Moreover as
among the Spanish and Dutch, one fashion of Apparel still observed amongst
them, argues a constancy of mind and humor, so their change and variety,
their vainness and leuitie; for every two year their fashion alters.

Their exercises are for the most part Tennise play, Pallemaile, shooting in
the Crosse-bow or Piece, and Dancing.

Concerning their diet, it is nothing so good or plentiful as ours, they
contenting themselves many times with mean viandes^ only in the solemn
feasts, and banquets of entertainment, they are bountiful enough, yea far
exceed us: as for the poor paisant, he is feign oftentimes to make up his
meal with a mushrome, or his grenoilles (in English frogs,) the which are in
Paris and many other places commonly sold in the market.

Concerning their building, is it very magnificent and I know not whether in
all Europe, any buildings may for Majesty and State be compared with those of
France, (though they have been miserably spoiled by the last civil wars) they
being the best Architects of the world; upon the view of some of which (as
breathing on a fair hill) I will detain you a while. And first we will begin
with the Lovure The Lovure.
in Paris. The Lovure is the royal seat of the kings of France, famous
throughout all Europe, situate near to the town walls on the West side: by
which runs the river of Se^^e, which in old time served rather for a
fortress then a Kings house, and herein was a tower wherein were kept the
king^ revenues and treasure. Which after by King Francis the first, was pulled
down, and in this place was begun the building of the front, which is of
Masonry, so enriched with pillars, frizes, architr^^es and all sort of
architecture with such excellent symmetry and beauty, that throughout all
Europe, you shall hardly find the like. It was begun by Francis the first,
finished by Henry his son, under the appointment of the Lord of Clagny, and
afterward increased by Francis the second, Charles the 9. Last of all made the
wonder of all other works by that beautiful Gallery, the work of Henry the 4.

The Tuilleries The Tuilleries
sometime belonged to the Suburbs of Saint Honor in Paris, by the side of the
Lovure, and was indeed a place wherein they made tiles, and by reason there
were many fair Gardens about it, the Queen mother drawing the plot her self,
seeing it a pleasant and fit place, began first to build here. It is a royal
work all of free stone. The portall or entrance is very stately of marble
pillars and Jasper.

Fontaineblea^ Fontaineblea^.
is situate in the forest of Biere, in a plain encompassed with great woods,
and was in old time a retiring place for the kings of France. Francis the
first, who loved to build, took great pleasure in this seat and builded here
the house, as we see it at this present; the base Court hereof is esteemed the
fairest of all Franc^^ in the second Court there is the purest and fairest
fountain esteemed in the world, wherefore it was called Bell^ ^au^, and so
Fontaine Belle (...). R. Francis loved this place so well, that he spent most
of his time here, beautifying it while he lived with all sorts of commodities,
goodly galleries, Sto^es, etc. and caused the r^rest Masters of Europ^ in
painting tobe sent for, for the beautifying it with all manner of Histories.
Also here he placed the rarest Antiquities he could get. In brief, whatsoever
he could wrap or wring, he thought too little for this place; it is about 1. 4.
leagues from Paris.

Bl^is Bl^is.
is an ancient Castle (...) from the River of Lo^^e upon an hill. Here the old
Kings of France were wont to reside, especially Louis the twelfth took delight
in this place, who was called Pater patri^. It has belonging unto it two
goodly forests, one on this side the riner, the other on the other. Going
forth of the gardens of the house, you pass into the forest under four rows
of elmes, at the least 12. hundred paces: this is rather remarkable for the
antiquity then the beauty. The town stands beneath, about the which are
these fair places within 2. or 3. leagues, Bury, B^^^^^gard, Ville-sansm,
Chind^ny, and some others.

Amboise Amboise.
is one of the principal buildings of France, it also stands upon the Loire
upon a high Sea^^; at the foot hereof is the town, and near that a goodly
Forest: this castle is seen a great way off both by the hill, and the valley
yielding so goodly a prospect, as I never beheld a better, for from the
terrasses that enuiron the Castle, you may easily discern Tours and the Abbay
of Mar^^^stier seven leagues off; the Castle stands upon a Rock, at the
foot whereof there is a Cloister.

This house is in Picardi^, Villiers Cos^ere^^.
upon the way from Paris to Soissons, distant from Paris 16. leagues, 5. from
Soiss^n^; it stands close upon the forest of Ret^^ it is of very great
receipt, as may appear by the enclosure of the par^e. Here King Francis (whose
only delight was in building) for many years together set Mason^ a work^, the
rather because it adjoined unto the greatest ^orrest of all France, himself
loving hunting exceedingly. Here are the goodliest walks in Europe, for the
tre^s themselves are placed in curious knots, as we use to set our her^^s in
gardens.

Charleval Charleval.
is in Normandy upon the way from Paris to R^v^n, near to the village of
Fl^^ry. It was built by Charles the 9. at the instance of the Lord of (...) it
stands in a valley enclosed with mountains above, which is the Forest of
Lions: among those Mountains are many goodly prospects one within another, it
is 3. leagues by a pleasant valley easily discerned to the river Seime^ had it
been quite finished it had been^ the chief building of France.

This Castle or Royal house is called B^is de Vin^^^^ The Castle of (...).
it is situate within one league of Paris, and two of Saint Denuis the place
of burial of the French Kings, so that these three stand in a manner in a
triangle. It is a very sumptuous work and of admirable Art: it was begun by
Charles County of Valeis, brother to Philiy the fair, and finished a good
while after by Charles the fifth. This house has many fair Courts in it,
withal about it a Park, containing in circuit 16, or 17. thousand pace^,
which amount to two leagues and an half, stretching on the South, even unto
the river of S^ine, and by North unto the river of Mar^^, which joining at the
village of Constuen^^ (so called of their meeting) near Chare^^^^^ fall down
unto Paris. This in ancient times was the usual Court and abode of the French
Kings, but now little freequented, and falling in a manner to ruin.

But I omit farther to speak as well of the Royal houses, and those of the
Noblesse, being indeed the beauty of France. Whereof there are many other, as
S. Ma^^, Chen^ncean, Chamb^^rg, Boul^gu^, Creil, Coussie, Folembray, Montargis,
S. Germain and la Mu^tl^, which are all the Kings houses and worthy your view
and regard, if you happen to find them in your way. In brief hold France for
one of the most rich, fertilest, and brauest Kingdoms of the World.

And since Spain Of Spain.
and France, are but one Continent, let us pass the Pyrenean hills, and take
some observations there.

Spain lies Southerly from France, in Northern latitude from 37. to 44.
degrees or there about, in the same height and parallel with the Azores Islands.
It is far hotter then Fra^^e, a very dry Country, yet abounding in sweet
Springs, Rivers, and all sorts of fruits. Pasture there is little or none in
respect of the great heat, but infinitely furnished with Vineyards, Olive
trees, having Corn sufficient save only in the skirts of the Country, which
are mountainous, hilly and barren, yet abounding in Goats and other Cattle.

For victuals you shall find it very scarce, not that the Counttey affords
not a sufficiency, but that the people beingby co^stitution, hot and dry, are
not able to digest heavy and more solid meat, like unto ours; but rather choose
Fruits, Sallets and sweet meats, as Mermalade, by them called Membrillada (for
membrill^ is a Quince) and conserues of all sorts, for coolness and
lightness of digestion. The people are by nature generally proud and haughty,
but withal very civil, faithful to their friend, and above all to their
Prince, for seldom or never have any of that Nation bin known to have bin
Traitors: their soldiers are infatigable, resolute, and obedient unto their
Commanders, but withal lasciuiously given, and too cruel in victory.

The Gentry affect not the Country, but desire to live in walled Towns
altogether, where they dedicate themselves either to some employment of State,
or business of War, save such who are of the better sort, dedicated to the
Church, of whom there is at the least a third part.

Their habit in apparel is all one for color and fashion, which hardly makes
a distinction of parties; only they are discerned by their servants (in whom
they observe an excellent equipage) their regelado horses, Ca^oches and
horselitters.

The women are black, and little, but very well favored, and for discourse
admirable: these have a more eminent distinction of habit, and are all
discerned by their apparel of what quality they are, they affect strangers
much, and are liberal in their converse with them.

The heart of the Country is very scarce of fish, that which they have, are
either Tons or Pilchards, brought salted from Biscay, on the one side, and from
Valencia on the other: Yea, the Church for want of fish is feign to give a
license to cate the entrails of beasts upon fasting days.

All their meat, fruits and bred are sold by the pound, and not except before
an Officer which they call Alcalda, so that no stranger can be dec^iued either
in weight or price.

They tread their Corn out with Oxen in the field as soon as it is reaped,
their Mules and horses eating the Straw with Barley, for Oats they are not so
well acquainted with. It is a Country for Travail very combersome in respect
of lodging and diet, except when you come into the walled Towns, where you
shall according to their manner be accommodated well enough.

They travail all on Mules, keeping their Horses for beauty and show, putting
them to no use, save only to be led up and down.

Their Coins are the best of Europe, ^ince all their neighbors make a gain
of them, as a piece of eight reals (or six pence of our money) goes in France
for four shillings and six pence: a doublon in gold, that which is a Pistolet
with them, being thirteen shillings, is in France and other places 29. reals,
which is 14. s. 6. pence of our money. Most of the Coin that passes for
ordina^y and triuiall things, as Wine, Bread, Melons, Peaches, is of Brass,
which they call Quartas and Quartillias. Of their Marauedies, twenty make three
pence. Their buildings are fair and stately, and the King, though he has
many goodly houses and palaces, as in Civil. Granado, Toledo, Cordo^a,
Valladolid, etc. yet the Esc^rial, seven leagues from Madrid, is the place
where the King most resides, and this exceedes all the buildings of
Christendom, for beauty and curiosity in contriuing, to which i^ adjoined one
of the goodliest Monasteries of the world, wherein are to be seen the rarest
Water-workes that men can devise.

Spain being divided into many Kingdoms or Provinces, you are allowed to
carry about you, only but an hundred reals; what you have above it is
forfeited, and for that purpose, at every bridge or passage where the Countries
part, you are to be searched.

And I hope you have heard so much of the Inquisition and the danger thereof,
that I shall not here need to give you any caveat.

Na^arre affords, by reason of the Mountains, Yet the finest Wool is of
S^g^uia.
a very hard passage. Whereof Pampel^na is the chief City, herein are the
best Muttons, and made the strongest Wines: this Country is so abundant in
Rosemary, that they make it their ordinary fuel in heating their Ouens, and
for their other uses.

Aragon abounds in Wine and Corn, which Portugal so wants, that all the
Corn in that Kingdom is not able to suffice Lisbone only, but they are feign
to have it of the Bretaigners, Hollanders, and from the Azores Islands.

Last of all it is worthy the noting, how that in their Universities, as
Salamanca, Alcala, C^nimbra, etc. and other of their Colleges, they care
little for the Latin, but dispute and keep their exercises in Spanish or the
Portugueze tongue, yet have they great Scholars in all professions.

Thus have I only given you a taste how and what, especially to observe in
your travail. I willingly omit to speak of Italy, Germany, and other
Countries, by reason they have been so exactl^ described by Master Sands and
others, unto whose ample discourses (excepting your personal experience) I
refer you, it being here mine only intent, but to give you some few
directions in general: and so I conclude, wishing all happiness to your
self, and prosperous success to your studies.

FINIS.

