THE IVDGMENT OF A CATHOLIC ENGLISHMAN, LIVING IN BANISHMENT FOR HIS
RELIGION: Written to his private friend in England. Concerning A late BOOK
set forth, and entitled; Triplici nodo, triplex cuneus, Or, An Apology for
the Oath of Allegiance. Against two BREVES of Pope PAVLVS V. to the Catholics
of England; and a Letter of Cardinal BELLARMINE to M. GEORGE BLACKWELL
Archpriest. VVherin, the said Oath is showed to be unlawful unto a Catholic
Conscience; for so much, as it conteyneth sundry clauses repugnant to his
Religion.

S. Hieron. Comment. in Cap. 4. Hierem. Let an Oath have these companions,
Truth, Judgment, and Justice; for if these be wanting, it shall not be an Oath,
but Perjury. Permissu Superiorum. ANNO 1608.

THE GENERAL Contents of this ensuing Letter, divided into three Paragraphes.
1. THE first paragraph handles matters concerning the substance of the Oath,
which in the Apology are spoken by way, as it were, of Preface, before the
setting down of the Popes Breues. 2. THE second, considers the said two
Breues, and impugnation thereof by the Apologer; and how sufficiently, or
insufficiently, the same is performed by him. 3. THE third, discusseth the
Answer made to Cardinal Bellarmynes Letter; and diverse points of moment
therein contained, but weakly impugned by the Apologer, as the Author of this
Letter judges.
To the Reader.
THIS Letter coming to my hands (gentle Reader) some days past, from my
learned friend beyond the seas, and having imparted the same privately unto
sundry of mine acquaintance, who desired to read somewhat, concerning the
Argument in hand; they were very earnest with me to yield to the printing
thereof, for eschewing so great labor, time, and expenses, as would be
necessary for the copying it out, to so many, as desired the view thereof: which
I entreat thee to take in good part, and use it to thy benefit. And so to
CHRIST JESUS I committ thee, with wish of all felicity, both in this life, and
the next.

PARTICVLER chief points handled in this Letter.
In the first Paragraph.
1.WHo is thought to be the true Author of this Triplex cuneus, or Apology:
and upon what reasons, and arguments. Number. 2. 3. 4. etc. 2.The contents of the
Oath; and how the lawfulnes of taking it, was consulted with learned men, both
at home, and abroad. number. 14. 15. etc. 3.Whether this Oath do conteyne matters
of only mere Civil, and Temporal Obedience, and not any of Religion, as is
p^^^^^ded. number. 20. 21. etc. 4.What full and perfect Obedience, and dutiful
Allegianc^, Catholic Subjects do acknowledge themselves to owe, and offer
unto his Ma. tie in all Temporal affairs, as much as ever any English
Subjects from the beginning, until K. Henry the eight his time; and as any
forrayne Subject does to any Catholic Emperor, King, or Prince at this day.
number. 25. 26. etc. 5.How contradictory it is in it self. That Catholics must
swear to take the Oath, freely and without coaction, notwithstanding the
penalty of Praemunire, if they refuse it. number. 29. etc. 6.Concerning a petition
to his Ma. tie for exposition of the said Oath, for avoiding of needles
vexations. number. 32. 33. etc. 7.That nothing is gained, but much lost to his Ma.
tie, by overmuch urging the said Oath. number. 34. 35. etc.
In the Second Paragraph.
THe sum of the two Breues of Paulus V. and whether1. he had reason to
complain of Catholics sufferance, or no? number. 1. 2. 3. etc. Whether Q.
Elizabeth did persecute Catholics,2. and whether she were so happy in her
life, and government, as some do make her. number. 5. 6. 7. etc. That it is not
height of pride in Catholics, to desire lyberty of3. Conscience, as the
Apologer says. number. 25. 26. 27. etc. That clemency is no cause of desperate
attempts, as this Apologer4. insinuates, but rather the contrary, to wit,
cruelty. number. 32. 33. etc. In what points, and why this Oath is held to be
unlawful for5. Catholic men to take: with the examination of Scriptures,
Fathers, and Councels about the same. number. 41. 42. etc. How the Apologer
wittingly mistaking the State of the Question,6. goes forward, impugning only
his own devises. number. 61. 62.
In the third Paragraph.
Cardinal Bellarmyne is wrongfully charged to mistake1. the State of the
Controversy, and to impugn the Oath of Supremacy, instead of the Oath of
Allegiance. number. 4. 5. etc. Why the Apologer changes the old Title of Supreme
Head2. of the Church, established by Statute under K. Henry the 8. and K.
Edward the 6. unto Supreme Governor. number. 6. 7. etc. 3.The ancient Councels of
Toledo, how untruly they are alleged, for prescribing this form of Oath now
exacted. number. 11. 12. 13. etc. 4.Clauses of belief, or not belief proved to
be in this Oath, contrary to the Apologers assertion. number. 26. 27. etc. 5.An
eleven Contradictions objected out of Cardinal Bellarmynes works, but no one
can be verified. number. 35. 36. 37. etc. 6.The Authorityes of sundry Fathers
examined, whether they make to the purpose, for which Bellarmyne does allege
them in his Epistle. number. 58. 59. 7.Great variety of calum^^ious dealing
against the Cardinal, for disgracing him. number. 74. 75. etc. 8.How Kings and
Princes are truly servants of their Subjects; and how their Authority is
mediatly, and not immediately from God. number. 78. 79. 83. etc.
THE IVDGMENT OF A CATHOLIC MAN, TO HIS FRIEND in England, Concerning the
Apology, for the new Oath of Allegiance.
Paragr. I.
I CANNOT but yield you hearty thanks (my loving friend) for the new Book you
sent me over by Gun^ar, at his last passage: For albeit, I have determined with
my self in this my banishment, to spend my time in other studyes, more
profitable, then in contention about Controuersyes: yet must I needs accept
kyndly of your good will, in making me partaker of your news there. And more
glad should I have been, if you had advertised me, what your, and other men's
opinion, was of the Book in your parts, then that you request me to write our
men's Judgment from hence. And yet, for so much, as you requ^^^t so earnestly
at my hands, and that the party is to return presently, I shall say somewhat
with the greatest breuity that I can: Albeit I do not doubt, but that the
parties, that are principally interessed therein, will answer the same much
more largely.

II. First then for the Author, for so much as he sets not down his Name,
About the Author of the Apology.
it seems not so easy to gh^sse; yet the more general opinion in these
parts is, that as, that odious Discovery of Roman Doctrine, and practices,
which of late you have seen answered, was cast forth against the Catholics,
under the cyrred name of T. M. with direction (as he said) from Superiors,
Tho. Morton.
the Author being in deed but an inferior Minister; so diverse think it to be
probable, that this other Book also, comes from some other T. M. of like
condition, Tho. Montag^e.
though in respect of his office, somewhat nearer to his majesty, to whom,
perhaps, he might show the same (^s the other dedicated his) and thereupon might
presume to set it forth Authoritate Regia, as in the first front of the Book
is set down, somewhat different from other books, and cause it to be printed
by Barker his Ma.ties Printer, and adorned in the second page with the Kings
Arms, and other like devises, wherein our English Ministers, do grow now, to be
very bold, and do hope to have, in time, the hand, which Scot^ish Ministers
once had. But I most certainly do persuade my self, that his Ma.tie never read
advisedly all, that in this Book is contained: For that I take him to be of
such judgment and honor, as he would never have let pass sundry things, that
here are published, contrary to them both.

III. As for example, his Highness great judgment would presently have
discovered, that the State of the Question, What his Majesty's great judgment
would have discovered, if he had read the Apology.
is twice or thrice changed in this Apology, and that thing proved by
allegations of Scriptures, Fathers and Councels, which the adverse part denies
not, as after in due place I shall show. And again he would never have let
pass, so manifest an oversight, as is the charging of Card.all Bellarmine with
eleven several places of contradiction to himself in his works, whereas, in
the true nature of a contradiction or contrariety, no one of them can be
proved, or mainteyned, as every man that understands the Latin tongue, and
will but look upon Bellarmine himself will presently find.

IV. Nay some of them are so palpable, as every man of common sense, even
without Latin, or learning, will espy the same: as namely, the very first,
where it is said, That Card.all Bellarmine writes in his fifth Book of
Justification: Cap. 7.
That, for the uncertainty of our own proper righteousness, and for avoiding
of vain glory, it is most sure and safe to repose our whole confidence in the
alone mercy and goodness of God. Which proposition (says the Apology) is
directly contrary to the whole discourse and current of all his five books De
Iustificatione. But every m^n out of common reason, will (...), that the
opposition between one place, and five books, is very gen^^^* and uncertain
to the Reader. He should have c^ted some one or two, or more places, out of
those five books, which in true sense, and words had been contrary to the
former place, to the end that judgment might have been made thereof: and this in
credit he ought to have done, to convince so great a man of contradiction to
himself.

V. Again, it is alleged for a manifest contradiction in Bellarmine, for
that in one place he says: That, the end of the world can not be known: and
in an other, That within 25. days after Antichrists death, the world shall
have an end. But what man is so simple, or sil^y, that will not presently
demand, how we shall know the certaynty, when Antichrist is to come? For
thereupon depends the whole controversy.

VI. In like manner whereas his Ma.tie is known to be a Prince of most
honorable respects in treaty, and usage of others, especially men of honor and
dignity, it is to be thought, that he would never have consented, if he had but
seen the Book, with any attention, that those phrases of contempt, not only
against the Pope (at least as a temporal Prince) but neither against the
Cardinal, calling him by the name of M. Bellarmine, What his Majesty in honor
would have misliked.
should have passed; For so much, as both the Emperor, and greatest Kings of
Christendom, do name that dignity with honor. And it seems no less
dissonant, to call a Cardinal, Master, then if a man should call the chiefest
dignityes of our Crown by that name, as M. Chauncelour, M. Treasurer, M. Duke,
M. Earl, M. Archbishop, M. Bancroft, which I assure my self, his Ma.tie would
in law of honor condemn, if any external Subject or Prince, should use to
men of that State in our Country, though he were of different Religion.
Wherefore I rest most assured, that this proceeded, either out of the Ministers
lack of modesty, or charity: and that if his Ma.tie had had the perusal of
the Book, before it came forth, he would presently have given a dash of his
pen over it, with effectual order to remedy such ouersightes of inciuility.

VII. Furthermore that general assertiue note given against Card.all
Bellarmine, that, Whensoever he is pressed with any difficult argument of his
Adversary, he cares not to contradict himself, so he may declyne thereby the
present storm, I can hardly believe that his Ma.tie would have passed over
with approbation. For so much, as it is so general, as I said, and would
require an induction of many particular examples, to infer the same; whereof
no one is here alleged, that can be stood unto, and proved to be a true
contradiction in deed. That other injurious and stinging conclusion also, that,
There is no greater difference between God and Belial, light and darkness,
heaven and hell, then there is between the doctrine of the Scriptures, and
Card.all Bellarmines works, concerrning the dignity of temporal Princes, I
can not imagine that the equity, and gravity of his Ma.tie would ever allow of
it, being apparently a passionate exaggeration, and refuted every where by
Bellarmine himself, Vide lib. de Laicis, maxim ca. 10. 11. etc.
where he teaches, that temporal Princes have their Authority from God, are
Gods substitutes and Vicars, in all temporal affairs of their States and
Kingdoms, are for such to be obeyed, not only, out of fear to avoid
punishment, but of conscience under pains of damnation: so as, wherein this
great and absolute opposition of Scriptures to Bellarmins works, about the
Authority and dignity of temporal Princes does consist, I see not. And if his
books had been so derogatory to Princely Authority, as here is said, it is
very like, that so many other Monarchs, Princes, and great States, would never
have permitted them to have been printed in their Dominions, as they have done,
and do daily. Wherefore, neither this also, do I suppose, that the great
wisdom of his Ma.tie would have allowed.

VIII. This then remains most firm in my persuasion, that his Ma.tie had
nothing to do with the Book, but only, perhaps, the allowance thereof in
general terms, before it was published: and this you will easily see by the
substance thereof, which consists (such as it is) of three principal points
or parts. Three parts of the Apology.
The first, conteynng, as it were, a preamble to the Breues, concerning the
nature of the Oath exacted, and circumstances thereof. The second, touching the
contents of the said Breues, and the Popes manner of proceeding therein. The
third, the examination of Card.all Bellarmines letter to M. Blackwell the
Archpriest: of all which, I do promise you, but a small taste, as I said; for I
have very little time, and I should offer injury to others, to whom it
belongs to make a more full answer, if I should deteyne my self long therein.

IX. The preamble begins with, The monstrous, rare, nay neuer-heard of
treacherous, famous, and infamous attempt, plotted within these few years
here in England (of the powder treason) infinite in cruelty, Page 1. and 2.
singular from all example, crying loudly for vengeance from heaven, etc. All
which Eplthetes for due detestation of so rash and heinous an attempt,
Catholics, no less then Protestants, do willingly admit; though for
singularity from all examples, if we respect Speciem, and non Indi^^du^m, that
cannot be like to an other in all points, there be recounted in Historyes, many
attempts of the same kind, and some also by Protestants, in our days: as that
of them, who in Antwerp placed a whole bark of powder in the vaulted great
street of that City, where the Prince of Parma, with his nobility, was to
pass: and that of him in H^ge* that would have blown up the who^e Counsel of
Holland, upon private revenge: as also that of (...) in Scotland, where the
like (...) of powder was laid for the cruel murder of his Ma.ties Father,
which not succeeding, his death was achieued by an other, no less bloody, and
barbarous, violence.

X. But why (I pray you) is this woeful attempt of those unfortunate Gentlemen,
The odious and often repetition of the powder treason.
so often brought in again, and repeated almost in every corner of this Book?
Are they not executed, that were culpable thereof? And are not other Catholics
delivered from the guylt thereof, by the long, and diligent search of Justice
made thereabout? The Minister himself confesses in his very next lines, Teh
equity of his Ma.tie to be such, as he professed in his Proclamation, and
Parlament-speach, that be would not use other Catholics the worse for that,
whereof it follows that he held them for guytlesse; and that all those
pressures both of cosciences and external affliction which since that time
they have suffered, and do at this present, were designed before that, and
begun also to be put in execution (as indeed they were) and that the
powder treason was not a cause of these afflictions, but an effect rather: The
powder treason not so much a cause, as an effect of Catholics tribulation.
that is to say, that those Gentlemen forseeing or knowing the course that was
designed to be taken, and partly also put in practice, resolved upon that
miserable Medium, to their own destruction, and public calamity.

XI. But alas, is there no end of exprobration against the Innocent for the
Nocent? No compassion? No commiseration? If the clemency of his Ma.tie in his
gracious Proclamation (as here is confessed) gave security, that,
notwithstanding that headlong action of those few Catholycke Gentlemen, None of
the profession should be the worse used for that cause; how comes it to
pass, that so many aggrieuances have been heaped upon them ever since, and are
daily, both by infamous libels published against them, as appears by the
former T. M. his flau^derous Discovery, In the treatise of Mitigation in the
preface
and others mentioned in the Answer thereunto; as also by the new Oath, devised
for the utter overthrow, both in soul, if they take it against their
conscience, and of body, goods, and estimation, if they refuse it? How come so
many searches of their houses, spoil of their goods, apprehensions of their
persons, afflictions of their tennants, servants and friends, so many
citations, attachments, vexations, and molestations, that daily do flow upon
them, as if they were the only malefactors of the Land?

XII. And now I pray you let us see, how this second T. M. (if he be Author of
the Book, as he is presumed) does speak of this Oath, as of a thing of no
pressure and prejudice at all. For having spoken of the former asseueration of
his Ma.tie, Apologia page 2. lin. vlt.
That none of that profession should be worse used for that cause, he adioyneth
presently: Only (says he) at the next sitting down again of Parliament a
form of Oath was framed to be taken by all his Ma.ties Subjects, whereby they
should make clear profession of their Resolution, faithfully to persist in his
Ma.ties Obedience, according to their natural allegiance: Page 3.
To the end, that heerby his Ma.tie might make a separation of his Subjects
etc. by which exception of (Only) a man may well perceive, that this Minister
makes little account of taking, or not taking this Oath, The agrieuance of this
Oath.
for so much as he supposes Catholic people to have received no hard usage
thereby, though they be brought into such extremityes, as either they must
swear against their own judgments, and conscience in diverse points,
appertayning to their Religion, or endure his Ma.ties heavy displeasure, with
loss of all, that in this ly^e is dearest unto them: which no Catholic man
can avoid now in England, but he that makes no scruple to sweat or vnsweare
whatsoever turns him best to his commodity, or Superior Authority does impose
upon him.

XIII. But against this, you will say, that two things here are alleged, and
avouched in his Majesty's behalf, by the Author of this Pamphlet: the one,
that, He intends no persecu^ion against Catholics for conscience cause,
Page 4.
but only desires to be secured of them for Civil Obedience: Which if it be
so, I see not, but that the matter may quickly be ended: for that I presume no
Catholic in England, will deny to swear all cyuill obedience that he owes
to his Majesty, or that any subject has ever in former Catholic times sworn
to their liege Lords or Princes, or do in other countries at this day. The
other is, That very many (says he) of his Majesty's subjects that were
Popishly affected, as well Priests as Laycks have freely taken the same Oath,
whereby they both gave his Majesty occasion to think the better of their
fidelity and likewise freed them selves of that heavy slander. So he. And then
follows immediately that his Majesty punishes none for Conscience cause, so
they exhibit Cyuill Obedience. And why then are men kept in prison, after they
have taken this Oath? Why are M. Blackwell, and M. Charnocke deteyned still by
the L. of Canterbury? Why are Recusants punished, and fined for Recusancy,
though they take the Oath of Allegiance? Is not Recusancie a cause of
Conscience? Do you see how these things do hold together.

XIIII. To return then to this Book, the writer says, That the Dyuell could
not have devised a more malicious trick, for interrupting this so calm and
clement a course, then by sending hither and publishing a Breue of the Pope,
counter-maunding all them of his profession, to take this Oath, thereby sowing
new seeds of iealousy between his Majesty and his Popish Subjects. etc. But
what was the calm and clement course before, all men know. For first men were
vexed, spoiled, and imprisoned for Recusancy; then was the Oath devised to
afflict their Consciences: and in these afflictions what should Catholics do?
They first consulted the case which Learned men at home; then also abroad: And
albeit at home, The Oath consulted, both at home and abroad.
some were moved in respect of the compassion they had of the present peril,
if it were refused, to think that in some sense the Oath might be taken: yet
none abroad were of that mind: For that they allowed not of any sort of
Equivocation in matters touching faith and religion. And in these, I hear say
that the Jesuits were among the chief and most forward, as here also is
confessed: who notwithstanding before were most accused, bayted and exagitated,
both in Books, Pulpitts, and Tribunalls, for allowing, in some points, the
lawful use of Equivocation.

XV. About this doubt, Catholics, according to their rule of Subordination,
and spiritual Obedience in such affairs, referring the matter to the judgment
and consultation of their Supreme Pastor, whom by the principles of their
Religion they believe, that our Savior gives assistance, for the direction of
men's souls; they received from him, after due deliberation, this answer, See
the Breue 10. Kal. Octo. 1606.
That the whole Oath, as it lay, could not be admitted with the integrity of
the Catholic Faith. For that albeit diverse parts thereof were lawful, to
wit, all such clauses, as appertained to the promise of Civil and Temporal
Obedience: yet other things, being interlaced and mixed therewith, which do
detract from the spiritual Authority of their said highest Pastor (at
leastwise indirectly) the whole Oath, as it lies, was made thereby unlawful.

XVI. And this I understand to be the substance of the Popes Resolution and
answer, though all these particularityes be not set down in his Breues, but
only the Oath declared to be unlawful in conscience to Catholic men, as it
lies, without distinction. And what malicious trick of the Devil them, this
may be thought, where sheep do make recourse to their spiritual Pastor, in
so great and important occasions of their souls, as these are, I see not. Do
English Catholics any other thing in this, then that which all English
Subjects, both great and small, learned and unlearned have done, and practiced
from our first Christian Kings, until the time of King Henry the eight, upon
the point of a thousand years? See Answer cap. 6.
Let the Answer to Sir Edward Cooks book of Reports lately set forth, be
examined; whether it does not show, that in all those Ages, recourse was ever
made to the Sea Apostolic, in like occasions, without prejudice of Subjects
temporal duties to their temporal Princes.

XVII. No one English Christian King (though they were many) did ever absolutely
deny recourse to Rome in spiritual things (notwithstanding in some other
Cyuill, Recourse to Rome ever usual from our first Christianity.
or mixed matters, upon different occasions, some restraintes were some times
made) from our first king Ethelbert to king Henry the eight, as by the said
discourse and Answer is evidently proved: and much more throughout the noble
rank of the Christian kings of Scotland, his Ma.ties Progenitors, until
his most renowned Progenitrix (by whom, and from whom he has his royal right
of both Crowns) who is known and reputed throughout Christendom, Q. Mary of
Scotland.
to have died for defense of this Catholic doctrine: For so much, as if she
would have abandoned that, there had been little doubt of making her away. And
the like may be said of all other great Christian and Catholic Princes of our
days, as the Emperor himself, the Potent Kings, and Monarchs of Spain,
France, Polonia, and other States, Commonwealths, and Potentates, do not
think it any disgrace, diminution of honor, peril or injury unto them, that
their Subjects, for matters of Conscience, do make recourse to the Sea
Apostolic, or that, which is consequent thereof, the said Sea, or general
Pastor do interpose his judgment, declaration, or decision in such affairs.

XVIII. This is the Catholic doctrine and practice: this has been in use
throughout Christendom from all antiquity, and no where more then in our
Realms of England and Scotland, as has been said. In this belief and
practice, Catholics do hold and practice what all their Ancestors have done.
lived and dyed all our forfathers, that were Subjects, all our noble Kings,
that were our Sovereigns, all our Bishops and Prelates, that were our Pastors,
all our great Counselors and Lawyers, that by their wisdom and learning
governed the land, all our Nobility, Gentry, Priests and Laytie: So as if now
this be holden for a malicious trick of the devil, dishonorable and
prejudicial to his Ma.tie, his Sovereignty, Crown, dignity and security, as
here is insinuated, it must needs be, for that the devil indeed has made
some change in other men, and matters, by altering of opinions and
apprehensions. For the Catholics are the same that they were wont to be, and
do think the same, believe the same, teach the same, and practice the same,
that all their predecessors have done before them.

XIX. But to return to the Apology. Two mislikes are consequently set down,
after the former words: The first, Apol. pa. 6.
that the Pope did mittere falcem in alienam messem, by intermedling between
his Ma.tie and his Subjects, especially in matters that merely and only
concern cyuill Obedience. The other, that he refuted not particulerly, what
special words he quarrelled in that Oath; which if he had done (says the
Apology) it might have been, that his Ma.tie for the Fatherly care he has,
Ibid. page 7.
not to put any of his Subjects to a needles extremity, might have been
contented, in some sort, to have reformed, or interpreted those words with his
own Catholics, and so had they been thereby fully eased in that business; or at
leastwise, some appearance or shadow of excuse, might have been left unto them
for refusing the same, upon scrupulous tenderness of Conscience, etc. Thus
writes he. Which if he do bona fide, and have besides any inckling or insight
in his Ma.ties meaning indeed that way, for the ease or comfort of his
afflicted Catholic people; I doubt not, but that full satisfaction may be
given to his Royal Highness, in these two points that here are set down.

XX. For first, about putting the Popes hook in another man's harvest,
supposing, as we do, that we treat of Catholic people only, English
Catholics not Messis aliena to the Sea Apostolic.
and according to Catholic doctrine, and in matters belonging to Catholic
men's souls and consciences; it cannot be called Messis aliena, an other man's
harvest, that the Pope deals in England, with such kind of people, and in
such causes, as well as in Spain, France, Flanders, Italy, Germany, Polonia,
and other States and Kingdoms; for that they are no less appertayning to his
flock, care, charge, and harvest, then the rest. Neither does the material
separation of our Island, separate us from the union of one body, nor of one
Obedience to one and the self same general Head and Pastor, no more, then it
does from the union of one belief, and of one number and form of Sacraments,
of one manner of service, and other like points, belonging to the internal
and external unity of Catholic Religion.

XXI. But the Apology says, Ibid. page 6.
that, His meddling about this Oath, is in matters, that merely and only
concern Cyuill Obedience: and the same he repeateth in diverse other parts and
passages of this Book; which if it be true, I will easily grant that his
Ma.tie has cause of just mislike. But if this prove not so, and that the
matters refused in the Oath, are points appertayning in deed to Religion, then
I hope, that by answering fully this point, we shall satisfy also the second,
why it was not needful for the Pope to set down any particular confutation in
his Breues, but only to say (as he does) in general, that, The integrity of
Catholic Religion permits them not to take such an Oath, in which, both
Cyuill and Ecclesiastical points are couched, and conjoined craftily
together, with no small prejudice of the said Catholic Religion.

XXII. And how the^ shall we clear this importa^t matter, Whether there be
any points in this Oath belonging to religion, besides Cyuill Obedience? Very
easily: by four several, and distinct ways. The first whereof shall be taken
from the plain express words, sense, and drift of the Oath it self: That
besides the acknowledgment of our Sovereign to be true King, and rightful
Lord over all his dominions, and that, I will be a true loyal Subject unto
him, and other such like clauses, whereat no man sticks or makes difficulty;
the said Oath conteyneth further, that, I must swear in like manner some
points concerning the limitation of the Popes authority, That the Oath
conteyneth points against Catholic Religion.
to wit, what he cannot do toward his Ma.tie or his Successors in any case
whatsoever. Which question being brought from the particular Hypothesis, to the
general Thesis, concerning all Kings (for the like reason is also in others)
both in the one and the other; it touches a point of doctrine and Catholic
belief, concerning the sufficiency of Pastoral authority, left by our Savior
in his Church unto S. Peter and his successors, for redressing of all
inconuenie^ces that may fall out, which I (being a Catholic) cannot in my
Conscience for^weare, without peril of everlasting damnation. And this is one
way of clearing the question.

XXIII. An other is, to look upon the Popes words in his Breues, whereby will
appear, what his meaning was of the contents of the Oath. The Popes words in
his Breue.
We have heard ( says he) how you are compelled by most grievous punishments
set before you, to go to the Churches of Heretics, to frequent their
Assemblyes, to be present at their Sermons, etc. Whereby we are moved by the
Zeal of our Pastoral Office, and by the Paternall solicitude which we have
for the salvation of your souls, to warn, and pray you, in no sort, to go to
the said Churches, nor to hear their Sermons, nor to communicate with them in
any external rytes, least you do incur the wrath of God thereby. For that, it
is not lawful for you to do these things without detriment of Gods service,
and of your own salvation: as also you may not, without most evident, and
grievous injury of Gods honor, bynd your self with the Oath, which in like
manner to our great grief, we have heard, to be administered unto you, of the
tenor under written, etc. And then after the whole form of the Oath set
down, he writes thus. Which things being so, it ought to be clear, unto
you, by the words themselves, that such an Oath can not be taken without
damage to the Catholic faith, and health of your souls: for that it
conte^eth many things against the said Catholic says, and health of your
souls.

XXIV. By these words of the Breue, we may see plainly, that as the matter of
going Church, Assemblyes, and Sermons of those o^ a contrary Religion, are
forbidden by him, as spiritual matters, and acts of a fa^^ Religion: so is the
taking of the Oath, not in regard of Temporal and Cyuil^ Obedience to his
Ma.tie (which by a ^ormer Breue his predecessor had permitted, and recommended
to an Catholics soon after his Highness entrance unto the Crown; but for the
admixture of other causes, appertayning to some points of Religion as before
has byn^^^d.

XXV. The third proof may be taken out of the ensuing ^etter of Card.all
Bellarmine, who having diligently considered with other learned men, of the
nature of this Oath, does therefore hold it to be unlawful, for that it is so
compounded by artificial joining together of Temporal and Spiritual things,
Cyuill Obedience, and forswearing the Popes authority, Cardinal Bellarmines
judgment of the contents of the Oath.
as (to use his words) No man can profess his Cyail^ Subjection, and detest
treason and conspiracy (by this Oath:) but he must be forced also to renounce
the Primacy of the Sea Apostolic. And therefore he compares it to the crafty
composition, and commixture of Images of the Emperor Julian, and of the Paynim
Gods, so coupled and combined together in his Imperial banner, as dutiful
Subjects that were Christians, and desired to perform their Temporal duty
and Cyuill honor to their Sovereign, could not bow down to his Picture, as
the fashion was, but must seem also to do the same to the heathen Idols: which
rather then they would do, they were content to suffer cruel death. So as in
this case such as denied to obey in that point, did it not for lack of
reverence, and loyal affection to their Emperor, as odiously it was objected
and amplified against them: but by reason of the mixture of things unlawful,
with those that were lawful: And the like plainly is here in this case, where
Catholics are wrongfully accused to deny their acknowledgment of cyuill
Obedience contained in this Oath, for that they refuse to take the same: whereas
their refusal is not for this, but for other clauses pertaining to their
Religion.

XXVI. Fourthly then, for a more full, and fynall clearing of this matter, I
can think of no better, nor more forcible mean, then to make this real
offer, on the behalf of every English Catholic, A loyal offer of civil
Obedience, made by Catholics to his Majesty.
for better satisfaction of his Ma.tie in this point, so much urged of their
Cyuill and Temporal Obedience. First that he will swear, and acknowledge most
willingly, all those parts, and clauses of the Oath, that do any way
appertain to the Civil, and Temporal Obedience due to his Ma.tie, whom he
acknowledges for his true and lawful king and Sovereign over all his
Dominions, and that he will swear unto him, as much loyalty, as ever any
Catholic Subject of England, did unto their lawful King in former times, and
ages, before the change of king Henry the eight: or that any foreign Subject
owes, or ought to swear to any Catholic Prince whatsoever at this day.

XXVII. Secondly that for the Pope, who, by the force of Catholic Religion,
is the Supreme Pastor of his soul, he hops in Gods goodness, that he will
never attempt any thing in prejudice of his Ma.tie, nor will he ever procure,
of his part, that he do: but rather will seek to stay, or let the same, as
much as shall lie in his power; praying heartily for them both. But for so much,
as the Question of his Authority, what he might do, in certain urgent cases,
for the preservation of any Country, and for the universal good of Gods
Church, is a matter belonging to doctrine and Religion, he cannot with safety
of his Conscience swear unto the Articles and branches of the Oath touching
that point.

XXVIII. Here then we see that all Civil Obedience, Apol. page 4.
and humble acknowledgment of all Temporal Duty is offered to his Majesty by
his Catholic Subjects, in most ample manner, that can be devised, or that is
offered to any Christian Catholic Prince living. And if this be not accepted,
then is it evident, that more is required, then mere and only Civil
Obedience, as here is often avouched.

XXIX. And now, for so much as it is said here in like manner, That very many
of his Ma.ties Subjects, that were Popishly affected, as well Priests as
Laycks, did freely take the same Oath (which he calls A blessed success from
God of this godly and wise intent, in devising and proposing the same:) I shall
be forced also to say somewhat of this matter, Whether the taking of this Oath
by Catholics be a blessing from God.
before I pass any further. And first of all, concerning the freedom, whereby
it is here said, That priests and Laycks did freely take the same; no man, I
think, will deny, but that the taking of this Oath is proposed by the Statute
it self under pain of the loss of all goods and lands, and perpetual
imprisonment to him, that shall refuse it: Statu^. 3. (...). obi Reg. cap. 4.
and no other that a merchant has in a tempest, either to cast out his goods
into the sea, for lightening his ship, or to be drowned himself. 2. Ethic. c.
2.
And though Aristotle in his Ethics do seem to hold it to be Simpliciter
inuoluntarium, simply against the will of the doer, and Catholic Deuynes,
That it is Inuoluntarium secundum quid, D. Thom. 1. 2. q. 6. art. 6. and
Va^etia, Vasquez, etc. met^m locum.
in part inuoluntary and simply voluntary, for that, all circumstances
considered, he resolves finally to be the best to cast out his goods and save
himself: yet all agree in this, that freedom is taken away by this constraint
of the passion of fear: For that freedom requires full liberty to both
extremes or objects, that are proposed; which is not in our case. For that the
displeasure of the Prince, How freely the Oath is taken.
the loss of goods and liberty, the ruin of his family, the terror and
persuasion of his friends, are heavy poyses, and do mightily preponderate on
the one side: and consequently the mention of this freedom, might have been
pretermitted, for so much, as no constraint of humane will can be greater, then
this. And yet is it said in the Oath, that he must do it, both willingly and
heartily, and as he belieueth in Conscience. Let the discreet Reader consider
what coherence there is in their tale.

XXX. Secondly, as for that multitude of Priests, Have freely taken this Oath;
as their freedom was that, which now I have mentioned, and a principal motive
(as may be presumed) the desire they had, to give his Ma.tie satisfaction, and
deliver themselves, and others so much as lay in them, from that inference of
disloyal meaning, which upon the denial thereof, some do use to make: so I
cannot, but in charity assure my self, that they being Catholics took the
said Oath (for so much as concerns the Popes authority in dealing with
temporal Princes) in some such lawful sense, The sense and meaning of
Catholics, that took the Oath.
and interpretation, as (being by them expressed, and accepted by the
Magistrate) may stand with the integrity, and sincerity of true Catholic
doctrine, and faith: To wit, that the Pope has not Authority without just
cause, to proceed against them: Quia illud possumus, quod iure possumus, says
the law: Our authority is limited by Justice. Directly also the Pope may be
denied to have such authority against Princes, but indirectly only, in ordine
ad spiritualia, and when certain great, importa^t, and urgent cases,
concerning Christian religion fall out, which we hope will never be, between
our Sovereign, and the Sea Apostolic; for so much as they have past already,
many years (though in different Religions) in peace, and quietness even since
his Ma.tie began first to reign.

XXXI. But concerning the general Question, to deny simply and absolutely,
That the Pope is supreme Pastor of the Catholic Church, has any authority
left him by Christ, either directly or indirectly, with cause, or without
cause, in never so great a necessity, or for never so great and public an
vtility of the Christian Religion, to proceed against any Prince whatsoever
temporally, for his restraint or amendment, or to permit other Princes to do
the same: this, I suppose, was never their meaning that took the Oath; for
that they should thereby contradict the general consent of all Catholic
Deuines, and confess, that Gods providence, for the conservation, and
preservation of his Church, and Kingdom upon earth, had been defectuous, for
that he should have left no lawful remedy, for so great and excessive an evil,
as that way might fail out.

XXXII. Wherefore, for so much as some such moderate meaning, must needs be
presumed, to have been in those that took the Oath, for safeguard of their
Consciences; if it might please his Majesty to like well, and allow of this
moderation, and favorable interpretation, as all ^orreyne Catholic Kings and
Monarchs do, An humble petition to his Majesty for exposition of the Oath.
without any prejudice at all of their safety, dignity, or Imperial
pre-eminence: I doubt not but he should find most ready conformity in all his
said English Catholic Subjects, to take the said Oath, who now have great
scruple and repugnance o^ Conscience therein: both for that the chiefest learned
men of their Church, do hold the same for utterly unlawful, being mixed and
compounded, as it is, and the voice o^ their chief Pastor, to whom by the
rules of their Religion, they think themselves bound to harken in like c^ses,
has utterly condemned the same: and the very tenor of the Oath it self, and
last lines thereof are, That every one shall swear without any Equivocation, or
mental reservation at all, that is to say, heartily, willingly, and truly upon
the true faith of a Christian. Which being so, they see not how they may take
the said Oath in truth of Conscience: for so much, as they find no such
willingness in their hearts, nor can they induce themselves in a matter so nearly
concerning the Confession of their faith, to Equivocate or swear in any other
sense, then from his Majesty is proposed: and therefore do think it less
hurt to deny plainly, and sincerely to swear, then by swearing, neither to
give satisfaction to God, nor to his Majesty, nor to themselves, nor to their
neighbors. And so much of this point.

That God did bless this godly devise and intent (of making and urging this
Oath) by the admittance thereof by so many Priests and La^cks: etc. Which
blessing (if it be a blessing) must concern either the takers, or the
exhibitours, or both. But for the takers, what inward blessing of comfort in
conscience they may have received thereby, I know not; But for outward
blessing, I see small, for they remain, either in prisons, or under pressures
still, as has been said. But for others of the same Religion that cannot frame
their Consciences to take the said Oath, and yet would gladly give his Royal
Majesty contentment and satisfaction, The urging of the Oath, how heavy a
pressure to Catholics of tender consciences.
so far as they might, without offending God; I can assure you, that it is
the greatest affliction of mind, among other pressures, that ever fell unto
them. For that no violence, is like to that, which is laid upon men's
Consciences; for so much, as it lies in a ma^s own will and resolution, to
bear all other oppressions whatsoever, whether it be loss of goods, honors,
dignityes, yea^ of life it self: but the oppression of the Conscience, no man
may bear patiently, though he would never so feign. For if he yield therein,
he offends God, and leeseth his soul: neither does Metus cadens in
constantem virum, fear that may terrify even a constant man, excuse in this
behalf, as appears by the example of the ancient Martyrs, who were forced,
under pain of damnation, to stand out to death against all human power,
vexations, torments, and highest violence, rather then to do, say, or swear
any thing against their Conscience. To all these men then, which are thowsands
in our Country, that never thought otherwise then to be good Subjects to his
Majesty, the devising of this new Oath, was no blessing, but an unspeakable
affliction, and angariation of mind.

XXXIV. To the exhibitours also, I see not what blessing it could be, or can
be, so extremely to vex other men without any profit, or emolument to
themselves, or to his Maiestyes service, Nothing gained at all by enforcing the
Oath, but much lost.
which herin they would pretend to advance. For if there be any cause of
doubt, of loyal good will in them, that are forced to swear against their
consciences: much more cause and reason may there be of like doubt, after they
have so sworn, then before. For that the grief of their new wound of
conscience remaining full within them, and stirring them to more auersion of
heart, for the injury received, must needs work contrary effects to that which
is pretended. And whosoever will not stick to swear against his conscience
for fear, favor, or some other like passion, may be presumed, that he will as
easily break his Oath, after he has sworn, upon like motives, if occasions
do move him. And among all other passions, none is more strong, then that of
revenge for oppressions received: So as we read of the whole Monarchy of Spain
overthrown, and given to the Mores, R^der. To let^m. lib. 3 (...) cap. 18.
for one passion of Count Julian, whereby he desired to be revenged of his King
^oderiquez. Nothing then is gotten in this behalf of loyal good will, by such
extreme pressures, but much rather lost.

XXXV. But besides all this, is the grievous sin which they commit, who
force, and press other men to swear against their consciences, then which,
almost nothing can be imagined more heinous: for it is to thrust men headlong
(especially such as are fearful) into the very precipitation and downfall of
hell it self. For it is the highest degree of scandal active, so much
condemned and detested in Scriptures, 1. Cor. 8. Romans 14. Matthew. 18.
and so dredfully threatened by our Savior, to be severely punished in the life
to come: for that scandalizing properly, is nothing else, but laying a
stumbling block for other men to fall, and break their necks. And such a one
is this formal Oath, which conteyneth diverse things lawful for a Catholic
to swear and other things unlawful: and he is forced by terror to pass
over, and swallow down the one with the other, without distinction, with
mani^est repugnance of his Conscience; which repugnance to him, is always a
sin, and damnable in such a public and weighty action, though the matter
were lawful in it self, and consequently also unto them, that force him to the
same, either knowing or suspecting his said repugnance of Conscience. How
grievous a sin it is to force men to swear against their consciences.
For he that should force a Jew, or Turk to swear, that there were a blessed
Trinity, either knowing or suspecting that they would do it against their
Conscience, should sin grievously, by forcing them to committ that sin.
This is Catholic doctrine, which I also think the learned Protestants
themselves will not deny.

XXXVI. Here if any man object, that among us also men are urged to take
Oaths, and to abjure their opinions in the tribunalls of Inquisitions, and the
like; and consequently in this Oath they may be forced under punishment to
abjure the Popes Temporal Authority in dealing with Kings: I answer first,
that if any Heretic, or other should be forced to abjure his opinions, with
repugnance of conscience, it should be a sin to the inforcers, if they knew
it, or suspected it. Neither is it practiced or permitted ^n any Catholic
Court, that ever I knew. But you will reply, that if he do it not, he shall be
punished by death, Objections answered.
or otherwise, as the crime requires, and Canons appoint, and consequently the
like may be used toward Catholics, that will not renounce their old opinions
of the Popes Authority: but here is a great difference; for that the
Catholic Church has Ius acquisitum, ancient right over Heretics, as her
due Subjects, for that by their Baptism, they were made her Subjects, and left
her afterward, and went out of her; and she uses but her ancient manner of
proceeding against them, as against all other of their kind and quality from
the beginning. But the Protestant Church of England has Nullum Ius acquisitum
upon Catholics, that were in possession before them, for many hundred years,
as is evident. Neither was there ever any such Oath exacted at their hands, by
any of their Kings, in former Catholic times: Neither is there, by any
Catholic forreyne Monarch, now living upon earth, and consequently, by no
reason or right at all, can English Catholic men, be either forced or pressed
to this Oath against their Conscience, or be punished, beaten, or destroyed, if
for their Conscience they refuse to take the same: humbly offering
notwithstanding to their Sovereign, to give him all other dutiful
satisfaction, for their Temporal Obedience and Allegiance, which of loyal
Catholic Subjects may be exacted. And this shall suffice for this first
point, concerning the contents and nature of the Oath. Now shall We pass to
say somewhat of the Breues, and answer made thereunto.

CONCERNING THE POPES TWO BREVES, AGAINST The receiving of the Oath.
Paragr. II.
THE sum of the Popes two Breues the first of the 21. of September, Anno
1606. the second of the 21. of August the next year following, is this: That
whereas he had heard, that the Catholics of England, were very sorely pressed
with a new devised Oath, against their Consciences, concerning certain
points, appertayning to the Authority of the Sea Apostolic, The sum of the
two Breues.
in some cases; he wrote the first Breue, to admonish, comfort, and direct
them; signifying his hearty sorry for their long continued afflictions, and
exhorting them to patience, and constancy in defense of the integrity of
Catholic faith, and the purity of their own consciences. And after this
setting down verbatim the whole Oath, as it lies in the Statute, he
condemns the taking thereof, as unlawful unto a Catholic man, in regard of
diverse clauses therein contained, contrary to the said integrity of Catholic
faith, and health of souls; though in particular, he descends not to
dispute, or discuss the reasons, or points, thereof, as became not a Judge:
especially seeing (as he says) the matters themselves be evident by the words
of the Breue. And whereas this first Breue was soon after called into question
by some, as not proceeding from the Popes own motion, and intention: his
second Breue was set forth to approve, ratify, and confirm the former;
assuring all Catholics, that both the one, and the other came from him
directly, sincerely, and upon due deliberation, and consequently* that they
were to be acknowledged, and obeyed by all true Catholic people. This is the
sum of what the Pope wrote: now let us see, what advantage is taken by the
Apologer against the same.

II. First of all he felleth at the Popes sorrow for Catholics afflictions,
making them to be none at all: and whereas the late Q. Elizabeth is not so much
as named in either of these Breues, this man will needs bring her in perforce,
and justify her actions against Catholic people, thereby the more to animate
his Ma.tie to follow her example, setting down this notorious fa^se position
concerning her, and her doings, Ap^^g. page 16.
That according to his own knowledge, her Ma.tie never punished any Papist for
Religion. Which how he can justify, or by what Equivocation mantayne, I know
not. But being not content with this, he passes further, and rages
exceedingly against those innocent Priests, Students, and others, that only for
the profession of their Religion, gave up their lives under her, as by their
inditements, and arraignements in public record does appear, and concludes
finally both of her, and them, thus: This Gracious Princess was as free from
persecution, See Stowes Chronicle in the death of M. Main anno 1577. of M.
M^^son anno 1578. Of M. Sh^rwood anno 1578. of M. (...) 1581. etc. Apol. Page
18.
as these hellish Instruments from the honor of Martyrdom. And yet further,
very profanely: Having now sacrificed, as I may say (quoth he) to the Manes of
my defunct Sovereign, as well for the discharge of my particular duty, as love
of verity; I must next perform my duty also to his Ma.tie present, etc.

III. Whereunto a man might answer, that if he perform it with no more verity
to his present Sovereign, then he has done to his defunct Sovereign past; he
will gain little grace (I suppose) with his Ma.tie whom I hold to be of that
noble nature, and magnanimity, as that he takes such grosse-lying-flattery,
father for injury, then obsequie. But as for his heathen, profane sacrificing
to the Manes or Hob-gob-lins of his late Lady; Q. Elizabeth her Manes.
I confess, that it is an office fitter for a Protestant-Minister, that
thinks it unlawful to pray for her soul, to deal with her Manes or
Infernal spirits, then with Celestial, by praying for her to Saints. But would
God these Manes might now have license to appear, and talk with him, and
relate what passes with her after all this ioylity, and ruff in this world; I
doubt not but they would cool his excessive vein of flattering vanity. For if
all the old platform of Saints lives, prescribed in Scriptures and practiced
by servants of God, were not erroneous and vain, as much fasting, continual
prayer, daily mortification, frequent recollection, diligent chasticement of
their bodies, humble and fervent devotion, laboring and working salvation in
fear and trembling, abundant almes-deedes, haire-cloth and ashes, contrition,
sorrow and sobbing for sins: If these things (I say) were the ancient ways
to life, and to everlasting salvation: then must the paths of Q. Elizabeth,
which are known by most men, to have been, either wholly different, or most
opposite to these, lead to an other opposite end, Quia vnusquisque recipiet,
secundum opera sua.

IV. But not to enter into these melancholicke matters of her Manes, or of the
other world, to make any certain judgment thereof, before we arryue thither: I
will only speak a word or two of the world present, and this with
protestation, that it is wholly against my will, and against the general
inclination (as I take it) of all Catholic people, who would in charity be
content, that the memory of her actions, and iniuryes against them, being never
so many, and injurious, were buried with her body; as may well appear by their
long silence therein since her death. But the continual egging of the adversary
is such, as forces us to say somewhat, for our own defense, and for clearing
the cause, and men, by her so eagerly and injuriously pursued.

V. This Minister then, as in part you have heard, makes her, Apol. page 16.
The most myld, dol^e, patient, and clement Princess in the world, even unto
Catholics, whose blood she shed so abundantly, both at home, and abroad,
during all the time of her reign: nay, That her Ma.tie never punished any
Papist for religion: And, That she was most free from all persecution: That she
never meddled with hard punishment of any Catholic, nor made any rigorous
laws against them before the excommunication of Pope Pius Quintus, that was in
the eleventh year of her reign: See Sa^ders lib. 7. de Ecclesiastica
Monarchia: who sets down the particular persons.
And yet is it known, and cannot be denied, but that the most grievous law,
and Oath of Supremacy, and rigorous penal Statute against saying, or hearing
Mass, were made long before that time: And that all the Bishops, Prelates,
Religious, and chief Ecclesiastical men were depryued, spoiled, imprisoned,
or forced into banishment: and this before the Pope used any Censure against
her at all: so exact, and punctual is the truth of this Ministers narration.
And not content with this, he does prosecute odious comparisons, between the
Pope, and her, laying all the origin of hurts and wickedness to him, and merit
of virtue, and innocence to her, which is the very same, that is mentioned by
the Prophet, Isa. 5.
to call evil good, and good evil.

VI. Nor is he alone in this devise, but that all Ministers commonly, and
Ministers mates of later days have taken up this Common place, to celebrate
her high praises, for disgrace of Catholics. And one among the rest, that for
his place, should have more equity and discretion, has declaymed upon this
matter in public Audience more then once, especially upon the occasion of
certain words in Pope Clements Breue, where she is named Misera Foemina, a
miserable woman (in respect no doubt of the myseries of her soul, little
respected by her:) upon which words the Orator triumphs thus, What
miserable? Lo. Cook in the book of the late Arraignements fol. 63.
It is said, That, Miseria constat ex duobus contrariis, copia and inopia,
copia tribulationis, and inopla consolationis, Misery consists of two
contraries, of abundance, and penury, abundance of tribulation, and penury of
consola^ion. And then he shows in what abundance of consolations Q.
Elizabeth lived in all her life, and without want of all tribulations: which if
it were true; yet is it but the argument which the worldlings used in the
Psalm, to prove their felicity, that their cellars are full, their sheep
fertile, their kyne fatt, they suffer no loss: and then, Psalm. 143.
Beatum dixerunt populum cui haec sunt; Happy did they call the people that had
these things. But the Holy Ghost scorneth them, and so may all men do our
Orator, that uses and urges so base an argument, in so high a matter.

VII. And as for his definition of Misery, by Copia and Inopia, store and
want, it is a miserable one indeed, and never heard of before, I think, to
come from any man's mouth, but his own: it being ridiculous in Philosophy, and
fit to be applied to any thing that has either store or want: As a wise man
in this sort may be defined to be him, that has store of wit, and want of
folly; and a fool to be him, that has store of folly, and want of wit; and
so a rich man is he that has store of riches and want of beggary, and a poor
man is he, that has store of beggary, and penury of riches. And are not these
goodly definitions (think you) for so great and grave a man to produce?

VIII. But to return to the matter it self of Q. Elizabeth her store of
consolations, Cook ib. page 64.
and penury of desolations in this life, Who (says this our Orator) was so
myraculously protected by God, so strengthened and fortified, as she did beat
her most potent enemy, did set up a King in his kingdom, de^ended nations,
harbored distressed people, and the like. Supposing all this were true, that
she had such temporal felicity in this life, and were so miraculously
protected, strengthened, and fortifyed by God as here is said: yea and that it
were evident, that God had chosen her for his elected servant (which yet does
not appear) and given her that title and power, to afflict the Catholics: yet
had that been no more, then we read in the Scriptures to have been given to
diverse Pagan Princes, and namely to Nabuchodonosor, of whom Jeremy the prophet
testifyeth in sundry places of his Prophesy, That God chose him, called him his
servant, and gave him special power, favor, and protection to afflict his
people. Hier. 27. 6.
Ego dedi omnes terras istas in manu Nabuchodonosor Regis Babylonis serui mei,
says God: I have given all these Countries into the hands of Nabuchodonosor
King of Babylon my servant, and all nations shall serve him, and yield
obedience to him, and to his Son, and Sons some: And what soever nation
shall not serve him, and bow his neck under his yoke, I will visit that
nation with the sword, with famyne, and with plague, till I have consumed them
by his hand. Hier. 25. 9.
And again in an other place: I will choose unto me my servant Nabuchodonosor
king of Babylon, and will bring him upon this Land, and upon all the
inhabitants thereof, and upon all nations round about etc. And yet further God
said unto Jeremy: Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I shall take unto me my
servant Nabuchodonosor, and shall place his throne upon these stones etc.

IX. By all which is evident that Sir Edward Cooks argument is worth nothing:
How Nabuchodonosor was the servant of God.
that for so much as God so miraculously protected Q. Elizabeth, (if it were
myraculous,) so strengthened, and fortifyed her, as she did beat her most
potent enemy, and did set up an other King in his Kingdom ((...) any such
thing were:) yet this did not make her happy. As neither it did
Nabuchodonosor, of whom God said in the same place, that when he had served
his turn of him, and wrought his will by his hand, and people, for the purging
or his own elect; he would visit upon him also, and his Country, and that in
a ^arre more grievous sort: Hier. 25. 11.
Ponam i^am in solitudines sempiternas, and reddam eis secundum opera eorum,
and secundum facta manuum suarum: I shall make that Country, all ever a^^ng
w^^de^nes, and shall res^ore to them (that afflicted my people) according to
their works, and to the deeds of their own hands against my people. This
then was his ^e^icity to be a scourge to others, and finally also to himself
most of all.

X. And the like. I doubt not, may be said of Q. Elizabeth's ^licity against
Catholics, it we knew all, that in the last day or judgment will appear, and
whereof her lamentable end may give great presage to them that are wise. For
that for a woman of so long and large a life, as horse was, to pass hence to
eternity with so small sense or (...) of God, as never so much, as to name him,
nor to suffer Archb. of Can^erb.
others to bring in any speech thereof, as they attempted to do, is so pitti^ull
an end, as can lightly said to a Christian soul: The story or which vpshot
others, I have read written by a person of much credit that was present at all
her last sickness, combats, and death, and relates all that passed as an eye
witness, which I pass over for breuity and modestyes sake; but it will
remain to posterity, as a dreadful pattern of a miserable end, after a life
of so much ioylitie.

XI. And thus much for spiritual infelicityes, reaching to the next world, and
life or death to come. But if we would rest our selves only upon vain and
brickle felicityes of this world, they were not (alas) so great in Queen
Elizabeth, Queen Elizabeth her felicityes mingled with infelicities.
but that they were mingled and interlaced with many, and great infelicityes in
like manner, and these such, as did even in the eyes of worldly men, ouerpoise
the other, especially with them that repute honor and dishonor among humane
felicityes, and infelicityes. For what more dishonorable infelicity can there
be, then that which stands in Capito Libri of Q. Elizabeth's life? To wit,
the public solemn Statute, and Act of Parliament, made within few days after
she was borne, upon the 28. year of King Henryes reign, and yet extant in
Print, wherein it is declared, not only by the judgment of the King, and of a^l
that Parliament, but by the judicial sentence also of Archbishop Cranmer, Q.
Eli. her dishonorable birth an. 28. Stat. Cap. 7.
she was pronounced, to be unlawfully borne, and that her mother was never King
Henryes lawful wife: whereupon the said statute uses these words: That it was
against all honor, equity, and good conscience, that the said Elizabeth should
succeed in the Imperial Crown of England. And could there be any greater
worldly infelicity the^this.

XII. I let pass many other infelicities, which happened by her occasion to
sundry, as well under the reign of King Edward, as the ruin of the Seymers
upon the Admiralls falling in love with her, and making away his former wife
Queen Catherine Parre to enjoy her; as also under Queen Marie, when so many
rebellions of Wiat, Courtney, Carewes, Stafford, and others, were made for
her. But her own reign had most infelicities for her, if they were well
considered: and I could touch many, but modesty forbids. And least I should
seem to speak out of revenge, let this one consideration serve for all; That
after all her afflicting Catholics, and by that exercise, upon the egging of
others, more then of her own propension, she was drawn into continual
suspicions, ^eares, and frights of her mind and spirit, even in the midst or
all these sensual delights, and contentments (admired so much by her Attorney)
which drove her to a point, whereunto by nature she was not thought much
inclyned, and by profession and protestations, she most condemned in others, to
wit, Cruelty, which in effect was such, out of the fore said fears, The
infelicity of Cruelty.
toward Catholic Religion, as never perhaps (yea without perhaps) were so
many several laws, and punishments devised by any one persecutour, nor many
putt together, as are extant of hers in Print, against the pro^essours of that
Religion, whereof herself had been one, and in secret or private speeches also
would not deny, to be in sundry points, even to her dying day. And was not
this a great in felicity? When strangers do read and behold her Edicts and
Statutes, wherein not only the whole use of Catholic Religion is condemned,
and under greiuous punishment prohibited: but men are forced also, by rigorous
penal laws to go to the Churches of a contrary Religion, to communicate with
them, to do acts, and swear against their own Religion, faith and
Consciences: that there are severe punishments, of loss of goods and lands,
for receiving an Agnus Dei, Q Elizab. her cruel per^ecutio^s
or a Medall, or Crucifix: greiuous punishments, for keeping of a Catholic
servant, or Schoolemaister to teach and bring up their children, or to send
them over seas to Catholic Schools: yea, that it is the pain of death it
self to be reconciled, by confessing his sins to the Roman Church, or to the
union of ^aith, with the Head thereof, or to persuade another to be a
Catholic, or do the same: When they read these things (I say) and many
others, which for breuity I pretermitt, and that all this notwithstanding, she
would not have it said, That she persecuted any for Religion (which in manner
this Apologer sticks not to avouch) nor put any Priest to death for that
cause in deed, whereas notwithstanding she shed the blood of above one hundred
and thirty, that might have had their lives even at the last cast, if in this
one point of Religion they would have yielded never so little. All this (I say)
being read and considered, seems unto forreiners a strange infelicity both of
body and soul.

XIII Especially when it is considered to what perpetual iealosy at length she
was brought unto, of all sorts of people, Puritans, Papists, yea of her own
dearest, as the death of the Earl of Essex, and his followers, does easily
declare. Neither was there any week lightly, but that she had some new fears,
of some Priest or Jesuit, or Catholic soldiers sent from Flanders, France,
or Italy to kill her by violence, others from Spain, and other Countries to
poison her, or at at least, her The fiction of Sq^ier an. 1598.
Chair. And vponsuch fancyes, men must be made away for greater terror; yea
Jews must be brought in also in this kind of pretended poisoning, as the case
of Doctor Lopez well declares. Q. Eliz. her dealing toward her cosen of
Scotland.
Nay further this gryping passion of fear and iealosy did so vex and consume
her inwardly, as she was never well, until she had made away, against all law
of Nature and Nations, the nearest unto her in Royal blood, that lived upon
earth, and coequall with her in dignity, if in sundry respects not Superior, I
mean his Ma.ties noble renowned Mother, Queen of France and Scotland, that by
force of the former Statute, which declared this other for illegitimate and
incapable of the Crown (as now you have heard) should have enjoyed the Crown
of England presently after the death of Q. Marie, and consequently his Ma.tie
had enjoyed the same 38. years at least, before he came unto it after her
death, who of all other living Creatures, is known most heartily to have hated
that issue and succession. And as she went about to disinable the same in the
very root and fou^tayne it self, by seeking the disgrace of the offspring, by
dishonor of the origin: so never ceased she afterward to continue practices
against them both, until she had wracked the one, and brought the other also
to great probability thereof, if she might have lived to her will, or have dyed
with such use of senses and judgment, as might have made way to her bad
affections in that behalf.

XIV. Well then, all this I have been enforced to speak upon this occasion:
first to repress somewhat thereby the insultation of our foresaid Orator, in
calling her, Lo. Cook in his Charge at Norwich. 4. August. 1606.
The happy Queen, the blessed Queen, whose unmatched wisdom, and
unconquered prowess (to use his words) crowned her the peerlesse wonder of her
sex. All which tends to the exprobration of Catholics, for having had so
happy and peerles a persecutour; and to the insultation also over the Pope, for
calling her in his Breue, as he says, Miseram Foeminam, a miserable woman:
which how true or false it is, I leave to the prudent Reader out of the former
discourse, about her birth, youth, age and end, to censure.

XV. Secondly I do heerin but imitate the first ancient Fathers, that wrote for
defense of those holy Martyrs, that dyed for Christian Religion in the
Primitive Church, What manner of Persecutour Q. Elizabeth was.
as namely, Justinius Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, and others, who to comfort
the afflicted, and to honor more their cause, did put them in mind what manner
of people their first persecutours were; as namely Nero and Domitian, what life
they led, what end they made, and the like; And that indeed they were fit
instruments, to be the first, in such a work. And the like we may say to
Catholics of Q. Elizabeth, that she being the strangest woman that ever was
borne for diverse circumstances, now partly touched, and the first absolutely of
that sex, either Christian or created, that took upon her Supreme power in
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters; it must needs be some comfort to
Catholic people, that God chose such an instrument to be their first scourge,
out of all woman kind.

XVI. And lastly, for that this Apologer will needs take upon him, to sacrifice
to her Manes: I thought my self obliged to offer some incense in like manner
to the same, for mitigating the evil sent, which that notorious untrue
assertion must needs import, to the senses of all understanding Readers: That,
Queen Elizabeth never punished any Papist for Religion, Nor made any rigorous
law against them, before Pius Quintus his Excommunication, nor since that time,
but upon private plots, machinations, etc. For clear confutation whereof, I
remit those of the elder sort that live in England, to their own eyes, ears,
and other external senses, and those of younger age, to the books of Statutes,
of Q. Elizabeth's time, John Stowes Chronicle, and other such public Records.
And so much of this point.

XVII. Next after these exaggerations of the clemency and indulgence of Q.
Elizabeth toward Catholics, this Apologer passes on to bestow some of his
adulation, and oleum peccatoris, upon his Ma.tie in like manner that now
reigns, telling us, That his kyndnes and benefits bestowed upon that sort of
people, have been far greater then those of Q. Elizabeth; which may easily
be, as, by that, which has been touched, may appear. Yet do we verily
persuade our selves, that if his Highness had been left to himself, and to his
own Royal nature, and noble disposition in this point (as See Answer. to Sir
Edward Cook ca. 15.
Q. Elizabeth was wont to say of her disposition in religion) we had tasted,
indeed, much of this his great humanity, and so we began, for some time: but
being prevented and diuerted by the subtle workings of this, and other such
Ministers, as desired to draw blood, and to incite his Majesty against us, His
Majesty's myld disposition diuerted.
we having no place to speak for our selves, no admittance to be heard, no
effectual intercessour to interpose his mediation for us; no marvel though
we were cast of, and do endure the smart.

XVIII. And I do name this Minister (T. M. the younger) in the first place among
the rest, for that it is commonly said, that his whole exercise is Sycophancy
and calumniation against men of our profession, The exercise of the Minister
Th. Mont.
be they strangers, or domestical: and that among other devises, he has this;
That every time his Ma.tie is to take his repast, he is ready, either with some
tale, jest, scoff, or other bitter lance to wound us absent, and that he has
ever lightly, some book and page thereof, ready to read to his Highness,
somewhat framed by his art to incense or auert his Ma.tie more, either in
judgment, or affection, or both; and thereby to draw from him some hard
speeches, which being published afterward by himself, and others, do serve to
no other end, but to ga^l and alienate minds, and to afflict them, that are
not suffered to give reason for themselves. And that is the service he does his
Ma.tie in this exercise.

XIX. And as for the places themselves, which he uses to bring forth with his
wet finger, as is said, we are to imagine, that they are no better, nor more
fitly applied, then such as he has set forth against us in this book, and
perhaps somewhat worse, for that he might probably think, that this book
would be examined, coming forth with so great pretense of authority, as it
does: And therefore if here you find him to use calumniation, and most
impertinent citation of Authors, and Authorityes, either wholly making against
himself, or nothing for his purpose, or against us: then may you think what
liberty he will take to himself there in speech, where no man is like to
contradict him, but all applause is expected from the standers by.

XX. Let us hear, if you please, one exaggeration of his, concerning his
Ma.ties myldnes unto us, and our ingratitude in abusing the same to pride.
Apol. page 18.
His Ma.ties government (says he) over them has so far exceeded that of Q.
Elizabeth, in mercy and clemency, as the Papists themselves grew to that height
of pride, in confidence to his myldnes, as they did directly expect, and
assuredly promise to themselves liberty of Conscience, and equality with us in
all things, that are his best, and faithful Subjects etc. Do you see what a
height of pride this was? And what an abuse of his Majesty's mercy and
clemency, to expect liberty of Conscience? Why had he not objected in like
manner, Liberty of Conscience.
that they expected the liberty of breathing, and using the common air, as
well as Protestants? For that neither breathing, nor the use of common air, is
more due unto them, or common to all, then ought to be liberty of Conscience
to Christian men, whereby each one lives to God, and to himself, and without
which he strugleth with the torment of a continual lingering death.

XXI. And surely, I cannot but wonder, that this Minister was not ashamed to
call this the height of pride, which is generally found in all Protestants
never so humble: yea the more humble, and underlings they are, the more earnest
are they both in books, speeches, and preachings, to prove that liberty of
Conscience is most conform to Gods law, and that wresting, or forcing of
Consciences, is the highest Tyranny, that can be exercised upon man. And this
we may see first, in all M. Fox his History, especially during the time of the
three King Henry's, 4. 5. and 6. and afterward, when those that were called
Lollards, and VVickcliffians, who as M. Fox says, were indeed good
Protestants, being pressed somewhat about their Religion, did continually beat
upon this argument of liberty of Conscience, and when they obtained it not,
they set up public schedles upon the Church doors of London, and made those
famous conspiracyes of killing K. Henry the 5. and all his family, In vita
He^ri^i quinti.
which are recounted by Walsingham, Stow, Fox, and other English
Historiographers.

XXII. In this our age also, the first oppositio^ of Protestant Princes in
Germany, against their Emperor Charles the 5. both at Smalcald, Austburgh,
and other meetings; as afterward also the fierce and perilous wars by the
Duke of Saxony, Marquis of Brandeburge, and other Protestant Princes, and their
people, against the same Emperor, begun in the very same year that our K.
Henry dyed. Anno 1546
Were they not all for lyberty of Conscience? so pretended, so printed, so
published, so diuulged to the world? The first Supplications, Memorialls, and
declarations in like manner, which the Protestants of France set forth in
print: Liberty of conscience demanded by all Protestants.
as also they of Holland, and Zeland in time of the governments, as well of the
Duchess of Parma, Duke of Alua, Commendador Mayor, and other Governors: did
they not all expressly profess, that their principal griefs were, about
liberty of Conscience restrained. And did not they cite many places of
Scriptures, to prove the equity and necessity thereof? And do not all
Protestants the like at this day, in all places, where they are, both in
Polonia, Austria, Hungaria, Bohemia, Styria, and else where? And how the^ is
Iordanis conuersus retrorsum, with this Minister? How is his voice contrary to
the voice and sense of all the rest? How, and with what reason, may he call it
the height of pride in English Catholics, to have but hope thereof, which is so
ordinary a doctrine and practice of all his brethren in foreign nations, to
wit, for us to expect liberty of Conscience, at the first entrance of our new
King, of so noble, and royal a mind before that time, as he was never known
to be given to cruelty, or persecution in his former reign? The Son of such
a Mother, as held her self much beholden to English Catholics? And himself
in his little Golden (...).
Book to his Son the Prince, had confessed that he had ever found the
Catholic party most trusty unto him, and thereupon had done sundry favors to
diverse of them, and given no small hope of greater unto others?

XXIII. From this King (I say) whom they so much loved, and honored, received
so gladly, and with universal joy, meant to serve faithfully; and trusted that
as he had united the two Kingdoms in one Obedience by his Succession: Height
of pride, and in whom it may be said to be.
so would he by his liberality, unite and conioyne the hearts of all his
Subjects, in bearing a sweet and equal hand toward them all: From such a
King (I sa^) or us to expect liberty of Conscience, and equality with other
Subjects (in this point at least of freedom of soul) what height of pride may
it be called? May it not rather seem height of pride in this Minister, and his
^ellowes, that having byn^ o^d enemies, and always borne a hard, and hate
u^^hand, and tongue against his Ma.tie both in their Sermons, Books, Speeches,
all the time of the late Queens reign; now upon the suddayne sine vllis meri
is praecede^^ious, will needs be so privileged, and assume unto themselves
such a confident presumption of his Ma.ties special favor, as to suffer no
man to stand by them, but to hold it for height of pride in us, to hope ^or any
freedom and liberty o^ our Conscience at al^? What is height of pride and
so^l^, i^ this be not?

XXIV. But his Ma.tie is wise, and will, as we hope, according to his prudence,
in time, look into this sort o^men, and manner of proceeding. And to return
to the Apologer, he reckons up (thereby to exaggerate the more our
ingratitude) the particular favors his Ma.tie did unto us, at his first
entrance, as, That he did honor diverse Catholics with Knighthood, Apol. page
19.
being open Recusants: That, he gave audiece indifferently to both sides:
bestowed equally favors and honors upon both professions: gave free
con^inuall access to all ranks, and degrees of Papists in his Court and
company: freeing Recusantes from their ordinary payments: gave order to his
Judges with his own mouth, Exprobration of his Maiestyes benefits toward
Catholics.
to spare execution of all Priests, though they were convicted: gave liberty
by his gracious Proclamation to all Priests not taken, to go out of the
Country by such a day, and all Priests that were taken, were sent over, and
set at liberty: and many other gracious favors and benefittes: Which (says
he) time and paper would fail me if I would make enumeration of them all: in
recounting whereof every scrape of my pen (so use his words) would serve but for
a blott of the Popes ingratitude, and injustice in meating his Ma.tie with so
hard a measure for the same. So as I think (quoth he) I have sufficiently
wiped of the tears from the Popes eyes, for complaining upon such persecution
etc.

XXV. Thus writes this man, who, in naming the Popes ingratitude, must much
more include ours, that are Catholics; for that these benefitts, such as they
were, appertayned nothing to the Pope, but only in Christian charity, as a
common spiritual Father and Pastor, he being otherwise a stranger unto us in
blood, and for other worldly respects. And as for Catholics, they accept
gratefully, Catholics dutiful demeanor to his Majesty.
whatsoever least favor has been, or is done unto them: and do not doubt, but
that if his Ma.tie had not been prevented by sinister information, and
persuasion of others, they had tasted of much greater, as due unto them, in
that they are natural borne Subjects of the Realm, most loyal in heart and
affection, and never meaning otherwise, but to live in most orderly and
dutiful Subjection and Obedience to his Highness, as to their liege Lord and
Sovereign.

XXVI. And whereas this man, for proof of the contrary, names the
powder treason of a few, thereby to discredit the whole, though this
calumniation have been answered before: yet now I ad further, as one said,
Distingue tempora, and scripturam concordabis, If there had been no persecution
before that treason, this might have been assigned for some probable cause of
the subsequent tribulations: but all England knows, that this is not so, but
that his Ma.ties sweet and myld aspect toward Catholics at his first
entrance, was soon, by art of their enemies, auerted long before the
conspiracy fell out. For that, not only all the most cruel Statutes and penal
Laws made by Q. Elizabeth were renewed and confirmed before this, Anno 1.
Iacobi Regis.
with addition of others, tending to no less rigor and acerbitie: but also
the exaction of the same was put in practice with great severity; and namely
the payment of the twenty pounds a month, or two parts of their goods and
lands for Recusants (once remitted by his Ma.tie as here is confessed) were
not only recalled again: but the arrearages thereof in like manner exacted; and
for leuying whereof, throughout sundry shyres of the Realm (especially in the
North) there was such ransacking of men's houses, such dryuing away of their
Cattle from their grounds, such strayning of their Rents, such vexing of
their tennants (not known perhaps to his Ma.tie) as if the whole Country had
been given over to spoil and desolation.

XXVII. Nor were men's goods and persons only afflicted, but the lives also of
sundry taken away for cause of their Religion before this powder treason fell
out: which desperate treason, to ascribe as an effect and fruit of too much
clemency in his Ma.tie (as this Minister does) is a strange assertion, Apol.
page 19.
no doubt: for so much, as such effects do not proceed, but of exasperated
minds; which clemency works not, either in men or beasts. Neither did ever
any learned Philosopher, Clemency no cause of desperate attempts.
that wrote of the good institution of any Common wealth, or of the security of
any Prince in his Government, put such effects for fruits of clemency, but
rather of the contrary manner of proceeding. And if all the disasterous ends of
the most unfortunate Princes, that ever have been destroyed, should be laid
together, and the causes thereof exactly inquired, it would be found so: and
consequently that this Minister is no good Counselor to his Ma.tie in this so
great and weighty affayre. And we hope that Almighty God, by the mercy of his
dearest Son our Savior, and through the prayers of his Ma.ties good Mother,
and other holy Princes of his Royal blood now in heaven, will never suffer
him, at the egging of such exasperating people, to follow so violent,
troublesome, and dangerous a course, and so contrary to theirs, whiles they
lived upon earth, and so alienate from his own sweet nature and Princely
disposition.

XXVIII. But to proceed a little further in the narration of some points of
heavy persecution, that insued soon after his Ma.ties being in England, much
before the powder treason was attempted: Who does not know what afflictions
were laid upon Catholics, even in the very first year of his Ma.ties reign,
especially toward the end thereof, and much more throughout all the second
year, before the said powder treason fell out. For then not only in the Shires
and Provinces abroad: but even in London it self, and in the eyes of the
Court, the violence, and insolency of continual searches grew to be such, as
was intolerable; no night passing commonly, The cruelty of searches.
but that Soldiers, and Catch-poles brake into quiet men's houses, when they
were asleep, and not only carried away their persons unto prisons at their
pleasure, except they would brybe them excessiuely, but whatsoever liked them
best besides in the house, either of Books, Cups, Chalices, or other
furniture, that might any ways seem, or be pretended to belong to Religion,
was taken for a prey, and seized on. And among others, I remember, that one
friend of mine, had a drinking Cup of silver taken from him, for that it had
the name of JESUS engraven upon it, though otherwise the form thereof did well
show, that it was but a Cup, and no Chalice. And these searches were made
with such violence, and insolency, as diverse ge^tlewome^ were drawn or forced
out of their beds, to see whether they had any sacred thing, or matter
belonging to the use of Catholic Religion, either about them, or under their
bedds.

XXIX. What shall I speak of the casting into prisons, and condemnation to
death of many Catholics for the same cause, in every corner lightly of the
Country, as namely in London of M. Hill the Priest, and this only for his
function, and for coming into England against the Statutes of Queen Elizabeth
to the contrary? Of M. Sugar also an other Priest in Warwick, that was not
only condemned, but Anno 1604. mense August.
executed withal rigor in that City for the same cause, and a lay man with
him named Robert Grysold, for receiving him into his house? At Oxford also
four Priests being taken at that time whose names were M. Green, Tichborne,
Smith, and Brisco, all had sentence of death passed upon them; though after
many afflictions suffered in the prison there, which made them desire much the
speedy execution of the sentence given against them, they had instead of this
one death, many deaths laid upon them, by sending them prisoners to the Castle
of Wisbech, where they received such cruel usage both in their diet, lodging
and other treaty, as made even diverse Protestants to take compassion of them.
And why was all this, but for their Religion?

XXX. I let pass the condemnation to death of a poor man in Oxford named
Shitell, for that the Priest M. Green had fled into his house, when he was
pursued by the searchers, through which condemnation, and perpetual
imprisonment thereupon ensuing, were brought to extreme misery and calamity, his
poor wife and children, most lamentable to behold, or hear recounted. And
upon like occasion was apprehended, imprisoned, condemned, and executed in
York, about the same time, an other Layman named Thomas VVylborne, only for
that he had used some words of persuasion to a certain woman to be a
Catholic, notwithstanding the prohibition of her husband, who followed so
hoatly the matter against him, as he caused him to be put to death. Diverse
examples of severe persecution.
I pretermit M.ris Shelley a Gentlewoman of good Worshipp, cast into the common
Iayle at Worcester for that the Priest M. Hassells, was found in her house.
The apprehension in like manner, and condemning to death of M. Edward Tempest
Priest and Gentleman in London at the same time. I pass over the cruel
sentence of cutting of the ears, of so ancient and venerable a Gentlemam, as is
M. Tho. Pound, that had lived above thirty years in sundry prisons only for
being a Catholic, and now last in his old age, had that honor from God, as
to be sentenced to leese his ears and stand on the Pillorie in diverse markets,
for complaining of hard measure, and iniust execution, used against Catholics,
contrary (as he presumed) to his Ma.ties intention.

XXXI. And finally I pass over what was practiced in Herefordshire,
Lancashire, and other places in this kind of persecution, and particulerly
concerning the new angariation and pressure, then first brought up, that men
should be bound to pay for their wives, that were Recusa^ts, a thing never
before exacted in the former Queens time. I pretermit also to mention, how his
M.tie before this, had rejected the common, and humble supplication of
Catholics, exhibited in writing for some toleratio^, and mitigation of the
calamityes: the which supplication was answered with contempt and insultatio^
by a Minister, and put in print. His Ma.tie in like manner had given public
audience both to Protestants and Puritanes for three days together,
concerning the differences of their Religion: but to Catholics he never
yealded to give any at all. And how then can this Apologer talk so much of
equality used in all favors? How can he say, that there was no persecution
before the powder treason?

XXXII. But let us go forward yet somewhat further: his Majesty had before
this time upon other men's importunity, confirmed, and ratified by his Letters
Patents, all that heap of Constitutions, and Canons, (being in number above an
hundred and forty) which the BB. of London and Canterbury, had devised, and
set forth against Catholics, for their greater vexation, and affliction. Out
of which has flowed since a huge sea of molestations and exagitations, by
searchings, spoils citations, apprehensions, excommunications, and other
violences, upon innocent and quiet people, by the ravenous hungry Purseuants of
those Prelates, and other their Catch-poles, without respect, either of Justice,
or hope of remedy, for iniuryes by them offered. There had passed also before
this, the speech of the L. Chancelour in the Star Chamber, The B. of Londons
Sermon 5. August. 1605.
and the Sermon of the B. of London at Paules-Crosse, both of them tending to
take all hope from Catholics of any least favor, that might be expected, and
the former expressly charging the Judges in his Ma.ties name, to use all
severity in seeking out and punishing them. Which things being seen, and ^arre
worse feared, yea designed also and threatened, as those Gentlemen apprehended
it, (especially at the next Parliament) cast them into that woeful impatience,
and precipitation, which the event declared.

XXXIII. All this then which the Apologer here tells us, of Catholics
ingratitude for so many benefits received, Apol. page 21.
during his Ma.ties reign, and, That it is a main untruth (to use his words)
and can never be proved, that any persecution has been in his said Ma.ties
government, or that any were, or are put to death or punished for cause of
Conscience, is such a kind of speech, as if it were told in the Indies, many
thousand miles of, where nothing is known of our Countries affairs, might
perhaps find some hearers that would believe it: Increace of persecution since
the powden-treason.
but in England to avouch such a thing in Print, where all men's outward senses,
eyes and ears are witnesses of the contrary, is a strange boldness. For as for
persecution in goods and lands, as also of men's bodies by imprisonment, and
other vexations, who can deny the same, that will not shut his said eyes, or
ears, Statut. 4. and 5. Anno 3. Iacobi Reg.
from seeing and hearing that which daily passes within the Realm. And when
nothing else were: Yet those two several and most memorable Statutes, to wit,
the 4. and 5. made in the third year of this Kings reign, containing more
several heads of affliction, and angariation against Catholicke-Recusants for
their mere Conscience, then ever, perhaps, in the world were seen extant,
against any one sort of wicked men, or malefactors before; do easily convince
the untruth of this asseueration about freedom from persecution. And as for
death, Land. 26. Febr. 1607. York. 21. Mar. 1608. Land. 11. Apr. 1608.
which is less greiuous to many then those other persecutions, the late
example of M. Robert Drury, and now again these last months past, of M.
Matthew Flathers, and M. Geruis Priests (to omit others) that dyed expressly
for refusing this late devised Oath, since the powder treason, cannot, I
think, be answered, except he will say, that this Oath has no matter of
Conscience in it for a Catholic man to receive: the contrary whereof we have
evidently showed before, by many demonstrations.

XXXIV. Wherefore, that which he adds immediately, insinuating, and expressly
threatening, that as there has been no persecution, or putting to death before
(which is not true as I have showed:) so now for so much as the Pope has
interposed his Authority, Page 21.
and forbidden the Oath as unlawful, there may chance be greater persecution,
and more abundant shedding of blood, which (as he says) must light upon the
Popes head, for this his prohibition: All this (I say) is so spoken as each man
may see, whither it tends: to wit, to incyte his Ma.tie by such devises, to
ingulfe himself into the effusion of Catholics blood, casting on the
pretense, and veil of the Popes intermedling, as cause thereof: which is an
ancient Art of deceit, to give Non causam, pro causa: for that no injury is
ever offered under the name of injury, but of justice or merit. And our Savior
was crucified as a deceyuer of the people, Luc. 23. and Matthew. vlt. Act. 24.
and disloyal to Caesar: and S. Paul pursued as a disturber of the
Wealpublicke and peace. And no suffering is so honorable, as that which
comes with a dishonorable title: so as English Catholics must not be
dismayed when they suffer for the false imputation of Civil Disloyalty to
their Temporal Prince, being witting to themselves, that it is indeed for
their Religion, and loyalty to God, their eternal Prince, and supreme King.
And this only shall suffice for this matter. For if Catholics further
affliction be determined by their Adversaries, and permitted by God, pretenses
will not want how to do it. The proverb is already known, Facile inuenies
baculum, vt canem caedas, as also the fable of Aesope, that the lamb must be
slain, for that drinking far beneath the well, he was pretended not
withstanding, to have troubled the fountain. Catholics must be beaten, for
that the Pope has resolved a case of Conscience, that men may not swear
against their own Religion. All be to the glory of God, and then finally will
they leese nothing thereby, which is the only comfort in such manner of
sufferings.

The second Part of this Paragraph.
ONE other point only is handled by the Apologer in this Paragraph, which is a
large insultation against the Pope, for that he says in his Breue, Apol. page
21.
as here is alleged, That the Oath cannot be taken with safety of the
Catholic faith, and of their souls health; since it conteyneth many things,
that are plainly, and directly contrary to their faith and salvation. And
albeit the word ( directly) be conveyed in here, which is not in the Popes
Breue, and is of no small moment, as all Deuines know in this matter, and
therefore ought not to have been thrust in, as the Popes word, in a different
distinct letter: yet not to stand upon that, but upon more grosser points, and
more injurious, he presently uses the speech, which is reported to have been of
Auerroes the Mohammedan Philosopher against Moses Lawgiver of the Jews, Vixit
An. 1150.
Multa dicit, sed pauca probat, he says much but proves little, and presently
passes to this insultation, Page 22.
How the natural allegiance of Subjects to their Prince, can be directly
opposite (mark how he serves himself of his own word shifted into the text)
to the faith and salvation of souls, is far beyond my simple reading in
Deuinity, as I must it a strange and new assertion to proceed out of the mouth
of that pretended general Pastor of Christian souls.

XXXVI. Here now what abuse is offered to the words and meaning of the Breue,
every simple Reader will see, without any explication from me: for that the
Pope does not prohibit natural Obedience in things lawful; nor does say,
that such natural, or cyuill Obedience is opposite to faith or salvation of
souls; nor that the Oath is unlawful, The Oath why it is unlawful.
for exhibiting such natural, or cyuill Obedience: but for that, besides this
exaction of natural Obedience, which is lawful, it conteyneth diverse other
points also, concerning matters of Catholic Religion: which points being so
conjoined, and couched with the other, as the one cannot be sworn without
those other, do make the whole Oath unlawful, as it lies, without
distinction, as before has been declared. So as this charge is now proved, to
be but a mere cavil, and calumniation, and voluntary mistaking of the
question and controversy in hand.

XXXVII. And yet does he so insist in it, and so dilateth himself upon this
false surmised principle ( that Cyuill Obedience is denied) as though all his
Discourse and Treatise depended only of this (as indeed it does,) and therefore
he enters into the confutation thereof with a great flourish of Scriptures,
Fathers, and Counsels (wherein he and his do abound, when they say the same
that we do, but otherwise are altogether barren) as though in earnest we did
deny it: which thing never so much as passed through our cogitations, but do
hold and teach that Subjects are bound to obey their Temporal Princes in all
things lawful, and those not only good Princes, but bad also: and not only out
of fear or flattery, but out of Conscience, as the Apostle teaches propter
Conscientiam, Romans 13.
for Conscience sake, but not contra Conscientiam, against Conscience. Which
being so; all is merely impertinent, that is alleged here by the Apologer,
out of Scriptures, Fathers, and Councels, to prove, that which we grant without
proof, and never denied: which is, that temporal Princes are duly to be
obeyed for Conscience sake, so long as they command nothing against Conscience.
But let them show but one only Authority, sentence, example or testimony out of
any of these three kind of witnesses, Scriptures, Fathers, or Counsels, that
we must obey Princes against our Conscience, or Religion, and I will grant he
says somewhat to the purpose, otherwise he does but leese time, and abuse his
Reader in making him believe, that he says somewhat when he says nothing. Let
us examyne therefore some of his examples if you please.

XXXVIII. He alleges for examples out of the Scriptures, Apol. page 22.
That the children of Israel obeyed the King of Babylon, Hier. 27. 12.
as also they exhibited temporal Obedience unto King Pharao of Egypt; Exodus 5.
1.
as in like manner to Cyrus King of Persia: Esdr. 1. 3.
All which examples we grant to be true, and could ad many more, both of the
Jews, and Christians that lived peaceably under Infidel Princes in those
days. But let one example (as I said) be brought forth, wherein they obeyed
them in points contrary to their Conscience or Religion, and it shall be
sufficient. Dan. 3. 12.
We read in the Prophecy of Daniel, that those three famous Jews, Sidrach,
Misach, and Abdenago, were most trusty unto King Nabuchodonosor in temporal
affairs, and so much esteemed by him, as he made them his universal Governors
over all the works of the Region of Babylon, says the Scripture: and yet when
it came to the point, No obedience against God and a man's Conscience.
that he would have them for his honor and pleasure, and upon his
commandment, adore the golden Statua, which he had set up; they forsook him
flatly, and said to him in the presence o all his Nobility assembled together,
that they were not so much as to answer him in that Commandment, nor would
they do, as he had appointed them.

XXXIX. The like in effect did the ancienter Jews do with King Pharao of
Egypt; for that albeit in temporal affairs they obeyed him, even in that time
when he oppressed, and persecuted them most: yet in that he would have had them
stay and sacrifice in Egypt, and not follow Moses their Spiritual Superior
into the desert (notwithstanding that the King had some cause perhaps to
suspect their temporal Allegiance, also by that departure, they being a potent
multitude of people:) yet would they not obey him, nor do as he would have
them, when they persuaded themselves that God would have the contrary.

XL. I let pass how Daniel and his fellows would not eat the meats of the
King of Babylon, Dan. 1.
nor Tobie those of the Asyrians, Tob. 1.
and much less would he leave of to bury the dead, though it were forbidden by
Proclamation under pain of death, The Machabees in like manner obeyed King
Antiochus so long, 1. Macha. 1.
as he commanded nothing against their Law and Conscience: but when he went
about to force them to sacrifice, and to eat swynes-flesh, and other things
against their Law and Conscience, they refused openly to perform that
Obedience. So as these places of Scriptures alleged by the Apologer, do prove
nothing for him at all, but are rather flatt against him, and for us, as you
have seen.

XLI. And much more do make against him, Authorityes of ancient Fathers.
his Authorityes alleged out of the ancient Fathers, for that they go about to
prove the very same point that we here hold, that in temporal and cyuill
affairs we must obey dutifully our temporal Princes, though Infidels or
Pagans: but not in matters concerning God, our Religion, or Conscience. And his
very first example out of S. Augustine is such, as I marvel much, that he
would cite the same, but that somewhat for show must be alleged: For it makes
so clearly and directly against him, as if it had been written purposely to
confute him in this our case. But let us hear what it is. Agreeable to the
Scriptures ( says he) did the Fathers teach. Apol. page 23.
Augustine speaking of Julian, August. in Psalm. 124.
says thus: Julian was an unbelieving Emperor, was he not an Apostata? an
oppressor, and an Idolatour? Christian soldiers served that unbelieving
Emperor: when they came to the cause of Christ, they would acknowledge no
Lord, but him that is in heaven: when he would have them worship Idols and
sacrifice, they preferred God before him: but when he said, go forth to fight,
invade such a nation, they presently obeyed: they distinguished their eternal
Lord from their temporal, and yet were they subject even unto their temporal
Lord, for his sake, that was their eternal Lord and Master. Thus he.

XLII. And can any thing be spoken more clearly for us, How far we are bound
to our te^porall Prince.
and for our cause, then this? For even thus do we offer to our King and
Sovereign: we will serve him: we will obey him: we will go to war with him:
we will fight for him: and we will do all other offices belonging to temporal
duty: but when the cause of Christ comes in hand, who is Lord of our
Consciences, or any matter concerning the same, or our Religion; there we do,
as S. Augustine here appoynteth us, prefer our eternal King, before our
Temporal.

XLIII. And like to these are all the other places of Fathers cyted by him, who
distinguish expressly between the Temporal honor and Allegiance due to the
Emperor, and the other of our Religion, and Conscience, belonging only to God.
Apol. page 23.
And to that plain sense are Tertullians words cyted by the Apologer: Tertull.
ad Scap.
We honor the Emperor in such sort as is lawful for us, and expedient for
him* as a man second after God, and as having received from God, whatsoever he
is, and only less then God. And will not the Catholics of England use this
speech also unto their King? Or will the Apologer himself deny that Tertullian
here meant nothing else, but in temporal affairs, for much as the Emperor at
that time were Heathen and Gentiles, and consequently were not to be obeyed in
any point against Christian faith or Religion?

XLIV. The like plain doctrine have the words of Justinius Martyr to the
Emperor himself, cyted here in the third place, Just. Apol. 2. ad Anto.
Imperat.
to wit: We only adore God, and in all other things we cheerfully perform
service to you, professing you to be Emperors, and Princes of men. And do not
all English Catholics say the same at this day, that in all other things, that
concern not God and his Obedience, by rule of Catholic Religion, they offer
cheerfully to serve his Ma.tie, acknowledging him to be their liege Lord and
King, and inferior only to god in his Temporal Government? And how then are
these, and such other places brought in for witness, as though they had
somewhat to say against us?

XLV. The other two sentences, in like manner cyted out of Optatus, Optat.
co^tra Parmen. li. 3. Ambros. Orat. co^tra Auxent. de Basilicis no^ trad. lib.
s. Epist.
and S. Ambrose, the first saying: That over the Emperor there is none, but
only God, that made the Emperor. And the other, That tears were his weapons
against the arms, and soldiers of the Emperors: That he neither ought, or
could resist: Neither of them do make any thing against us, or for the
Apologer, even as they are here nakedly cyted, without declaration of the
circumstances: for that in temporal affairs the King or Emperor is Supreme,
next under God. And when the Emperor will use secular ^orces against the
Priests of his dominion, they, being no soldiers, must fall to prayers, and
tears, which are Priestly weapons. But what? Did S. Ambrose by this
acknowledge that the Emperor had higher Authority, then he, in Churchmatters?
Or that if he had offered him an Oath, repugnant to his Religion, or
Conscience, in those matters he would have obeyed, or acknowledged his
Superiority? No truly. For in three several occasions that fell out, he flatly
denied the same, which this Apologer Three occasions in which S. Ambrose
resisted the Emperor his temporal Sovereign.
and says not a word thereof.

XLVI. The first was, when he was cited by Dalmatius the Iribune, bringing with
him a public Notarie to testify the same, in the name of the Emperor
Valentinian the younger, to come and confer, or dispute with the heretical
Bishop Auxentius, in the presence of his Ma.tie and other of his Nobility and
Counsel, which point S. Ambrose refused utterly to do, tellyng the Emperor
plainly by a letter, written unto him; That in matters of faith and Religion
Bishops must judge of Emperors, Libellus. Ambros. epist. 32.
and not Emperors of Bishops. And diverse other doctrines, by this occasion, he
taught him to that effect, as is to be seen in the same Epistle.

XLVII. The second occasion fell out the very next Milane, Amb. l. 1. epist. 33.
when the said Emperor, by suite of the Arrians, and favor of Iustina the
Empress on their behalf, made a Decree that a certain Church of that City
should be delivered to the said Arrians: which Decree S. Ambrose the Bishop
refused to obey. And when the Emperors Officers coming with arms, urged
greatly to give possession of the Church, he fled to his former weapons of
weeping and praying: Ego Missam facere caepi etc. I began to say Mass, and
when the te^porall Magistrate urged still, that the Emperor used but his own
right, in appoynting that Church to be delivered, S. Ambrose answered, Quae
diuina sunt, Imperatoriae Potestati non esse subiecta: That such things as
belong to God, are not subject to the Imperial power. And thus answered S.
Ambrose about the gyuing up of a material Church. What would he have said in
greater matters.

XLVIII. The third occasion was, when the Tribunes, and other Officers to
require certain Vessels belonging to the Church to be delivered, which S.
Ambrose constantly denied to do, saying: That in this, he could not obey: And
further adding, That if the Emperor did love him self, Amb. Ibid.
he should abstain from offering such injury unto Christ. And in another
place, handling the same more at large, Ambros. Concion. de Basililcis no^
tradendis haer. to. 5.
he says: That he gave to Caesar that which was Cesars, and to God that which
belonged to God: but that the Temple of God could not be the right of Caesar,
which we speak (says he) to the Emperors honor. For what is more honorable
unto him, then that he being an Emperor, be called a Child of the Church, for
that a good Emperor is within the Church, but not above the Church. So S.
Ambrose. What would he have done, or said, if he had been pressed with an Oath
against his Conscience, or any least point of his Religion?

IL. Neither does the last place cyted out of S. Gregory the Great to the
Emperor Mauritius make any thing more for our Apologers purpose of taking
Oaths against Conscience. For albeit the same Father do greatly complain in
diverse places of the oppression of the Church by the Kingly power of Mauritius,
Apol. page 24.
whom (though otherwise a Catholic Emperor) he compares in that point to
Nero and Dioclesian, saying: Quid Nero? How S. Gregory agreed to the publishing
of the law of the Emperor Mauritius.
quid Dioclesianus? quid denique iste, quihoc te^pore Ecclesiam persequitur?
Nunquid non omnes portae Inferi? What was Nero? what was Dioclesian? what is he
who at this time, does persecute the Church? Are they not all gates of Hell?
Yet in this place alleged by the Apologer, he yealded to publish and send
abroad into diverse Countries and Provinces, a certain unjust law of the said
Emperors, that prohibited Soldiers, and such as had been employed in matters
of public acco^pts of the Common Wealth, to make themselves Monks: which law,
though S. Gregory did greatly mislike, Greg. lib. 2. Epistol. 65. Indict. 11.
and wrote sharply against it, to the Emperor himself: yet to show his due
respect in temporal things unto him, and for that indeed the law was not
absolutely so evil, but that in some good sense, it might be tolerated, to
wit, that Soldiers sworn to the Emperors wars, might not (during the said
Oath and obligation) be received into Monasteryes, but with the Princes
license: yet for that it tended to the abridgment of Ecclesiastical freedom,
in taking that course or state of life, which each man chooset^ for the good of
his soul; S. Gregory misliked the same, and dealt earnestly with the Emperor
to relinquish it, or to suffer it to be so moderated, as it might stand without
prejudice of Christian liberty: whereunto the Emperor at length yealded, and so
S. Gregory sent the same abroad unto diverse Primates and Archbishoppes of
sundry Kingdoms mentioned by him, but corrected first and reduced by himself,
as supreme Pastor, to a reasonable lawfulnes, and temperate moderation: to
wit, That those who had borne offices of charge in the Common wealth, and
after desired to be admitted to Religious life in Monasteryes, should not be
received, until they had given up their full accounts, and had obtained
public discharge for the same. And that soldiers which demanded the like
admittance, should be exactly tried, and not admitted unto Monassicall habit,
but after they had lived three years in their lay apparel, under probation.

L. This determines S. Gregory in his Epistle, Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 11.
Indict. 1.
beginning, Greg^ri^s (...) Thessalo^consi, Vrbicio Dirachitano, etc. adding
further in the same Epistle, as has been said, De qua re, Seren^inus and
Christanissimus Imperator omnimdo pl^ca^^r: About which matter our most Clement
and Christian Emperor is wholly pleased and content. So as in this S. Gregory
showed his pastoral care and power, in limiting and moderating the Emperors
law, according to the law of God, though in temporal respects he showed him
the Obedience, that was due unto him. But what is this unto our Oath? May we
think that S. Gregory, that would not pass a temporal law of the Emperor,
without reprehension of the unlawfulness thereof to the Emperor himself, and
correction thero^ in the publication, for that indirectly it did intringe the
liberty of Religious life, when men were called thereunto, that he would not
have much more resisted the admission of an Oath, about such affairs, if it
had been proposed? No man, I think, in reason can imagine the contrary.

LI. The last thing the^ that is cited without purpose by this Apologer, are
certain Councels, which are said to have submitted thems^lues to Emperors, as
that of Arles in France unto Charles the Great their King for that in the last
words of the said Council, the Bishopps there gathered together presenting
the same to the same Charles write thus: Hae sub breuitate, quae emendatione
digna perspeximus, Con^. Arel. sub Carol. Can. 26.
etc. These things briefly which we have seen worthy of reformation, we have
noted and deemed to be presented to our Lord the Emperor, beseeching his
Clemency if any thing be wanting to supply it by his wisdom; and if any thing
be otherwise done then reason requires, it be amended by his judgment; and if
any thing be reasonably censured, it may be perfected by his help, and by the
Clemency of Almighty God. So the Council. And heerof would the Apologer
infer that this Council of Bishops submitted it self to the Emperor.

LII. But I would ask him wherein? To take any Oath that the Emperor Charles
should propose unto them? We see no Oath offered, nor mentioned, and so
nothing here to our purpose. Wherein then, or why are they said to have
submitted themselves? For that, perhaps, it is said in the Preface of the
Council, that they were gathered together by order, and commandment of the
said Emperor. Surely it was hard, that so many Bishops, and Archbishops should
be assembled together without his liking, and Order. But that the consent,
direction, and chief Commission for the same, came from the Bishop of Rome,
may easily be gathered: for that in the first Council that he caused to be
celebrated in his Dominions, Vide in Capitularibus Pranc. li. 6. c. 285. de
Con^ilio VVormac.
which was that of Worms in the year of Christ 770. it was left registered in
these words: Auctoritas Ecclesiastica, atque Canonica docet, non debere,
absque sententia Romani Pontificis, Concilia celebrari. Ecclesiastical and
Canonical Authority teaches, that Councels may not be held, without the
allowance of the Bishop of Rome.

LIII. And wherein the^? Or why is this submission made? For approbation of
matters concerning faith? No, for that you have heard before out of S. Ambrose,
that therein Emperors are not judges of Bishops, but Bishops of Emperors.
Wherein then, or why is this submission, or rather remission to the Emperor,
and his judgment? It was, for that this Council was made only for reformation
of manners and matters, at the religious insta^ce of the good Emperor, Wherein
the Council of Arles did submit it self to the Emperor.
the effectuating whereof did depend principally of his good will and
assistance, and so after the first Canon, where briefly is set down the
Confession of the Christian faith, all the other 25. Canons (for there are only
26. in all) are about reformation of matters amiss: as for more diligence in
daily prayer for the Emperors person, and his children, to wit, that Can. 2.
Masses and Litanies be said daily for them, by all Bishops, Abbots, Monks,
and Priests. Can. 3.
That Bishops and Priests study more diligently, and teach the people, both by
lessons and preachings: Can. 4.
That lay men may not put out Priests of their benefices, without the sentence
of the Bishop, nor that they take money of them for collation of the said
benefices: Can. 7. and 8.
That none be admitted to enter into the Monasteryes of Virgins, either to say
Mass^, or otherwise, but such as be o^ approved virtue: Can. 13.
How peace is to be held between Bishops, Earls, and other Great men,
especially in execution of Justice: Can. 15. and 16.
That weightes and measures be just and equal, and that none work upon holy
days: Can. 20. 22. 23.
That all Tithes be paid, all ancient possessions mantayned to the Churches:
That no secular courts be held in Churches, or Church porches: That no Earls,
or other Great men do ^raudulently buy poor men's goods, etc.

LIVE. These then were the points of Reformation, decreed in that Council of
Arles, The zeal of Charles the Great to have manners reformed by the authority
of Bishops.
at the instance of Charles the Great, who was so zealous a Prince in this
behalf, as he caused five several Counsels to be celebrated in diverse Parts
of his Dominions, within one year, to wit, this of Arles, an other at Towers,
a third at Chalons, a fourth at Mentz, the fifth at Rhemes, and another the
year before (which was the fixed) Ad Theodonis Villam, which is a town in
Luxemburge. All which Provincial Synodes are extant in the third Tome of
Cou^cells, together, with the Canons and Decrees, which are such as could not
be put in execution, but by the temporal favor, authority, and approbation
of the Emperor in such matters, as concerned his temporal Kingdom and
jurisdiction. Wherefore if for these respects, the Council did present unto the
Emperor these Canons to be considered of by his wisdom, whether any thing
were to be added, altered, or taken away, for the public good of the Common
Wealth (no Controversy of faith being treated therein) what is this to prove,
either, that the Emperor in spiritual matters was superior to the said
Bishops, or that if he had proposed unto them any such Oath, as this is, wherein
by professing their temporal Allegiance, they must also have impugned some
point of their faith, that they would have obeyed him? And so much of this
Council.

LV. And for that, all the other Authorityes of other Councels here cyted, do
tend only to this end of proving Temporal Obedience, which we deny not, but do
offer the same most willingly: we shall not stand to answer or examine any
more of them, but shall and this Paragraph, with laying down the insultation
of this Apologer against the Pope, upon his own voluntary mistaking the
Question. I read (says he) in the Scriptures, Joan. 18. 36. Mat. 22. 21. Apol.
page 26. and 27.
that Christ said, His Kingdom was not of this world, bidding us to give to
Caesar that which was Cesars, and to God that which was Gods: and I ever held it
for an infallible Maxim in Deuinity, That temporal Obedience to a temporal
Magistrate, did nothing repugne to matters o^ faith o^ salvation of souls. But
that ever Temporal Obedience was against faith and salvation of sou^es, as in
this Breue is alleged, was never before heard or read of in the Christian
Church; and therefore, I would have wished the Pope, before he had set down
this Commandment to all Papists here, That since in him is the Power, by the
infallibility of his spirit, to make new Articles of faith, when ever it shall
please him; That he had first set it down for an Article of faith, before he
had commanded all Catholics to believe, and obey it. So he.

LVI. And I marvel, that a man professing learning, would ever so tryfle, or
rather wrangle, and wrongfully charge his Adversary: for that I find no such
thing in the Breue at all, as that Temporal Obedience is against faith and
salvation of souls: nor does the Breue forbid it: Neither the Pope or Church
can make any new Articles of Faith.
nor does any learned Catholic affirm, that the Pope has power to make new
Articles of Faith: nay rather it is the full consent of all Catholic Deuines,
that the Pope, and all the Church together, cannot make any one new Article of
belief, that was not truth before, though they may explane what points are to
be held for matters of faith, and what not, upon any new heresies or doubts
arising: Which articles so declared, though they be more particulerly, and
perspicuously known now for points of faith, and so to be believed, after the
declaration of the Church then before: yet had they before the self same truth
in themselves, that now they have. Nor has the said Church added any thing to
them, but this declaration only. 3. Reg. 3.
As for example, when Solomon declared the true Mother of the child that was in
doubt, he made her not the true mother thereby, nor added any thing to the
truth of her being the mother: but only the declaration. Wherefore this also of
ascribing power to the Pope of making new Articles of faith, is a mere
calumniation amongst the rest.

LVII. There follows his conclusion: I will then conclude (says he) my
answer to this point in a Dilemma: Either it is lawful to obey the Sovereign
in temporal things or not. If it be lawful, as I never heard or read it
doubted of: then why is the Pope so unjust and cruel toward his own
Catholics, as to command them to disobey their Sovereigns lawful
commandment? If it be unlawful, why has he not expressed any one cause or
reason thereof? But this Dilemma is easily dissolved, or rather falls of it
self, both his pillars being but broken reeds, framed out of false
suppositions: For that the Pope neither denies it, Wilful mistaking of the
controversy.
to be lawful, to obey the Sovereign in Cyuill and Temporal things nor does
he command Catholics to disobey their Prince his lawful comma^dements: but
only where they be unlawful to be performed, as he supposes them to be in the
taking of this Oath. Whereof he expresses sundry causes, and reasons, I mean,
so many as the Oath it self co^teyneth points concerning Religion: to which
end, he sets down the whole Oath, as it lies, with intimation, that those
points cannot be sworn with integrity of Catholic Religion, and good
conscience: which is sufficient for a Judge, who disputes not, but
determines. So as, hereupon to make illation of the Popes unjust, and cruel
dealing toward Catholics, by this his decision, as though he sorbad Civil
Obedience; is to buyld upon a voluntary false ground, supposing, or rather
imposing the Pope to say, that which he does not, and then to refute him, as
though he had said it indeed. And is this good dealing?

LVIII. But yet he goes forward upon the same false ground to buyld more
accusations against the Pope, saying: That if the foundation of his exhorting
Catholics to bear patiently their tribulations, be false (as this Apologer
avouches it to be) then it can work no other effect, then to make him guylty
of the blood of so many of his sheep, whom he does thus wilfully cast away,
not only to the needles loss of their lives, and ruin of their famylies: but
even to the laying on of a perpetual slander upon all Papists. As it no
zealous Papist could be a true Subject to his Prince: and that Religion, and
the Temporal Obedience to the Cyuill Magistrate, were two things incompatible
and repugnant in themselves. Thus he.

LIX. But who does not see that these be all injurious inferences, enforced
upon the former false suppositions, to wit, That Catholics suffer nothing for
their Conscience, That there is no persecution at all in England, That there is
nothing exacted by this last oath, but only and merely Cyuill Obedience, and
that in this, the Pope exhorts them to disobey the Temporal Prince in
Temporal duties, and thereby gives just occasion to the Prince to use his
sword against them, and consequently that he is cause of the effusion of their
blood, and of the infamy of Catholic Religion: as though no Catholic by his
Religion could be a true Subject to his Temporal Prince. All which
suppositions being utterly mistaken, and not true, the more often they are
repeated, the more exorbitant seems the oversight of the writer. And in my
opinion, the very same might have been objected unto S. Cyprian and other
Fathers of the Primitive Church, See S. Cyprian Exhort. ad Martyr.
that they were guylty of so many Martyrs blood, wilfully cast away, and of
the ruin of their familyes, and other inconveniences, by exhorting them not to
do against their Consciences, nor to yield to their Temporal Princes
Commandments against God and their Religion: no not for any torments that
might be laid upon them, nor for any losses that might fall unto them, of
goods, life, honor, same, friends, wife, children, or the like, which were
ordinary exhortations in those days of persecution, as by their Books yet
extant does appear.

LX. Neither is it sufficient to say, that those times and ours are different,
for that the things then demanded were apparently unlawful, but these not:
for that, to us that are Catholics, these things are as unlawful now, as
those other were then to them, for that they are no less against our
Consciences in matters of Religion. For why should it be more damnable then,
and indispensable to deliver up a Bible, or new Testament, for examples sake,
when the Emperor commanded it, then now to swear an Oath against our
Conscience and Religion, when our Temporal Prince exacteth it? For that this,
perhaps, is called the Oath of Allegiance? Who knows not, that the fairest
title is put upon the fowlest matter, when it is to be persuaded or exacted?
And he that shall read the Historyes of that time, and of those ancient
afflictions, shall see that Act also to have been required, See Eusebius. lib. 8.
ca. 4. and Aug. de Bap. lib. 7. cap. 2. and lib. 7. co^tra Cresc. cap. 27. and
Arnob. co^tra Gentes lib 4. in fine.
as of Obedience and Allegiance, and not of Religion, being only the delivery
up of material books: and yet did the whole Church of God condemn them for
it, that delivered the same, and held for true Martyrs, all those that dyed for
denying thereof, for that they would not do an Act against their Consciences.

LXI. Well then, to draw to an end of this second paragraph about the two
Breues of Paulus Quintus, two things more writes this Apologer, whereunto I
must in like manner say somewhat. The first is, That Pope Clemens Octauus sent
into England, two Breues immediately before the late Queens death, for
debarring of his Majesty, our now Sovereign, of the Crown, or any other,
that either would profess, or any way tolerate the professors of our
Religion, contrary (says he) to his manifold vows, and protestations, simul
and eodem tempore, and, as it were, delivered, vno and eodem Spiritu, to diverse
of his Maiestyes Ministers abroad, professing all kyndenes, and showing all
forwardnes to advance him to this Crown, etc. Wherein still I find the same
vein of exaggeration, and calumniation continued by the Apologer. For having
procured some knowledge of those two Breues, Touching the two Breues of Clemens
octauus. Anno Domini 1600. and 1603.
I find them not sent into England together, nor immediately before the late
Queens death, but the one diverse years before she dyed, and the other after
her death, and this to different effects. For in the first, the Pope being
consulted, what Catholics were bound to do in conscience, for admitting a new
Prince after the Queen should be dead, for so much as some of different
Religions, were, or might be, pretenders; he determined that a Catholic was
to be preferred, not thinking (as may be presumed) to prejudice therein his
Majesty that now is, of whom, upon the relations, and earnest asseuerations of
those his Maiestyes Ministers abroad, who here are mentioned, he had conceived
firm hope, that his Highness was not far from being a Catholic, or at least
wise not altogether so alienate from that Religion, or professors thereof, as
reasonable hope might not be conceived of his conversion: though in regard of
not preiudicing his Title in England, the said Ministers avouched, that it was
not thought expedient at that time to make declaration thereof.

LXII. This was auerred then, how truly or falsely I know not. But many letters
and testifications are extant hereof, which were the cause of those
demonstrations of Clemens Octauus, to favor his M.ties Title, which he did so
heartily and effectually, as when he, after the Queens death, understood that
he was called for into England, he wrote presently the second Breue, exhorting
all Catholics to receive and obey him willingly, hoping that at leastwise they
should be permitted to live peaceably under him. And this is the very truth of
those two Breues: nor was there in the former any one word against his Majesty
then of Scotland; and much less that he was therein called the Scottish
Heretic, In his Charge at Norwich 4. August. anno 1606.
as Sir Edward Cook has devised since, and falsely uttered in print without
shame or conscience. Nor was there any such words, as here are alleged,
against any that would but tolerate the Professors of Protestants Religion:
nor was there any such double dealing or dissimulation in Pope Clement his
speeches, or doings, concerning his Ma.ty as here are set down. But the truth
is, that he loved his person most heartily, and always spoke honorably of him,
treated kindly all those of his nation, that said they came from him, or any
ways belonged unto him: and often times used more liberality that way, upon
diverse occasions, then is convenient, perhaps, for me to utter here: caused
special prayer to be made for his Majesty, whereof, I suppose, his Highness
cannot altogether be ignorant, and much less can so noble a nature be ingrate
for the same, which assures me, that those things vtterd by this Apologer, so
far from the truth, could not be conferred with his Majesty, but uttered by
the Author thereof, upon his own spleen, against the Pope, and such as are of
his Religion.

LXIII. The second and last point affirmed by the Apologer in this Paragraph,
To the last point.
is, that the first of these two Breues of Paulus Quintus was judged to be
far against Deuinity, Policy, and natural sense, by sundry Catholics, not
of the simpler sort, but of the best account both for learning and experience
among them, whereof the Archpriest was one, and consequently, that it was held
but for a counterfaite libell, devised in hatred of the Pope. etc. All this (I
say) has much calumniation in it, and little truth. For albeit some might
doubt, perhaps, whether it came immediately from the Pope, Ex motu proprio, or
only from the Congregation of the Inquisition, upon defectuous information of
the State of the question in England (of which doubt, notwithstanding, if any
were, there could be little ground:) yet no Catholic of judgment or piety,
would ever pass so far, as to judge it contrary to Deuinity, Policy, or
natural sense, and much less, to be a libell devised in hatred of the Pope.
These are but devises of the Minister-Apologer: and he offers much injury to
so Reverend a man as the Archpriest is, to name him in so odious a matter, but
that his end therein is well known. And if there were any such doubt, or might
be before, of the lawfulnes of the first Breue, now is the matter cleared by
the second; and so all men see thereby, what is the sentence of the Sea
Apostolic therein, which is sufficient for Catholic men, that have learned
to obey, and to submitt their judgments to those, whom God has appointed for
the declaration, and decision of such doubts. And thus much about those two
Breues. Now let us see what is said to Cardinal Bellarmyne, for writing to M.
Blackwell in this affair.

ABOUT CARDINAL BELLARMINES LETTER TO M.r BLACKVVELL: And answer given
thereunto, by the Apologer.
Paragr. III.
THE last Part of this Apology concerns a letter written by Cardinal
Bellarmine in Rome, unto George Blackwell Archpriest in England: Apolog. page
36. 37. etc.
which letter, as appears by the argument thereof, was written out of this
occasion: That whereas upon the coming forth of the forenamed new Oath,
entitled, Of Allegiance, there were found diverse points combined together,
some appertayning manifestly to Civil Allegiance, whereat no man made scruple,
some other seeming to include other matters, contrary to some part of the
Catholic faith, at least in the common sense as they ly; there arose a doubt
whether the said Oath might be taken simply and wholly, by a Catholic man, as
it is there proposed without any further distinction, or explication thereof.
Whereupon some learned men at home being different in opinions, The State of the
controversy with Card. Bellarmine
the case was consulted abroad, where all agreed (as before has been showed)
that it could not be taken wholly with safety of conscience, and so also the
Pope declared the case by two several Breues.

II. In the mean space it happened, that M. Blackwell being taken, was
committed to prison, and soon after, as he had been of opinion before, that the
said Oath might be taken as it lay in a certain sense; so it being offered unto
him, he took it himself. Which thing being noysed abroad, and the fact
generally misliked by all sorts of Catholic people in other Realms, as
offensive, and scandalous in regard of his place, and person, so much respected
by them: Cardinal Bellarmine, as having had some old acquaintance with him in
former years, as it may seem, resolved out of his particular love, and zeal
to the Common cause of Religion, and special affection to his person, to write
a letter unto him, thereby to let him know what reports, and judgment there was
made of his fact, throughout those parts of Christendom where he remained,
Ca. Pellar. his opinion of taking the Oath.
together with his own opinion also, which consisted in two points, the one
that the Oath, as it stood, compounded of different clauses, some lawful, and
some unlawful, could not be taken with safety of Conscience: the other, that
he being in the dignity he was of Prelacy, and Pastoral Charge, ought to stand
firm and constant for example of others, and rather to suffer any kind of
danger or damage, then to yield to any unlawful thing, such as the Cardinal
held this Oath to be.

III. This Letter was written upon the 28. day of September 1607. and it was
subscribed thus in Latin; Admodum R.dae Dom.is Vae. Frater and seruus in
Christo. Robertus Card. Bellarminus. Which our Apologer translateth, Your very
Reverend Brother: whereas the word very Reverend in the letter, Page 44.
is given to the Archpriest, A Cavil.
and not to Card. Bellarmine, which the interpreter knew well enough, but that
wanting other matter, would take occasion of cauilling by a wilful mistaking
of his own, as often he does throughout this Answer to Bellarmine, as in part
will appear by the few notes which here I am to set down, leaving the
morefull Answer to the Cardinal himself, or some other by his appointment,
which I doubt not, but will yield very ample satisfaction in that behalf. For
that, in truth, I find, that great advantage is given unto him, for the defense
of his said Epistle, and that the exceptions taken there against it, be very
weak and light, and as easy to be dissolved by him, and his pen, as a thin
mist by the beams of the sun.

IIII. As for example, the first exception is (which no doubt were great, Page
46.
if it were true in such a man as Cardinal Bellarmine is) that he has
mistaken the whole State of the Question, in his writing to M. Blackwell, going
about to impugn only the old Oath of Supremacy, Whether Bellar. mistaketh the
state of the Question.
in steed of this new Oath, entitled, Of Allegiance: but this is most clearly
refuted by the very first lines almost of the letter it self. For that telling
M. Blackwell, how sorry he was upon the report, that he had taken illicitum
Iuramentum, an vnlafull Oath, he expounds presently, what Oath he means,
saying: Not therefore (dear Brother) is that Oath lawful, for that it is
offered somewhat tempered and modifyed, etc. Which is evidently meant of the new
Oath of Allegiance, not only tempered with diverse lawful clauses of Civil
Obedience, as has been showed, but interlaced also with other members, that
reach to Religion: whereas the old Oath of Supremacy, has no such mixture, but
is plainly, and simply set down, for absolute excluding the Popes Supremacy
in causes Ecclesiastical, and for making the King supreme Head of the Church
in the same causes: all which is most evident by the Statutes made about the
same, from the 25 year of King Henry the 8. unto the end of the reign of King
Edward the sixth.

V. Only I do here note by the way, The title of Supremacy.
that the Apologer in setting down the form of the Oath of Supremacy says:
I A. B. do utterly testify, and declare in my Conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only Supreme Governor, as well in all causes spiritual as
temporal, whereas in the Statute of 26. of K. Henry the 8. Stat. 26.
where the title of Supremacy is enacted, the words are these: Henr. 8. c. 1.
Be it enacted by this present Parliament, that the King our Sovereign, his
heirs and successors, shall be taken, accepted, and reputed the only Supreme Head
in earth of the Church of England, called Ecclesia Anglicana, and shall have,
and enjoy, annexed, and united to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, as well
the title and style thereof, as all honors, digni^yes, authorityes, annuityes,
profitis, and commodityes to the said Dignity of Supreme Head of the said
Church, belonging etc.

VI. And further, whereas two years after, an Oath was devised for confirmation
heerof in Parliament, the words of the Oath are set down: Stat. 28. H. 8.
cap. 10.
That he shall swear to renounce utterly, and relinquish the Bishop of Rome,
and his Authority, power, and jurisdiction etc. And that from hence forth, he
shall accept, repute, and take the Kings M.tie to be the only Supreme Head in
earth of the Church of England etc. And that the refusers of this Oath, shall
be reputed traitors and suffer the pains of death etc. And in other Statutes
it is decreed, that it shall be treason to deny this title of headship to the
King. And by like Decree of Parliament, it is declared under King Edward, Stat.
1. Edo. 6. cap. 2.
what this Authority of headshipp is, when they say: For so much as all
Authority of Jurisdiction spiritual, and temporal is deryued, and deduced
from the Kings M.tie as Supreme Head of these Churches, and Realms of England
and Ireland etc.

VII. This was wont to be the doctrine of Supremacy in the times of King Henry,
and King Edward, and it was death to deny this title, or not to swear the
same: now our Apologer thinks it not good to give it any longer to his Ma.tie
that now is, but calls him only Supreme Governor, which is a new devise
taken from John Reynolds, and other his fellows, who above twenty years gone,
being pressed by his Adversary M. Heart, about calling Q. Elizabeth, Conference
in the Tower. cap. 1. diuis. 1. pa. 90.
Head of the Church, he denies flatly, that they called her so, but only
Supreme Gouernesse, which I had thought they had done in regard of her sex,
that is not permitted to speak in the Church. But now I perceive they have
passed the same also over to his M.tie not permitting him to inherit the
tytles, either of King Edward, or King Henry; which misliketh not us at all,
for that so far they may pass heerin, as we may come to agree. For if they
will understand by supreme Governor, the temporal Princes Supreme Authority
over all persons of his dominions, both Ecclesiastical, and Temporal, in
temporal matters, excepting only Spiritual (wherein as you have heard a little
before S. Ambrose told the Christian Emperors of his time, that being Laymen,
they could not rightly meddle:) I see no great difficulty, which in this
affayre would remain between us.

VIII. To return then to the Charge of oversight, and gross mistaking (to use
the Apologers words) laid by him to Cardinal Bellarmine, for impugning the
ancienter Oath of Supremacy, instead of this later called, Of Allegiance, and
Of giving the child a wrong name (as he says,) I see not by what least color,
or show of reason, it may stand against him. For besides that which we have
said before, of the te^perament, and modification mentioned by him to be
craftily couched in this later Oath, which by his letter he refuteth (I mean
of lawful, Apolog. page 37.
and unlawful clauses) which must needs be understood of the second Oath; he
adioyneth presently the co^futation of those modifications, saying: For you
know that those kind of modifications, are nothing else, but sleightes and
subtilityes of Satan, that the Catholic faith, touching the Primacy of the
Sea Apostolic, might either secretly, or openly be shot at. Lo here he
mentions both the Oaths, the one which shoots secretly at the Primacy of
the Sea Apostolic (which is the later Of Allegiance) and the other that
impugneth it openly, which is the first of the Supremacy. And as he names the
second in the first place, so does he principally prosecute the same, and
proves the unlawfulness thereof, mentioning the other but only as by the way,
for that it is as Totu^ ad Parte^ to the former, as a man can hardly speak of
particular members of a body, without naming also the said body (as when S.
James inuegheth against the tongue, Iac. 3.
he says, That it inflameth the whole body:) so Card.all Bellarmine could
hardly reprove the particular branches of the Oath of Allegiance, tending
against sundry parts of the Popes Primacie, without mentioning the general
Oath of Supremacy, though it were not his purpose chiefly to impugn that, but
the other. Which later Oath, albeit the Apologer sticks not to say, that it
touches not any part of the Popes Spiritual Supremacy: yet in the very next
period, he contradicts and overthrows himself therein. For so much, as
dividing the said Oath of Allegiance into 14. The Oath divided into 14. parts.
several parts or parcels, twelve of them, at least, do touch the said
Supremacy one way or other, as by examination you will find, and we shall have
occasion after to declare more at large.

IX. As for example, Apolog. page 49.
he writes thus: And that the Injustice (says he) as well as the error of
Bellarmine his gross mistaking in this point, may yet be more clearly
discovered; I have thought good to insert here immediately the contrary
conclusions to all the points and Articles, whereof this other late Oath does
consist, whereby it may appear, what unreasonable and rebellious points he
would drive his Ma.ties Subjects unto, by refusing the whole body of that Oath,
as it is conceived. For he that shall refuse to take this Oath, must of
necessity hold these propositions following: First that our Soueraign^ Lord
King James is not the lawful King of this Kingdom, and of all other his
Ma.ties Dominions. Secondly that the Pope by his own authority may depose,
etc. But who does not see what a simple fallacy this is, which the Logicians do
call A composito ad diuisa, from denying of a compound, to infer the denial
of all the parcels therein contained. As if some would say, that Plato was a man
borne in Greece, of an excellent wit, skillful in the Greek language, most
excellent of all other Philosophers, and would require this to be confirmed by
an Oath, some Platonist, perhaps, would be co^te^t to swear it: but if some
Stoicke, or Peripateticke, or Professor of some other Sect in Philosophy,
should refuse the said Oath, in respect of the last clause, might a man infer
against him in all the other clauses also, Ergo he denies Plato to be a Man?
He denies him to be borne in Greece, he denies him to be of an excellent wit,
he denies him to be skillful in the Greek tongue, etc. Were not this a bad
kind of arguing?

X. So in like manner, if an Arrian, or Pelagian Prince, should exact an Oath
at his Subjects hands, Bad kind of arguing.
concerning diverse articles of Religion, that were believed by them both, and
in the end, or middle thereof, should insert some clauses, sounding to the
favor of their own sect, for which the Subject should refuse the whole body
of that Oath, as it was conceived; could the other in justice accuse him, for
denying all the several articles of his own Religion also, which therein are
mencyoned? Who sees not the injustice of this manner of dealing? And yet this
is that which our Apologer uses here with Catholics, affirming in good
earnest, that he which refuses the whole body of this Oath, as it is conceived
(in respect of some clauses thereof that stand against his Conscience, about
matters of Religion) refuses consequently every point and parcel thereof, and
must of necessity hold (in the first place) that our Sovereign Lord King James
is not the lawful King of this Kingdom, and of all other his Ma.ties
Dominions. The contrary whereof all Catholics do both confess, and profess:
and consequently it is a mere calumniation that they deny this. But let us
see, how he goes, forward in proving this whole Oath to be lawful to a
Catholic man's Conscience.

XI. And that the world (says he) may yet further see, Apol. page 52.
his Ma.ties and whole States setting down of this Oath, did not proceed from
any new invention of theirs, but as it is warranted by the word of God: The
Oath of Allegiance confirmed by the authority of Councels.
So does it take the example from an Oath of Allegiance, decreed a thousand
years agone, which a famons Council then, together with diverse other
Councels, were so far from condemning (as the Pope now has done this Oath)
as I have thought good to set down their own words here in that purpose;
whereby it may appear, that his Ma.tie craves nothing now of his Subjects in
this Oath, which was not expressly, and carefully commanded them by the Councels
to be obeyed, without exception of persons. Nay not in the very particular
point of Equivocation, which his Ma.tie in this Oath is so careful to have
eschewed: but you shall here see the said Councels in their Decrees, as
careful to provide for the eschewing of the same; The difference between the
ancient Councels, and the Popes Counselling of the Catholics.
so as, almost every point of that Action, and this if ours, shall be found to
have relation, and agreeance one with the other, save only in this; that those
old Councels were careful, and strait in commanding the taking of the same;
whereas by the contrary, he, that now vaunteth himself to be Head of all
Counsels, is as careful and strait in the prohibition of all men, from the
taking of this Oath of Allegiance. So he.

XII. And I have alleged his discourse at large, to the end you may better see
his fraudulent manner of proceeding. He says, That the example of this Oath is
taken from an Oath of Allegiance decreed a thousand years agone in the
Councels of Toledo, but especially the fourth, Conc. Tole. 4. can. 74.
which provided also for the particular point of Equivocation: But let any man
read those Councels, which are 13. in number, and if he find either any form
of an Oath prescribed, or any mention of Equivocation, but only of flat lying
and perfidious dealing; let him discredit all the rest that I do write. And if
he find none at all, as most certainly he shall not; then let him consider of
the bad cause of this Apologer, that dryueth him to such manner of dealing, as
to avouch, Every point of that Action to have agreeance with the offering of
this Oath.

XIII. True it is that those Councels of Toledo, upon certain occasions, which
presently we shall declare, do recommend much to the subjects of Spain, both
Goths and Spaniards; that they do observe their Oath of fidelity made unto
their Kings, The occasion of gathering the 4. Counsel of Toledo.
especially unto Sisenandus, for whose cause principally this matter was first
treated in the fourth Council of Toledo, but no special form is prescribed by
the said Council: nor is Equivocation so much as named therein, but only (as
has been said) Iurare mendaciter* to swear falsely, as the words of the
Council are. Which how far it is from the true nature of Equivocation has been
lately and largly demonstrated as you know.

XIV. The cause of the treaty of this matter in the 4. Council of Toledo,
was, for that one Sisenandus a Noble man of the blood of the Goths, and a
great Captain, taking opportunity of the evil life of his King S^intila,
whom he had served, did by some violence (as most of the Sea Rode. Tolet. lib.
2. dereb. His. c. 19. Sa^tius par. 2. hist. Hisp. c. 27. loan. Vasaus in Chron.
His. number. 631.
Spanish Historiographers write, though confirmed afterward by the
Commonwealth, and proved a very good King) and, as Paulus Aemilius in his
French History records, by help of Dagobert King of France, put out the
said Suintila: and fearing lest the same people that had made defection to him,
might by the same means fall from him again, he procured in the third year
of his reign, this fourth Council of Toledo, to be celebrated of 70.
Prelates, as some say, and as others, of 68. hoping by their means, that his
safety in the Crown should be confirmed. Whereupon it is set down, in the
Preface of the said Council, that coming into the same, accompanied with many
noble and honorable persons of his train; Conc. Tole. 4. in Praefat.
Coram sacerdotivus Dei humi prostratus, cum lachrymis, and gemitibus pro se
interueniedum postulauit: He prostrate on the ground before the Priests of God,
with tears and sobbes, besought them to make intercession unto God for him.
And after that, religiously exhorted the Synod to be myndfull of the Fathers
Decrees, for confirmation of Ecclesiastical rytes etc. Whereupon after seauenty
and three Decrees made, about Ecclesiastical matters, which whosoever will
read, shall find them wholly against the Protestants, Anno Domini 633.
as setting down, and describing the whole use of the Catholic Church then
in Spain (which concurred with our first Primitive Church of England conform
to that which now also is seen there) they in the last Canon, which was the
74. turned themselves to treat in like manner of matters of the Common wealth,
appoynting the order how their Kings for the time to come, should be
established: Defuncto in pace Principe, Primates Genesis is cum Sacerdotibus,
successorem Regni, consilio communi, constituant. The Prince being dead in
peace, let the Nobility of the Nation, together with the Priests, by common
counsel, appoint a successor in the kingdom etc.

XV. And then next to this, The care of the Council for Civil Fidelity to be
observed to the King.
they do excommunicate all those, that shall attempt the destruction of the
present King, or shall break their Oath of Fidelity made unto him: Aut si quis
praesumptione Tyrannica Regni ^as^i ium vsurpauerit: or if any shall, by
Tyrann. call presumption, usurp the dignity of the Crown, aut Sacramentum
fidei suae, quod pro Patriae, Gentisque Gothorum sta^u, vel conseruatione
Regiae salutis pollicitus est, Can. 74.
violauerit, aut Regem neci attrectauerit: If any man shall violate the Oath of
his fidelity, which he has promised for the state, or conservation of his
Country, and Gothish Nation, and of the Kings safety, or shall attempt the
Kings death etc. Let him be accursed (say they) in the sight of God the
Father, and of his Angels, and cast out from the Catholic Church, which by
his perjury he has profaned; and let him be separated from all Society of
Christians, together with all his associates in such atte^ptes. And this curse
they do renew and repeat diverse times in that Canon; Vt haec tremenda, and
toties iterata sententia, nullum ex nobis praesenti atque aeterno condemnet
iudicio; that this dreadful and often iterated sentence of excommunication, do
not condemn any of us with judgment present, and everlasting also, if we
incur the same.

XVI. This then was the great care which those ancient Fathers (whereof the holy
and learned man S. Isidorus, No form of Oath prescribed by the Council.
Archbishop of Civil was the first that subscribed) had of the dutiful
obedience, and fidelity of subjects toward their Princes, unto whom they had
once sworn the same. But as for any particular form of Oath there prescribed,
whereby this new Oath now required of Allegia^ce may be framed, that has so
many clauses therein of scruple of conscience to the receauer, I find none at
all. And no doubt, but if this King Sisenandus should have exacted of any of
these Bishops, or other his subjects, such an Oath of Allegiance, as should
have been mixed with any clauses prejudicial to any of those points of
Ecclesiastical affairs, which are handled and decreed by them, in the said
73. precedent Canons of this Counsel, or others contrary to their Conscience
or judgment in Religion: they would have been so far of from yielding
thereunto, as they would rather have given their lives, then their consents to
such an Oath.

XVII. But to go forward, and speak a word or two more of this Council of
Toledo. After those 70. Fathers had taken this order for the temporal safety
of their Prince, and Gothish Nation (for that was a principal point that none
should be admitted to the Crown, but of that race) they turn their speech to
the present King Sisenandus, What the Council demanded at K. Sisenandus his
hands toward his people.
and to his successors, making this exhortation unto him. Te quoque praesentem
Regem, ac ^uturos aetatum sequentium Principes, humilitate, qua debemus,
deposcimus, vt moderati and mites erga subiec^os existentes etc. We with due
humility, do require at your hands also that are our present King, and at the
hands of those that shall ensue in future times, that you be moderate and myld
toward your subjects, and do rule your people committed unto you by God, in
justice and piety; and do yield to Christ, the giver of all your power, good
correspondence by reigning over them, in humility of heart, and endeavor of
good works etc. And we do promulgate here against all Kings to come this
sentence; Vt si quis ex eis, contra reuerentiam legum, superba dominatione, and
fastu Regio in flagitiis crudelissimam potestatem in populis exercuerit,
Anathematis sententia a Christo Domino condemnetur. etc. That if any of them
shall against the reverence of the laws, by proud domination, and Kingly
haughtines, exercise wickedness, and cruel power upon the people committed to
their charge, let him be condemned of Christ, by the sentence of curse; and let
him have his separation, and judgment from God himself.

XVIII. After this, for better establishment of the said present King
Sisenandus, The deposition of K Suintila confirmed by the Council.
they do confirm the deposition and expulsion, from the Crown, of the
foresaid King Suintila, (which by error of the print, is called in the Book of
Counsels, Semithilana) pronouncing both him his wife, and their brother, to be
justly expulsed for their wickedness: though the foresaid S. Isidorus, then
living, and writing the History of Spain, dedicated to this King Sisenandus,
does speak much good of the Se Chro. Vasaei nu. 631.
former part of the other King his life and reign. And finally some five
years after this again in the sixth Council of Toledo, being gathered
together in the same Church of S. Leocadia, the said Bishops, together with
the Nobility, did make this law, and prescribed this form of Oath to all Kings
of that nation, Vt quisquis succedentium, Conc. Tol. 6. ca. 3:
temporum Regni sortitus suerit apicem, non antea conscendat Regiam Sedem, quam
inter reliquas conditiones, Sacramento pollicitus fuerit, hanc se Catholicam
non permissurum eos violare fidem. That whatsoever future King, An Oath
prescribed by the Council to Kings.
shall obtain the height of this Kingdom, he shall not be permitted to ascend
to the Royal seat thereof, until he have sworn, among other conditions,
that, he will never suffer his subjects to violate this Catholic faith, Mark
that he says ( this) which was the Catholic faith then held in Spain, and
explicated in those Councels of Toledo; the particulers whereof do easily show,
that they were as opposite to the Protestant faith, as we are now.

XIX. So as, all this is against the Apologer: for that in these Counsels no
particular form of any Oath was set down, or exhibited at all to Subjects,
that we can read of, but only in general, it is commanded, That all do keep
their Oath of Allegiance sworn to their Princes, at their first entrance, or
afterward. Which thing, no Pope did ever forbid, and all English Catholics at
this day do offer willingly to perform the same to this Ma.tie; and
consequently, all that ostentation made by the Minister before, That this Oath
is no new invention: That it does take the example from an Oath of Allegiance
decreed a thousand years gone, by a famous Council: That the Council provided
in particular for the points of Equivocation: That almost every point of that
action has agreeance with this of ours, saving only in this, that the Council
was careful, and strait in commanding the taking of the same, and Pope Paulus
careful and strayt in the prohibition etc.

XX. All this, I say, falls by it self to the ground: for so much, as
neither that Council commanded the taking of any Oath, nor prescribed any
form to Subjects, nor Pope Paulus prohibiteth this, so far as it concerns
Temporal, and Civil Obedience, as has been declared. And whatsoever the
Apologer cyteth more out of these Councels, the meanest Reader, by looking upon
it, will easily espy, that it makes nothing at all for him, or against us, and
consequently the entering into the narration of this matter, with so great
ostentation, as, That the world may see, that it proceeded not of any new
invention, but is warranted by the word of God, authorized by so ancient a
Council, and the like: All this (I say) was needles; for so much, as nothing
is found in this Council that agrees with our case, but only the naming and
recommending of an Oath of fidelity, wherein we also fully agree and consent
with our Adversary.

The second Part of this Paragraph.
NOw then to come to the particular Answer of our Apologer to the Card.lls
Letter, Contradictions objected to the Cardinal.
he does for diverse leaves together, as it were, dally with him, picking
quarrels here and there, until he come to the main charge of contradiction
of himself, to himself, not only in this Letter, but throughout all his works.
And albeit I doubt not, but that the Card.ll or some other by his appointment,
will discuss all these matters largly and sufficiently: yet for so much, as I
have promised to give you my judgment of all, I shall briefly in like manner
lay forth what I have observed about these pointe^.

XXII. Page 57. of his Apology he writes thus: That some of such Priests, and
Jesuits, as were the greatest traitors, and fomentors of the greatest
conspiracyes, against her late Majesty, gave up F. Robert Bellarmyne, for one
of their greatest authorities, and Oracles. And for proof he cites in the
margent Campian and Heart: Card. Bellar. Wrongfully charged with conspiracyes.
See the Conference in the Tower. By which I discover a greater abuse then I
could have imagined, would ever have come from a man careful of his credit:
for I have seen and perused the Conference of M.r D. John Reynolds with M.
John Heart in the Tower, upon the year 1583. two years after the death of F.
Campian, and there it appears indeed that the said M. Heart alleges diverse
times the opinions and proofs of F. Robert Bellarmyne, then public Reader of
Controversies in Rome, but always about matters of Deuinity and Controversies,
and never about Treasons or Conspiracyes. And as for F. Campian, he is never
read to mention him, either in the one or the other. Consider then the
deceitful equivocation here used, that for so much, as M. Heart alleged F.
Robert Bellarmine sometimes in matters of Controversy in that conference,
therefore both he and F. Campian alleged him for an Author and Oracle of
Conspiracy against the Queen. And how can these things be defended with any
show or probability of truth?

XXIII. Page 60. he frames a great reprehension against the Card.ll for that
in his letter he says, that this Oath is not therefore lawful, for that it is
offered as tempered and modified. Whereupon the Apologer plyeth, and insulteth,
as though the Card.ll had reprehended the te^perate speech therein used, adding,
That in Luther and others of the Protestant writers, we mislike their bold and
free speaking, as coming from the devils instinct. And now if we speak
(says he) moderately, and temperately, it must be termed the devils craft,
and therefore we may justly complain with Christ, That when we mourn, they
will not lament, and when we pype they will not dance. And neither John Baptist
his severity, nor Christ his meeknes can please them, who buyld but to their
own Monarchy, upon the ground of their own Traditions, and not to Christ,
etc. Thus he, and much more exprobration to this effect, that we mislike the
temperate style and speech used in this Oath of Allegiance. But all is quite
mistaken, and the Apologer has just cause to blush at this error, if it were
error and not wilful mistaking. For that Bellarmyne does not say, that this
Oath is temperate in words, but tempered in matter, aliquo modo temperatum and
modificatum: in a certain sort tempered and modified by the offerers, in
setting down some clauses lawful, touching Cyuill Obedience, and adjoining
others unlawful, that concern Conscience, and Religion. Which meaning of
Bellarmyne is evident by the example, which he alleges, of the Ensigns of
the Emperor Julian, out of S. Gregory Nazianzen, to wit; That the images of
Pagan Gods were mingled, and combined together with the Emperors picture, and
thereby so tempered, and modified, as a man could not adore the one, A voluntary
mistaking of te^perate for tempered.
without the other. Which being so, let the indifferent Reader consider what
abuse is offered to Card.all Bellarmyne, in charging him to mislike temperate
speech in the form of this Oath, which of likely hood he never thought on, and
yet thereon to found so great an inference, as to accuse him to buyld thereby to
a Monarchy, and not to Christ. Is this a token of want of better matter, or no?

XXIV. Page 62. the Apologer having said with great vehemence of asseueration,
That heaven and earth are no further asunder, then the profession of a
Temporal Obedience, to a Temporal King, is different from any thing belonging
to the Catholic faith, or Supremacy of S. Peter (which we grant also, if it
be mere Temporal Obedience without mixture of other clauses:) Two questions
proposed and solued.
he proposes presently two questions for application of this to his purpose.
First this: As for the Catholic Religion (says he) can there be one word
found in all this Oath, tending to matter of Religion? The second thus: Does he
that takes it, promise to believe, or not to believe any article of Religion?
Whereunto I answer first to the first, and then to the second. To the first,
that if it be granted, that tending and sounding that way as before has been
showed.

XXV. To the second question may make answer Clauses of belief or not belief
in the Oath.
I A. B. do truly, and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare
in my Conscience, that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the
Sea or Church of Rome, has any power and authority to etc. does not this
include either belief, or unbelief? Again: I do further su ear, that I do
from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as imp^ous, and here icall, that
damnable doctrine, and position, That Princes which be excommunicated, and
deprived by the Pope, may be deposed etc. Does not here the swearer promise,
not to believe that doctrine which he so much detesteth? How the^ does the
Apologer so grossly forget, and contradict himself, even then, when he goes
about to prove contradictions in his Adversary?

XXVI. It follows consequently in the Oath: And I do believe, Page 12.
and in Conscience am resolved, That neither the Pope, nor any person
whatsoever, has power to absolve me from this Oath, or any part thereof. These
words are plain as you see. And what will the Apologer say here? Is nothing
promised in those words to be believed, or not to be believed?

XXVII. But now we come to the contradictions of Cardinal Bellarmyne, whereof
the Apologer takes occasion to treat, for that the Cardinal affirms in one
part of his letter, That neither his Majesty of England, nor any Prince else,
has cause to fear violence from the Pope; for that it was never heard of,
from the Churches infancy, until this day, that any Pope did command, Apolog.
38. and 64.
That any Prince, though an Heretic, though an Ethnicke, though a
Persecutour, should be murdered, or did allow the murder, when it was done by
an other. Bell. lib. s. de Pon. c. 8. and lib. 3. cap. 16.
Which assertion, the Apologer to improve, brings in examples first of
doctrine, that Bellarmyne himself does hold, That Princes upon just causes may
be deposed by Popes: and then of facts, That diverse Emperors have been
deposed, and great wars raised against them, by Popes, as Bellarmyne in his
works does confess, and cannot deny, and consequently does contradict
himself. But surely this seems to me a very simple opposition or
contradiction. For who does not see, that these things may well stand
together, are not opposite, and may be both true; That Popes upon just causes,
have waged wars against diverse Princes, and Potentates; and yet never caused
any to be unlawfully made away, murdered, or allowed of their murders
committed by others. For, may not we say justly, that warlike Princes are no
murderers, though in the Acts of wars themselves, many have been slain, by
their authority and commandment? Or may not we deliver our Judges of England,
from the crime of murder, though many men's deaths have proceeded from them,
by way of Justice? No man (I think) will deny it.

XXVIII. And so if some Popes have had just wars with some Princes, Kings or
Emperors, or have persuaded themselves, that they were just, in respect of
some supposed disorders of the said Princes (as here is mentioned the war,
and other hostile proceedings of Pope Gregory the seventh against the Emperor
Henry the fourth) this is not contrary to the saying of Cardinal Bellarmyne,
Touching Henry the 4.
That no Pope ever commanded any Prince to be murdered, or allowed thereof,
after it was done by an other. For as for that which here is affirmed by the
Apologer, That the Pope was enraged at the Emperor Henry the 5. Page 65. 66.
Platin. and Cusp. in vita Henrici 4.
for giving burial to his Fathers dead corpse, after the Pope had stirred him
up against his Father, and procured his ruin, neither proves the matter, nor
is altogether true, as here it is alleged. Not the first: for this proves
not, that the Pope either commanded or procured this death, which Bellarmyne
denied. Not the second: for that the two Authors by him cyted in his margent,
to wit, Platina and Cuspinian, do not auerre the same. For in Platina I find
no such thing at all; and Cuspinian his words are plain to the contrary:
Cusp. in Henrico quarto.
That when Henry the Father was dead, and buried in a Monastery at Liege, his
Son would not make peace with the Bishop of that place, called See Naucler.
part. 2. genesis 37. in anno 1106. and Crantz. lib. 5. Saxo. cap. 24.
Otbert, except the dead body were pulled out of the grave again, as it was,
and so remained for five years.

XXIX. And again Cuspinian writes, That the report was, that Gregory the 7.
did before his death absolve the Emperor; but that his Son Henry the 5. and
his followers never left to solicit the succeeding Popes until he was
excommunicated again, Cuspin. in Henrico 4.
and thereupon had afterward this Christian burial denied him. And how then,
is all this ascribed to the Pope, which proceeded from the Some against his
Father? Our Apologer says, That he was set on by the Pope to rebel against
him, but this his witnesses affirm not. For Cuspinian says that it was, Suasu
Marchionis Theobaldi, Berengarij Comitis Noricorum, and Ottonis sibi ex materna
s^irpe cognati. And in this commonly agree all other Authors, as Vrsperge^sis
in anno 1106.
Vrspergensis, who then lived, Crantz. in Saxo. lib. 5. cap. 17.
Crantzius, Sigon. de regno Italiae lib. 9. in anno 1105.
Sigonius, Nauclerus part. 2. genesis 37. in anno 1105. and alij.
Nauclerus, and others. And why then is this so unjustly laid upon the Pope?
What Author can he bring for it, that avouches the same? Why is it covertly
cast in, as though this matter apperteyned to Gregory the seventh, who in his
life had wars with Henry the fourth, but yet dyed before him? Here then
nothing is so apparent, as the desire to say much against Popes, with never so
little occasion, and less proof. But let us go forward.

XXX. In the second place he produces the approbation of the slaughter of the
late King of France by Pope Sixtus in his speech in the Consistory: But no
record of credit, either in Rome or elsewhere, can be found to testify, that any
such speech ever was had by Pope Sixtus. Apolog. page 66.
And I understand that diverse Cardinals are yet living, who were then present
in the first Consistory, after that news arrived, who deny that Sixtus ever
uttered any such words, as of the allowance of that horrible fact, though he
might, and did highly admire the strange providence of God, in chastising by so
unexpected a way, so foul and impious a murder, as that King had committed
upon a Prince, Bishop, and Cardinal (and those nearest of blood unto his
Majesty of England) without any form of judgment at all. And that a spectacle
heerby of Gods Justice was proposed unto Princes, The example of K. Henry the
3. of France his death.
to be moderate in their power, and passions: for that in the midst of his
great and Royal army, and corporal guardes, he was strangely slain by a
simple unarmed man, when nothing was less expected, or feared. Nor can any
thing be more improbable or ridiculous to be imagined, then that which is here
affirmed by our Apologer (and yet, he says, he is sure thereof) That this
friar, which killed the King, should have been canonized for the fact, if some
Cardinals, out of their wisdom, had not resisted the same. No such thing
being ever so much as imagined, or consulted of, as many do testify who were
then in Rome. So as nothing is more common here, then bold assertions without
witnesses.

XXXI. And the like may be said to his third example of the late Queen of
England, against whose life (he says) that so many practices, and attempts
were made, and directly i^ioyned to those traitors, by their Confessors, and
plainly authorized by the Popes allowance. Apolog. page 67.
So he says. But if a man would ask him, how he can prove, that those things
were so directly enjoined, and plainly authorized, what answer will he make?
You shall hear it in his own words, for he has but one: For verification
(says he) there needs no more proof, then that never Pope, either then or
since, called any Churchman in question, formedling in those treasonable
conspiracyes. And needs no more (Sir) but this, Priests put to death for
feigned co^spiracies.
to condemn both Confessors and Popes of conspiring the last Queens death,
That no Pope has called in question, or punished any Cleargy-man for such like
attempts? What i^ he never knew of any such attempt? What if he never heard of
any Clergyman to be accused thereof, except such as were put to death by the
Queen her self, either culpable or not culpable? What if he saw some such
ridiculous false devises, made against some Priests to make their whole company
and cause odious, as justly discredited with him all their other clamours and
calumnious accusations in that behalf? As that of Squier, induced (as was
said) by Fa. VValpole in Spain to poison the Queens chair, An. 1598.
or the Earl of Essex his sadd^e, which was so monstrous a fiction, and so
plainly proved for such in forrayne Countries (and so confessed by the
miserable fellow at his death) as took all credit from like devises in these
attemptes, of holding the Queen in perpetual frightes, to the end, she should
never attend to the true way of remedy.

XXXII. And with what little care of sincerity. or of punctual truth, all
these things are here, and elsewhere, cast out at random, to make a sound and
noise in the Readers ears, Facility and custom of ouerlashing.
appears sufficiently in the very next sequent words, wherein speaking of
Doctor Sanders he says: That whosoever will look upon his Books, will find
them filled with no other Doctrine then this. And will any man think it
probable or possible that so many books as Doctor Sanders has written, both
in Latin and English, and of so different arguments concerning Religion, have
no other Doctrine in them, but this of killing, and murdering of Princes? And
that other assertion also, that ensues within very few lines after, against
Cardinal Bellarmynes whole Works, That all his large and great Volumes are
filled with contradictions, whereof we are to treat more presently. Now only I
do note the facility, and custom of ouerlashing in this Apologer.

XXXIII. To conclude then about Queen Elizabeth. Albeit Pius Quintus, and some
other Popes did excommunicate her, and cut her of from the body of the
Catholic Church by Ecclesiastical Censures, in regard of her persecuting
Catholic Religion: yet did I never know it hitherto proved, that any Pope
procured or consented to any private violence against her person: albeit, if
the forealledged Statute of the 28. year of King Henry the 8. be true, wherein
it is determined both by the King himself, his Counsel, and whole Parliament,
as by the Archbishop Cranmer, with his Doctors, in his Judicial Seat of the
Arches, that Lady Elizabeth was not legitimate, nor that her mother was ever
King Henryes true wife (which once being true, could never afterward by any
humane power be made untrue, or amended to the prejudice of a third, rightly by
due succession interessed therein:) and if, Statut. an. 28. H. 8. c. 7
as the whole Parliament testified, it should be Against all honor, equity,
reason, and good conscience, that the said La. Elizabeth, should at any time
possess the said Crown, then the said Popes, Q. Elizab. against conscience
held the Crown from his Maiestyes Mother 44. years.
respecting in their said sentence (as it is certain they did) the actual
right of the Queen of France and Scotland, and of her noble issue his Ma.tie
that now is, they might proceed, as they did, against the other, for her
remouall (whom they held for an usurper) in favor of the true inheritours
oppressed by her, not only by spiritual, but temporal arms also, as against
a public Malefactor and intruder contrary to right and conscience. And I
cannot see, how this fawning Apologer, can either without open untruth, or
manifest injury to his Majesty, auerre the contrary. Which being true, does
greatly justify the endeauours and desires of all good Catholic people, both
at home and abroad against her, their principal meaning being ever known to
have been the deliverance, and preferment of the true Heir, most wrongfully
kept out, and iniustly persecuted for righteousness sake.

XXXIIII. This then being so, and nothing proved at all against Popes for their
murdering attempts against Princes, which Cardinal Bellarmyne denied: yet
this Apologer, as if he had proved much against him, in this point of
contradicting himself, he writes thus: But who can wonder at this
contradiction of himself in this point, when his own great Volumes are so
filled with contradictions, which when either he, or any other shall ever be
able to reconcile, I will then believe that he may easily reconcile this
impudent strong denial of his, in his letter, of any Popes meddling against
Kings. Wherein is to be noted first, that whereas Card.ll Bellarmine does deny
any Popes murdering of Princes, Unjust dealing against the Cardinal.
this man calls it, An impudent strong denial of any Popes meddling against
Kings, as though meddling, and murdering were all one. Is not this good
dealing? Truly if the Card.ll had denied, that ever any Pope had dealt, or
meddled against any King, or Prince, upon any occasion whatsoever, it had been
a strong denial indeed: but for so much, as he says no such thing, I marvel
of the Apologers proceeding in this behalf, for with the word impudent I will
not meddle. But let us hear him yet further. Ibid.


XXXV. And that I may not seem (says he) to imitate him, in affirming boldly
that, which I no ways can prove, I will therefore send the Reader, to look
for witnesses of his contradictions in such places here mentioned in his own
book. Thus he, very confidently, as you see, And verily I cannot but marvel,
that he knowing how many men of learning would look upon the places
themselves, (for I understand now also that the book is out in latin) would not
be ashamed in him self, to suffer their judgment of him and his doings in this
behalf: albeit he had not respected the Cardinals answer, which must needs be
with exceeding advantage against him, such as, in truth, I am ashamed for
Country sake, that strangers should laugh us to scorn for such manner of
writing. For if I do understand any thing, and that mine own eyes, and
judgment do not deceive me, this Apologer will remain under, in all and
every one of these oppositions, no one of them being defensible in the nature
of a true contradiction, Card. Bellarmynes Volumes much justified by these
objected contradictio^s.
and consequently Cardinal Bellarmynes great volumes of Controversies, will
not only, not be proved full of Contradictions by this taste here given, as is
pretended: but will rather be infinitely justified; that in so many great
Volumes, this Author has not been able to pick out any better contradictions
then these. Whereof again, I must say and avouch, that no one seems to me any
contradiction at all, if they be well examined.

XXXVI. And though I mean not to discuss them all in this place, nor the
greater part of them, they being eleven in number, as has been said, both for
breuityes sake, and not to peruent the Cardinals own Answer, and
satisfaction therein (which I doubt not but will be very sufficient, and
learned:) yet three or four I shall touch only, for examples sake, thereby to
give the Reader matter to make conjecture of the rest. This then he begins
his list of eleven contradictions against the said Cardinal.

XXXVII. First in his books of Justification (says he) Bellarmyne affirms,
The first supposed contradiction.
that for the uncertainty of our own proper righteousness, and for avoiding of
vain glory, it is most sure and safe, to repose our whole confidence in the
alone mercy and goodness of God: Bellar. de Justify. lib. 5. cap. 7. Apol. 68.
which proposition of his, is directly contrary to the discourse, and current
of all his five books De Iustificatione, wherein the same is contained etc. Of
this (...) contradiction we have said somewhat before, to wit, That it is
strange, that five whole books should be brought in, as contradictory to one
proposition. For how shall the Reader try the truth of this objection? Shall he
be bound to read all Bellarmynes five books, to see whether it be true or no?
Had it not been more plain dealing to have alleged some one sentence, or
conclusion contradictory to the other? But now shall we show, that there can be
no such contradiction betwixt the sentence of one part of his said Book of
Justification, and the whole discourse or current of the rest: for that
Bellarmyne does make all the matter clear, by soyling three several Questions
in one Chapter, which is the seventh of the fifth Book here cyted.

XXXVIII. The three Questions are these, Three Questions about Confidence in
merits answered by Bellarmine.
about Fiducia, quae in meritis collocari possit, what hope and confidence, may
be placed, by a Christian man, in his good works, and merits. The first
Question is, whether good works, in a Christian man, do increase hope and
confidence by their own nature, and the promise of reward made unto them? And
Bellarmyne answers that they do: and proves it by many Toby the 4. where it
is said: That almsdeeds shall give great confidence, and hope to the doers
thereof in the sight of God. Tob. 4.
And Job says: That he which lives justly, Job. 11.
shall have great confidence, and hope, and shall sleep securely. And S. Paul
to Timothy says: That whosoever shall minister well, 1. Tim. 3.
shall have great confidence, etc. And I omit diverse other plain places of
Scriptures, and Fathers there alleged by him, which the Reader may there
peruse to his comfort, showing evidently, that the conscience of a virtuous
life, and good works, does give great confidence to a Christian man, both
while he lives, and especially when he comes to dye.

XXXIX. The second Question is, whether this being so, a man may place any
confidence wittingly in his own merits, or virtuous life. And it is answered,
That he may; so it be with due circumstances of humility, for avoiding pride,
and presumption. For that a man feeling the effect of Gods grace in himself,
whereby he has been directed to live well, may also hope, that God will crown
his gifts in him, as S. Augustines words are. And many examples of Scriptures
are alleged there by Card.ll Bellarmyne of sundry holy Saints, Prophets and
Apostles, that upon just occasion mentioned their own merits, as g^^ts from
God that gave them hope and confidence of his merciful reward: and namely that
saying of S. Paul: I have fought a good fight, I have consummated my course, I
have kept my faith, etc. and then adds, 2. Tim. 4.
that in regard hereof, Reposita est mihi Corona Iustitiae, A crown of Justice
is laid up for me, which God the just Judge shall restore unto me.

Bellarmyne answers, in the words set down by the Apologer, That for the
uncertainty of our own proper Justice, and for avoiding the peril of vain
glory, the surest way is to repose all our confidence in the only mercy and
benignity of God; The su^me of Cardinal Bellarmynes discourse and Answer.
from whom and from whose grace our merits proceed. So as albeit Card.ll
Bellarmyne does confess, that good life, and virtuous acts do give hope, and
confidence of themselves, and that it is lawful also by the example of
ancient Saints, for good men to comfort themselves with that hope and
confidence: yet the surest way is to repose all in the benignity and mercy of
almighty God, who gives all, and is the Author, as well of the grace, as of
the merits, and fruits of good works that eusue thereof. And thus has
Cardinal Bellarmyne fully explicated his mind in this one Chapter, about
Confidence in good works, by soluing the foresaid three different Questions,
whereof the one is not contrary to the other, but may all three stand together.
And how then is it likely, that the foresaid proposition, of reposing our
Confidence in the mercy of God, should be contradictory, as this man says, to
the whole discourse and current of all his five Books of Justification? Let
one only sentence be brought forth, out of all these five Books that is truly
contradictory, and I shall say he has reason in all the rest of his
ouerlashing.

XLI. His second objected contradiction is as good as this, The second supposed
contradictio^ about Moraliter.
which he sets down in these words. Bellar. de amiss. great. and stat.
peccat. l. 2. c. 13.
God (says Bellarmine) does not incline a man to evil, either naturally or
morally: and presently after he affirms the contrary, saying: Ibid. paul^
post.
That God does not incline to evil naturally but morally. But this is a plain
fallacy of the Apologer, for that the word morally is taken here in two
different senses, which himself could not but see. For first Card.ll Bellarmyne
having set down the former proposition, That God does not incline a man to
evil, either Physice vel Moraliter, naturally or morally, he expounds what
is understood by each of these terms, to wit, That Natural or Physical
concurrence is, when God concurreth to the substance of the action, as moving
or impelling a man's will: but Moral concurrence is, when he does command or
ordain any sin to be done. As for example, If a great man should concur to
the murder of another, he may do it in two manners, either Naturally or
Phisically, concurring to the action it self of poisoning, strangling, or the
like: or Morally, by counselling or commanding the same to be done, which is
properly called Moral concurrence. And by none of these two ways, God does
concur to the committing of a sin.

XLII. But there is a third way of concurring, Occasional co^currence to a
sin what it is.
termed Occasionalicer, occasionally, or by giving occasion, which improperly
also may be called Moral: and this is, When God seeing an evil man
euill-disposed, to do this or that sin, though he do not concur thereunto
by any of the foresaid two ways, of assisting or commanding the action to be
done: yet does he, by his divine providence, and goodness, make occasions so to
fall our, as this sin, and not that, is committed; and consequently it may be
said, That almighty God, without any fault of his, or concurrence in any o^ the
forsaid two ways, has been the Occasional cause of this sin. Genesis 37.
As for example, we read in Genesis, That when the brethren of Joseph were
obstinately bent to kill him, God, by the pulling by of certain I smaelites,
Merchants of Galaad, gave occasion of his selling into Egypt; so as he was
herby some Occasional, or Moral cause of this lesser sin, for eschewing the
greater, but not in the former sense of Moral concurrence, which includes
also commandment.

XLIII. This Occasional concurrence then, though in some large sense, it may
be called also Moral: yet is it much different from the former, and
consequently, the one may be affirmed, and the other denied, without any
contradiction at all. And so this second observation against Cardinal
Bellarmyne, is wholly impertinent: for that Contradictio must be in eodem,
respectu eiusdem, which here is not verifyed. For that when the Cardinal
says in the first place, That God does not co^curre Morally to sin, he
means by co^mau^ding or counselling the same: and when in the later place, he
grau^teth, That God does co^curre somtymes Morally, he means by giving
occasion only for this sin to be committed, rather then that, which is a
plain different thing.

XLIIII. And of the same quality is the third Contradiction, The third supposed
contradictio^, about Bishops succeeding of the Apostles.
set down by the Apologer in these words: All the Fathers teach constantly
(says Bellarmyne) that Bishops do succeed the Apostles, and Priests the
seauenty disciples. And then in another part of his works, he affirms the
contrary: That Bishops do not properly succeed the Apostles. But whosoever
shall look upon the places here quoted, Bellarm. de Cler. lib. 1. cap. 14.
shall find this to be spoken in diverse senses, to wit, that they succeed
them in power of Episcopal Order, and not in power of Jurisdiction, and other
extraordinary privileges: Lib. 4. de Po^tif. c. 25.
so as both those do well stand together. And the like I say of the 4.
contradiction objected, which is, That Judas did not believe: and yet in an
other place, The 4. co^tradiction about Judas.
That Judas was just, and certainly good: which is no contradiction at all, if
we respect the two several times, whereof Cardinal Bellarmyne does speak,
Lib. 1. de Pontif. c. 12. Lib. 3. de Iustif. cap. 14. Io. in. 6.
proving first, out of S. John's Gospel, by the interpretation of S. Hierome,
that Judas at the beginning was good, and did believe; and then by other words
of Christ in the same Evangelist, uttered a good while after the Apostles
vocation, That he was a dyuell. and believed not. And who but our Apologer,
would found a co^tradictio^ against so learned a man as Bellarmyne is, upon a
manifest Equivocation of times, whereby he may no less argue with Bellarmyne
for calling S. Paul an Apostle and persecutour, and Nicolaus an elect of the
holy Ghost, and yet an Heretic, for that the one was a Persecutour first, and
then an Apostle, and the other first a chosen Deacon by the holy Ghost, and
afterward an Heretic, possessed by the devil, as most do hold.

XLV. But I should do injury (as before I said) both unto Cardinal Bellarmyne
and my self, if I should go about to answer these supposed contradictions at
length. To the Cardinal, in preventing him, that will do it much better. Unto
my self, in spending time in a needles labor, for so much as every one of
mean judgment, that will but look upon the books, and places themselves
here cyted, will discover the weakness of these objections, and that they have
more will, then ability to disgrace Cardinal Bellarmyne.

XLVI. After the obiecting then of these devised contradictions, our Apologer
returns again to exagitate yet further the foresaid saying of Bellarmyne,
The Apologer returns to calumniate Popes.
That neither his Majesty, nor other King has need to fear any danger to his
Royal Person, by acknowledging the Popes spiritual authority in his Kingdom,
more then other Christians, and Monarchs have done heretofore, or do now in
other Kingdoms round about him, who admit the same Authority and have done
even from the beginning of their Christianity, without any such dangers of
murder incurred thereby. Whereupon this Apologer makes a large new excursion,
numbering up a great Catalogue of contentions, that have fallen out, between
some Popes and Emperors, and the said Emperors received hurtes, domages, and
dangers thereby, and consequently had cause to fear, contrary to that which
Bellarmyne writes.

XLVII. And in this enumeration the Apologer brings in the example of the
Emperor Henry the 4. brought to do penance at the Castle of Canusium,
Examples objected of Princes molested by Popes.
by Pope Gregory the seventh; as also of the Emperor Frederick the first,
forced by Pope Alexander the third to lie agroofe (as his word is) on his
belly, and suffer the other to tread on his neck: Of the Emperor Philip, that
is said to have been slain by Otho at the Popes motion; and that in respect
thereof, Apolog. page 72. 73.
the said Otho going to Rome, was made Emperor, though afterward the Pope
deposed him also: Of the Emperor Frederick the second, excommunicated, and
deprived by Pope Innocentius the fourth, who in Apulia corrupted one to give
him poison, and this not taking effect, hired one Manfredus to poison him,
whereof he dyed: That Pope Alexander the third wrote to the Soldane to murder
the Emperor, and sent him his picture to that effect: That Pope Alexander the
sixth, caused the brother of Baiazetes the Turkish Emperor, named Gemen, to be
poisoned at his brothers request, and had two hundred thousand crowns for the
same: That our King Henry the second, besides his going barefooted in
pilgrimage, was whipped up and down the Chapter-howse, like a schoole-boy, and
glad to escape so too: That the Father of the modern King of France, was
deprived by the Pope of the Kingdom of Navarre, and himself (I mean this King
of France) forced to beg so submissiuely the relaxation of his
excommunication, as he was content to suffer his Ambassador to be whipped at
Rome for penance.

XLVIII. All these examples are heaped together to make a muster of witnesses,
for proof of the dangers wherein Princes persons are, or may be, by
acknowledging the Popes Supreme Authority. But first in perusing of these, I
find such a heap indeed of exaggerations, additions, wrestings, and other
vnsyncere dealings, as would require a particular Book to refute them at
large. And the very last here mentioned of the present King of France, may show
what credit is to be given to all the rest, to wit, That he suffered his
Ambassador to be whipped at Rome, and the latin Interpreter turns it, Vt
Legatum suum Romae virgis caesum passus sit: as though he had been scourged
with rodds upon the bare flesh, or whipped up and down Rome; whereas so many
hundreds being yet alive that saw that Ceremony (which was no more, but the
laying on, or touching of the said Ambassadors shoulder with a long white wand
upon his apparel, in token of submitting himself to Ecclesiastical
discipline) it makes them both to wonder, and laugh at such monstrous
assertions, coming out in print: and with the same estimation of punctual
fidelity do they measure other things here avouched.

IXL. As for example, Touching K. Henry the second.
that our King Henry the second was whipped up and down the Chapter House, and
glad that he could escape so too, for which he cyteth Houeden, and this he
insinuates to be, Houed. pa. 303.
by order of the Pope: in respect whereof (he says) the King had just cause to
be afraid. But the Author does plainly show the contrary, first setting down
the Charter of the Kings absolution, Ibi. pa. 308.
where no such penna^ce is appointed: and secondly after that again in
relating the voluntary pennances which the King did at the Sepulcher of S.
Thomas, See Baron. in an. 1177. subfinem.
for being some occasion of his death, does refute thereby this narration, as
fraudulent, and vnsyncere, that the King was whipped like a schoolboy by order
of the Pope, as though it had not come from his own free choice, and devotion.

L. That other instance of the Emperor, that lay agroofe on his belly (which I
suppose he means of Frederick the first) and suffered Pope Alexander the
third to tread on his neck, is a great exaggeratio^, and refuted, as fabulous,
by many reasons, and authorityes of Baronius, to whom I remit me. The other in
like manner of Celestinus the Pope, that should with his foot beat of the
Crown from the head of Henry the sixth Emperor, being only mentioned first of
all others by Houeden an English Author, and from him taken by Ranulph of
Chester, no other writer of other nations, either present at his Coronation as
Godesridus Viterbiensis his Secretary, or others afterward as In vita Celestini
Platina, part. 2. genesis 40. in anno 1190.
Nauclerus, Tom. 2. Ennead. li. 5
Sabellicus, in anno 1190.
Blondus, Lib. 15. in Henrico 6.
Sigonius, Lib. 7. Saxon. cap. 3. and alij.
Crantzius, so much as mentioning the same, though yet they write of his
Coronation, Vrspergensis page 310. Sigonius li. 15. in fine c. 13. Crantzius in
sua Saxonia li. 7. cap. 28. Nauclerus. part. 2. genesis 41. in An. 1208. idem
Cuspinianus, Crusius and alij.
makes it improbable, and no less incredible then the former.

LI. That also of the Emperor Philip, affirmed to be slain by Otho his
opposite Emperor, at the incitation of Pope Innocentius the third, is a mere
slander. For that, according to all histories, not Otho the Emperor, but an
other Otho named of VVitilispack* a private man and one of his own Court, upon
a private grudge, did slay him. And albeit Vrspergensis, that followed the
faction of the Emperors against the Popes, do write, that he had heard
related by some the speech here set down, that Innocentius should lay, That
he would take the Crown from Philip, or Philip should take the Myter from him:
yet he says expressly, Quod non erat credendum, that it was not to be believed.
And yet is it cyted here, by our Apologer, as an undoubted truth, upon the
only authority of Vrspergensis in the margent.

LII. The like may be said of the tale of Frederick the second, attempted to
have been poisoned, first in Apulia by Pope Innocentius the 4. and afterward
effectuated by one Mansredus, as hired by the Pope: which is a very tale in
deed, and a malicious tale. For that he which shall read all the Authors that
write of his life, or death, as In vita Innoc^^tij 4
Platina (whom the Protestants hold for free in speaking evil of diverse
Popes) Li. 2. Decad. lib. 7.
Blondus, Tomo 2. Enne. 9. l. 6. non long ante finem.
Sabellicus, Part 2. genesis 41. an. 1247.
Nauclerus, Lib. 8. ca. 18. si^e Saxoniae.
Crantzius, In fine lib. 18.
Sigonius, and others, shall find, that as they write very wicked things
committed by him in his life: so talking of his first danger in Apulia by
grievous sickness, they make for the most part no mention of poison at all, and
much less as procured by the Pope Innocentius, praised Blond. vbi supra.
for a very holy man, and to have proceeded justly against Frederick. And
secondly for his death, they agree all, that it was not by poison, but by
stopping his breath and stifelyng him in his bed with a pillow, by Mansredus
his own bastard Son, to whom he had given the Princedome of Tarentum, for
fear least he should take it from him again, and bestow it upon Conradus his
other soon. But that the Pope was privy to this, or hired him to do the fact,
as our Apologer affirms; there is no one word or syllable in these Authors
thereof.

LIII. But you will say, that he cyteth one Petrus de Vineis in his margent,
Petrus de Vineis lib. 2. epist. 2. and Cusp. in vita Frederici 2.
and Cuspinian in the life of Frederick, both which are but one Author; for
that Cuspinian professes to take what he says, out of Petrus de Vineis, which
Petrus was a servant to Frederick, and a professed enemy to the Pope, and
wrote so partially of this contention, as Pope Innocentius himself wrote Libros
Apologeticos (as Blondus records) Apologeticall Books to coniute the lies of
this Petrus de Vineis in his life time: Blondus Ibid.
And yet you must note, that he avouches not all that our Apologer does, nor
with so much stomach, or affirmative assertion. For thus relates Cuspinian
the matter, out of Petrus de Vineis: Non potuit cauere, etc. The Emperor could
not avoid, but when he returned into Apulia he perished with poison, the 37.
year of his reign, and 57. of his age, on the very same day that he was made
Emperor. For whereas at the town of Florenzola in Apulia, having received
poison he was dangerously sick, and at length, by diligence of Physicians, had
overcome the same, he was stifeled by Mansredus his bastard son, begotten of
a noble woman his Concubine, with a pillow thrust into his mouth, whether it
were, that Mansredus did it, as corrupted by his enemies, or by the Pope, or
for that he did aspire to the Kingdom of Sicilia. So he.

LIVE. And albeit, as you see, he says more herin against the Pope, then any of
the other Authors before mentioned, Enforcing of matters against the Pope.
for that he desired to cast some suspicions upon him: yet does he it not with
that bold asseueration, that our Apologer does, saying: That both his first
sickness was by poison, of the Popes procurement, and his murdering afterward
by hyring of Manfredus to poison him again: whereas the other ascribes not
the first poisoning to the Pope (if he were poisoned) neither does so much as
mention the second poison, but only the stifeling, and finally leaves it
doubtful, whether the same proceeded from the Emperors enemies, or from the
Pope, or from his Sons own ambition, and emulation against his brother.

LV. To the other objection, or rather calumniation out of Paulus Iouius,
Apolog. page 73.
that Alexander the third did write to the Soldane, That if he would live
quietly, he should procure the murder of the Emperor, sending him his picture
to that end: It is answered, that no such thing is found in that second book
of Iouius, by him here cyted, nor elsewhere in that History, so far as by some
diligence used I can find: and it is not likely, it should be found in him,
for so much as he begins his History with matters only of our time, some
hundreds of years after Alexander the third his death.

LVI. So as the only chief accusation, About the death of Gemen or Sizimus
brother to the great Turk.
that may seem to have some ground against any Pope, in this catalogue, for
procuring the death of any Prince, is that which he alleges out of
Cuspinian, that Alexander the sixth took two hundred thousand Crowns of
Baiazetes Emperor of the Turks, to cause his brother Gemen to be put to
death, whom he held captive at Rome, which he performed (says our Apologer)
by poison, and had his pay; this I say, has most appearance: for that some
other Authors also besides do relate the same, affirming, That albeit Prince
Gemen the Turk, when he dyed, either at Caieta, or Naples, or Capua, (for in
this they differ) was not the Popes prisoner, but in the hands of Charles the
8. King of France, who took him from Rome with him, when he passed that way
with his army: yet that the common fame or rumor was, that Pope Alexander the
sixth, had part therein, or, as Cuspinias words are, Pontifice non ignorante,
the Pope not unwitting thereof. Lib. 2. hist*
The reason of which report Guicciardine alleges to be this, to wit, That
the evil nature and condition of Pope Alexander, which was hateful to all
men, made any iniquity to be believed of him. In vita Alexand. sexti.
Onuphrius Panuinus writes that he dyed in Capua of a bloody flux without any
mention of poison. And Ennead. 10. lib. 9.
Sabellicus before him again, relates the matter doubtfully saying; Fuerunt
qui crederent, eum veneno sublatum, etc. There were some that believed, that he
was made away by poison, and that Alexander the Pope was not ignorant thereof;
for that he was so alienate in mind from the Frenchmen, that he was loath
they should take any good by him: Thus we see, that the matter is but
doubtfully and suspiciously related only, and the Frenchmen being angry for
his death, by whom they hoped great matters, might easily brute abroad a false
rumor, for their own defense in that behalf.

LVII. But as for the two hundred thousand crowns, though Iouius do say, that
they were offered by Bajazet, as also Vestis inconsutilis Christi, The garment
of our Savior without seame: yet does he not say, that they were received,
either the one, or the other. So as whatsoever evil is mentioned of any Pope,
our Apologer makes it certain: and when it is but little, he will enlarge it
to make it more: and when it is spoken doubtfully, he will affirm it for a
certaynty: wherein he discovers his own humor against Popes, and thereby
limiteth the Readers faith in believing him; though we do not take upon us to
defend the lives and facts of all particular Popes, but their faith and
authority; being forewarned by our Savior, that upon the Chair of Moses
shall fit Scribes and Pharisyes, whom we must obey, in that they teach, and
not follow or imitate, in that they do. And this shall serve for this point:
Card.ll Bellarmyne, I doubt not, will be more large. If a man would go about to
discredit Kingly authority, by all the misdeeds of particular Kings that have
been registered by Historiographers, since the time that Popes began, he should
find, no doubt, abundant matter, and such, as could not be defended by any
probability. And yet does this preiudicate nothing to Princely power or
dignity, and much less in our case, where the facts themselves objected, are
either exaggerated, increased, wrested, or altogether falsified.

The third Part of this Paragraph.
THERE remains the last part of Apolog. page 78.
which consists in the examining all the Authorityes and Sentences of ancient
Fathers, alleged by him in the same. As first of all, the comparison of the
art, and deceit used by Julian the Emperor, Nazian. orat. 1. in Julian.
surnamed Apostata, and recounted by S. Gregory Nazianzen, in placing, and
inserting the images of his false Gods, into the pictures of the Emperor, in
his Imperial banner: so, as no man could bow down, The example of Iulians
ba^ner examined.
or reverence the Emperors picture, (as then was the custom) but that he must
adore also the images of the false Gods. Which art of temperament, the
Cardinal does compare unto this mixture and combination of clauses lawful,
and unlawful, Cyuill, and Ecclesiastical in the Oath proposed; so as a man
can not swear the one, but he must swear also the other. Which similitude,
although it do express most fitly the matter in hand; yet the Apologer being
sorely pressed therewith seeks many euasions to euacuate the same, by
searching out dissimilitudes, and saying; That albeit a similitude may be
admitted claudicare vno pede, to limp, or halt on one foot: yet this (says
he) is lame, both of feet and hands, and every member of the body: And then he
takes upon him to set down at length the diuersityes that may be picked out.
As first, that Julian was an Apostata, but our Sovereign is a Christian: he
changed the Religion which he once professed, but our King not: he became an
Ethnicke, or an Atheist, our King is not ashamed of his profession: Julian
dealt against Christians, but his Ma.tie deals only to make a distinction
between true subjects, and false-harted traitors. And so he goes forward to
weary his Reader with many more like diuersityes, which must needs be loathsome
to every man of mean judgment, who know that a similitude requires not parity
in all points (for then it should be idem, and not simile) but only in the
point wherein the comparison is made, as here in the compounding and couching
together of lawful and unlawful things in the Oath, as the other did in his
banner.

LIX. For if a man would tryfle, as our Apologer does, and seek out
differences between things, that are compared together, as like in some
certain points, Similitudes hold not in all.
but unlike in other; we should overthrow all similitudes whatsoever, and
consequently we should eneruate many most heavenly speeches of our Savior in
the Gospel, that stand upon similitudes. As for example: Be you wise as
Serpents, and simple as Doves. What enemy of Christian Religion might not
cavil, Matthew. 10.
and calumniate this? seeking out diuersityes betwixt a serpent and a man, and
between the malicious craft of that malignant creature, and the wisdom that
ought to be in a prudent man. But it is sufficient that the similitude do hold
in that particular point, wherein Christ made the comparison. And so again,
When our Savior makes the comparison between the Kingdom of heaven, and the
little grain of mustard seed; who cannot find out infinite differences between
the one and the other, Matthew. 13.
making the similitude to halt and limp in many more parts, Mar. 4.
then it can go upright. But it is sufficient, Luc. 13.
that it stand, and halt not in that one point, wherein the comparison is made.

LX. I pass over many other like similitudes, Ibid.
as that the Kingdom of heaven, is like to a man that sows good seed in his
field: As also it is like to leaven, which a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal, until the whole was leauened: It is like also to a treasure
hid in the ground; and to a Merchant man, that seeks good margarites, and
precious stones: And unto a net cast into the sea, and gathering together of
all kind of fishes. Who cannot (I say) find out differences and diuersityes, if
he would study for them in all these similitudes used by our Savior. For as
for the last of the net, that gathers together perforce, good and bad fish
in the sea, seems hard to be applied to the Kingdom of heaven, whether we
understand it, either of Gods Kingdom in the next world, or of the Church in
this; for that in the next world good and bad are not admitted; and in this
world, the Church of Christ gathers none perforce, as the net does. But yet
in the point it self, wherein Christ our Savior made the comparison, the
similitude does hold; and that is sufficient to show the impertinent endeavor
of this Apologer here, to seek out diuersityes, that appertain not to the
point wherein the comparison is made.

LXI. The next example which our Apologer seeks Eleazar in the book of
Machabees, who rather then he would do a thing unlawful, and against his own
conscience, 2. Match. 6.
or that might be scandalous to others, he refused not to suffer all kind of
torments; which the Cardinal applies to the taking of this unlawful Oath,
About the example of Eleazar.
by such as are Catholics, but especially by the Archpriest, head of the
Clergy in England, whose case he presumes to be more like to that of Eleazar,
for his age, estimation, and authority above the rest. To which example the
Apologer answers thus: Apol. page 81.
That if the Arch-priests ground of refusing this Oath were as good as Eleazars
was, for refusing to eat of the swynes-flesh that was proposed, and urged unto
him, it might not unfitly be applied to his purpose: But the ground failing,
(says he) the building cannot stand. But this is an escape much like the
former, that runs quite from the matter: for that the Cardinal supposes a
Catholic conscience in him to whom he writes, to which conscience it is as
repugnant to swear any thing, sounding against any point of Catholic
Religion or Doctrine, as it was to Eleazar to eat swynes-flesh, against the
law of Moses. Which supposition being made, and that in the Cardinals
judgment, this Oath conteyneth diverse clauses prejudicial to some points of
the said Catholice belief and doctrine concerning the authority of the Sea
Apostolic, and that the taking thereof would not only be hurtful to the
taker, but offensive also, and scandalous to many other of that Religion, both
at home and abroad; the application of this example of Eleazar was most fit and
effectual. Let us see what ensues of the rest of the Authorityes.

LXII. The third example is of S. Basil surnamed The great, who being most
earnestly exhorted (as Theodoret recounteth the story) by Modestus the deputy
of Valens the Arrian Emperor, Apol. page 84.
sent of purpose to that effect, that he should acco^modate himself to the said
Emperors will, Theodoret lib. 4. c. 19.
and present time, and not suffer so many great Churches to be abandoned (for
that all such bishops, The tentation of S. Basil by the Deputy Modestus.
as would not accommodate themselves were sent into banishment) for a little
needles subtility of doctrines, not so much to be esteemed: offering him also,
the friendship of the Emperor, and many other great benefits to ensue, both to
him and others, if he would in this point show himself conformable. But this
holy and prudent man (says the Cardinal) answered, That it was not to be
endured, that any one syllable of Diuinoru^ dogmatum.
dyuine doctrynes, should be corrupted, or neglected; but rather, that for the
defense thereof, all kind of torment was to be embraced. Out of which example
the Cardinal does gather, how strict and wary a good man must be, in yealding
to any thing never so little, that is preiudicall to the integrity of Catholic
doctrine: and it seems very fit to the purpose, and the cases somewhat like.

LXIII. Yet does our Apologer by all means possible seek to wype of, or
weaken all that can be inferred out of this example. Page 84.
And first of all, he begins with a mere calumniation thus: First I must
observe (says he) that if the Cardinal would leave a common and ordinary
trick of his, A cavil against Bellarmyne.
in all citations, which is, to take what makes for him, and leave out what
makes against him, and would cite the Authors sense, as well as the sentence;
we should not be so much troubled with answering the Ancients which he
alleges. And to instance it in this very place, if he had continued his
allegation but one line further; he should have found this place of Theodoret,
of more force, to have moved Blackwell to take the Oath, then to have dissuaded
him from it. For in the very next words it follows (in S. Basils speech:) I
do esteem greatly the Emperors friendship, if it be joined with piety, but
without it, I hold it for pernicious. So he.

LXIV. And do these words last adjoined make any thing at all for our Apologer?
Or rather agree they not fitly to the purpose of the Cardinals exhortation,
though for breuityes sake he left them out? How then is their omission brought
in for a proof of A common and ordinary trick of the Cardinals, in all his
citations, to take only that which is for him, and leave out what makes against
him? How is this against him? Or how does this show any such ordinary trick of
falsehood in the Cardinal, not in one or two, but in all his citations? Does
this man care what he says? This then is one shift, to answer this Ancient,
or rather Anticke, as here he is made. Let us see an other.

LXV. His second is by taking advantage of translation out of the Greek,
Another shift against S. Basils testimony.
in which Theodoret wrote his story, or rather by perverting the same in some
points to his purpose. For which cause he repeateth again the substance of
the history in these words: But that it may appear (says he) whether of us
has greater right to this place (of Theodoret about S. Basil) I will in few
words show the Authous drift. Aplo. Page 84. and 85.
The Emperor Valens being an Arrian, at the persuasion of his wife, when he
had deprived all the Churches of their Pastors, came to Caesarea, where S.
Theodoret lib. 4. cap. 19. graece. latin cap. 17.
Basil was then Bishop; who, as the story reports, was the light of the
world. Before he came, he sent his Deputy to work it, that S. Basil should
hold fellowship with Eudoxius (which Eudoxius was Bishop of Constantinople and
the principal of the Arrian faction) or if he would not, that he should put
him to banishment. Now when the Emperors Deputy came to Caesarea, Compare this
to our times.
he sent for Basil, entreated him honorably, spoke pleasingly unto him, desired
he would give way to the time, neither that he would hazard the good of so many
Churches tenui exquisitione dogmatis, promised him the Emperors favor, and
himself to be Mediator for his good. But S. Basil answered, These intising
speeches were fit to be used to children, that use to gape after such things.
But for them that were thoroughly instructed in Gods word, they could never
suffer any syllable thereof to be corrupted. Nay, if need required, they would
for the maintenance thereof, refuse no kind of death. In deed the love of the
Emperor ought to be greatly esteemed with Piety; but Piety taken away, it was
pernicious.

LXVI. This is the truth of the story (says he:) and I have laid down at
length his declaration, to the end that his sleightes may the better appear in
eluding the force of this Answer of S. Basil, as though he had said only, that
no syllable of Gods word was to be suffered to be corrupted, whereas his meaning
was, not only of Gods word, or of Scriptures alone, but, Ne vnam quidem
syllabam diuinorum dogmatum, Crafty conueia^ce in translating.
not any one syllable of dyuine doctrine, taught by the Catholic Church, and
so much import his words in greek, which are guylfully here translated: for
that instead of the forealleadged sentence, wherein consists the substance of
the said answer, to wit: That for them that are thoroughly instructed in Gods
word, they can never suffer any syllable thereof to be corrupted, he should
have said: (...)
That they that have been brought up and nourished in sacred learning, cannot
suffer any one syllable of dyuine doctrynes (of the Church) to be violated,
which is conform also to S. Basils purpose in hand. For that the controversy,
which he and other Catholic Bishops had with the Arrian Doctors in those
days, was not only, nor immediately about the Scriptures out of which the
Arrians alleged more abundantly then their adversaries, but about certain
doctrynes determined by the Church, especially by the Council of Nice, as
namely about the use of the words and doctrines of hom^sion, or
consubstantiality, hypostasis, substance, person, trinity, and other the like;
and whether they should say Gloria Patriet Filio, or Gloria Patri cum Filio; or
in Filio, and such other differences, which unto the Deputy Modestus, seemed
but small matters and subtilityes of doctrine, but to S. Basil matters of great
moment: for so much as they were now determined by the Church, and thereby made
Diuina dogmata, Divine doctrines, though they were not all expressly found in
Scriptures. So as this slight in tra^slating S. Basils answer, That such as
were thoroughly instructed in Gods word could never suffer any syllable thereof
to be corrupted (as though he had meant only of Scripturs) is not sincere,
neither agreeable either unto the letter of the Greek text, or meaning of S.
Basil.

LXVII. Let us see then his third shift, The third shift.
to put of this matter, which is the same that before we have mentioned in the
first example of Julian, to wit, by seeking out differences, and disparityes,
between the clauses or members that are compared together, saying: That
albeit Basil and the Archpriest may have some comparison; yet not our
Orthodoxe King with an Arrian Emperor. Basil was solicited to become an
Arrian: but the Archpriest, not once touched for any article of faith. And so
he goes forward with many contrapositions. But I have spoken sufficiently
before of the weakness of this manner of argument. And if we remove the mentions
of some persons, that may be offensive, the matters themselves will easily
discover their conformity. For if you had demanded Modestus the Deputy then,
in favor of what religion would he have S. Basil to conform himself and
subscribe; he would have said the Orthodoxe, no less then the Judges of
England do now, that require this Oath: And yet did not S. Basil think so.
Wherein the comparison of S. Basil and Modestus may be like in our days.
And if any man should have called that Emperor an Arrian, it would have been
no less offensive, then to call a Protestant-Prince at his day, a Caluinist or
Lutheran; notwithstanding that the reason of difference between the Catholics
and Arrians at that day, be the same, that is between Catholics and
Protestants at this day: to wit, the following, or impugning of the universal
known Church, descending from Christ's time, unto Saint Basils, and from Saint
Basils to ours.

LXVIII. There remain yet 3. or 4. other examples mentioned by the Cardinal
in his Epistle to the Archpriest, whereof the first two are of S. Peter, and
Marcellinus the Pope, whose fortitude and diligence in rising again, he
desires him to imitate, if perhaps he followed their infirmity in falling. The
other two, are of S. Gregory, Three or 4. examples together.
and S. Leo, two holy and learned Popes, and for that cause both of them
surnamed the Great, who do set down in diverse places, the obligation that all
Catholic Christian men have, to hold union and subordination with the Sea
Apostolic. Unto the first two examples, as there is little said, but
disparityes only sought out, between Peter and Marcellinus, and the story also
of Marcellinus called in question; so I leave the same to the Cardinal
himself to treat more at large: for so much, as in his former books, and
works, he has handled the same sufficiently; as also the third objection,
made against S. Gregory, about refusing the name of Universal Bishop. And the
same I must say of the 4. also, S. Leo, whom the Apologer confesses to be
truly alleged against him, Apol. page 94.
for exalting the Authority of S. Peter, and firmitie of his faith, which he
puts of with this scoff borrowed from D. John Reynolds his book of
Conference in the Tower, Reynoldes Conference. ca. 1. diuis. 2. Cicero in
Horten.
That as Tully said to Hortensius the Orator, when he praised immoderatly
eloquence, That he would lift her up to heaven, that himself might go up with
her: so would S. Leo lift up S. Peter with praises to the sky, that he being
his heir, might go up also, and be exalted with him.

LXIX. And after this scorn, he picketh out diverse sentences of S. Leo his
works, The Apologers impugnation of S. Leo.
which seem somewhat odious, and to contain overmuch praise, and exaltation
of S. Peter, and his Authority; all taken out of the said Reynolds Book, as
Reynoldes himself had taken the greatest part of the^ out of M. Jewel, to
whom the same was very sufficiently answered before by D. Harding, and the
most of them showed to be mere calumniations. The first and chief whereof is
this, Leo Sermon. 3. suae assumpt. and epistola 89. ad Episcopu^ Vie^nens.
That our Lord did take S. Peter into the fellowship of indivisible unity;
which S. Leo his adversaries going about to wrest to an absurd sense, to wit,
that this indivisible unity must either be in person, or nature with Christ, D.
Harding shows plainly by S. Leo his own words, sense, and drift, that he
meant it only of the indivisible unity or fellowship of the high name of Rock
of the Church, which Christ our Savior the chief and fundamental Rock
imparted to none, but to S. Peter, and consequently that unity of name of Rock
was indivisible between them: which if either M. Jewel, or M. Reynolds, or our
Apologer would have equally considered, they needed not to go about to disgrace
so ancient a Father with so mere a cavil: or at leastwise it being once
answered, they ought not to have so often repeated it again, without some new
matter, or reason for the same, or impugnation of the former answer.

LXX. But I will not trouble you with any more at this time, albeit there ensue
in the Apology diverse other points that might be stood upon, not for that they
conteyne any great substance of matter, but for that they seem to proceed out
of no small auersion of mind, acerbity, and gall in the writer, against all
sorts of Catholic people: which CHRIST JESUS amend and mollify, and give him
light from heaven to see the truth, that he so bitterly impugneth.

LXXI. And as he deals with S. Leo, so does he much more in the same kind
with D.or Sanders, and Cardinal Bellarmine, Great injury offered to Car. Bell.
about Kingly authority.
cyting out of their works, diverse sentences culled and laid together, that
seem less respective to the Authority of temporal Kings and Princes, and all
this to incite more his Ma.tie against them, and those of their Religion: and
finally, against the Cardinal, he concludes in these words: That God is no
more contrary to Belial, light to darkness, and heaven to hell, then Bellarmines
estimation of Kings is to Gods. Aplo. Page 110.
Which is a very passionate Conclusion, if you consider it well, for that
setting aside the prehemine^ce for judging in matters of Religion, which in his
Controuersyes he proves both by Scripture, and testimony of all antiquity, to
appertain to Bishops and not to Princes (and so was practiced for 300. years
after Christ, when few, or no Kings, or Emperors were yet Christians;) in all
other points he speaks so reverently of them, and defends their Supreme
Authority with as great respect as any Author (perhaps) has ever done before
him. And to pretermit other places, let the Reader but look over the first 16.
Chapters of his Book de Laicis, and he shall find not only the Authority of
Princes proved to be from God, by many Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, Reasons,
and other Authorityes of Saints, against Anabaptists, Atheists, and other
miscreants of our time; but the quality also, and excellent power of the said
Princely Authority so exalted both for making of laws, judging, condemning,
waging war, and like actions of supreme power; as will easily refute this
cauillation.

LXXII. And among other propositions tending to that effect, he has this in
the beginning of his eleventh Chapter, which he proves largely, and of purpose
throughout the same; not only, That Temporal Princes are to be obeyed out of
Conscience, or for Conscience sake; but also, Quod lex Ciuilis non minus
obligat in Conscientia, quam lex Diuina: Lib. de Laicis cap. 11.
That the Cyuil law of the Temporal Prince does no less bynd the Subject in
Conscience, the^ the law that comes immediately from God himself. And how then
is Cardinal Bellarmyne said here to be no less contrary to God, Card.
Bellarm. exalts much Princely authority.
concerning Kings Authority, then light to darkness, and heaven to hell? But
especially if you consider further, that when Cardinal Bellarmyne in that
book, comes to treat of the Authority of Temporal Princes in matter of
Religion, though he set down this Conclusion, That, Non pertinet ad eos
Iudicium de Religione, The authority of judging of Religion (which is true or
false) belongs not unto them, but unto Bishops: yet, Pertinet ad eos defensio
Religionis, the defense and protection of Religion appertains unto them: as
also the cyuill government in cyuill matters over all persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal, which is so much as a Catholic man can give to
Caesar, reserving to God that which is Gods.

LXXIII. And albeit this might be sufficient to show the tooth that is held
against Cardinal Bellarmine, and the ardent appetite these Ministers have to
disgrace him in somewhat: yet am I enforced to lay forth some few examples
more, whereby, as in a clear glass, the indifferent Reader will see, behold,
and wonder also, at the manner of dealing used against him to that end.

LXXIV. And now we have already seen, what general Conclusions have been
gathered against him: That he uses to contradict himself wittingly, so often
as ever he is pressed with any hard argument by his Adversary: That his common
trick is to tell the sentence of his Author without his sense: That he
seeks euery-where to debase Kingly authority, Calu^nious dealing against Car.
Bellar.
and the like. Which generalityes, as, in truth and reason, they may not be
inferred, but upon proof, and induction of many particularyties: so when it
comes to trial, you have seen not so much, as any one particular
sufficiently proved. Now shall you hear some more examples of calumnious
dealing with him.

LXXV. Page 92. the Apologer speaking of S. Gregory the Great, and going about
to interpret those words of his, alleged by the Cardinal, where he calls*
Greg. li. 11. epist. 42.
the Sea Apostolic Caput fidei, the Head of faith, in regard of the direction
in matters of Faith, that is to be taken from thence, as from the Head; the
Apologer would have it understood, that for so much as in that place he
speaks to the Bishop of Palermo about the use of the Pall, accustomed to be
given by the sea Apostolic to Archbishops, S. Gregory's meaning is, that the
Sea Apostolic of Rome is head only in matters of Cerimonyes, Bellar. 2. de
To. Pontif. cap. 10. and li. 2. de Christo cap. 2.
and then he infers thus: Which sense (says he) if you will not admit,
give me leave to say that once of one (Gregory) which Bellarmyne himself
says often of many of the Fathers, Minus caute locutus est: Gregory spoke not
so advisedly: And the latin translation has, Quod ille de multis, and saepe
dicit, ex omni numero Patru^, That Bellarmyne says it often, and of many, and
of all sorts of Fathers; to wit, that they spoke inconsideratly: and yet when
I went to examyne the two places of Bellarmynes works, cyted by our Apologer
in the margent, I found a strange abuse, to wit, no such thing at all spoken of
the Fathers, but only of one Nicolaus de Lyra, made a Christian of a Jew, not
much above two hundred years past, who seeming by some words of his, to hold a
certain extrauaga^t opinion, that S. Peter, and S. Paul were not put to death
at Rome, but at Jerusalem, Lyr. com. in 24. Matthew.
against the general consent of all antiquity, Cardinal Bellarmyne expounds
first, what his true meaning was, to wit, nothing in deed differing from the
Fathers expositions, and namely of S. Hierome, and then adds, Quanquam minus
caute locutus est etc: Albeit Lyranus in his manner of speech, was not so wary,
as he might have been, in giving suspicion of so absurd an opinion, and so
contrary to all the ancient Fathers. Here then you see, how matters are
strayned. That which Cardinal Bellarmyne speaks only of Nicolaus Lyranus
upon so just occasion, as this was, is extended by our Apologer, to often,
many, and all sorts of Fathers. Is this good dealing? How can the Apologer
defend himself in this place, from wilful exaggeration, and voluntary
mistaking? In the other place cyted by him lib. 2. de Christo cap. 2. there is
no such matter at all. But let us see some other like examples.

LXXVI. Page* 108. he sets down this general odious proposition-out of
Bellarmyne: That Kings are rather slaves, then Lords. And may a man think
this to be true or likely, that so rude a proposition should come from
Bellarmine? Look upon the place by him cyted lib. 3. de Laicis cap. 7. and you
will marvel extremly at this manner of proceeding. For that in this very
place, you shall find that the Cardinal does most exalt, and confirm by
Scriptures, Fathers, and other arguments, the dignity and authority of the
cyuill Magistrate among Christians. And in the next precedent Chapter before
this cyted, he has this beginning. The fourth reason, says he (to prove the
lawfulnes and dignity of the Cyuill Magistrate against the Anabaptists) is from
the efficie^t cause, to wit, God the Author thereof, from whom it is certain,
that Cyuill power proceeds, as S. Augustine proves throughout his whole
fourth, and fifth books De Ciuitate Dei, Prouer. 8.
and it is evident by the Scriptures, for that God says: By me Kings do reign
etc.

LXXVII. So Bellarmine: and then passing to the next Chapter here cyted, which
is the seventh, he proves the same by another argument, which is. That in the
state of Innocence, if Adam had not sinned, we should have had Cyuil
subjection and government; and consequently it cannot be thought to be evil,
or brought in by sin, or for the punnishment of sin, as the Anabaptists
affirmed, but must needs be of God, and from God. True it is (says he) that
servile, or slavish subjection, was brought in after the fall of Adam, and
should not have been in the state of Innocence, but cyuill subjection should.
And then he shows the differences between these two sorts of government,
and subiections, to wit, that the one, which is the servile, tends wholly to
the vtility and emolument of him that governs, and nothing to them that are
governed. But the other which is cyuill and politic, tends principally to
the profit of them that are governed thereby. So as if there be any servitude,
says Bellarmine (but he means not slavish) in this Civil principality, it
falls rather upon him, that governs the people to their own vtility, then
upon the subjects that receive the said vtility thereby. And so are Bishops
called the servants of their flocks, and the Pope himself, The Servant of
servants: and S. Augustine upon those words of our Savior in S. Matthews
Gospel ( He that will be made first (or chief) among you, Aug. li. 19. de
ciuitate Dei cap. 14. Matthew. 20.
must be the servant of all the rest) does prove at large, that, In Civilly
Principatu, magis s^ruus est, qui praeest, quam qui subest: In a Civil
Principality, he is more a servant that governs to other men's profit, then he
that obeys, to his own.

LXXVIII. This is all that Cardinal Bellarmyne has about this matter: wherein
he does scarce name a King, How good Kings and Princes are truly servants.
as you see, but Bishops, and Popes to be servants in the gouerme^ts of those,
whom they govern; though he include good Kings in like manner, putting this
difference between a good King, and a Tyrant, out of Aristotle; That a good
king governs to the profit of his Subjects, Arist. li. 8. moral. c. 10.
wherein he is their servant in effect (though not their slave, as this man
odiously urges) and a Tyrant, that turns all to his own vtility without
respect of those, whom he governs. And is this so absurd doctrine? Or does
this justify the Apologers outrageous proposition, That Bellarmyne affirms
Kings to be rather slaves then Lords? Who would not be ashamed of this
intemperate accusation?

LXXIX. And now there remain eleven places more of like quality, alleged by
the Apologer out of Cardinal Bellarmynes works, Apol. page 108.
which being examined by the Authors words, meaning, and sense, have the same
want of sincerity which the precedent had. Libr. 1. de Pontif. c. 7.
The second is, That Kings are not only Subjects to Popes, to Bishops, to
Priests, but even to Deacons. This is a plain cavil: for the fault, if any
be, falls upon S. Chrysostom, and not upon the Cardinal, whose words are
these: S. Chrysostom in his eyghtie and three Homily upon S. Matthewes.
gospel, does subject Kings and Princes (in Ecclesiastical matters) not only
to Bishops, but also to Deacons. For thus he speaks to his Deacon: Si Dux
quispiam, si Consul, si is qui Diademate ornatur etc. If a Duke, if a Consul,
if one that wears a Crown, comes to the Sacrament unworthily, restrain
him, and forbid him, for that thou have greater power then he. What fault has
Cardinal Bellarmine here in alleging the words, and judgment of S.
Chrysostom?

LXXX. The third place is, Libr. 1. de Pont. c. 7.
That an Emperor must content himself to drink, not only after a Bishop, but
after a Bishops Chaplin. But these words are not found in Bellarmine, but are
odiously framed by the Apologer out of a fact of S. Martyn Bishop of Tewers in
France, related by ancient Sulpitius in his life, Sulpitius in vita D. Martini.
that he sitting one day at dynner with the Emperor Maximus, and the Emperors
officer bringing a cup of wine to his Lord, he would not drink thereof first,
but gave it to the Bishop to begin, who accepting thereof, and drinking,
delivered the said cup to his Priest to drink next after him, thinking no
layman to be preferred before a Priest, says Sulpitius. But what does this
touch Bellarmine, that does but relate the Story. May he, in truth, be said to
^rouch, that an Emperor must be co^te^t to drink after a Bishops Chaplin? Who
sees not this violent inforceme^t?

LXXXI. His fourth place is this, Ibid. and de Cleri^. c. 28.
That Kings have not their Authority, nor office from God, nor his law; but
from the law of Nations. Good God! what desire is here descried of
calumniation? Let any man read the two places here quoted, and he will bless
himself, I think, to see such dealing. For in the first place his words are
these: Principatus saecularis. etc. Secular Princedome is instituted by man,
and is of the law of Nations; but Ecclesiastical Princedome is only from God,
and by dyuine law, which he means expressly of the first institution of those
Principalyties, or Gouernmentes: for that at the beginning God did not
immediately appoint these particular and different forms of Temporal
government, which now the world has, some of Kings, some of Dukes, some of
Commonwealths, but appointed only, that there should be Government, leaving
to each nation to take or choose what they would. But the Ecclesiastical
Government by Bishops was ordained immediately by Christ himself, for which
cause Bellarmine says in the second place here alleged: That Kingdoms are
not immediately instituted from God, but mediatly only by means of the people;
which people therefore may change their forms of government, as in many
Countries we see that they have: but yet when any form of Government is
established, and Governors placed therein, their authority and power is from
God, and to be obeyed out of Conscience, under pain of damnation, How Princes
authority is mediatly or imediatly from God.
as before I have showed out of Bellarmyne. And he that will read but from his
third Chapter de Laicis unto the 13. shall find store of assertions and proofs
to that effect, to omit many other places throughout his works. So as the
former proposition, That Kings have not their Authority nor office from God nor
his law, is very fraudulently set down. For if he understand, that their
form of Principality and Office therein, is not immediately from Gods
institution, but by means of humane laws, of succession, election, or the
like; it is true. But if he mean, that their Authority is not from God, either
mediate, or immediate, or induces not obligation of Conscience in obeying
them, as it seems he would have his Reader to think; it is most false. And
the Apologer ought not to have walked in these obscurityes, if he had meant
uprightly.

LXXXII. I am weary to wade any further in these objections, and yet will I not
let pass to note three more, though most briefly, and almost in three words,
leaving the rest to be examined by the Reader himself. The first is, That
Churchmen are as far above Kings, as the soul is above the body. The other:
That Obedience due to the Pope, is for Conscience sake. The third: That
Obedience due to Kings, is only for certain respects of order and policy; The
first and last being mere calumniations and the other not denied by us. For as
for the first, though the words here mentioned be not in Bellarmyne: yet the
comparison it self of Ecclesiastical and Temporal powers in the Church, unto
the soul, and body, is the comparison of S. Gregory Nazianzen related only by
Bellarmyne, Nazian. orat. ad Ciues timor^ pereulsos and Imperat. irasc.
and consequently it must needs follow, as the same Father also infers, that
so much more eminent, as the soul is above the body, so much more excellent is
the power Ecclesiastical above Temporal, which S. Chrysostom in like manner
proves at large in his books de Sacerdotio: So as this is not Bellarmynes
comparison, but of the said two ancient Fathers, and consequently Bellarmyne
is not here reprehended, but they.

LXXXIII. The other two places, if they be two, and not one, but made two for
multiplying of odious matter against us, have been so fully answered by us
before, as we shall need to say no more here thereof. For as Obedience is due
out of Conscience unto the Pope, and other Bishops, and Spiritual Governors,
in spiritual Governments, Hebr. 13.
by the Apostles precept, Obedi^e Praepositis vestris, etc. Obey your Prelates,
and be subject unto them; for they watch, as being to render account for your
souls: So the same Apostle has commanded also, due Obedience to Temporal
Magistrates, in temporal affairs, by the same obligation of Conscience, as
Cardinal Bellarmyne does show at large, in the places by me alleged. And I
marvel with what Conscience the Apologer here can deny it, cyting a place
for the same in his margent, which has no such matter, as he would infer,
Libr. de Cleric. c. 28.
That not for Conscience, but only for certain respects etc. For that treating
of the obligation of Obedience to temporal laws, in temporal affairs, his
second proposition is; Non sunt exempti Clerici ab obedientia legum Ciuilium:
Clergymen are not exempted from the obedience of temporal laws. And in
another place before cyted; Libr. de Laicis c. 11.
Lex Ciuilis non minus obligat in conscientia quam lex diuina: The Temporal
law byndeth no less in conscience, then the Divine. So as all those odious
matters are but frandulently laid together to make Catholics, and their cause
hateful, especially unto him, whom unto they desire most of all men under God,
to yield most satisfaction for their temporal duties, and would hope also to
effectuate it, if these makebate Ministers did not by their continual
incitations, clamours, and false suggestions disturb the same, and renew
daily iealosyes and distrustes in his Ma.ties mind against us.

The Conclusion.
WHEREFORE to draw to an end of this distasteful argument, it cannot but grieve,
and afflict much the hearts of all that love either Prince or Country, and
look into the natural sequels of like proceedings, to see matters run daily
unto such extremityes as they do, and that by such instigators, as are both
both less careful to foresee the hurts both private and public that may
ensue, and less able to remedy the^ when they fall out. The principal of whom
(being the first and chief motors) besides the general hatred wherein they are
with both extremes of opposite in Religion, are so interessed in like manner by
the spoils, and rapines which their ravenous Purseuants daily bring home, out
of their continual searches, and ransacks of innocent men's houses, goods and
persons, as little moderation may be expected from them.

LXXXV. Would God it might please his dyuine Ma.tie so to inlighten and
illustrate that excellent understanding of our Prince and Sovereign, as he may
see the many and great inconuenie^ces, that do and must follow upon so violent
courses as these men for their own utility do suggest, and prosecute. Nothing
can be more pitiful, then to see a Noble House divided in itself, and the
one to beat, hunt, and pursue the other, and this to be their continual
exercise, especially of Children, under the sight of their own Father, loving
them all, and desyring to be beloved. Ah! what solicitude must there needs be
in that Fathers heart! And were it not a great sin to increase the same, by
casting in oil to augme^t the flame?

LXXXVI. Would God his Ma.ties ears, and those of his wise Counsel could
reach into these parts beyond the seas, and to all forrayne nations of
Christendom besides, to hear what is said, what is written, what is
discoursed by men of best judgment in this behalf, not only in regard of
justice and piety, but in reason also of State and Policy; no man being of so
simple understanding, but that he must see, that so notorious differences, of
Subjects for Religion, pursued with such hostility among themselves, must
weaken greatly their forces, and make them less esteemed both of friends and
adversaries. So as, besides internal dangers, which are ever consequent upon
such inward divisions, if forrayne occasions should be offered us again (as in
former times they have been) by forrayne wars; we should not know how to
trust the one the other.

LXXXVII. The cries and co^playntes of these afflictions running throughout
Christendom, do give strange admiration unto men, and do work strong effects
both in judgments and affections: Admiration, for that no such thing was ever
expected under his Majesty's government, for many causes: strong effects, for
that they work great alterations both in the one, and the other: In judgment,
for that wise men find not any reason, either of Religion or State, why such
extremityes should be pursued, with such rigor at the instigation of parties
interessed, to the evident danger of so great and honorable Kingdoms, who if
in wills they were vinted, as they are in one Prince and Governor; their
forces were both admirable and dreadful: In affections, for that the
compassion which naturally does accompany our brethrens afflictions, especially
for a cause that we most esteem and love, to wit, our Religion; must needs
work the contrary effect of inward auersion, both in Princes and people
abroad, notwithstanding they hold external amity, and friendship for the time.

LXXXVIII. I let pass the general obloquies, and murmurations that are to be
heard every where, almost in Christendom, upon this manner of proceeding, and
much more the public and private complaints, outcryes, and prayers that are
made and offered daily to heaven, throughout all Catholic Kingdoms lightly,
in all particular Congregations, Oratoryes, Chapels, and meetings of zealous
men, that pray instantly to Almighty God for some remedy of these oppressions,
and persecutions of English Catholics, sufficiently (as they think) declared
unto the^ and to the whole world by the very printed Catalogues of English
Statutes extant in Print against them, for profession of their Religion: for
that by the view of those Statutes, they do easily conceive, what enormous
effects, do, and must follow in the execution thereof; albeit they did not both
hear and see daily so many lamentable preside^ts and spectacles therein.

LXXXIX. As for example, there have not passed many months, since there were
seen some threescore Priests more or less (to omit others) cast into
banishment about one time, and wandering up and down, throughout Christendom,
according as every man had occasion, or necessity for their mayntenance, gave a
lamentable spectacle to all nations, to see me^ of so good parts, amiable
aspects, sweet behavior, natural borne subjects of the La^d, the most of them
of very worshipful pare^tage, all of learned education, clear and deuoyd of
any suspicion of crimes that could be objected unto them (for otherwise they
should not have been dismissed) in the flower of their age, to be cast out of
their native soil, for professing that Religion only, whereby their said
Country was first made Christian, and so continued under all their noble
Princes, Kings, Queens, and Sovereigns, Nobility, and Communatly, from the
beginning of their Conversion, unto this our age.

XC. This spectacle (I say) presented to the eyes of most Nations of Europe,
moved men not a little, especially hearing them protest their duetifull
affections to his Ma.tie and Realm in all Cyuill and Temporal respects,
without seeking of any preferments, dignityes, riches, or other emoluments by
staying at home; but only the rest and use of their own Consciences in matters
of Religion, which Protestants in many other Catholic Countries are suffered
to enjoy, though with far lesser reason, in regard of the ancient right and
possession, which each part pretends for the use of their said Religion.

XCI. And since this time again there has been seen very lately another
spectacle, not much unlike to the former (though much more markable) to wit, a
like number of Noble and Gentlemen, with their followers and train, passing in
very good sort through sundry Countries, being lately retired out of his
Ma.ties Kingdom of Ireland, for the self same cause of their Conscience, and
Religion; which when men do behold, and hear them otherwise to speak
honorably of his Ma.tie and the State, ascribing rather their afflictions to
some under Magistrates in Ireland, and Ministers that set them on; it moves
more compassion, and makes men think and muse, what may be the end of all
this, and whereunto finally it may grow? Whether the like may not be expected
in time or doubted, out of other parts also of his Ma.ties dominions, upon
like angariatio^ of Consciences: which points seem to be of no small
consideration, and consequence to wise men; though those that be the immediate
causes thereof, will and must make light of all: but the natural issue of such
euentes, are not unknown. And if the occasioners thereof were guylty of no
greater fault, but only to cast his Ma.tie and the State into perpetual cares
about the same (his Royal nature being inclined otherwise to sweetness, peace,
and tranquillity) it were a great sin in them, and scarce sufferable.

XCII. Nor is the remedy here attempted by our Minister-Apologer (of denying
all, and saying that there is no persecution, nor hard dealing with any, for
matters of Religion, no not in the late Queens days, when so many were so
rackt and rented for the same) any remedy at all; but rather a doubling of the
injury to the afflicted, with increase of exasperation and auersion of minds;
as also a leesing of all credit with others that hear it, either at home or
abroad: for that facts contrary to words, do preponderate with all sober men,
and prevail against the same.

XCIII. And truly, I cannot but wonder, why this late Apology has been so
greedily published by the Apologer, both in English and Latin to the world, for
that the Popes Breues, being but written privately to the Catholics of England,
for informing their Consciences in a matter of necessary doctrine about the
lawfulnes, or unlawfulness of taking the Oath, and the Letter of Cardinal
Bellarmyne being directed only to a private friend; both of them might have
remained also private, if this attempt had not been made of publishing the same.
But now being drawn by the Apologer into the Universal Theater of the world,
besides, that diverse will hold themselves obliged, or at leastwyse provoked to
answer the same; it will follow also, that the unlawfulness of the said Oath to
Catholic Consciences will more be seen, disputed, and condemned by all
Universities, Schools, Books and Treatises of particular learned men,
throughout all Countries of Christendom that profess Catholic Religion.
Whereupon also the unjust violence, enforcing men to swear the same Oath, under
so rigorous pains, as are the loss both of goods and liberty, and
therwithall to swear in like manner, that they do it willingly, freely, and
without coaction: will be censured (no doubt) for one of the greatest
contradictions in it self, and the most injurious manner of proceeding with
Christian men, that ever, perhaps was heard of in the Christian world.

XCIII. And this now occurred to me (dear Sir) to write to you concerning my
judgment upon this matter. What more may be said to this Apology, when it
shall come into the hands of learned men; you will easily guess by these few
notes, that I have here laid together, which conteyne but little in respect
of that which may be written of the matters here handled. God of his endless
mercy inclyne the heart of his Majesty, to take the best way in this his course
of Royal Government: and for so much, as he has been pleased to join so many
Great Kingdoms under his only Scepter, and permitted them to have so great
differences of judgments in matters of Religion, that their union of wills, at
least, in dutiful affections, may be so combined and conserved by sweet and
temperate proceeding toward all, as despair, the mother of headlong
precipitation, enter not. The Proverb is known, Qui nimium emungit, elicit
sanguine^: and patientia laesa vertitur in furorem. I never heard or read, that
too much violence toward free Subjects ever ended well, especially for
supposed faults that are not acknowledged for such, by the punished: and
consequently no hope of amendment by way of compulsion. Some may dissemble for
fear, but they are more lost in their affections then the other. Some
reasonable toleration, and friendly treaty would bynd up wounds from bleeding
on all sides: Exulceration makes them fester more greiuously, and dangerously.
To Gods holy Providence the whole is to be committed, who will dispose of all
to his greater glory, sieve in vitam, sieve in mortem. And to him also I committ
you, with my hartiest Commendations, etc. This 10. of June. 1608.

FINIS.

