A Discovery of I. Nicols minister, misreported a Jesuit, latelye recanted in
the Tower of London.

Wherein besides the declaration of the man, is con^ayned a full answer to his
recantation, with a con^utation of his slanders, and proof of the contraries,
in the Pope, Cardinals, Clergy, Students, and private men of Rome.

There is also added a reproof of an oration and sermon, falsely pretended by
the said Nicols to be made in Rome, and presented to the Pope in his
Consistorye.

Whereto is annexed a late information from Rome touch^ng the aute^tical copy
of Nicols recantation.

IHS


God has exalted him, and given him a name which is above all names.
Philippens.2.ver.9. There is no other name under heaven given unto men, wherein
we must be saved. Act.4. ver.12. A lyeing witness shall have an yuel end. Pro.
21. An non ex hac odiosa impudentia, pullulabit mox impoenitentia, matter
desperationis? Bern. Ser. 42. in Can. 1 A preface showing different proceeding
in ^atholicks and their adversaries, with a division of the book into three
parts.

2 The first part contains a narration of John Nicolls, with a refutation
of certain vain and false vauntes, made of him self.

3 The second part contains a confutation of many malicious slanders,
uttered by Nicolls against Catboliques, but especially and more in
particular, against the Pope, the Cardinals, priests, and religious men, the
English students in Rome, diverse particular persons, and against the cittye
of Rome it self: where also the contraries, to Nicols reports, are declared.

4 The third part contains an explication and defense of certain
controversies, misunderstood and absurdly perverted by Nicols.

5 Nicols oration and sermon published in english since the writing of this
book, and pretended by him as made in Rome, and presented to the Pope, are
convinced of forgery by manifest absurdities, impossibilities, and
contradictions.

6 Also, there is added a late information from Rome, of the true copy of
Nicols recantation in that place.

7 Lastly, there is put down, an example, (...) a taste of Nicols talent in
railing at both sides.

TO the indifferente Reader.
IT IS one point among other o^ very bare brokers, to extol immoderatly very
base wares. And it is not ye guise but of needye and distressed warryers, The
adversaries poverty.
to receive wi^h tro^pet to place of dignity, every ragged and wandering
fugitive. Which two things notwithstanding, (with no small discredit of their
own cause) some adversaries of ours have followed of late, in so greedye
receiving and aduauncinge to the pulpet, with measureles commendation, one John
Nicoles, far unfit (in mine opinion) for so great a do, being but a
rejected thing of the contrary part, a seely grammarian, and twice revolted
minister. Whose recantation, or railing, rather, inuectiue, published not long
since from the Tower of London, In february Ano. 1581.
I could more willinglye have pitied then answered (knowing the man's
feeblenes as I do) but only for that, he surchargeth with slander so many
other men, yea Princes and states, in that his declamation, as it was hard for
me (which before god in my conscienes knew all or most of it to be forged)
to hold my peace in so manifest untruths, and by silence to yield credit to
the many malytious and reproche^ul reports.

The dealing also of our adversaries in this case and she like, moved me not a
little to answer, who shame not to proclaim triumphs upon so base
conquestes against their mother the Catholic Church, who has borne them and
brought them up, and who, if she would but a little follow the same course,
Different dealing in Catholics and their adversaries.
not in falshed and malice, as they do, but in evident truth, either by noting
the known vices of her enemies (which rather she soroweth and heartily be
wayleth) or in vaunting the gain of such as daily, by gods grace return
again from rebellion: she might easily in both these things, match and
ouermatche the lauishe tongues of her reuoulted children, were she not
restrained by charytie in the one, and by gravity in the other. For touching
the first, who does not know that if in lewe of this and the like, t^^ notable
infamous a^tes of ministers preachers only, in this one Realm of England,
for the space of one doson years past, Look the crown off^^^ and other like
records.
were ga^hered into some one book, ^or the vewe of the world: they would be
more in quantity, and in quality more heinous, then all that they have
gathered by great labor and much falshod, in their several books, out of
the lives of the worste Catholics, for these thousand years past, over all
the whole world? And yet these men ^or^oothe, came as prophets to re^orme us
and our f^thers lives, and ther^ore in reason should have lived more exactly
them selves. And touching the second, who does not see, the great variety of
important learned personages, which from time to time, upon trial of the
truth, do retourn^ unto us, even from their ministry, and they also of
other quality and talente, then seelye John Nicols, who, in good soothe, is
not worth the taking up, being sound in the street, and yet we vaunt not of
each thing in printe, nor stir we tragedies upon little trifles. We are
content to leave this to our adversaries, whose fraud or feruor is, to make
mountains of molehilles, and great speech upon small matter.

If any man will doubt whither such return of Protestants be made unto us or not, as I noted before: passing over other places, let him cast his eye, but
upon these Seminaries, and Colleges on this side the seas, where English
students are, and he shall find a great and principal part thereof, to have
been in times past, not only of there religion, but also toward there
ministry, Ministrye to Preisthode.
who on the contrary, can not show me any one Priest in these later years
perverted by them. I add (in these later years) for that, albeit in the
beginning of heresy, when first the banner of sedition was raised against the
Church, great multitudes of people revolted together (as in all commotions is
wont to hap, by some general fa^se sugg^stion of the principal rebels):
Cause of former reuolting and present re^urninge.
yet afterward, the heat being past, and more calmer consideration coming in
place, men have stayed them selves, and harkened to the cause, and diverse also
returned, which in the first fury ran out with the rest, of which two
sorts, both the one and the other remain better fortified for resisting of
like error for the time to come.

The means which have been used generally, to preistes taken these later years
(for I will conceal tower matters in particular) for the withdrawing of them in
religion, have been many and strong, and qualified in both extremities of
rigor, and allureme^t, promises, and minaces, and yet (so great is God his
goodness) no one, I say not any one, has unto this day faultered. But of
ministers which have offered them selves to us in this time, it were long to
recount the particulares, and yet have we nothing to compel them unto our
part, except evidence of truth, n^r any thing so allure them, except poverty
and honesty.

It is no marvel then (all circumstances considered) if such s^ore be made of
one John Ni^ols, a ^^^^gate of their own ^ampe. For even the Egle her self
must bait on flees when she can finger no fethered foul. If any one man of
more sufficiency might have been gained, why John Nicols was preferred to the
pulpit.
John Nic^ls had been spared; but seeinge it could not be, and that som^what at
that time must needs be v^tered, for the more defacinge and bringing in hatred
the Catholic religion: some of zeal were content to use his person, sor the
auowchinge of that, which either he or other could devise for that purpose, and
so was his recantation published, with common fame that he was a Jesuit of
great learning and renowino, to which recantatio^ I am now breefly to answer
according to the cheese points thereof, which in effect I find to be three: A
Deni^i^n of the book (...) to three part^
the one in vaunting of him self: the second in s^ander^nge of others: the
third in willinge of certain controversies, by ^^bling them before he
understood the^.

Vauntinge of him self.
The first (...)
For the better understanding of this first part, as also to see, how little
cause this little man had to trouble us with bragginge, it ^ot be amiss to set
down in words, some short progress of his life, declared by him self to
his fellows in Rome, and publiquelye known to others there, namely his course
from Wales to England, from England to Flaunders, from Flaunders to Rome, and
from Rome, to the pulpit in the tower of London, wherein I will speak nothing,
but such as is commo^lie known, or confessed by him self. Other matters
suppesed of greater importance, I will utterly ^mit. If hereafter upon trial
they break forth unto the world, I shall take no comfort therein, for in good
sooth I much pity the man, and wish^ only his repentance to pardone, and
not his infamy to desperation.

John Nicols therefore was borne at Cowbridge in Wales, A Narration of John
Nicolls.
and afterward a minister in the weste parts of England. In which art how
he behaved him self, I am not to dis^^^^e or reveal, only him self vs^
^^^en to declare, how that he p^^^ched commonly certain sermens of one
^^^brooke as his own, and thereby (...) ^hered o^n on of very good and (...)
Also, that he procur^ (...) benefices by Simonie an^ that M. deane of Powles
and he could never agree, which I suppose was for noe good demeanure on his
part. But in trade of time, being enforced to depart England, either for his
conscience, as he would pretend, or for worse causes as some suspect, he passed
over to Flaunders, and there applyinge him self to the religion and manners of
the place, played some time the soldier and some times the minister, until
being werie of both, he departed thence, and passing by Cambraie, (being
helped by the liberality of English men there) he took his walk toward
Italy, where he served a Bishop for certain months, and finally, after a
space, he came to Rome, attired ridiculouslie in an old cast purple cassoke
down to the ground, geeuen him by the same Bishop.

John Nicolls behavior at Rome.
Being come to Rome, and deuisinge how to get some credit there, thought it
best to offer him self to the inquisi^tion voluntarily, and so he did, by the
conduction of one M. Moris, accusing himself grievously, for that he had
^orsaken the Catholic Church and fal^len into heresy, making him self also
a minister of the same, for which fault he craved pardone, and for more
satisfaction both to God and the world^ he desired most earnestlye, to be
admitted to a recantation or abiuration of his former errors, which was
granted unto him. He abiured therefore with all the vehemency he could devise,
and after that, made suit to be received as scholar, into the English College
or Seminary there. Whereunto, albeit for his apparent insufficiency some
dela^e and difficulty were made, yet finally he was admitted, and delivered
over (as the manner is) to the posers to try what studdie he was fit for, who
found him very raw in the latin tongue, and therefore determined him to the
study of Rethorike and Humanity: wherein having spente some time, he was
advanced to the study of Logique, but not being able to wade in so great
matters, he was removed again thence, as non proficiens, and shifted of to the
studdie of certain cases of conscience more easy for his capacity, wherein,
John Nicolle ability in learning.
notwithstanding, he profitinge little or nothing, the College began to be
werie of him, and the rector, taking occasion of the roman aier, which this
fellow was persuaded that it (...) his wit, as also wronght some distemperature
in his body, (...) hansomlie ridd she College of him under (...), that the
S^minarie of (...) in ^^^unce was more conu^^ient (...) ^^alth. John Nicols
therefore depar^^ng Rome toward Rh^mes, in the company of some other English
men whose iornie late ^o England, f^ll into consideration upon the way, as is
thought, what disgrace would ensewe upon this departure, and so betook him
self to a new resolution, which was, to slip secretly from his companions,
which he did, near unto a city called F^ligno in Umbria or the Dukedom of
Spoleto, and so came directly into England, where in short space he met
with Sir Ow^n Hopton, who converted him soon after in the tower of London.

Collections out of the premises.
By this it appears firse, that John Nicols was no Jesuit, nor yet Priest,
nor yet so learned and principal a man as was given out. Se^endlie it
appears, that his recantati^^ now, is noe great novelty, seeing he has
practi^sed the like before with such facility: nor has the tower of London
more certainty in this, then had the Romish Inquisitio^ hold in the other, but
rather much less, this being made in prison, the o^^^r in liberty: this upon
fear, the other voluntary. Lait^^e, it seems (the man's importance being no
greater th^^ appears) that this his revolution needed not to be celebrated
with such triumph of printing, preaching, and presence of noble men, except it
were only for the honoringe of his conuertour and patron Sir Owen, whose good
nature seems to be, to make great store of a little gain, especially if it
come far of, and from Rome, as this did.

It appears further by consideration of the premises, that John Nicols his
vauntes powered out in his book to his own commendation, are as void of
probability, as fraught with vanity, especially those, which imply great
ability, as to preach before the Pope and others, with sufficiency in the
learned tongues, etc. whereof I must speak a word or two for the discrying of
his lack of modesty, whereof I shall be forced to complain often in the
sequel of min answer. First therefore to begin with the principal matter which
he reports for his credit, to wit, his oration and sermon before the Pope, let
us hear what he says. John Nicols vaunt of preaching b^^ore the Pope.
I had before that time (says he) made an oration and a sermon in the latyne
tongue, presented before the Pope and four Cardinales, and before all them
that were with the Pope in the consistory. If you my brethren yet prisoners
within the tower, deny the assertion thereof, yet to your shame and my credit,
they that go to Room for pleasures sake, may safely go to the Popes
Protonotori^, dwelling fast by S. Peter's Church in the inquisitorye Palace,
or to any of his cla^kes, and there make inquisition of my name, which is
registered in three great paper volumes, of such as are always present writing
in chambers, to whom all men without danger may resort, where turning to my
name, they shall find the sermon and oration, containing ten sheets of
paper, for the which the Pope gave me great thanks and so did the Cardinals,
with all the rest. Here you see a long childishe recital, with many
particulers, much vanity, little wit, and less truth. He would make you
believe that he had been both orator and preacher to the Pope, which, if you
saw but only his visage, you would hardlye give any credit unto. I could
improve him also by the testimonies of almost an hundredth English men, that
time present in Rome, but his own particulers shall sufficiently confute him.

First he puts not down whether his oration and sermon were one or two
things, but if they were twoe, then it is to be understood, that sermons are
not made before the Pope in the Co^sistorie, but in Consta^tines hawle within
the Popes palace by Toletus only, Toletus The Pop^ preacher.
a famous learned man, of the Society of Jesus, or in his absence by some
other equal to him self in learning, and appointed by like authority.
Orations are made sometimes in the Consistory, but only upon the coming
of ambassators, and for matters of estate, except the frydayes in lent, when
chosen men of each order of religion have plac^ to preach in the latyne
tongue. So that hitherto I see not how John Nicols could come to preach
before the Pope, and four Cardinals in the Consistory, both in respect of
the causes alleged, and also for that I could never yet find so few
Cardinals in the consistory with the Pope, as four twice or three times told.
The rest which he adds implies manifest co^tradictions and impossibilities.
For the Popes Protonotorie dwells not in the Inquisitorie Palace, by S.
Peter's Church, nor has he any thing to do with that Palace, and much less
does he keep clarckes wrytinge there in chambers: for only the Inquisition
has to do there. If Sermons and Orations made to the Pope, were to be
regestred in paper volumnes (as they are not, and much less in three at once
as Nicols says, his was) yet this nothing appartayneth to the Popes
Protonotorie, or to his clarckes. How the Pope also should give John Nicols
such thanks for his stuff, Improbabilities of Nicol^ ^aun^e.
as he says, he did, I can not conceive. For in the Concestorie, the Popes
place is so far distant from them, which come thither to make orations, as he
can not speak unto him, nor does he use to thank any man that speakethe
before him, what so ever he be: much more impossible is it, that the
Cardinals and the rest in the Consistory, should give him thanks for it, as
al they will bear me witness which know the place, and presence of the same.
Great learned men, and famous Orators, have departed thence without
particular thanks, albeit they did their matters with great commendation,
such is the grauitye and state of that place. So that all this long tale of
John Nicolls, has not only noe probability, but in deed noe possibilitye
of truth.

Here some perhapps will ask, how then, has this tale noe ground or color
at all whereupon it was founded? to which I answer, yes, but such a ground as
his best friends are least beholding to him for it, and such, as greatly
discovers his shameless disposition. Mark the Stratageme. You have hard
sometimes of scholmasters which make their boye^ kiss the rod, wherewith
they were beaten: even so does John Nicols with the protestants. John
Nicolls abusinge his new friends.
For having made voluntarily and malitiouslie, an abiuration of their religion
in the Inquisitorie palace of Rome, containinge ten whole sh^etes of reproach
and slander, would now make them yield thanks for the same, by calling it a
sermon before the Pope, in the Consistory. If he get credit by this dealing,
as he pretends to do: his hap is good, to deal with men so favorable to
his order. For suerlye, if he should have dealt so in some other countries,
where ministry is not sufficient to excuse dishonestie, it would rather have
fallen out to his cost, then his credit, and the deludinge of such men,
would have been thought worthier of pillorie then printe.

After this, he makes a second vaunt of an other sermon which he made in the
latin tongue, John Nicols se^mon at dinner time.
requested (as he says) by the Prefect of studies, upon the festival day of
Peeter ad vincula, certayn^ English doctors of the Cittye and some of the
Popes chapel, with other strangers being present at dinner. He tells not
in what place he made this sermon. You may parhaps imagine it to hau^ been in
sum great auditorie, for that h^ mencioneth Festival day, Doctors, Popes
chapel, and strangers. But I will open the mystery, that you may judge of his
vanity who trobleth you with such toys. The Prefect of studies in the
English roman college, is wont to command (and not to request) the
students committed to his charge, to write some thing for the exercise of the
latin tongue, and to recite it in the halle, at the time of dinner, and this
excercis^ the vnlearnedst of all the College audideth not. Amongst whom Ihon
Nicols, upon S. Peeters day ad uincula, was commanded to do the same: and
behold he has published it in print, with many falshodes and vanities
annexed. For, that he preached, it is false: for it was only an excecise of
learning. That he was requested, is false: for he was commanded. That it was
festyuall day in Rome, is false: for they keep it not holy day there.

That he preached there against faith and the new testament, as he aftarward
affirmethe, is most false, as they which were present can and do, testify.
Now, that this sermon, was before English docters of the cittye, is vanity:
for there could not be above some one, for the rest were departed the city:
and for Englishmen to dyne there, was an ordinary matter: that some of the
Popes chapel were there, is a notable vanity: for that they were only two
seely singing men, hired servants of the College to teach the students to
sing, at such time as they waited not at the Popes chapel. That there were
other strangers present, is noe less vanity: for that they were but
ordinary servants of the house, one, the manciple, and the other the master of
the chapel in the college, which both are citizens of Rome, and yet not
strangers.

Thus you see what importante stuff this fellow brings to praise him self
withal. But whatsoever he braggeth or lies of him self, yet may you guess
what a sufficient preacher he is, by that, that his fellow students, used
commonly to recreate them selves, with his sermons, which he would at their
appointment, utter, extempore, John Nicols stool doctrine.
from the top of a stool, and namely those sermons which he had preached
before in England in time of his ministry, repeatinge them with all actions
and gestures which he had used before. He would tell also by name, how he had
flattered this or that man present at his sermon. Which properties made him so
co^temptible and rediculous in all men's judgments, as they would not have
employed him, among all other, to preach in earnest, before any grave
auditorie, albeit his learning had been sufficient to perform it.

But now because we talk of learning, some man parhaps may say, that Ihon
Nicols seems to have his part in that, espciallye in the tongues, for that in
his epistle dedicatorye to sir Owen Hoptone, he alleagethe one sentence in
greek, and another in hebrew, out of the bible, which argues that he has
skill in both. To which I answer, that this is also a vaunte of vanity,
and a mere fantastical florishe of folly, which John Nicols and his fauorours
thought good to use for the casting of a miste before some men's eyes, and for
more probability of that, which with full mouth was given out, of his
exceedinge great knowledge and facility in these tongues. But I know and can
avouch the contrary, for I am privy to his defect, not only of wit and
discretion, but also of knowledge in these tongues, whereof he vaunteth, and if
I were not, yet could I easily make conjecture, both of the one and the other,
by these two sentences, which he puts down for show of great^ knowledge.

For towchinge the first, which is discretion, mark the circumstances of the
matter. John Nicolls discretion.
He had made in that epistle, a long impertinent request, that Papists would
leave their errors and embrace the truth: for performance whereof, he bids
them never to forget two sentences: the one out of David. Psalm. 34.
He that loves life and desires to see good days, let him keep his tongue
from evil, and his lips from speaking deceit. The other of S. Paul: 1. Cor.
6.
You are bought with a great price, glorify therefore God in your body and in
your spirit which are of God. What pertayne these two sentences to the matter
which he handles? or why should these be kept more in memory by the Papists,
the^ other sente^ses of the scripture? and much more, why must these sentenses
be alleged in stra^g tongues, the one in Greek and the other in Hebrewe?
especially to that man, whose great business may hardlye permit him to
understand either of them, and perhaps was overmuch troubled with the latin
before? but this is John Nicols discretion, to have no con^ideration either of
man or matter.

Now for the second (which is his skill) it discrieth it self in this one
little sentence which he has put down in Hebrew, John Nicolls skill in hebre^
which (besides the false ortographie in diverse words) he has so mangled and
perverted in writing it out, as there is no sense at all left in the same. For
where as the words in the Hebrewe text do stand thus. Psalm. 34. ver. 13.14.
What man will (have) life and loves days, to see good? keep thy tongue from
evil and thy lips from speakinge decepte. He has so corrupted it, as it
standethe thus^ Days louinge lives willinge man what good to see and thy
lips from evil thy tongue keep decepte from speaking. Is it likely (think
you) that this Doctor has any great skill in the tongue, which could not
write out two lines without so many gross and absurd errors? But these are the
florishes, wherewith the ears of the simple people are fedd instead of better
learning.

Hitherto as you see, John Nicols laboreth to get him self some creditt of
learning for his preferment. Now shall you see, what shift he makes to procure
and gain some opinion of honesty, which he fears to be the more difficult
point, and therefore pleads more earnestly for the same, especially that men
should thinck, this his last co^uersio^ to be true, sincere, hearty and
zealous, and not spotted at all with hypocrisy, or dissimulation. The which,
albeit he should mean as he speaks, yet al me^ will not straight way believe
him therein, for that the reward of a known liar, is, not to be credited when
he tells a tru^^ (...) less^ will they trust that, which he ^^^eth of his
undoubted perseuera^ce unto the e^^, for if the Apostle say truly, ^ac. 1
that, ^^^^o ^ble hearted man is inconstant in ^^l his ways. The is it also
likely to be true, that a double or triple tonged man after so many
recantations, will not be very certain in all his promises.

Why his former protestations should have more likelihood of sincere meaning
then this, How unlikely that John Nicolles ^ealeth plainly.
I have given some reasons in another place, seeing they were voluntary, made
in liberty without hope of reward. But why this renegation should be more
credited then the former, I see no reason at all, except only because it is
the last, and so will remain until he make another.

But he takes away all suspicion of dissimulation, by askinge us a certain
vna^swerable qnestion. How can I (says he) be a Protestant outwardly and a
Papist in heart with a mind to be saved? This question (I say) were hard to
answer, were it not that he answers it himself in his own book a little
before, where talking of his preachinge in Papistrie, he utters these words.
Thus I did wilfully fight against Gods word, albeit my conscience cried within
me day and night, that, this is not the ^ighte way etc. These words (I say)
do answer ye dout, for if he cold disse^ble against his conscience then, why
may he not also now? if he could speak one thing and think an other then,
what shall let him to do the same now? if you respect his words, they were
then more vehement bitter and reproachful against the protestants, then they
are now against us: if you consider his meaning, he says it was dissembled,
I think it was as he spoke, but howsoever it was, neither words nor meaning
had certainty the^, and much less now. For you know the saying, Cicero.
Qui semel verc^undiae limits transierit, eum gnauiter impudsntem esse
oportet. 1. Timo. 5.
And S. Paul gives but a hard sentence of those which have broken their first
faith and promise. And as for that he adds, of his mind to be saved, it is
of small importance, for I think, that rare, trobleth him little, as it may
appear by the rest of his dealinges, which I shall have after occation to
touch.

Slaunderinge of others.
WE HAVE had a view in the former part, The secod^ part.
of the one side of Ihon Nicols his tongue, very smothe, as you see, and
clear in his own praise. But now if we turn up the other side also, we shall
find it no less cankered and venomous in the slander of his neighbor, then
the former was current in his own commendation. And here before I pass any
further, very grief of mind enforces me to ^^eake a word or two in
detestation of a certain familier property of Ihon Nicols, which is wilful
and malicious detraction^ For as it is a great fault to favor detraction in
any degree, or to utter easily a true reproach to the infamy of any man: so
to devise lies and slanders without any reason or ground at all, and to
auouche the^ of a man's own knowledge, as Ihon Nicols does, is a point of a
very deadly resolution, made, within the den of a desperate heart. What cause I
have to utter these words, shall appear in the sequel of this part, which for
more perspicuites sake, I will reduce unto certain genaral points, acording
to the diversity of parties which are slandered in the same.

But first by the way I am to examine a reproach laid down by Ihon^ Nicols in
the very beginning of his book against all Catholics, by which you shall have
a guess of his truth in reportinge other matters hereafter. A taste of John
Nicols truth in reporting.
He says therefore amongst other things in his preface, that Catholics
hold the soul of Aristotle to be in purgatory, thence to be delivered by
dirges and masses. And this is the first and formest of his reports against
us, the which how malicious, gross and impudent a slander it is, all the
world can witness, which seethe our books wherein we hold more then the
plain contrary. For we are so far of, from saying that infidels or
heritiques go to purgatory, as also we teach that many. Catholics depart
hence straight to hell for their wicked lives, and only such go to
purgatory, as dye in the favor of God, This place is so interpreted by
saint Aug in psa 37. and li. 21. de Ciu. ca. 26. and li. de fide and open. cap.
10. and in psalm 80.
but have not do^ne such penance for their sins, as Gods justice requires,
and therefore they are to be purged by fire after this life and so saved, as S.
Paul signifies 1. Cor. 3. by the interpretation of the holy Fathers. We
teach then (as it may appear in the Council of Florence in li^eris vnionis,
Orig. ho. 12. and 13. in Hiero. and ho. 25. in Nu. and ho 6 in Exodus Greg. lib.
4. dia. cap. 39. Beda in ca. 3. Luc.
) that there are three sorts ^f men which dye: one very good, which ^oe
straight to heaven: one very evil which go straight to hell: one mean
be^wixt both, which go to purgatory, and ^here may be relieved by the piety
of the ^iuing This was the doctrine of the Ca^holicke Church twelve hundred
years ^ast, set down by S. Austen a chief do^tour of the same Church in,
diverse pla^es of his works most plainly, as in his Enchiridion cap. 110.
Whose words are these. Doctrine about the dead iu S. Austens time.
Nether is it to be denied, that the ^oules of the dead are relieved by the
pi^tie of their living friends, when the sa^rifice of our Mediator is offered
for the^, or else alms are given for them in the Chruch, but yet, those things
profit only those, which deserved whiles they li^ed, that these things might
profit them after their death. For there is a kind of ^yfe, nether so good,
but that it may need ^hese things after death, nether so evil, ^ut that these
things may profit it after death. But yet there is another kind of ^ife so
good, as it needs not these things: and again another so evil, as it can not
be helped by those things, when it is o^^ gone. Wherefore, in this life all
me^^e^ is to be gotten, by the which a man may be relieved or oppressed, after
this lyfe^ But let noe man hope to obtain that, at God his ^ande after he is
dead, which he neglected while he was alive. Wherefore these things which the
Church does use for the commending of the dead, are no^ contrary to the saying
of the Apostle (a^ we shall stand etc.) for that each man whiles he was yet
living in flesh, ^. Cor. 15.
gate him self this merit, that those things might profit him. For they do
not profit every man: and why do they not profit al, bu^ only for the
di^fference of life which ec^ man did lead in his body? therefore, when
sacrifices either of the altar, or of any o^ther alms, are offered for all
those tha^ died in baptism, for the very good, they are thanks giving: for
the not very evil they are propitiations or intreatinges for pardon: for the
very wicked, althoug^ they help not the dead, yet they comfor^ in a sort the
living. Hitherto are S. Au^sten his words, and he repeteth the ver^ same again
in his second question t^ Dulcitius, and the like, in his 21^ book o^ the
city of God the 24. chapter. Whereby it appears yt his Church taught the^, as
directlye against our adversaries, as we teach now. But of these matters we
shall have occasion to speak more in the third part of this answer. Only here
I meant to confute the slanderous lie of John Nicolls, and to give you some
show of his shameless forhead, wherewith I must have often combat hereafter
in this second part, which now I begin, according to the division promised
before of the principal parties slaundered in the same, which for methods sake
may be reduced to this order. The order of this secu^d part
First of the Pope, secondlye of the Cardinals, thirdly of the prists and
religious folks, fourthly of ye English stude^tes in Rome, ^iftly of particular
persons, lastely of the city of Rome it self, for that all these have tasted
of the whippe of John Nicols tongue without exception.

Of the Pope.
John Nicols for lack of matter rather then malice, could have been content
(as it seems) to pass over with silence the Pope which now is, but only for
breaking the custom of his companio^s, and offending the appetites of his
compartners, who could not have taken well the omitting of the Pope, being
the principal obiecte of their diuinitye. For which cause, he is enforced to
follow the custom, and to say sumwhat against him, be it never so little,
false, or impertinent. But before he comes to bite his person in particular,
common use teaches him, to snarre at all Popes in general, which he does with
this usual reproach. You shall have no Pope (says he) that teaches the people
how to live in the true fear and love of God. Which he attemteth not to
prove, but taking i^ as a thing clear and evident, and as a prin^^^le granted
in their own schools, he comes to Gregory the thirteenthe saying^ An
unthankful confession.
Paraduenture now you will say that this Pope is a holy man: Although I am
indebted unto him 50. or 60. l. in money, yet will I not, nether can I, but
speak the truth of him and cet. In which words he seems to me, to say thus
much. Paraduenture you will say, and the world will bear witness, that the
Pope which now is, is a most just, wise, liberal, and virtuous man, and I my
self have proved the same, besides the ^recepte of fifty or threescore
pounds in liberality from him, yet now, because I am in hope of greater gain
in England, and because I shall not otherwise procure me credit, or content my
benefactoures: I must lie, and rail, one crashe against him also, though mine
oune conscience condemn me for it, and the whole world be witness of my slander.

But here before I pass any further, I must deliver unto the Christian Reader,
An aduertisme^t of S. Ansten about the Pope.
from as learned a man as ever lived in Christ his Church, an advertisement
most necessary for these our times, wherein, every tongue is exercised in
deprauing of him, who, if he were the worst liu^^ in the world, (as God be
thanked is altogether contrary) yet were he to be reverenced for his place and
dignity, I mean the Pope or Bishop of Rome. The aduertisment is from S.
Augustine that famous and learned pillar of Christ his holy Church, who, being
troubled with heretics and renegates in his time, as we are now, which
inueighed against Rome and her Bishops as ours do, (for always the
malefactor detesteth the lawful judge) warns Christians, not to think the
worse of the authority and docttrine of the Bishop of Rome, or of his see
Apostolic, if at any time his life should be wicked, or if heretics (which
always seek to slander him) should bring matter of truth, towching evil
life, against him. Wherefore, having reckoned up for proof of his faith, the
succession of Bishops of Rome, from S. Peter unto Anastasius which was Pope in
his time, and confirmed the infallibility of that succession by the promise of
Christ to S. Peter. Upon this rock will I buyld my Church etc. Math 16.
He adds: To this order of Bishops (of Rome) which is derived from Peter to
Anastasius, Aug. epist. 165. ad gene
which now sits in the same chair, if any traitor, in those times had
crepte in, A wiked Pope spottethe not the popedom
yet should it have been noe prejudice to the Church, and to innocent
Christians, to whom, our Lord forseeing, said of evil prelates: Do as they
say, but do not as they do, for they say and do not. Math. 23.
And this Christ said, to the end, that the hope of the faithful should be
certain, and never shaken with the tempest of sacri^egious scisme, being
placed in God, and not in man. By which words we see, that the evil life of
any Bishop of Rome, ought not to deminishe our reverence or obedience
toward him, noe more then if he were a Saint.

But in an other place, S. Austen dealinge against a raylinge heretic, as I
do now, handles this matter more properly to our case. If all (our Bishops)
(says he to Petilian the Donatiste) through out the world were such as thou
most vaynely do cavil: yet what has the chair of the Church of Rome done
against thee, in which Peter sat, The Bishop of Rome sits in Peter's
chair, which heretics call the chair of pestilence.
and in which at this day Anastatius does sit? why do thou call the chair
or see apostolic, the chair of pestilence? If thou do it for the men, whom
thou think to speak the Law, but not to do it: did our Lord Jesus Christ,
wrong or iniure the chair wherein the Pharases sat, for the Pharases? of whom
(notwithstand^ng) he said: They say and do not. Math. 23.
Did not he commend that chair by Moses, and yet (reserving the honor to the
chair) reproved the Pharasees? For he says. They sit on Moses chair: Do
as they say, but not as they do, for they say and do not. If you (heretics)
would think on these things, Apply this to our time.
you would never blaspheme the chair apostolic, in whose communion you are
not, for the men, whom you infame. But what is this other, then not to know
what to say, and yet you can not but speak evil? This far S. Austen against
John Nicols and his fellows, who fill up books with reproaches and slanders
of the Bishop of Rome.

But now let us see, what this accuser brings in particular, against his
benefactour the Bishop of Rome: (for I will pass over al general reproaches,
wherein each heretic abounds according to the measure of his own
invention.) First he charge this Pope, The first crime objected by John
Nicolls against (...) Pope.
with taking away certain merchandise from Turks, in his haven of Ancona,
whereupon ensewed the like entreaty toward Christians, from Turks in
Constantinople. But this is a false charge, feigned of him self, or received
from some his like, in some tavern upon the way, as he passed by. For the
Pope has no league at all or truce with the Turks, whereby either Turks
repair to his dominions, or his subjects to the Turks. Wherefore if he
stayed any Turkishe vesle at al, (as I can not learn that he did) it must
needs be some pyrate, and not any merchant. Whereby it appears, that which
he adds, to be of his own invention, that the Turkish Empe^our should writ a
letter to the Pope, desiringe restitution of his goods, and yet could not get
it, whereby he was enforced to stay Christians goods in Constantinople etc.
This I say is invented, to bring the Pope in hatred.

For first, the Emperor of Turks uses not to write letters to Princes, of so
small matters, as the stayinge of one private ship is, and much less to the
Pope, with whom he has no league, as is said. Secondly, if he had written any
such letters, it had been hard for John Nicols to know it, being of so bas^
an estate in those countries, as he was, except only by some tavern or
barbers shop, where princes matters are more talked of, then understood.
Thirdly, if the Turkishe Emperor had wroten (as John Nicols says) yet is it
not credible that the Pope would have sturred him against Christians, by
denyinge so just a demand, which in conscience he could not do, seeinge he
has not only doonne more, of him self, then that comes too, but also
procured other Princes to do the like, and that without any letters of so
great a Potentate as the Turk is, namely, at my being in Rome, I saw a great
man of Swetia delivered from the Inquisition, The Popes justice and clemency.
with restitution of his money which was taken at Millaine, and also an
English ship or two, delivered from Naples, which had been seized on,
there, by the Inquisition, for their misdemenaur before: which all was done by
the Popes request, albeit they were taken in other Princes dominions. Some
also, which now live in England, fallinge into the Inquisition in those
countries, can give testimony of the Popes justice, in restoringe them their
own, upon their dimission.

Finallye, the Pope having noe subjects of his own dominions in
Constantinople (as I noted before,) could not hurt Christians there, by
staying a Turkishe ship in Ancona, for that other Princes, having league
with the Turk, as the French men, Uenetians, Florentines, and other, they must
have enjoyed their liberties, how soever the Pope and Turk had disagreeed.

Bnt now, how far of the Pope is from voluntarye hurtinge of Christians in
Constantinople, and how careful to do them any good he can, especially those
which are in servitude there, it may partlye appear, by this which I saw him
do my self, at my beeinge in that City. There passed through Rome toward
Uenice, and so to Constantinople, forty Turks, delivered from the Galleys in
Naples, upon exchaung of so many Christians to be delivered from like bondage
in Constantinople. These men beeinge very poor, made supplycation to this
Pope for some relief, Liberal alme^ given to Turks.
who gave them five hundred french crowns, willinge them to procure so
much courtesy as they might, to Christians abydinge in their Emperoures
dominions. By which it may appear, how vniustelye he is slaundered by his
malytious and ungrateful scoller.

The second crim objected.
The second crime wherewith Ihon Nicols charge this Pope, is, That he should
put a certain County out of his living, in Macerata, not paying him half the
value: for the preferring of his son James to the same. But this is more
apparently false then the other was before, for that the world can witness that
there is noe such fact done, and that the Popes son James, has noe such
county. Reasone also teaches us, that it cannot be true, for that Macerata
being under another Prince his dominion, to wit, under the duke of Urbine, the
Pope has nothing to do, touching Counties possessions there, to displace them
from the same. And in places and times when just occations has been given of
gaining of greter matters the^ Ihon Nicols talks of, as of the dukedoms of
Ferrara and Urbine them selves, which for want of ishew, were like to turn
again unto the Church, from whence first they were given: this Pope has well
showed how far of he is from all extortions, seeing he has confirmed again to
ye former families, in respect of their virtues, the said states and
dukedomes, which lawfullye he might have taken.

And as for his son James, whom Ihon Nicols says, He has raised from a
beggar to a marquis, able to spend thirty thousand crowns by the year. True
it is, The Popes son.
that this young gentleman is well able to live partly by his own friends,
before the present dignitye of his father, being of a worshipful and welthie
family, and espetiallye by the King of Spain, whom he serves, and from
whom he has received diverse good prefermentes. It was reported also, that the
house of Sforza, in which he is matched by marriage, had some talk with the
King, about exchanging or buying a certain state for his children in the
Kingdom of Naples. But yet nothing is done, so that both are false, that he
was a beggar before, or that he is a Marquis now. Nether could Ihon Nicols
understand of these matters, but only by the servants of the Roman College,
whose lips are larger commonly in such reports, then their knowledge
certain: as also we may see, in Ihon Nicols him self who pretends noe
small priuitie to this man's coffers and ability, which notwithstanding he
could not learn but by them only which knew it least. For albeit this man be
the Popes only son, begotten in matrimony before his fathers Priesthode: yet
his fathers moderation is such toward him, (as also toward the rest of his
kin and carnal friends): as his very enemies can not reprehend it, and good
men are maruailousllye edified by it.

The third crime objected.
The third accusation, wherewith John Nicols presses his benifactor the Pope,
is, For taking from a moncke two precious stones, worth a hundredth thowsande
crowns, which he had brought from India, and presented to this Pope, which
he acepting of, in stead of reward, put the monk in prison for departinge his
Abbey without license. And this is accounted a great point of iniquity, which
is marvelous, the party wronged being a monk, from whom to take not only
moveable goods, but also his Abbye and life too, had been noe offense in a
protestant Prince, by the cannons of new divinity. Marye in the Pope all
things must be heinous. But yet before indifferent judges, I might ask this
question. If the matter had been true, and if the Pope had taken these jewels
from the monk, as from his subject not capable or fit for so great riches,
and had also punished him for leaving his cloister without order: what law or
reason makes this matter so heinous as is objected? but I am persuaded, that
all this whole tale is either false or mistaken. For diverse which were in Rome
since and before John Nicols, do report no such thing to have happened in
their time, but only that a Spanishe merchant, which dwells at the foot of
Trinity hill, toward Porta del populo, John Nico^ changinge a merchant to a
moncke.
brought a Jewel not long since from India, of some good value, and being
accused by the letters of certain Bishopes of India, that he had gotten the
said Jewel wrongefullye, was put in prisone by the Pope, until he had laid
the same in safety to abide the trial of law: which thing happening at John
Nicols being in Rome, might give him occasion to err in his report, and to
turn that to a moncke, which happened in a marchante. Especially his capacity
being not of the cleerest cleerest to distinguishe matters, and his
intelligence of affairs, coming unto him from such obscure parsons, as easily
might huddle up chalk for cheese. And in very deed it seems not a matter
probable, that a pore monk should light upon Jewels of so great value, and be
suffered to wander the country with them, as John Nicols reportethe.

This then is all wherewith John Nicols charge the Pope, which
notwithstanding, may well be called nothing, John Nicols accusations proved to
be nothing.
in the consideration of indifferent judges. First, for that they are but
triflinge matters in respect of the manifould great affairs of Princes, whose
troublesome and infinite dealinges, are subject to suspion of greater
iniquities, if they should be called to judgment, before the tribunal of our
imaginations. Secondly, for that, if they were both great and heinous, and
also true: yet were they noe prejudice to religion, whose slander here is
sought, for the reasons aleaged by S. Ausste^ before. Lastly, for that they are
false, and supposed only by John Nicols, as may apeare by that already has
been answered, and also by some things which herafter shall ensue. For thanked
be the holy providence of our merciful Savior, he has blessedly provided for
the malice of our time, by placing in that rowme, so virtuous and just a man,
as may stopp the barking chappes of all his spitfull and slanderous enemies,
especially in this crime of covetous iniquity, objected against him by the
shamles ingratitude of him only, who confesses the receipt of more lberalitie
from him in few months, Great ingratitude.
then he could have gotten at home in many years. I say Pope Gregory is
greatly wronged, to be charged with that vice, whereof never Prince in man's
remembrance, has had so many testimonies of the contrary virtue. The
monumentes of his bountefulnes, piety and exceeding liberality, are extante
to the view of every manes eyes, whom malice has not blinded.

I could here fill up books, with recital of infinite particulers known to
the world, and confessed by his enemies, which would seem wonderful unto the
reader, touching his munificence and works of charity, but the place
serves not, and parhaps it may hereafter be declared by others. Now it shall be
enoughe to note only in two or three words, the deuersitie of ways, whereby
this holy man powers out his liberalite to the needye, and then let the
indifferent reader judge, whether it be likely, that he which esteems so
little his own, will use extorsion for the spoiling of others.

There is a virtuous preacher in Italy, named Julius Rasius Hortinus, Julius
Rasius Hortinus.
who about two years past, made certain colections of things done in Rome.
This man notethe that the Alms and charitable deeds of this Pope, are of two
sorts, the one, certain, firm, and standing, and openly known to the world:
the other, secret and uncertain, given out only as occasions do require. For
the which notwithstanding, this Pope every year, lays a side one hundrethe
thousand crowns, albeit many times this sum is not sufficient for that
purpose. He reckons up many perticulers to prove this his saying, The Popes
extraordinary deeds of charity.
which I omit. As for example, that within the space of five years, he gave
extraordinariely (besides his standing pensons to that purpose) above two
hundred t^owsande crowns to one good work only, which was, to the relief of
poor widows, and to the marriage of orphane girls and other, which without
that help had been in danger to have fallen (for need), to a lewd kind of
life. The like occasions are innumerable wherein his aid is demanded, as in
the often necessities of pilgrims that come to that city: of Christians
taken by the Turks and Moors: of poor people fallinge into misery within
his dominions, and also for the faith abroad: of hospitales, religious
howses, Churches, Colleges, schools, confraternities, and the like: which all
in their needs, make recourse unto him and are never rejected without some
relief.

But now for his certain and standinge works of mercy, they are far
greater without all comparisone. For first as Rasius notethe, Ca. de principum
vita.
there are above three thousand parsons which have their dailye maintenance out
of his palace of Vatican, The Popes ordinare expenses in deede^ of cha^itye.
whereof very few are his own servants, for that they have their standinge
wages besides, but they are but they are such, as live abroad in the city, and
receive thence, every second day, their portions of bread wine and raw
flesh, to the value of a crown a week, for which purpose the Pope, besides
the wines of his own dominions, buyeth every year, a thousand and five
hundred butts of wine out of the Kingdom of Naples, whereof the King
Catholic gives him the custom. Besides this, the numbers are marvelous of
English men, Strangers relieved.
Irish men, Scotts, Flemings, Germa^s, Hungaria^s, Slauons, Greeks, Cypriotes
and others: which being molested for their consciences at home, repair to him
for succor, whereof none are rejected, but all helped according to their
necessities and his ability, as some of them have 30. crowns a month, some
20., some 15., some 10, some 6, and none less then 4., which I have hard of.

Besides all this, are his standing pensions to hospitalls, and to sundry
orders of poor religious howses, which being in great multituds, must needs
be very chargeable unto him, especially his munificence being, to give so
abundantlye as he does, and such liberal portions: for I understand of one
religious house only in that city, which receaueth yearly from him above
5000. crowns in ordinary alms, besides all other.

After this, are schools and learned men, Universities and learned me^
maintained by him in diverse places, but principally in his universities of
Rome, Bononie, and Perusium. For example: in Rome, he has Muretus, Muretus.
and in Bonony, Sigonius, Sigonius.
both men of great name, and entertained by him with several stipendes, of
little less soome then of 1000^ crowns yearly. The other readers also of these
universities, are many, and very sufficient, depending, all, or the most part,
of the Popes exhibition: as in Rome, there are 30. readers in the Colldge named
Sapientia, Rasius cap. de colleg.
and the meanest of them, has yearly for his lecture 100. crowns: and the
most, much more. And besides these, he gives very large entertaynment, to many
learned men of all professions in Rome it self, as Deuines, Lawyers, Orators,
Poets, Antiquaries, Gretians, Hebritians, Arabians, and Sirians, which remain
there for the ornamente of that city.

Last of all, and above all, are his Seminaries, and Colleges which he has
erected and founded upon his own charges, for the virtuous trayninge up of
youth, as well in other countries as in his own. Seminaries in Rome.
And in Rome, the Seminaries are many which he has erected. Whereof the first
is Seminarium Germanicum: Germanicu^
for the use of Germans, which cost him 37. thousand crowns, the first year,
and now has endewed it with twelve thowsande crowns a year, of annual
rentes. The second is, Hebreum.
Seminarium Hebraicum for the use of young Jews, converted to the faith,
wherein they are brought up in exact study of divinity in the Hebrew
tongue, under Christian Rabbines, for the confutinge of their nation, when they
come to be of sufficient ^nowledge. The third is, Seminarium Grecum, Grecum.
wherein the children of the Greeks are brought up, gathered from diverse
parts of the world, and are instructed by learned men of their own language,
together with the latin tongue, for the confutinge of their countries errors,
and for the conuertinge of such iufidells, as live there amongst them. The
fourth is, Seminarium Anglicanum, Anglicanu^.
for English men only. The fifte is, Seminarium Hungaricum, Hungaricu^.
for Hungarians and Slauons. The sixte is, Seminarium Belgicum, Belgicum.
newlye begoone for Fleminges. The last is, Seminarium Romanum, Romanu^.
for the Italians, wherein their is great stoare of most goodlye youth, albeit
the most part of this Seminarye live not of the Popes charges, and this is all
with in Rome it self.

But now, if we look into other countries, this Pope has many more
monumentes of his munificence, Seminarie^ out of Rom^^
especially Seminaries mayntayned at his charges, as the English men in
Rhemes: Rhemes.
the Scottishe men in Paris: Paris.
the French men in Auinion: Auinion.
the Zuisars in Lucerna: Lucerna.
the Bohemians in Prage: Prage.
the Duche men and Polonians in Uienna: Vienna.
and in diverse other places has he the like, espesially in Germany, which
now I do not remember. But it shall be sufficient to have named these, for
here hence we may gather a conjecture of the rest.

Now then, this being so, let the impartial Reader judge, how likely a matter
it is, that this Pope disboursing his own so abundantly abroad, will pelf
unjustly from other men at home, as his scoller John Nicolls, for good will,
accuses him.

Noe, noe, this slander has no jot of lykelihood, as I noted before, but was
uttered for customs sake, and for pleasing of their humors, who feed of
reproach against the sea of Rome, and against the man sitting there, whatsoever.
God give them his grace, for the ^uringe of their Frenzy.

I would here end, to speak of the Pope, but that I am enforced to add a
word or two, towching an impertinent quarrel, which John Nicols picketh to
him, for his Pontificalitie, that is, for the reverence which Christians in
respect of his rowme and dignity, exhibit unto him, which being in dead a
very reasonable thing, and such as may be given without flattery, and received
with out pride: yet the malice and envy of heretics can not bear it, but in
great ^eate of speech they inueigh agynst it.

John Nicols, here towcheth two points: the one, that men kneel downe^ as he
passes by: the other, that he is borne upon men's shoulders, of both which I
will speak.

And for the first I answer, Kneling dou^^ for the Popes blessinge.
that seeinge we kneel down to temporal princes and governors, in respect
only of the high governor, whom they represent, not expecting any thing from
them except temporal commodities: much more of right may we kneel down to
a spiritual magistrate, who governs by a higher title, the^ the temporal
does, for that, he is the instrument and ang^ll of God, by whom al heavenly
gifts and benedictio^s are derived unto us. He succeeds in the place of
Adam, Enoch, Noe, Abraham, Melchisedech, Isaac, and Jacob, of moses and Aaron,
of all the holy Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles, to deliver Gods
blessings unto us, if we humbly seek the same. For which cause, it has
always been the fashion of Christians, to ask with humility the benediction
of priests, and if of all priests: then much more of the highest Priest of
all. And this is the cause why men do kneel down unto the Pope, not to
addore him, as malice slaundereth, but to reverence him in honor of Christ,
whose person he bears, and to receive by him Christ his benediction, whose
rowme he possesses.

This I say is the cause why men kneel down unto him, which thing,
whosoever reprehendeth, must needs do it more of envy then of reason, seeing
he cannot but grant, that some honor is to be given unto him which blesses
another, for that S. Paul says: Heb. 7.
That the better always blesses the lesser. And of reason, we must needs
think, that the blessings mentioned in the scripture as received at men's
hands, for example of Melchisedech by Abraham, Genesis 14.
of Isaac by Jacob, Genesis 32.
of Israel by the ^wo sons of Iosephe, Genesis 32.
of Iosue by the two tribes and a half, Genesis 49.
and of Solomon by the whole congregation of Israel, 3. Reg. 8.
were received with some external reverence, 2. Paral. 6.
especially that of Aaron, which is more like unto ours, for that he was high
Priest, and also for that he is reported in scripture to have Blessed the
people afte^ sacrifice, Leuit. 9.
by extending out his hand, which ceremony whiles he did (and being high
Priest) it is like the people showed some external reverence, by bowinge them
selves or the like, seeing good men were wont in that time, to cast them
selves upon the ground to honor other upon less occasions. As Jacob to Esau,
Iosue. 7. 1. Reg. 20. 25.
Iosue before the Arcke, David to Ionathas, Abigail to David and the like.

Now, towching the second, which is, that at certain high festival days,
Bearing of the Pope on men^ shoulders^
he is borne from his palace into S. Peter's Church, (for at no other time or
place is that thing used) it is a matter so reasonable (the circumstances
considered) as can be offensive to noe indifferente wise man, and much less
give occasion of such inuectiues and e^clamations, as are used against it, or
rather against all religion for this one thing.

The matter stands thus: At certain principal feasts of the Church, the
Pope uses to leave his private chapel, and to come d^wne to service in
Saint Peter's Church^ At which time such great multitudes of people expecte him
theere, to receive his benediction, and very many also, to see him, which
never saw him before, being strangers and come from far countries to visit
those holy places: as it is impossible for him to pass in, and out, thoroughe
the preasse, and to be seen to give his benadiction to all, except he should
either ride or be borne in his chair. And to ride, it were very unseemly and
inconvenient, having to pass thorough all S. Peter's great church, where the
most preasse is, and also for the passages of stones and steres. Wherefore they
have used always, to lift him up in his chair, and so to conuaye him
thorough the multitude, and this is all the matter, which is so much exclaymed
at. Which notwithstanding, being done upon such considerations and necessities
as I have said (for at all other times he goes on foot or rides) it rather
notes malice in them that malign it, then conuincethe pride in him that
admits it, or any fault at all in the well meaning Christians, who upon
so just causes do both^ desire and o^fer it.

Of the Cardinals.
Next after the Pope let us see what John Nicols brings against the
Cardinales. Wherein I must be shorter then in the other before, both for that
I have not so^ much spare time as Ihon Nicols in the Tower may have, as also
to obey the wise man's counsel. Prou. 26.
Answer not a fool, according to his folly, lest thou also becume like unto
hin. Which sentence, that I bring not against Ihon Nicols without just cause,
shall appear by his manner of accusing the Cardinals, which is very foul as
follows.

First (says he) I will begin with your Cardinales, the pillars of your
church. Have not they bewtifull boys, with whom they committ the sin of
Sodom, as I have hard by the Romans, How this sin is punished in Rome, ^ee
after in the answer to Rome.
and by a gentelman who served to Cardinal Sfoisie, who travailed by land with
me from the city of Ancona to Venice? have not these young Cardinales pretye
wenches in their palaces, An improb^ble slander.
whom in the day time they call either their sisters or cosins, and in the
night time make them either their bedfelowes or concubins? And do you not
know, how that there was a young Cardinale, a Prince, An impuden^^lye.
burnte at Rome not long since, by a common queen of the s^ewes, and took
from her the french disease wherewith he dyed miserablye. This is John Nicols
unclean accusation of ye Cardinals, grounded only (as you see) upon a bare
interrogation, which always may be answered iu^siciently with a No. But for
that I will not imitate his slanderous manner of dealing, I mean to add proof
and reason to my Noe. Yet, first I am enforced to complain of some other men,
whose wisdom or grauitey should have stayed the publishinge of such
scurrilitie, as here is put down, against so many honarable parsons, and
some Princes also, without any proof or reason at all.

I do apeale heerin, to the consciences of al modest and civil gentelmen, be
they of what opinion in religion soever. The publishing of Nicols scurrilitie
against law both of nature and Nations.
Whether it be not against al law, both of nature and nations, and against the
dignity of our kind, being men, to suffer so shameless filthe, both lothsum
and intolerable to any chaste ears, without all proof, to be cast out
against so noble parsonages, which never offended us, and to be published in
printe, to the vewe of the world. If some wicked mann should adventure the
like against vs^ in other countries, and should set down such particulariteis
of dishonestie, either heard, or devised, against our Nobility and Maiestrates,
and should offer to printe it: would not very natural shamfastnes cause men to
suppress it, were they never so contrary in religion? yes surely. For there
is humane respect to be used, even toward our enemies.

Although therefore the base spirit of Nicols, shamed not to set abroche such
dregs of dishonestie, to the reproach of so many worthy men: yet, me
thinks, respect of common civility, should have moved those, by whose
allowance the matter passed, to have stayed or qualified so reproachful
infamies, powered out without certainty or ground of truth. For what does he
bring for proof of his reproaches, but only an uncertain hearsay, and the
report of a wandering serving man, if it be true, as I think it false, that any
such conferred with him. And is this sufficient to publish the auouchme^t, of
y^ infamous and horible crime, against al Cardinales without exception? The
whole matter is quikly answered. For the first point is a mere supposall,
suggested by envy, and uttered by malice. For the Cardinales keep noe such
b^wtiful boys, nether is there any light suspicion of such wickedness in any
of them, and if there is were, they could not esape the seueritis of justice
excersised in that place upon this detestable sin. The second point, is an
improbable slander, for that Cardinales keep no women at all in their howses,
noe not their own sisters. Nether shall a man see any woman repair to any
Cardinals house, except upon special known business, in the company of men,
with whom they depart presently again, and yet this thing is so rare a
matter also, as in mani^ years you shall not see some few to use it.

The third point, of the young Prince Cardinale, is an impudent and
apparentlye, reprouable in the face of al ye world. For there was no young
Prince Cardinal in Rome these many years, but only about three years past,
Card. A^striacus.
the Cardinal of Austria, cossen german to the Emporour, who, albeit he were
young, yet according to his virtuous education, he lived in Rome most
innocently, as also he does now in the court of Spain; without al spote of
such infamy as Ihon Nicols would enforce upon him. But ^et Nicols name the
man that dyed in Rome, and prove but this one reproach ^o be true, and I will
yield in all the rest: ^ut if he cannot, then let him be sorry that ^e has
reported it, or his favorers yt they have published it, or at least, the simple
reader, that he ever believed it, being so ^niust a slander.

And albeit this might stand for a suff^cient answer, to so insufficient an
accusation: yet for the more satisfaction of the reader, and to show how far
of the lives of Cardinals are, from occasions of these objected abominations,
(being al together occupied in virtuous affairs) I will touch breefely, the
order of life, and common excersises of the most of the Cardinals, The
excersises of Cardinals in Rome^
with their particular inclinatio^s, which for the most part, is in one of these
four kind of virtuous excersises following, that ts to say, in governing the
Church, in aduauncing learning, in excersise of charitable deeds, and in rare
example of Pastoral life. In each whereof, albeit I name but few, which are
principal and always present at Rome: yet must you understand, that these
men have their adherentes and followers, both in Rome, and abroad in other
countries also.

Wisdom in government.
And for the first, which is government, I will name only three: that is,
Cardinal Como, Sauello, and Morono, whose singular gifts in that matter do
excel. Cardinal Como, Como.
is Secretary to the Pope, and directs all actions of state, which pass
from him. Cardi. Sauello, Sauello.
is Uicar general in spiritual matters, and governs the Clergy, with great
zeal and sincerity. Card^ Morono, Morono.
is deane of the Consistory, and is commonly employed in Embassages abroad,
wherein he has showed him self a man of great valewe, especially in his last
iornie to Genua, about 4. years past, when by long labor, and peril to his
own parson, he quieted and set at union, by the help of Benedictus Palmius of
the Society of Jesus, the cittezens of Genua, so far in discord amongst
them selves, the commonaltie against the gentelmen, as it was like to have
turned to the ruin of the city, for that they were now entered into violente
murdering one an other. To these are adherents in matter of estate and
government, Card. Cardinales employed in matters of state.
Aragonia, Sforza, Altemps, Ferra^a, Columna, Vrsino, Gonzage, Farnesio,
Alexandrino, Sansisto, in Rome, Granvello, Guisio, and others abroad: employed
by these men's direction.

For the second, which is learning, Exercise of learning.
I might name the most part of them al, but for brevity, I will name only
four, Sanseuerinus, Sanseuerinus.
Sirletus, Sirletus.
Alciatus, Alciatus.
and Hossius lately decessed. Hossius.
Whereof the former two, being very expert in the tongues, do promote with
special care, the studdy and knowledge of the same, as by that which I mean to
speak of their excersices, shall appear. Card. Sanseuerine, is protector of
the Hebrew Nation, and of their Seminary which they have in Rome, whereof I
have spoken before. Besides the care of which College, he maintains diverse
excele^t Hebritians about him, from sundry parts of the world, and he has
besides certain learned Rabbines converted, which every satterday repair to
the Jews Sinagoges, to convert them, or to confound them, out of their own
law in the hebrewe tongue. Furthermore, he has at certain days in the
week, a Congregation or meeting of learned hebritians, who in ^h^ presence of
him self, and diverse other Cardinals and Prelates, do examine and discuss
the hebrewe writings of all the oulde Rabbines, taking out only^ that which
shall be thought bye the Congregation, to be blasphemous against Christ and
vnsu^ferable, and the rest to correct, and make clear with anotations, for
the better understanding of stude^ts in that tongue. And by this means, we are
like, err it be long, to enjoy all the Hebrewe commentaries, The Syriacke and
Arabicke songs in rome
and other discourses upon the old Testamente, which will be noe small help to
students in divinity.

Besides the promoting of the Hebrewe tongue, this Cardinal has also, by the
Popes appointement, a special care of aduauncinge the Syryan and Arabian
tongue in Rome, but principallye of the Arabian, which is common to all the
East parts of the world, both of Asia (...) Egypt, for hel^^ of which
countries, their is also a peculier. Seminary now th^^ght upon, and a very
gold print erected in Rome, this last year, for the diuulgatinge our auctours
in that tongue: which is doonne chiefly by the Patriarch of Antioche, which
about three years ago, fled from the Turk, to Rome, The patriarch of
Antioche fled to Rome.
and there is maintained by the Pope, according to his degree, with many
learned Arabians about him, who write and translate many things in that tongue
by his direction, he being very learned in divinity himself. There is used
also, as a principal instrumente in this matter, one Johannes Baptista
Romanus, of the Society of Jesus, a Jew borne, and once a learned Rabbin
amongst them, but now a zealous Christian, who was sent about three years
past, with diverse companio^s into Asia, and there wrought great fruit in our
faith, and returned again after one year, requiringe more laborers to be
sent thither, and for a proof of the peoples capacity, he brought with him
two excellent boys, of very a quick and sharp understanding, by seeinge of
which, the Pope was the more moved to think of a Seminary for the^ Nations,
and to prefer other matters before recited for their commodity.

Card. Syrletus, is protector of the Greeks and of their Seminary, being
him self excellent well studied in that tongue: and as Sanseuerin furthereth
the Hebrew^ so does he, by all means possible the Greek, and has a like
Congregation of learned Gretians at certain days of the week, Greek
exercises under Sir ^etus.
as the other has of Hebritians, and they have now almost ended the
examination of the greek Bible, according to the Septuaginta, with the help
of great variety of aunciente copies from many parts of the world, with
conference of all the old greek Fathers, which work is thought will be very
profitable when it shall come forth in print, the which being done, they mean
to proceed to other matters of noe less commodity for the furtherance of
Christian divinity. To these are ayders in the aduauncemente of learning
(besides the forenamed) Card. Saints, Leomeline, Maffeus, Sancta Croce,
Iustinia^, Cornaro, Sangeorgio and others.

For the third, which is bountefull liberality in works of charity, Works
of charity.
God be thanked, I might bring many examples, but without injury to the rest,
I will name only a few particulers, whose present monumentes of charity are
more apparante to the world. Card. Cesius has bulded in our time for ye
monastery of destitute maids, such as before their coming thither, were in
peril of dishonest life, a very fair Church, with other necessaries, to the
value of 30. thousand crowns. Card. Burrho^meus.
And Card. Borrhomeo has bestowed 40. thousand crowns in a Church for the Mal
Maritate, whereof I will speak more in mine answer for Rome. Card. Farnesius.
Card. Farnesius also, has disbursed already above 80. thowsa^d crowns in a
Church for the Jesuits, the thing being not yet half finished: and his alms
besides, are known to be very liberal, partly, to poor Hospitals, partly, to
other poor people, to whom be gives certain stipendes, and pensions to the
number of a 100., so that the whole some of his expenses in charitable deeds,
are thought to amounte yearly to 30. thousand crowns, or not much less.

I could reckon here, many particulers of other Cardinals, but that time
serves not. Notwithstanding, I can not omit to say a word of Card. Medices,
Car. Medices^
brother to the Duke of florence, who besides other deeds of piety, Anno 1575^
did use in the late year of Iubile, to repair often to Trinity Hospital,
where great numbers of Pilgrims did always remain, A very rare example in a
Prince.
and there (putting on an apren) did serve them at table, and not only
relieved them with money of his own, but also became a gatherer for them
amongst his friends and acquayntance, to the great edification of others, and
comfort of those poor men. And finallye there is no Cardinal that I have
hard of, but does (besides his extraordinary al^es) allot out monthly, some
certain s^ome of money to be distributed to the poor, as may appear in the
books of Hospitalls and other poor howses, wherein you shall see noted, how
much these howses receive from each Cardinal every month.

For the fourth and last, which is rare example of Pastoral life, Rare example
of pastoral life.
amongst many I will name three, whom the world does both know, and wonder
at: That is, Card. Caraffa, Caraffa.
Paleotto, and Borrhomeo. Caraffa is a young man abiding coo^monly in Rome, and
his virtues are rare in all kind of zealous Christian behavior, that is, in
earneste study, often prayer, great labor, much preaching, marvelous
abstinence, and fervent desire of the advancement of virtue and true religion.

Card. Paleotto is Bishop of Bononie, Paleotto^
endewed with no less zeal in God his cause, whose wise and watchful
gonerment may appear by the decreees of his Prouincial Sinods extant in print,
and his singular virtues, may in part be conceived by that, which I will say
of Card. Borrhomeo whom in government and life he seeks to imitate. Only I
add this of Paleotto, that he preaches incessantly, and distributeth every
month to the poor, that, which amounts of his Bishoppricke above his own
necessary expe^ces. He is singular well learned him self, and a great Patron
of all learned men.

Card. Borrhomeo is Bishope of Millaine, Borrhomeo. the mirror of Prelates of
our time.
and seems to have received the same spirit in government, which his
predecessor S. Ambrose had. For he is a pattern of perfect prelacie to the
world, and his doings are such, as in deed are scarce credible in these our
days, but only to them that have seen them with their eyes: his labor
seems intolerable, both in visiting his provinces for the most part a
foot, and also for his continual preaching, commonly eu^ry day, and some time
twice or thrice in one day, and upon occasion of need he stays in the Church
40. hours together, as he did of late, bestowing ye one half hour in
prechinge and the other in prayer, of all that time: and the poeple coming and
goeing from far parts to his Church of S. Ambrose in Millaine, to that his
40. h^ures exercise. This exercise is called in Italy la Quarantena.
His diet is most slender eating only once a day, and that in the refectorie
with his servants without difference of meats. His exercise is after dinner
to hear his Chapplens discourse upon some spiritual matter, redd at dinner
time, (for all the^ dinner noe word is spoken, but one reads the scripture
for half an hour, which is all the time that his dinner dureth:) his sleep
is not above 4. or 5. hours in the night: he has a College or Seminary of
priests in Millaine erected and founded at his own charges, to whom (for the
most part) he makes every day an exortation, and spends one other hour with
them in spiritual conferences.

At the time of the last great plague in Millaine, about 4. years past, al
men fleeing for ye terror of death, he by no means would be persuaded to
depart, but perseuered there al ye plague time, A marvelous example of a
loving Pastor
going to ye infected himself, and ministering ye Sacraments unto them: and when
they lacked necessary maintenance, he sold away all his household furniture,
(as appears yet by his naked chamber walls) and distributed al unto them.
Besides this, every friday during the plague, he went bare footed to the Church
before ye people, bering ye Cross himself, and reciting ye Litanies^ with
streams of tears, so long, until God turned his hand from that City: every
night before he goes to bed calling al his people together they have prayers,
and spiritual meditations in his chapel, to which also strangers of ye Town
some time resort, amongst who^ there came once a wicked catif and discharged a
pistol upon ye Cardinals back, A wonderful miracle.
as he was kneelinge in prayer, but God delivered miraculo^ly his servant, for
the pellets passing only through two thin cassoks and his shirt, staid at ye
skin and persed it not, as it was there found and showed in the presence of
many, which are yet alive to testif^ie the same. Much more might be spoken, of
this rar^ man, but this may suffice, to show that Cardinals are not so wicked
me^, as Ihon Nicols does affirm. And generally I may add, that as many
Cardinales as are Bishopes in these days, as none of of these in Rome are,
(for the Pope suffers no Bishop to lie from his bishopric, but to be
resident, according to the Council of Trent, Sesio. 23. cap. 1.
) they are all of very good and exemplare life, as might be showed in
particulers, and by the most virtuous lives and deaths, of two late Cardinales
arche Bishopes of Naples, and Augus^a, was declared.

Of Priests and religious men.
John Nicols accuses the clergy of Rome and Italy, in two things, the one
of ignorance, the other of dishonestie. For the first, he says: Their
Priests in Italy, are for the most part unlearned. I demanded of some of
these Italian priests, in the Italian tongue, wether God the Father and God
the holy Ghost, had bodies, they answered yea. Well then seeinge their
priests be ignorant and cet. Here you see, John Nicols, borne in Cowbridge,
vaunting over the Italian, and condemninge him of doulfeshnes, which is some
what more ridiculus, then the Ape scoffing at the fox, for want of a tail.

That the Italian priests are commonly well learned, Italian Priests learned.
I could affirm of mine own experience, and prove it also by the infinite
books, which are daily set forth by them, in all sciences, but especially in
their own language, which they esteem as much as the latin, and have
^urnished the same with all variety of authors, which ever wrote commendably
in any tongue. But why Italian priests, shonld not be so ignorant and
unlearned as Ihon Nicols reports, I could yeald many more resons, whereof the
first and principal is, their great wit and capacity, joined with a great
desire of knowledge, and therein to excel all others. Which things, being
compared with other helps, whereof I will now speak, must needs bring forth
greater effect of learning, and learned men in Italy, then in other places
where the like helps are not.

And touching the helps to learning, Helps to learning in Italy.
which Italians, besides their excellent wit, have above other men, they are
many. For first, in stead of our two universities, Universities.
Cambridg and Oxforde, they have their Pauia, their Padua, their Ferrara, their
Bononie, their Siena, their Perugio, their Rome, their Salerno, their Naples,
and some other universities, besides their great schools not much inferior to
Uniuersities, Schools.
as Turin, Millan, Mantua, Brescia, Cremona, Uenice, Florence, Genua, Macerata,
Aquila, Cosenza: and other places where commonly the Jesuits do read. Also
besides their provincial Seminaries, Seminaries.
which according to the Counsel ^f Trent, Ses. 25. ca. 18
every Bishop that is able, has in some town within his dioces, which in
Italy amounts to be some hundrethes.

To this now, if we add their facility in obtaini^ge the latin tongue, by the
vicinitie which it has with their own: also the variety of all sciences
written, or by translation, in the Italian tongue: also the great store of
learned men and teachers amongst them, and the continual conference which
they have with learned strangers, who daily come unto them: lastly, the great
and often excercises which Italian priests have, in preaching to their
flocks, or expounding the Cathechisme every sonnday and holy day, according
to the council of Trent: Ses. 24. ca.
we shall find it very unlikely that Italian priests could not answer John
Nicols whether God the father and the holy Ghost, have bodies or not.

If there were any such matter talked of (as I dout very much): yet the error
might eas^ly be committed, A probable ges^e of Nicols false report.
either by them in not understanding Ihon Nicols Italian, or by him in not
perceauing their answer. For they mistaking his eydle demand (which no man but
his like would have made) might answer him to a another question of some
discretion, saying: that God the father, and the holy Ghost, being without
bodies, might nothwithstanding be represe^ted unto us in bodies, as God the
father was represe^ted to Daniel, Dan. 7. Math. 3.
in the shape of an old man, and the holy Ghost to Ihon Baptist, in form of a
dove, and that the Church lawfully uses the same now. This I say, they might
perhaps answer. But for the other question, whereof no child in Italy is
ignorante, it was as impossible for Italian priests to answer so grossly, as
it was easy for John Nicols simplicity to ask it, and for his malice to
report it now in printe.

The second thing which Nicols obiecteth against Italian priests, and
especially them of Rome, is dishonestie in life, which he proves not but only,
by his accustomed way of interrogation. And first of Monks, Ihon Nicols
^launder of monks answered.
Was there not (says he) at Rome a whole monastery of such as bear a silver
cross in their hands, and are appareled in blew, full of women, that went in
habit of these monks, and were they not espied at the last, and escaped
unpunished. To which I answer, there was noe such thing, and all Rome will
bear me witness of the same, as also many English men, which all Nicols time
were there, and never heard mention of any such enormitie. And it appears by
that which he adds. Of their vnpunishment after they were known, That all,
is his own invention, for filling up his book, and flattering his exhibitors.
For that such matters once known, escape not unpunished in Rome, Severe
justice upon a friar.
apeareth well by the justice done upon a Spanish friar in his time, for a
less matter then he reports, albeit in the same kind: that is, he was
publicly hanged at the bridge of S. Angelo, for running out of Spain with an
other man's wise, which fact of his, was the only great offense heard of in
Rome by any of his profession these many years.

Noe less impious, is Nicols second slander against all priests, of Rome,
where he says, Nicols slander of Prieste^ refuted.
That they go without punishment openly to the stews, and that he has seen
them with his eyes embracing the queanes. Which is so false a slander as has
greatly to fear the saying of Scripture, which is, Pro. 21.
That a lying witness, shall have an evil end. For it is so salse, that such
things are practiced or permitted publicly in Rome, as the half of that
which he reports, is sufficient to depose any priest from his living in
that place, and to suspende him from his function, and besides, to procure him
self, half a dosen stretches of the Strappado, The strppado^
which is greater punishment, then al clergy men in England, would willinglye
admit for such offenses Wherefore his exclamation is ridiculus, where he
says. Oh if a minister heerin England should commit such abhoemination and
escape unpunished, how would you cry out and cet. This I say, is ridiculus.
For what their ministers do commit in this kind of sin (notwithstanding
their own wives) we hear and other men see, and the world abroad can
witness, and how seuerlye they are punished, some late exampels have declared.
And yet we cry not out, except to God alone: nor endeavor we to proclaim al
in printe, and if we would, (as perhaps we may hereafter being thus
provoked:) yet have we truth sufficient to put down, and need not damn our
selves by lyeing, as Nicols seems resolved to do.

I do not defend all priests in Rome for Saints, as you will not, I think,
al your ministers our reformers. But this I say to the confu^ion of your
malice, (which al indifferent men that know the place will testify with me,)
that as little outward scandal is given in Rome, as in any one place of the
world besides. To which I will add without detraction from any place, that I
have found more inward honesty, learning, zeal, religion, and devotion, in
seculer priests of Rome, then in any place else of Christendom.

He that will make proof of this, let him frequent the florentine congregation
of seculer priests, The excercises of Seculer Priests in Rome.
at S. Ieroms church by the English College, or at their new church named
Puzzo Bianco. Also let him repair to the Rosarie Congregation, at our Ladies
church Supra Mineruam, and he shall hear every festiual day such spiritual
excercises in those places, yt is, such learned discorses on spiritual matters
such exhortations to virtue, such detestations of vice, such deep
considerations of our end, and things belonging to our end, of our accounte
after death, of casualties in this life, and of our duties in every man's
present estate: as is able to move any hard or stonnye heart. And all these
excercises are done, by the seculer priests of Rome, with great pain, much
studdye, and no small charges, and yet all this is voluntary, and not by any
compulsion. The effects of spiritual congregations in Rome.


By means of these learned and zealous excercises, much good is done in Rome,
upon diverse persons which come to hear them, being of all sorts many, both
temporal and spiritual, and amongst other, diverse wild young gentlemen
resorting thither, of curiosity to hear, are often times so pearsed by
speeches uttered in those exercises, as they presently change the order of
their life, and become most virtuous and sober the rest of their days.
Soundrie great mutations of life are wrought also, in greater personages by
help of the said exercises, which would never be, if the Roman priests
(who are doers in the same) were such wicked lyuers, as John Nicolls affirms.

Of the English students in Rome.
John Nicolls slander of ye students refuted.
John Nicols, to omit no part of a perfect Sicophant, picketh occasion of
quarrels and detraction to his own felow-students of the Roman College, who
never offended him, but rather from who^ he has received great love and
courtesy. And because he had no fact to charg them withal, he invented a very
odious matter, which was malicious words against her Majesty, and diverse of
her honorable counsel: also, against some other chief men in ecclesiastical
causes. The effect of which words were, that they threatened, forsoothe, the
forsaide great parsonages, if ever there came a contrarietime, to requite with
rigor, the rigor now received. And pretending that he would not name the
parsons so threatened, yet childeshly he puts down the first letters of
their names, and that with such art and secrecy, as each man may read it,
and understand it. Wherein he follows so apparently his own invention or his
enditers direction: as he names diverse men, whom, I dare auouche, noe student
in that College knows, and much less threateneth. But it seemethe that John
Nicols has made a leag with hell, Esa. 28. Psalm. 138.
and therefore cares not how far he wadeth in this way of wickedness.

If he had put down, any particular circumstances, Ihon Nicols slander of
the students refuted.
as proofs of his accusation, it had been easier to have improued his
falshold. But bringing nothing, but a bare assertion, I must refute him with a
mere denial, until he brings further proofs, only adding certain
likelyhods which indifferetly considered may lead the reader to the discovery
of his malice. Whereof the first is, as I noted before, the naming of such men
here as are not known to any of the seminary. The second is, the naming of
so many as hardly could be talked of by them, or remembered by him. The third
is, for that the times of meeting and talking together in the seminary, are
both rare and short, and commonly in the company of some strangers, who
understanding not our matters or particular men, give occasion of other talk.
To this now, if we add the malice of the reporter, and how many other apparent
untruths he has uttered, and how many absurd contradictions, has and
shall be, gathered out of his own words, and how easy and plausible a matter
it was to devise this thing at that time without controulmente: I d^ut not but
the wiser sort will quickly discrye the whole.

But I cannot let pass without adding somewhat to that which touches her
Majesty in particular. To whom I know these virtuous students
(notwithstanding this slanderous acusatio^) bear all dutiful good will and
affection, The students dutiful meaning toward her Majesty.
excepting only their consciences in religion, whose conformity they cannot
frame, to her Majesty's proceedinges. This they have showed in reverent speech
to diverse of the contrary religion, who has been with them in Rome, and are
now England. And in show of this, imediatly upon the erection of their
College, they caused her Majesty's arms to be drawn very fair in gould,
and with convenient ornaments erected them in the haul of the College. In
token of this also, they appoint certain every month to pray for her
majesty, and her counsel in particular. The manner of which is this.

In the beginning of every month, they come all together in their haul, and
there after some prayer made, each man takes by lot, a little scrol of paper,
wherein three things are written. The Queens Majesty prayed for by the
students in Rome.
First, the name and festiual day of so^e saint of that month ^o come.
Secondly, some rare sentence of scripture. Thirdly, some special thing which
the whole College much tendreth. The first is written, for that each man shall
take that saint which falls to his lot, for his peculier protector under
God, that month, to pray for him. For which cause, each man reads the life
of his saint, and notes some vertewe out of the same for his own imitation.
The The second is written, as a posie for each man to meditate, and put in
practyse that month. The third, is written, to be prayed for by him to whom
the paper happens. Now, amongst other things which they pray for, there is
nothing more common, then pro Regina Angliae, So they use to pray pro summo
Pontisice. pro Imperato re^ pro Rege Catholico. pro Rege Christianissimo. pro
Regina Scotiae. and cet.
for so they use to write, and to read it alowde in the hearing of all men,
and this John Nicols cannot deny. which thing the students would never use to
do, if they were so maliciously minded toward her Majesty, as he falsely
reports.

Now touching the excomunication of her Majesty by, Pius Quintus, which Nicols
maliciously accuses the students, The students cleared about the
excomunication.
To have renewed again at midsomer last, was twelve month, and to have
published at Rome and Rhemes by fixing them upon pillars, and by sending them
thorough out Italy, Spain, and a part of Germany. There is no one part
true, but al is mistaken and spitfully perverted: for the matter was only thus.
In Christmas week was tweluemoneth, Anno 1580. there were found in Rome
certain coppies, of the said excomunication, and sent to the Bishop of S.
Assaphe by Car. Allexandrino, which coppies the said Bishope suppressed, for
any thing that we know, nether was it known whether the said coppies were of
the oulde printe of Pius Quintus his time, or printed since.

Now the students of the Seminary are wrongfully charged by Ihon Nicols in
all these points. Nicols great malice in matter of death against his fellows.
First, for renewing the same: for they renewed them not, nor can any man
affirm whether they were new printed or no. Secondly, that they published
them on pillars at Rome and Rhemes: for there was noe such publication made at
all, and the students never saw within the Seminary any such coppies, for
the matter was secretly suppressed, as I have hard said, and scarce any man
knew of it in Rome it self, by which also appeerethe how unjustly they are
accused to have dispersed them, thoroughout Italy and Spain etc, seeing no
such copyes ever came to their hands.

Of particular parsons.
The particular parsons wronged by Ihon Nicols are diverse, but I will touch only
the principal. First, Nicols slander of two learned men.
he reprocheth two excellent learned men, the one M. D. Allen, the other, Iacobus
Pais, reader of divinity in Rome, saying that, D. Allen demanded whether we
might not worship the timber whereof the image is made, as well as the thing
represe^ted? And that ye other answered, yes: which slander is so gross, as
it needs no further co^futatio^, but only to name the men of who^ it is
made, for their opinions are exta^t to the contrary, as shall more appear in
handling the third part of this answer.

Not being contented to have injured Father Pais, with this absurd report, he
proceeds to charg him and his fellow readers, with much more odious matter.
For of Pais he says: yt he uttered these words in latin in presence of 300
scholars. Nicolls slander of Fa^ Pais refuted.
The Popes good will is tried and known, and his purse is ready: but either
fear withdraws King Philip, or power forbids him, so that he dares not
to co^uay his army into England.

For answer whereof, I say, that albeit, it be not easy to convince
apparantlye a shameless liar, talking of matters past, and in far countries,
especially to us who have no access to plead for ^ur selves, nor course of
justice to examine our cause: yet by such means as in this case a^ possible, I
will prove this report false and malicious.

First, for that John Nicols being noe scholar nor hearer of Fa. Pais, but
always present at an other lecture of Petrus Ga^bacurta, reader in cases of
conscience, the same hour wherein Pais did read, could not hear Pais to utter
these words, which he faineth him to have spoken in his lecture to the
scholars: nether is it probable that he hard the^ by report of other, for
then would he have named both the man and the circumstances, which he nether
does nor can do.

Secondly, F. Pais being a private religious man, attending only his lecture,
and dealing nether with Court nor courtiers, Evident con^iectures.
could hardly come to understand so secret meaninges of great Princes, and if
he had known any such thing, it is not likely that he would have proclaimed it
in a public schole, where no occasion could be given of such matters,
especially in particular princes. And if his own wisdom could not have
direc^ed him in this yet ye respect of his superiors in ye Society, would
have restrained him, who seuerelye interdicteth to their readers and preachers
all mention or glauncing at matters of particular Princes ^siats. But what do
I stand to confute by circumstances so manifest an untruth? the matter is
easy to be tried. There are 3. or 4. priests in prison lately come from Rome,
who for diverse years have been hearers, and have missed no one lecture which
Pais read, but have received all in wrytinge: let their dictates be seen, and
if that be not sufficient, let them be demanded upon their oaths, whether ever
they hard Pais say any such thing. Let Nicolls come before them, and lay
down the particulers, and by all those ways he shall be proved a slaunderer.

After this John Nicols, as now contemning al, Prouer. 18. Psalm. 56. Psalm. 13.
being entered (as it seems) to the depth of iniquity, and making his tongue
a sharp swoorde, and his throtte an open sepulcher, to woonde and bury whom
soever he pleases: passes on to fowler reproach, which is: That a Reader in
positive divinity in Rome, should say in the hearing of 200. scollers, that
any man of worship in England, might give authority to the vilest wretch that
is, to seek the death of our Sovereign Queen. But this venomous darte I will
repel as the other before, by the vnlykelyhods of time, place, matter and
persons: and by the testimonies of those priests now prisoners in England,
who must needs have been present at the words, if any such had been uttered
by their reader. Which preistes being many, and superiors to Nicols in all
respects, both of age, descretion, honesty and learning, ought to
counteruaile his only assertion. Besides this, if Nicols will put down the time
and occasion of his speech, and also name the reader (for there are but two in
positive divinity that is, Robertus Bellarminius in controversies,
Bellarminiu^^
and Benedictus Pererius in scriptures) I will procure the reders own Apology,
Pererius.
with the subscription of all his scholars, in defense of him self, from this
unjust sl^under: for these learned and sober men, are so far of from such
desperate points of doctrine: as the plain contrary has often times been
hard from them, and may also be gathered out of their several dictates now
extant in England, especially out of the dictats of there fellow readers in
scolastical divinity, I mean Achilles Galiardus, Galiardus.
and Stephanus Tuccius, Tuccius.
in their late Lectures de legibus.

All which being so, it appears that Nicols reports have no truth or ground,
but were only devised by him self, The dryfte of Nicols ^laundering ye
Jesuit readers.
and others, to serve that present opportunity of time, wherein it was said,
that certain Jesuits, among other priests were come into England, and
daily expected to fall into the magistrates hands, whose rigor was the more to
be procured against them, and the people more to be incensed, by these odious
reports of Jesuit readers in Rome.

But let Caine take heed, Ge. 4. v. 10.
for Abells blood will cry vengeance from the earth. And albeit Caine do get
a bodily protection for a time, Ge. 4. v. 15.
and a reprobates mark, that noe man may hurt him, yet is he not free: Psalm.
2.
there will come a reconing day, and a judge to strike with an iron rodd. Psalm.
9.
And if besides, there be any such, whereof the Prophet complayneth, who lie in
wait for innocente blood, and have not the judgments of God before their
eyes: let them be assured, that he seeeth them, who protecteth the afflicted,
and whose hands they shall not escape, all be it they receive praises and
blessings now for their iniquities. And for Nicolls, I can give him noe
better counsel, then to meditate at his leisure these two verses, uttered by
the holy Ghost.

Quid detur tibi, aut quid apponatur tibi ad linguam dolosam? Psalm. 110.
Sagittae potentis, accutae, cum carbonibus desolatorijs. Of Rome.
Now come I to the greatest eye sore of our adversaries, which is Rome, a
City that yields great matter of talk, and furnishes not only our
books to the printe, but also our pulpittes and tables in England. Whatsoever
is amiss in Rome, overthrows our Catholic and Roman religion. As though
our faith depended of those crased walls, so often beaten down and possessed
by the enemy, If Rome were most wicked, yet were it no pre^udice to Roman
religion.
without hurt or blow to the religion of Rome: or as though, if that city were
destroyed or soonk: ye Bishopric of Rome might not remain, and ye Bishop still
head of Christ's Church, albeit he were in India and dwelt in a barn: or, to
come near to our purpose, as though, 1. Pet. 5. Apoc. 18.
if Rome were ye wickedst city under heaven (as it was when S. Peter and S.
John called it Babilo^ yet Christian religion might not be good in it, as it
was at that time, when it was Babilo^, Romans 1.
For even at that time, S. Paul commended the true and holy faith of a wicked
Rome. Au. li. 2, co^t. lit. Petil. ca. 51. Ite^ ep. 16 5. ad Gene.
Wherefore this is but a point of a wrangling heretic (as has been noted
many hundred years ago) to condemn the faith, because of the place: the Sea
Apostolic, for the vices of the city: the substitute of God, for the
frailty of a man: and Moses chair, for the life of a Pharasee.

But yet in truth let us see, what they bring against the City of Rome, for I
deny not, but as in a great and populous city their must needs many sins
and faults be committed: and that (I think) our adversaries will not deny
also, in their most reformed cities of England.

But the question is, of the public face and government of Rome, which our
adversaries, for the slander of our religion, declare to be permitted in all
kind of vice and licencious living, which is not so: Rome less reproueable
the^ other Cities.
for as there be some evil there, so are there many good, and more examples of
virtue in that City, then in any place else of the world whatsoever, as by
that which I will say more clearly shall appear. And first, as I did before
about the Cardinals and priests, I will refute John Nicolls particular
slanders, and afterward show the contrary virtues.

Nicolls therefore, Nicolles first slander of Romans answered.
begins by demanding, as before he used to do (for other proof he has
none) How do the Citizens (of Rome) live (says he)? was there not lately a
great rich citizen, that had a place to the which resorted many young Roman
gentlemen, who committed the sin of Sodom one with an other? and were they
not spied out at the last? and did not they al escape punishment, except one
poor man which died for all? and did not the Romans say that he died
wrongfully? for that the sin of Sodom was but a trick of youth? For
answering this, I will begin with that which is last: what soever some poor
abject in Rome might tell John Nicols in familiarity, of the lightness of this
detestable sin: (for no man of wit would either say so, or confer with Nicols
about such matters) yet, it appears by him self yt it is not so tawght there,
nor so taken by ye magistrate which inflicted death upon one for the same. The
which thing, albeit he confesses: yet, as his fashion is, he either grosely
mistakethe, or peruerteh impudently, a matter done and known in the sight of
the world, and reproueable by as many, as wear then in Rome. For the thing
touched not any Citizen or Roman young gentleman as he forgethe, but thus.
There were seven lewd roges, some spaniardes, some french men, and some
Italians, that meeting some times in grottes or caves, without the wales o^
Rome, were suspected to committ this horrible abomination. Wheruppon the
Sbirri were sent out, Sbirri are catchepoles.
to watch and appr^hend them, whereof the other having distrust: two of them
ran away, and five were taken, all which five, were hanged at the bridge of S.
Angelo by Tibers side, How Sodomi is punished in Rome.
and afterward burned to ashes at the place where the fact was espied, in the
sight of more (I think) then twenty thousand people: by which may be
conceived, Nicols honesty in the rest.

Nicols 2. slander of Rome ^unswered.
But he goes on against Rome, saying. What murder is there? insomuche that
noe man can sit in his wagon without danger of life. It may be, that sitting
in wagons is dangerous in Rome, for I never saw any man ride in them there,
except it were coming out of the country, but in Coches you may see five
hundred every day riding up and down, with out danger of life or any other
hurt. And I never heard of any in our days which were assalted in their
Coches, but only, about twelve monethe ago, or more, there was agoodlye
french gentleman, son and heir, to the County De la Ponte, The death of
young County de la Pont^
who having enemitie with a certain Italian rider, belonging to the Cardinal
Altems, was challenged by the said Cauallarizzo or rider and his companions, as
he passed the streets in his coche, wheruppon the said french man and his
servants and compagnions isshewinge forth to figthe: was soon after slain,
to the great discumforte of the City, and grief of the Pope, as appeared by
the diligence used in apprehending the malefactor. For albeit certain
Roman gentlemen, had conveyed him out of the city: yet was he gotten
again, and after diverse torments, excecuted. So that I see not what this
act can make against Rome.

Nicols third accusation of Rome.
And yet Nicols proceeds further a^gainst Rome, for he says. Have not the
Romans six streets full of Curtezans and harlots, who pay a yearly tribute to
the Pope. And be there not thorough out all Rome Queanes, who lay out of their
windows carpets, and their gowens, which is a sign to them that pass by that
there they may have a woman for monye. At shrouetid, what horrible abuses are
there practiced at Rome without punishment, do not men go in women's apparel,
the gentle women out of their windows throw rose water, which is a token to
the^ that pass by, that there they may defile their bodies one with an other.
Here Nicols hudleth a great dele of malice against Rome, and proves it only by
his accustomed bare interrogation. To which I shall make sufficient answer by
gathering out only the several lies, uttered in these few lines, which are in
number no fewer then eight.

Eighte untruths in one report.
For first, it is false that Rome has six streets of Curtezans, for it has
but one, whereof I will speak more at large presently. Secondly it is false
that these Curtezans pay tribute to the Pope, and if they did (as they do not)
yet were it a punishment, and not an allowance of their life, as when you make
a Catholic pay money for his not cominge to church, you do not allow
thereby of his absence, but you punish him for it. Thirdly it is false, that
there are queanes thorough out all Rome: for if any be taken out of that one
street, named Burdello, she is presently whipped about the town. Fowerthly, it
is false, that they are dishonest women who hang out their Carpets and gowens
at their windows: for having noe gardens to air their clothes in, they use to
hang out the same at their garret windows, as also in London they are
accustomed to do. Fifthly, it is false, that horrible abuses are practiced in
Rome at shrouetide, for in this Popes time, there are permitted no other
pastimes, to be spoken of, at shrouetide, but only running with horse, an old
excersise of the getlemen Romans. At which act notwithstanding, there want not
some religious men, every year to be present, and by occation of that great
assembly, to speak some thing of edification to them. And as for maskes or
other dishonest sportes, they have not at al permitted. Sirthly, it is a
shamles lie, that m^^ go in women's apparel and women in men's, at that time.
Seventhly, it is false, that al gentlewomen do use to cast out rosewater upon
goers by, at y^ time: for they are only certain that dwell near to the course
of the horses, where great repair is. Lastly, it is a malicious slander, that
such water is cast out in token of dishonestie. For the best and noblest
personages use to do it, upon their friends as they come to see the course of
the horsemen, and not for dishonest meaning, as Iho^ Nicols interprets. So
that, be ye things never so honest or lawful of them selves, this man draws
all to a corrupt meaning as you see.

Of the permision o^ the stews.
But here, before I pass any further, I must say a word or two touching the
stews in Rome, the permission whereof by ye Pope, and by other Catholic
Princes in their countries, is accounted so heinous a matter by our
adversaries, as it may not be answered, but yt we thereby allow of unchaste life.
Which is a most false and wrongful charge, as may apeere by that which
follows. First the Pope, with all Catholics that ever wrote, condemns and
detesteth the act of simple fornication, as a deadly sine, and damnable to the
doers, without repentance. And our adversaries shall never be able to charge
truly our Catholic doctrine with ye contrary. Secondly, notwithstanding this
detestation, the civil magistrate may, for ye avoiding of a worse inco^ueni^nce,
tollerat or permit this sin in some degree, without fault, Tolleratinge of
stews noe alowinge of them.
and without any alowing of the sin it self. As God does tollerat with
wicked men and with many wicked acts in ye world, which he detesteth, and
might, notwithstanding, let the^ if he would: and yet he does not allow of
the^ for that he permits them. Thirdly that a naughty and wicked thing may
sometimes be necessary, and consequently tolerated without fault. (the
corruption and lewd inclination of men supposed) It apereth plainly by S. Paul,
who says, 1. Cor. 11. Math. 18.
yt heresies of necessity must be: and by Christ, who affirms that scandals
must needs come, and yet nether Christ allowed of scandals, nor S. Paul of
heresies. Fowerthly I might ask, why ye protestants in England, do permit
vsery by their laws, yt is, does not punish men for taking under ten of the
hundredth? They must needs answer that they allow not of the sin, but that
they do it for the avoiding of a greater inconvenience, which is, lest by
punishing all usury (as the Catholic Church does) no man would lend any
monye at all.

The causes why the stews is permitted.
So then the Pope, and other Christian Princes, for the auoidinge of a greater
inconvenience, seeing the corruption of some men will always be such, as being
restrained of this, would break to worse matters: and having learned by long
experience, (as S. Austen affirmed also of his time) that if this public sink
should be taken away, the infection would rushe into private howses: (as in
part (I think) may be noted in our own country, if we compare the chastity
of our fathers days, when such a place was permitted, with the times which
have followed since the taking away thereof): considering also, that the
tolleratinge with this public sink, is no ways any allowance of the sin:
for these causes, I say, Christian Maiestrates, have always permitted this
public scandal, protesting to their subjects, by the words of S. Jerome,
which he uses in a like matter, upon Christ's words. Li. 3. comment. in
math. 18.
It is of necessity that scandals should come, but yet, woe to that man, which
by his fault makes that to be, which otherwise in the world must needs be.
That is to say, of necessity there must, for causes, a stews be permited, but
yet woe unto him which haunteh the stews, or uses this permission. So that
the thing is permitted of necessity in general, but no man's going thither,
allowed in particular.

Whereof it comes, that there is no prince in the world which does or can use
more means, then the Pope does, Means used by the Pope for withdrawing lewd
women from their naughty life.
to draw al men from that vice, and to reform those miserable women themselves,
which live in that kind of life in his dominions. For first, they are shut up
in one street, with a note of infamy, not only to them selves, but to all
those who repair unto them. Sec^ndly, they are debarred of all spiritual
consolation, for they remain unable to receive any sacrament, as long as they
abide in yt trade of life. Thirdly, they are deprived of al credit or
countenance in ye world abroad, so that, if any of the^ should be found in a
Coche, both horses and Coche are, ipso facto, forfeited Fowerthly, they make no
testament, except they have lawful children, but al their goods must go to ye
conuertites, Conuertites.
that is, to those which are converted from yt kind of abominable life.
Fifthly, ye Pope causes every week, some religious men to repair to yt place
and there in the midst of ye street, to prech hell and damnation unto them
for their wickedness. And lastly, he has provided a goodly monastery for all
the^, which will leave yt state, to enter into, and there to be maintained whiles
they live, with a very competent and sufficient provision of an honest and
virtuous life. By which means, diverse are recalled daily from their wickedness.
Which things being so, let ye indifferent reader judge, how unjustly the Pope
is charged with alowing of there lewd behavior, as God, who is not partial,
will one day declare.

Thus, having answered Iho^ Nicols untrue and slanderous reports of the city
of Rome, it shall not be amiss, according to my promise, to bestow so^e few
words in declaring ye piety, of this city, which every man yt has seen it,
and is not blinded with partiality, will easily confess, to be greater, then
in any place of ye world besides. And first, in talking of ye chief head head,
ye Pope himself, and of the Cardnals, I have showed how for matters of
learning it does excel, having in it, The multitud of students
Seminaries and colleges of al nations and tongues, also two distinct
Uniuersities, as I may term the^, for besides the schools of Sapientia, where
30. sundery learned men do read, the Jesuits schools have above 1200.
shollers which frequent the^, besides the students of law in ye college of
Capronica, Capronica.
and besides ye great howses of religion, where also are learned readers, and
have often public excercises of disputation one with another, to the great
commoditye of all students in that place.

After this, in my speech of the priests and clergy of Rome, Congregations in
Rome.
I showed what co^gregatio^s and confere^ces they have in spiritual matters, to
ye great instruction and edification of all strangers that repair thither. In
which kind of piety, I touched but ye lest part, for besides those
congregations yt I named, there ar diverse others, and where as the number of
Societies or Co^pagnies of seculer men in Rome, 80. Societies in Rome.
amou^t to above 80. theris never ^ Co^pagnie, which maintains not a church
or a chapel with some number of priests, with whom, sundery times of the wek^
they have conference in spiritual matters.

Now then, to pass over to the deeds of piety which are corporal, and which
appertain more in particular to ye Citizens them selves, I must say generally
that there is noe good work of charity, that may be devised, which is not
exercised among the Citizens of Rome. For proof whereof, we have to consider,
that all need commonly is found in one of these 7 sorts of people, Seven
kinds of men upon whom ye Romans use principallye their charity.
and consequently charity to be showed upon them, that is to say: children,
sick folks, strangers, prisoners, oppressed with debte, oppressed with
sin, and adjudged to dye. Upon all these, do the Romans exercise their
deeds of charity in great abundance.

Children. Societas S. Spi^itu^.
And first for children, the company of the holy Ghost receaueth as many
Infantes, as come, and because many are ashamed to bring their infantes thither
openly, there is a secret place where they may lay them down and not be seen,
so that the multitude of infantes which are brought, is very great, and
commonly never less then 200. and the number of Nurces there continually
mayntained, is never fewer then 100. Besides this society, there is another
house appointed for Orphan boys, in Antonines bathes, Thermae Antonini.
and another for Orphan maids, in another place named gli quattro Coronati,
and each house receaueth ^00. All which children cominge to ripe age, are
distributed into two sorts, the boys, some to learning, and some to
handiecraftes: the maids, some choose to enter into Monasteries, and the rest
have portions allotted them to be married away, as shall be showed more hereafter.

For sick men, Sick folks.
the provision of Rome is marvelous. For besides the hospitalls which each Nation
has there, severally, the Romans have made great provision for all sick men
by their hospitalls, Hospitalles in Rome.
which in number are many, but four do excel above the rest. If a man have
an ague, then he may go to the hospital of S. Spirit, S Spiritus.
if he have a fresh woonde or hurt, he may go to the hospital of our Lady, S.
Mariae de co^solatione.
if he have an ache, then he may go to the hospital of S. John: S. Io^nnis
Lateranensis.
if he have a festered sore or incurable desease, he may repair to S. James
his hospital. S. Iacobi ad po^ta^ populi.
In all which places he shall find as good provision, of meat, drink, clean
beddinge, phiscike, surgerie, and dilligente attendance, for nothing, as
commo^lie he could have for his money in the city, or rather better, for which
cause, many gentlemen do remove from their own howses, to the hospital of S.
Spirit, for recovery of their health: which hospital of S. Spirit has
commonly noe less then 300. sick persons in it, with goodly partitions for
men and women, gentlemen, and of the porer sort. S. James his hospital
receaueth in number 155. men, and 45. women: the other two hospitals receive
few less: all things are kept so sweet and clean in these hospitals, that
many noble women, Ladies and gentlewomen do repaier often thither, to comefort
the sick, as also very many gentlemen, especially the holy days,
bringinge with them some what or other to present unto the sick people for
their comefortes. These haspitals are thought to spend above 150. thowsande
crowns by the year, which depend for the most part upon the alms of the
Romans.

Strangers.
Towching strangers the liberality of the Romans is very great, for besides
the particular hospitalls which are in Rome, for every country, there are
diverse hospitals of the Romans, appointed out for the receite and relief of
poor strangers. Hospitium ^riita^is.
But the hospital of the Trinity excels all the rest, which, all the whole
year of Iubilee Anno 575. was never empty of great numbers of strangers: and
some days they received 14. thowsande together, with abundance
notwithstanding, of meat and lodging, and with so good entreatie, as diverse
noble and gentlemen of Rome, would repair thither to serve ye said Pilgrims
and to wash their feet for love and devotion.

For Prisoners, Prisoners.
the care of ye Romans is singular, above al other nations in the world.
Societas charitatis.
For they have amongst them a company named the company of charity: which
company, by license of the Pope does choose every year, two officers for the
relief of the prisoners, the one a protector, who has to defend ye poor
prisoners yt are wro^ged, by law or otherwise. The other a procter, whose
office is, to make sufficient provision for meat, drink and other necessities
for the^. These me^ also do see, yt al things pass orderly in ye priso^s, and
yt all ye priso^ers have divine service said before the^ daily: and yt there
come every week once or twice, preachers, to preach unto the said prisoners.
Lastelye, that there be convenient books of piety and devotion in every
prison, tied with chains for all to read: and that al books of scurrilitie
and dishonestie, be removed thence, by which good means, and other used by
them, many profit more in piety by one months imprisonment, then they had
done before, in many years liberty.

Men indebted
For men indebted, the Romans take very charitable order. For first, they
have a great bancke of monye, called mons pietatis, Mons Pietatis.
out of the which al banckrupts or other poor people may borrow money without
intrest, bringing a paune or sufficient sureties. Secondly, the company of
charity, by help of other Romans do deliver out 80. ^uery year, which are
imprisoned for debt. Thirdly, the society of S. Apostle, uses to go about
the city, and to enquire of poor gentlemen or gentlewomen who are behind
hand, and are ashamed to ask help, and if their debtes be not very excessive,
they seek means to discharge them.

Lyuers in open sin.
Towchinge those that live in sin, and lewd life, or are in danger to fall
into the same, the Romans do practice great piety. For first, towching maids
destitute of friends, Occations of sin how much shunned in Rome.
which for need might fall unto an evil trade of life, they marrye every
year of their own charges above 500. as after shall appear more in
particular. Other they place in monasteries, and 140. they maintain from time
to time in a house named S. Catharins besides those which I named before.
Secondly, for them that be married and can not agree with their husbands, and
by that mea^es are in danger to turn to dishonest life, the Romans have
builte a goodly monastery dedicated to S. Martha, and named it Delle Mal
Maritate, Mal Maritate of S. Martha.
in which house such young women may live virtuously, under the government of
certain grave Noones, until they be reconciled to their husbands again.
Thirdly, for them that are now dishonest and will be converted, they have a
house to maintain them in, as I noted before, called the house of Conuertites.
The house of Conuertites
Lastly, because, they which once enter into this house, of Conuertites, may
not turn back, or go fourth again, but must persevere there al their life,
(which many of these dishonest women can not at the first resolve them selves
to do.) Therefore have the noble matrones of Rome procured another house,
called Casa pia, Casa pia.
behind Pantheo^, where these women may come for a time, to prove what they
will resolve upon, in which time, the said matrones, The great care of ho^est
life in Roman Matron^.
do omit no means to persuade them from all dishonestie for the time to
come, and do offer to provide for them by good services with virtuous gentle
women, if they can not resolve them selves to enter into the monastery of
Conuertites, and by this means also many be reclaimed from wikednes and sin.

Men adjudged to dye.
Concerning these which are adjudged to dye, the citizens of Rome do show
themselves very charitable and peitiful: for they have amongst other, a
Society named the company of mercy, Societas mis^ricordia^.
who receive into their costodie, all such as are condemned to dye, toward
whom they use all humanity and gentle dealing, never leauinge them day nor
night, until the time of execution be past. If the prisoner have any children,
they promise him to take order for them, and so they do, as also for his
debtes, if he be trowbled with any: if he have any enemies, they bring them
unto him to be reconciled: after that, they read good books unto him and
cause virtuous men to preach and make exhortations to like effect: they
watch also with him, and cause prayers to be said for him, and finally they
accompany him to the place of execution, and thence receive his body and bury
it, causing certain Masses to be said for his soul.

These are the general points of ye good works done in Rome, which I have
touched breefely, leauinge out many more things then I have mentioned, for
breuities sake. But he that would conceive the multitude of these works, which are done by ye Romans, let him but read ye books of the Societies or companies
in Rome, which being in number above 80. as I noted before, and every society,
besides ye ordinary service of god, exercising some particular good work: The
cause of so many good works in Rome.
it must needs be that such good works are many in Rome. I have made mention
before of y^ society of charity, which have care of priso^s, and of ye
society of mercy, which takes care of condemned men, and of some other
Societies which have care of Hospitalls: But yet those are not all the good
deeds, which those societies do: for the society of charity does besides
give 50. crowns a month, unto ye Co^uertits, and does marry 22. maids yearly,
giving the^ 30. crouns a piece with new aparel: also it distributeth every
sou^day great quantity of bread unto the poor.

Now, if I should speak of all other Societies, strange liberality in
marrying of mayds.
I should be to tedious. But yet by these two or three words which I say of a
few, you may judge of the rest. The Society of the Annu^ciata, La compagnia
dell Anuonciata.
do bury strangers and poor people which dye in Rome, causing masses to be
said for the^, and it marries every year 180. maids giving each of them 35.
crowns, with new apparel. The Society of the Conception, La compagnia della
Concettione.
does marrye every year 30. maids, geuinge them 20. crowns a piece with
apparel. The Society of S. Angelo, marieth every year 20. maids, with 25.
crowns a piece and apparel. The Society of Confalones, La compagnia delli
Confalonieri.
marriethe yearly an uncertain number, with 18. crowns a piece and apparel.
The Society of Brescians, gives 20. crowns. The Society of Bononians, 35.
crowns. The Society of Neopolita^s, 35. crowns The Society of S. Apostolo,
besides helping of poor gentlefolkes, does attend to make peace between
enemies. The Society of Weepinge, La Compagnia del P^anto
does go to poor people and visit them in their sickness, at their own
howses, and gives them physic and all necessaries besides, with apothicarie
ware. The Society of the Name of God, La Compagnia del nom^ di Dio.
besides other good works attends to reprehend them which blaspheme or
swear, or abus^, the name of God The Society of S. Laurence in Damaso,
besides other good things atte^deth always to wait on the blessed
Sacrament, and to go before it with lights, when it is carried to the sick.
The Society of S. Marcellus, attends principallye, to procure prayers and
masses to be said for the sowles of all Christians departed. Besides all this,
every one of all these Societies, and the rest, have their particular deeds
of charity, several to them selves, as peculier little hospitalles, howses for
orphans, and the like.

And this shall be sufficient for the Societies or compagnies. Besides al which,
the alms and good deeds of particular men, Alms and good deede^ of
particular men in Rome.
are infinite, for diverse Romans will take upon them diverse particular works
of charity, as some to maintain one or two poor scholars of other countries,
(as the under Penitentiarie maintained always an English man or two) and so
other, of other nations. Some will take upon them to help in particular, some
religious house. Some to sustain some poor family. Other to visit every
day once, the sick people of some hospital, especially those that are in
worst case, and next to deaths door. Besides this, there is scarce any artezane
in Rome, which has not some chapel in some church, with a vawte in the same
for ye burying therein of his family, which chapel he maintains of his own
charges. Moreover at ye station days of Ro^e, Great alms geauen at station
days in Rome.
which are every holy day in the year, and every day of the lent and sundery
days besides, (these station days are days of repair to some particular
churches in Ro^e for devotions sake) you shall scarce find a citizen which will
not be there, or some of his howshould for him to pray with ye rest, and bestow
sumwhat on ye poor which are there to expect alms, in great numbers
(notwithstanding the hospitales): and it is almost increadible how many there
are in so much that this last year of Jubelie, the Pope seeing the infinite
nu^ber^ of beggars, about the churches where the statio^s were, spoke to his
officers, to entice them away, who did so, and offered them meat and drink
in the hospitals, and a Iulio a day besides, a Iulio is vi. d English.
for a monethe. And yet they would not take it. Which being told to the Pope,
he commanded them to be permitted still, saying, The Popes saying o^ many^
beggars.
That their sight did much good in procuring men to compassion and to give
alms, which otherwise many would not do. And so in deed it fell out, for
monye was given in such plenty that year, as a great man of Germany said
that he thought, that more alms was given in ready money in Rome, then in all
the provinces of his country.

Last of al, I will ad one thing in testimony of the Romans piety and
devotion, The order of the Romans in taking vo^unta^ie discip^ine for their
offenses in the holy week.
which many in England, will rather laugh at, the^ imitate, which is, yt upon
maundie thursday, before easter, they use to go to S. Peeters church, late in
the night, whipping the^ selves until ye blood stream from their bodies. They
go, their faces al covered, except only ij. holes to look out, and upon their
bodies they have only a shirte of sak^cloth cut so behind, that their
shoulders appear naked, where, with whipcorde they beat the^ selves, for more
then the space of one hour together. They go commonly above 600, in a
company. The Societies, of the Trinity, S. Marcellus, and of the Confalons,
are cheifest in this matter. And they are each of them, a hundred commonly
every year. Now, the beaters go in order, two and two, and between every two
beaters, go two other with torches. To see only this spectacle, were a matter
to move any man whatsoever. Besides these Societies, many private men, do
punish them selves very grievously in this holy week, for their offenses
past. Who covering their faces in such sort, as they may not be known, they
go to all the churches of the city, or the most part, beatinge them selves
pittifullye, until the blood do run from them in great quantity. All
which may suffice, for an answer to Ihon Nicols, touching this second
part.

Spilling of Controversies.
IN THIS third part, The third part
I must for two causes, be very short. The one, for that more has been spoken
in the second part before, upon urgent occations of Nicols his slanders,
the^ was meant at the first, unto the whole book. The other is, for that to
dispute with Ihon Nicols in Controversies, that is, with a grammarian in
grounds of deuinitie: is as lost labor, as to argue with Pedlers in points
of Poetry, or with a Colliar in cunning of Chivalry. He understands not the
state of that which is in question, nor conceaueth the meaning of either part
aright. The authors which he cites, he never read, but took them up at second
hand in English books where he fell upon them, namely in those of Hanmer and
of Philip of Mornay, whence often he boroweth whole pages together. Heerof it
comes, that his allegations do pass from him much mangled and perverted,
with evident testimony of ye ma^s insufficiency. Ihon Nicols insufficience.
For some times he mistaketh his authore: some times he names him not at all:
often, he alleagethe some ^t random, without citing any book or place: other
times he coteth, but with error. And yet, so little s^kil as he has, he
knowethe to falsifye a place for his purpose, or to corrupt it by translation,
and if that will not serve, yet to fill up the page with stuff impertinente or
against him self. For which cause I have named his do^inges in this part,
Spilling of Controversies.

The matters offered at by Nicols in his book, are diverse: as of the Church:
of miracles and revelations: of Images: of Purgatory: of Prayer for dead: of
prayer to Saints: of good works: of the Sacrament of the altar: of the
Supremacy: and of the Pope. But all is done (according to their fashion)
without order or method, beginning, or ending, by iumping in only upon
certain quillotes of controversies, and by s^karring at them with certain
broken shaftes of other men's quiuers, shiuered in pieces long a go, and beaten
back upon his co^pagn^ons. But the grou^des of these matters, are nether
touched nor conceived by him, and much less the pith of any one point
discussed, as shall appear in part by this brief aun^ere, albeit I can not
stand to d^sclose the whole.

Towching the church, Of ye Church.
Ihon Nicols, letting pass al declaration of the state of the question, and
other groondes of more intelligence, is content only according to his sckil, to
object against certain marks of the Church set down by Catholics, to
distinguish the true Congregation and church of Christ, from al Congregations
in the world. For better understanding whereof, and of this whole Controversy,
most n^edful of all other, to be rightly understood, I think it not amiss, in
most brief manner, to lay forth some few grou^des of the same. Not so much for
the aunswering of Ihon Nicols obiectio^s, which are of no importance, as for
the better co^ceauing of whatsoeur is in question between us and our
adversaries, in this matter of the Church. What the Church is.


First therefore we do al agree, Math. 16. Act. 5. Ro^. 16. 1. Cor. 6. Act.
20. Ephesians. 3. 2. Tim. 2. 1. Tim. 3. Math. 13. Exodus 19. Cant. 1. 4.
that the true and holy church of Christ, is a Congregation of Christians,
professing his faith and dedicated to his service, and so highly respected by
him, as being boughte with his blood, and linked by the bond of his eternal
^oue, is become his own house, his kingdom, his peculier possession, his
darling, ^is spowse, and his own body. To To which Church of his, 1. Cor. 11.
Ephe. 5. Ephe. 1. 1. Cor. 12. No salvation out of the Church.

Aug. Ep. 50 and 1^2^ li. de vnit^ eccle. cap. 4. and 16. li. 4 de sim. cap 10.

Cypria^ li. 1. ep. 1. li. 4. ep 2. and trac. de simpli. prel. Iren. li. 4. co^
here cap. 13. Chris. ho^ ^1 in ep. ad ephesians F^lge^t. li de fide. ca. 37. 38^ 39.
Pacia^ ep 2. ad ^^m Greg^ li. ^4. cap. 2. ^or. A^e^^ 204 and ^^ psa. 82^ ser.
181. de ^e^


all his promises are meante, all his gifts given, all his blessings
directed, al his graces powered out, all his love assured. S^condly, we also
agree, that seeinge this is so, that is: seeing this congregation is the only
house of God: no man can look for wages at Gods hands, as his servant,
e^cepte he be one of this household or family. And seeinge this Church, is
the only spowse of Christ: no man may have him, for his father, who has
not this Church for his mother. And seeinge this Church is Christ's own
body, whero^ himself is head: no man can be a member of Christ, or receive
any influence of grace or life from him, except he be a member of this Church.
Whereof has followed that common sentence of holy^ Fathers against heretics
and ^chismatiques o^ there times, that out of the Church is noe salvation. That
is, do a man what he can, out of the unity of this Congregation, yea although
it were to suffer death for Gods cause, yet cannot ^e escape damnation.

Thirdly, Catholics do deduce of these premises, that se^ing this Church or
Congregation is so necessary to be known and repaired to of all men, The
true Church is visible.
as has been said, that is, that no man can be saved, except he repair unto
h^^, enter into her, hear her, obey her, and the like: Cyp. li. de. simpli.
Ire. ep. 1. ad Da^. Aug. li. 4. de bap^ ca. 1.
they do deduce (I say) by infallible consequence, that this Church or
Congregation, must be visible to man's eyes. Otherwise how shall we repair
unto her, whom we cannot see? how can we complain unto her, Math. 18.
as Scripture bids us? why shall we be damne^ ^or disobeying her, as Christ
threatens us? 1. Cor. 15.
How shall we receive the Sacraments and true inter^retation of Scripture from
her, if she be invisible? Act. 20.
How did S. Paul persecute the true Church of Christ? Aug in psa 30. and 47.
and 44. li 2. ^o^. Pet. cap. 32. tract. 1. and 2. in ep. ad Io. Orig. ho. 30 in
math^ Chris. ho 4 in ca^ 6. Esa.
How does he say, that God has put Bishops and Pastors t^ govern it, if it be
invisible? The holy Fathers of the primative Church, have labored much in
this point against heretics, who always had this shifte, to say, that the
true Church was invisible, and therefore their obscure and new vpstarte
congregations might be it. Whereof S. Austen writes at large against the
Donatistes^ But the said Fathers, overthrew this refuge of heretics, by many
places of scripture: As where the Church is promised to be a hill, upon the
top of all other hills: Esa. 2. Deu. 2. Mich. 4. Psalm. 18. Math 5. 1. Tim.
3. Math. 18. Genesis 22. Aug. tract. 19. in epist. Joan. and Ier. in haec o^nia.
loca.
a tabernacle of God placed in the soon: a city inobscurable builte upon a
mountain: a pillar of truth, erected for all men to repair unto: and a
benediction for all nations to participate of, as well Jew and Gentile as others.

By which and like places of scripture, the holy Fathers do prove, that the
true Church of Christ is not invisible, but so visible and subject to al men's
sightes, as al may know her, repair unto her, enter into her, hear her, obey
her, and follow her, that will, except heretics only as S. Austen says:
Aug. li. de unit. cont. Pe^il. ca. 14. and in Psalm. 32.
Who do blind them selves, and will not see so great a hill, and if they do
see her, yet they run from her, according to the spalme: They saw me and yet
ran out from me.

Fowrthly, the Catholics do deduce of the premises that, The true visible
Church cannot err.
if this true visible Church of Christ, have so great privileges from him,
as to be his spouse, and his own body, as is said before: also if no man can
be saved but by repayringe to her, and obaying her direction: then is it
necessary that Christ should (according to his promise) so govern her by
his holy spirit, Au in Psalm. 147. and de unit. eccle. ca. 13 20. Math. 28.
and direct her unto the end by continual assistance, as she may never be
deceived in doctrine of faith, or bring her children into error. For otherwise
she might become of the spouse of Christ, a stromp^t and an apos^ata, as the
Donatistes said she was in their time, and as Luther said she was in his
time: S. Auste^ detesteth all such as say so

Conc. 2. in Psalm. 101. 1. Tim. 3.


and so Christ his Kingdom should perish, and the work of his passion become
frustrate: also, otherwise, why is she called by the Apostle a pillar of
truth, for us to repair unto in all doubts, and why are al men commanded
under pain of damnation to hear and obey her, Math. 18.
if she may err and deceive those that take direction from her? Leo ep. 31.
Math. 3. ^3.
Moreover, if this visible Church might err, and so perish, how then shall
the barn floor, contayninge corn and chafe? The corn ^^^de, Ephe. 4. Aug.
li 22. de ciui. ca. 15. and 18.
contayninge wheat and cockle? (understood literallye of this visible Church)
remain unto y^ end of the world, as Christ affermeth yt they shall? How does
S. Paul say, that this visible Church shall co^tin^w under visible pastors and
teachers until we meet all in unity of faith? etc.

Finally, read S. Austen only of this absurdity. That Church (says he)
which was the Church of all Nations, Aug. in ^sa^ 101. co^cio. 2. vide. Chris.
ho. 4. inca. 6 Esa. and^ Orig ho. 3. in mat.
is she not now? Is she perished? they say so that are not in her. O impudent
speech: is she not because thou art not in her? nay, see least thou be not in
her, for saying so. For she shall be, though thou be not.

Fifthly, Catholics do deduce out of the premises, that seeing the
knowledge and finding out of this true Church, The necessity of infallible
mar^es to know the Church.
is so necessary to all men, as has been said, and as noe man can be saved
without it: it is certain, that Christ has left ^ome such manifest, sure, and
infallible marks, to know this true Church and Congregation from all other
congregations in the world, as no man may be deceived therein, except he will
wilfully blind him self. This is agreeable both to the mercy and justice of
Christ, who forsawe in his providence, the doutes that would rise about this
matter. For which cause also S. Aus^en says. Aug. in psalm. 32.
That the holy Prophets spoke more plainer of this Church, the^ of christ him
self. Foreseeing that more controversies should rise about the Church, then
about Christ etc. Of these marks therefore, we are now to entreat, so far
as Nicols gives us occasion. Which thing because it is of al other, of most
importance, (for the true Church once found, Why here^iques are so angerie
with the marks of the Church.
all other controversies are ended) the heretic striuethe most in this
point, to avoid the true marks, which descrye his estate, and to forge other
marks, which are noe marks at all, nor any way to be found in his church:
but yet may be challenged by him, and not so euedently improued by the
contrary part.

But for the examination both of his and our marks, Three properties of true
marks.
it is to be noted, that true marks of the Church, should have these three
conditions or properties at the least. First, that the mark should be better
known, and easier to be found out, then the thing marked by it. For otherwise
it could be no good mark, being more, or no less obscure then the thing it
self, which it ought to make manifest unto us. Secondly, that the mark be
proper only to the thing marked, and not common to many other, for the^ it
should no more make manifest the thing we seek for, then any other. Thirdly,
that the mark be such, as our forefathers used in the Primative Church, to
prove their Church true, against heretics. Now then, let us examine breefly
both our marks, and those of our adversaries, according to these three
properties and conditions^

Our adversaries bring two principal marks, Call. li. 4. in. ca^ 1. number. 7. 8.9.
whereby they would have the true Church to be tried: the one is the true use
of Sacraments: the other the true interpretation and preaching of God his
word: which two things, alb^it they be pri^iledges of the true Church, and
only found in the same: yet, can they be no external marks to show unto us
the said Church, Heretical marks re^uted.
for that they want al those three properties of true marks before recited.
For first, they are as unknown to us as the thing we seek for: it being as
hard and obscure, and as much in controversy, who do preach the word
sincerely, and administer the Sacraments aright, as it is, which is the true
Church. Secondly, these two things are not so proper to the true Church, but
that every heretical congregation may and does in the sight of the world,
chale^g the same unto it self, and consequently it can not be a good mark to
distinguishe their co^gregations from the true Church. Thirdly the holy Fathers
did never use these two marks against ye heretics of their time, but rather did
reject the^ when they were brought for marks by heretics, as they are now: Li.
3. ca. 19. de bap. con. Don. and ep. 48. ad Rog. li. 1. ca. 29. cont. Cresc.
as it may appear by S. Auste^ in diverse places against the Donatists,
Rogatistes, and other here^ickes, which did labor as he says: That their
error may be named truth, and there wikednes justice, for the sacraments and
scripturs which they hold for a show and not to salvation.

The Catholics on ye other side, do alleag more certain, easy and manifest
marks, for trial of ye Church, which marks have al ye properties before
recited: and albeit they use to bring 15. or 16^ s^ueral notes or signs, al
founded in ye scripturs, by view whereof it is most esie to discern ye true
Church from al other: yet for breuities sake I will name only four, three
whereof are impugned by John Nicolls in his book.

The first mark is, yt the true Church is Catholic, as our Creed teaches
us: Catholic.

Au^ ep. 170. ad Sever. Lirin li. aduer. here.


which word S. Auste^ expounds thus. The Catholic Church is that, which is
spread over the whole world: and an other father not long after him, expon^deth
that to be the Catholic or universal Church which holds that faith, ^ero.
dial. con. Lucif. Pacian. ep. ^ ad Simp. Aug. li de vera religi. cap. 7 tract.
118. in Ioh. in psalm. 49. and 147. li. 2. cont. Pet. cap. 55. ser. 131. de
tempore.
that has been h^lde generally by Christians, every where, and in all times,
since the beginning^ And generally all the holy Fathers do use and urge this
mark, against all heretics, proving that church only to be the true church,
which being planted by the Apostles and their successors, was spread over al
parts of the world, or the chief parts thereof: whereby it took the name of
Catholic, and that all other congregations, which afterward began in
corners, or by some one or few men contrary to the more part of
Christianity, can not be the true Church, but heretical Sinagogues. Li. de
vtili. cre. cap. 7.
Whereas there be many heresies amongst Christians (says S. Austen) and all
will seem to be catholics, calling other men heretics besides them selves:
the Catholic Church is but one, more plentiful in multitude if we consider
the whole world, as al men will grant. And again. Ep. 165. ad genesis
If an Angel from heaven should say, leave the Christianity of the whole
world, and hold the parts of Donatus: he ought to be accursed, for that he
goes about to cut thee from the whole, and to thrust thee into a part. And
again. Li. 4. de simb. ca. 10.
Whatsoever Congregation of heresy, sits in a Corner, she is a harlot and
noe mother. Now whether this mark agree to our church or theirs, let our
adversaries judge.

The second mark of the true church is, Antiquity. Antiquity.
For as God was before the devil, and as the good seed was sowe^ in the gospel
before the cockle: Math. 13.
so was Christ his true church, before al heresy, and al heresies have sprung
up since our Catholic faith was planted, which thing may be showed in this
manner. See of this. Aug. li. co^. Ep. funda. cap. 4. Iero^. ep ad Pam. and
Ocean. and dial. con. Lucif. Hillar. li. 6. de trin. ante medium.
For that in every notable change or alteration of religion, these six things
may be showed. First, the authore of that new religion: secondly, the new
doctrine which he taught: thirdly, the time when he began: fowerthly, the place
or country where he began: fifthly, that some men resisted and impugned this
new doctrine at the beginning: sixthly that some other few men first began to
embrace the same. And al these six things, we can show in every heresy since
Christ's time, as also of the doctrine of our adversaries. But they can never
show the same of the beginning of our doctrine. And therefore, it appears
that their doctrine is new and h^retical, and ours ancient and Catholic.
This argument of antiquity, all the Fathers have used against heretics of
their time. Lib. de prescrip. con. here.
What are you, (says Tertulia^ to certain heretics) whence and when came
you? where have you been hidden so long? Lib. 2.
And Optatus against Parmenian. Show the beginning of your chair which will
challenge the holy Church unto you.

The third mark used by the old Fathers to know the true Church, Succession.
is succession of Bishopes, from the Apostles time, especially in the sea of
Rome. Lib. 3. con. her. cap. 3.
For so says Ireneus above 1300 years past, reconinge up all the Bishopes
of Rome from S. Peeter unto his time. And adding that by that succession of
Bishopes, all heretics were confounded. The same says Tertulian, Lib. de
prescrip.
Let heretics lay forth the beginning of their churches, let them turn
over the order of their Bishopes coming down by succession^ and cet. Epi.
her. 27.
Epiphanius also uses this argument of reconing up the Bishopes of Rome for
proof of the Catholiqu^ faith and confutation of heresy. The like does
Optatus and S. Augustine against the Donatistes. Oopt. li. 2. cont. Pa^m. Au.
^p. 165. and 42.
Willing them to do the like, if they mean to aquite them selves from
heresy. And the reasone of this, is, for ye Christ, leaving his Church to be
governed by his Apostles, which were Bishopes, and they by their successors:
whosoever came in afterward not by this lawful and ordinary door, of
ordination and succession, John. 10
except he bring extraordinary proof of his extraordinary vocation, must
needs be a thief and a wolf as Christ notes, and as all heretics have
been, seeking to intrud them selves, by extraordinary ways, and means,
starting up in particular countries, and making them selves gouerners, without
any lawful calling.

The fowerth mark of the true church is unity and consent of doctrine. 4
Unity and consent.
For as ye devil is authore of dissension, so is God authore of unity and
concord: 1 Cor. 14. Math. 12. Vide. Aug. Li. 18. de tri. Li. 52. and 41.
and the true Church being the body of Christ, and ruled by his holy spirit,
which is always one and the same, must needs keep one faith and one doctrine.
And heretics, being governed by the contrary spirit, must needs change
their opinions, as the malice of that spirit changes. For which cause the
holy Fathers have always used this as an invincible argument against
heretics. For that the Church, has endured so many ages in great variety
of times, and infinite men have written in diverse countries, in diverse tongues,
and upon diverse occations. And yet in all these writings they have agreed in all
points of faith so many hundred years together, which is a sign of one
holy spirit gouerninge their doeinges from time to time. Contrariewise,
heretics, albeit they began but in some one country, yet could they never
agree any space of time in one opinion, but would range from one thing to
another, until by dissension, they were all extinguished again. So Ireneus
writethe of the first heretic Simon Magus, Iren. li. 1. ca. 21. cont. her.
whose heresy was soon divided into the sects of Menandrins, Bisilidians,
and Saturnians. Li. de bap. cap. 6.
So S. Austen writes of the Donatistes, whose first heresy was quickly
divided into many secttes. Epi. li. 1. co^. her. to. 3.
So Epiphanius testifies of the Marcionistes: of whom in small time sproung
the Lucianistes, the Appellians, and Seuerians. The very same does IIreneus
write of the Ualentinians. Ire^. li. 1. ca. 5. Aug. de her. ca. 6.
And S. Austen of the Manachies: and Epiphanius of the Montanistes, Epi. li. 2.
to. 1 and her. 80.
and of the Massilians. And Rufinus of the Arria^s, who almost every year
changed their religion, as S. Hillarie also witnesses. Hill. li. 1. ad Constable.
Eua. li. 3 and.4.
Finally of the Eutichians and other heresies of the east, Euagrius and
Damascen bear witness. Dam. li. de. 100. heret.
And of our age it is evident also, how many sects have begun since Luther.
Fredericus Staphilus counsailer to the Emporoure, Staph. li. de concor. Lu.
shewethe how Luthers scholars were quickly divided into three sects, that
is, into Anabaptists, Confessionistes, and Sacramentaries, and they again
sub-deuided into other sects, insomuche that in his time they were 34. but
now are many more. So that by this mark it is easy to judge which is the
true Church and which is the false

Now then let us examine, what Ihon Nicols obiecteth against these marks of
the Church, which, although if be so impertynente and ridyculous as it is not
worth a confutation: yet for the readers instruction in their manner of
dealing, I will say a word or two about it.

Against the first mark, Nicols objections against the first mark which is,
Catholic fol. 25.
he obiectethe out of Exodus 23. Ne insist ito vestigys pote^tiorum ad mala.
Follow not the stepes of stronger then thy self to do yuel. which he
translateth thus: Thou shall not follow a multitude to do yuell. Which is not
according to the words put down. And albeit, it be according to the words in
the very text, yet is his fault double. First, to put down one thing in latin
and and an other in English, This trick he uses in many other places.
and secondly, to devise latin words him self, which are not in the text.
But to graun^ this and all the rest which he brings against wicked multitudes,
as of Turks, Jews, Infidels and heretics, Math. 7. and 24 Luc. 12.
which often times are more then the good: also that Christ his flock was small
in the beginning, and often oppressed after by persecuton: Iereni. 18. Esa. 53.
and cet. What is this to ye purpose? we talk not of al multitudes but o^
Christians: nor of Christianity in the beginning, but after it was spread over
ye world: nor of vices in manners, but of error in faith. In res^^^t therefore
of Infidels and other wicked of the world. Christians are but few: and very
much fewer at the beginning in respect of the number which they are now: and
for manners, both now and then, the more part parhapes licencious: but this is
nothing to our question. For notwithstanding all this, we say, Catholic and
private.
that after Christian faith was once spread over the world, by the Apostles and
their successors, and was received in unity by the followers thereof, and
thereby named Catholic: whatsoever private Congregation began afterward among
the said Christians, or shall do to the worlds end, teaching different
doctrine from this first received general doctrine, A sure mark to know an
heretical Congregation.
and disagreeing to the universal multitude of Christianity, (as Arrius
Pelagius and Berengarius did in their times, and Luther in his:) this private
Congregaton (I say,) is convicted to be heretical, by this first mark, of
Catholic. The Church tried by Scripture.
Nether is that refuge of heretics any thing worth, when they say, the
Church must be tried by the Scripture: for we grant that further forth then
they do, and therefore we bring all our marks out of the Scryptures, as by
examyninge of them may appear.

Against the second mark which is Antiquity, Nicols objections against
Antiquity Fol. 22.
Nicols obiecteth out of Job 32. Old men do not always understand judgment:
which is not worth the answering: for albeit private old men may lack wit, yet
Christ's old spouse, which is the Church, can not.

Secondly he alleges out of Philip of Mornay, Phillippe of Mornay translated
by field
that the Church is compared to a ship on the sea, to a city, and to a man's
body: all which decay by old age and need reparation, and therefore the Church
in like manner. To which I answer, that, by as good consequente I might
argue, Io. 15. Apoc. 5.
Christ is compared to a vine and therefore needed to be lopte: also to a Lion,
and therefore needed to be fedd with raw flesh, which is absurd. For
similitudes must not be like in all things: especially, in the matter whereof
we talk, where comparison is made in perfections, and not in defectes. For the
Church is compared to a ship on the sea, Math. 8.15.
in that as a ship is tossed by many waves and yet not drowned: so the
Church by many persecutions, and is not overwhelmed. Also to a city and humane
body, for that, as they have their members one above another, and one rulinge
the other by good laws: 1. Cor. 12 Ephesians. 4.
so she has her division of fu^ctions as S. Paul expounds.

Thirdly he obiecteth, that Caine was elder then Abel, Ismaell then Isaac, the
Jews law, then Christ's law, and yet antiquity made them not the better. I
answer: that we hold not, al old things to be the better: for so old boots
were better then new: but in all alterations of religion amongst Christians,
the elder religion is absolutely the better, for that as I noted before, Math.
13^
the good corn was first sowe^ by Christ, and after the cockle cast in by the
devil.

Fourthly, he obiecteth the east Churches of Greeks, Armenians, and
Ethiopians, which are fallen into errors, and yet are as aunciente as the
Church of Rome. To which I answer, that lettinge pass the comparison of their
antiquity, I say their errors are not so ancient, but that we know when
they began and upon what occation, and were controwled even at the beginning
which is sufficient for our purpose. For our adversaries can never show the
like of the Roman religion.

Lastly he brings in certain Fathers, as Ignatius, Tertullia^ and Cyprian,
inueihing against noughtie wicked customs. But what makes this against vs^ We
defend not noughtie customs: nor is our question of such matters: but note
John Nicols discretion in this place, in citing S. Cipria^, in his second book
and third epistle, where he inueigheth against certain lewd priests, which
upon an evil custom, Wine and water in the sacrifice.
did use to consecrate and sacrifice wine only in the chalice, and not wine
and water together, as Christ taught them, and the Church used, as he says:
and is this against us, or against our aduersaries^

Against the third mark which is succession, Nicols objections against
succession. Fol. 27.
Nicols brings more stoare of objections, all or the most part out of
Phillippe of Mornay his book, which book (as I hear) bears some swaye
amongst simple men in England, but how undeservedly may appear partly by
his arguments here answered and before: which in deed are the substance of
that vain treatise. First therefore Nicols obiecteth, that, upon the chair
^f Moses, sit the Scribes and Pharisees: which is as direct a place against
his ^wne purpose, as may be devised. For christ by those words, commands
^^presly Christians, to ob^y those which ^it by succession in Moses chair,
albeit they be Scribes and Pharisees, that is, most wicked men in life. By which
also, is answered his cauil of Annas and Ca^phas, who though they were evil
men, ^et were they by succession in true au^horitye, and consequentlye to be
obey^^, until the oulde Testamente (by which they held their dignity) was
ab^ogated, by entrance of the new. Cip. li. 2. ep. 3. and li. 4. ep. 9.
wher^f S. Cyprian writes excellentlye in ^wo epistles of his.

Secondly Nicols obiecteth S. Paul's ^ords to the pastors of Ephesus, thus. ^
know, Act. 20.
that after my departure hence, ^aueninge woolfes shall enter (and suc^eede me)
and out of your selves shall (by ^uccession spring up) men speakinge
^erue^slye: By alleaginge of which place ^nelye, if there were noe other, we
may ^onceaue the proceedinges of our adversaries. For, to make this place for
him, which is alltogeather against him, he has added of his own so much
(...) sounds with him, which is, Mark thi^ manglinge of Scripture.
(Succeed^^ by succession, spring up etc.) and ha^^ left out so much as
made against him as, (not sparing the flock: to draw awa^ disciples after them
etc.) For the word^ uttered by S. Paul are these. Vareis.
I know this, that after my departure, there shall enter in upon you, ravenous
(or greeuous^ wolves, not sparinge the flock, and ou^ of your selves their
shall arise men spe^^king perverse things, to draw away di^^ciples after them.
This sentence condem^neth John Nicols not only of forgeri^ in translation, but
also of folly in all^^gation, for it makes directly against h^^ party, being
meant literally by S. Pa^^ of heretics, who should enter by in^trusion upon
the flock, as Luther an^ Calvin did, and not by ordinary vocati^on and
succession: and for this cause, eue^ry word, has his proper emphasis. For he
says: Eiseleusontai ^is hymas
They shall enter in upon you, which imports intrusion and not succession or
orderlye vocation. He says: not sparinge the flock, and not, their flock:
to signify, that they were not their ordinary pastors by succession nor the
people their flock. He sayeth^ not: there shall spring up, which is proper to
succession: but, there shall arise up, or lift up them selves to dignity,
without vocation, Anastesontai.
certain men speakinge perverse things, to draw away disciples after them:
which also is added to signify, that these men, had not disciples of their
own, because they were noe pastors. And this you see, that albeit we grant,
that a man which came lawfully to a place by succession, may afterward fall
away and become an heretic: yet heresy comes not by succession, as S. Paul
signifies in this place, and therefore strange is their folly and
impudency, which blushe not to bring this place for proof of the contrary.

Thirdly, Nicolls raungeth further from the purpose, alleging S. Jerome his
saying: That they are not always Saints children, which possess the place
of Saints. As though we did hold that they were: and that the Turk were a
Saint, for possessinge the Saints places in Jerusalem. This is a strange
kind of argument against succession. But he adds against the Pope without
citing any place, that: The Pope is heir^ of S. Peter's goodness. And that: He
receaueth holiness from his chair etc. To which I answer, that the Canons do
command every man, to have a reverent judgment and opinion of their
pastors, and to think (except they see apparently the contrary) that God
will g^ue them (for their office and dignities sake) sufficient grace and
holiness to discharge their dewti^s in that room. And this is only against
rash condemninge of our pastors, and not to iusti^ie them, as the words there
added, A malitiouslye.
and malicious^y left out by all heretics, that cite the place, do plainly
declare, which are these. Did. 4. can. 10. in gloss.
It is not said here, that they (the pastors) are holy, but that they are
presumed as holy, until the contrary be manifest.

Fourthly, Nicols obiecteth the e^ample of the Jews, who refused Christ and
his doctrine, and denied his preesthood, for that he came not to them by
succession, addinge, that if we had been then alive, we would have rejected him
also for the like caus^, as we do now Calvin and Luther and other Ghospellers,
with much other like tedious trashe. To al which I answer, yt this argument
makes greatly against his own side, as ye most of yt did, which he objected
against us before. For ye Jews sin was not, in refusing Christ for lack of
succession: for they might well have denied his ordinary vocation for y^ want,
seeinge they had an express law from God, Nu. 1.4.8.
yt none should be priest, but of the Tribe of Levy, whereof Christ was not,
but of Judah. But ye Jews sin was, in rejecting Christ's extraordinary vocation,
which was prophesied to the^ by Moises before, yt it should be as his was,
Deuteronomy. 18.
and which Christ did now prove by many evident supernatural miracles, and yet
they would not receue him. This Christ him self testifies, saying: Ioh. 15.
If I had not done the works among them, which noe other man has done: they
had no sin. And again: Ioh. 14.
Believe me for my works sake. And again: If I do not the works of my
father, (yt is supernatural works) believe me not: but if I do them, then if
you will not believe me, believe my works. Ioh. 10.
Again: Luc. 7.
when John Baptist did send to Christ, to know whether he was ye true Messiah
or not: he wrought miracles only in their sight, and bidd them tell John
Baptist, what they had seen and hard, signifying that, that was a sufficient
testimonye, Extraordinari vocation not to be admitted without miracles.
and without that he were not to be believed. The like he has showed in all
those that ever he sent besides him self, to reform or instruct the people,
by extraordinary vocation without succession: as in Moses, Aron, and all the
Prophets, the Apostels also, and diverse other after them, as Anthony,
Hillarion, Benedict, Dominicke, Francis, and others, which being noe pastors by
succession, were sent extraordinarily for the help of the Church, but their
vocation was declared, by evident miracles. And so also must ^ur new pastors
and prelates show their extraordinary vocation by evident miracles, seeing
they can not plead ordinare succession, or Canonical ordination, except they
will challenge more unto them selves, then the very son of God, who required
not to be admitted, (as I have showed) but only upon that testimonye,
concurringe together with the Scriptures which spoke of him.

Nether is that dry shifte of Philipe of Mornay, or rather childishe evasion,
to be admitted, where he says, that it is a sufficient miracle for the
protestants, that one poor friar Luther has made so great an alteration in
the world, A straung miracle whereby the protestants prove their vocation.
in so few years: and so many thousand men have forsaken their old religion
upon the only blaste of his mouth. This I say is very ridiculous, and worthy
of such a divine as he was. For by this argument, Arrius, Donatus, Manicheus,
Pelagius, and above al other, Mahomet, wrought very great miracles, and
proved their vocations substantiallye, because they drew from the truth, so
many thousand men to follow their errors. Nay, rather it is an evident
argument that Luther was a wicked deceauer, preaching plausible doctrine to
itching ears. 2. Tim. 4.
For you shall never find since their was any orderly form of a Church, and
eccl^siasticall government in the same, that either such as were sent
extraordinarily to reform it, had so great rushinge of people unto them,
(for that their doctrine was unpleasant in reprehendinge men's vices) or that
they withdrew those few which followed them, from the obedience of their former
pastors, Note this o^seruation.
ruling them by right of succession, as Luther did, though those former
pastors were never so wicked in life. Nay, more, Christ himself which came to
plant a new law, and new pastors also, and to remove from there places the
scribes and pharisees, yet for the little time they had to endure, (which was
until after the new testament was sealed with his blood, Math. 8. Marc. 1.
Luc. 5.
) he taught obedience to the said Pharasies, as may appear by sending the
leapers unto them, and by charginge all men to do as they commanded. Math. 23.
And this is greatly to be noted as a very plain detection of our adversaries.

Fifthely, Nicols obiectethe, that the Jews bragged of succession from their
father Abraham, and yet Christ says they were of the devil: so diverse that
came to their bishoprics by succession, Ihon. 8.
were her^tiques after, as Nestorius and Samosate^us. But all this (as the
other) is quite from the matter. For we grant (as I said before) that those
which succeed in good men's places, may alter and become wicked, and play also
the heretics or apostatas. But that religion which has come down by
succession from the beginning, as ours has done, can not be false: nor that
religion which raises it self, against the same without succession, and the
other marks before recited, (as al heresies have done) cannot be true.

Lastly, he obiecteth that we, by this succession of the sea of Rome, do tie
our religion to one place and province. Which is not so, but it is his, and his
fellows gross error in mistakinge us. For albeit we hold the Bishop of Rome,
as successor of S. Peeter, to be the only supreme pastor of al christianity:
yet is it not necessary, that he should be in Rome, or any way tied unto that
city, but i^ that whole city were distroyed, desolate, and waste, and all
Europe besides in the possession of our enemies (as it was in old times of
persecuting Emperors:) yet might there a man be chosen to that dignity and
bishopric in Aegipte, Asia, or India, and should be as much Bishop of Rome,
and have as great authority, as he that sittethe there now, and his faith,
be called the Roman faith, were h^e never so poor or mean a priest of any
other country. In his bad answer t^ Howlet.
Wherefore we do not make our Catholic religion local or of one province,
as besides Ihon Nicols, the peart master of penbrooke Haull very vndocterly
affirms.

I might here add a pleasant objection of Ihon Nicols, which he urges in
great earnest against succession, and that is, yt the Turk at this day
possesses four Patriarkcal sees by succession, and that Antichrist in the
end of the world, shall co^^ to his tirannicall authority, by succession. and
cet. Which is as true, as that his religion comes from Christ and his
Apostles by succession. What right the Turk has to the four Patriarchall
sees, and Antechrist to the rule of the world by succession, the same has his
religion and her prelates, to the gouernmente of Christian people.

And thus I have answered all that they object against the first three marks
of the true church. For against yt fowerth which is unity, they say nothing,
nor can they bring any excuse of their own discord, but only that we have
sects among us also, as Benedictins: Variety of religious orders noe sects
in ye Cotholique Church.
Dominicans, Franciscans, and other orders of religion. Which is as absurd an
illation, as: you have in your body fingers, toes, ears and like parts, and
therefore you have distinct bodies, and are a monster. For as fingers, toes,
and ears, are not bodies, or deuisions of one body, but parts and ornaments
of the same, because they receive all life, norishment, and spirit from one
soul: so diverse orders of religious men and women not differing in faith,
but in manner of life in the Catholic Church, are parts and orname^tes of
the same church, according to the propheci of her before made: The Queen stood
at thy right hand in golden apparel, Psalm. 45.
environed with varieties. These varieties, are the varieties of states,
degrees, professions, and orders in the Catholic Church, which al, agreeing
in one fountain of faith, and taking norishment, life, and spirit, from that
unity of faith, as diverse members from one soul: do not impair, but
bewtifie the unity of that body, which is the Catholic church, and therefore
are not to be called sects, as the Lutherans, Caluinistes, and Puritanes are,
which differ in matter of belief and doctrine. For all that has been said
therefore, or ever can be hereafter, I do not see, why our ^aith and Church is
not proved true and ^ur adversaries false, by these four marks of Catholic,
antiquity, succession, and unity. And if we once gain this, we need noe
longer to dispute of contr^uersies.

Having ended this first and cheifest matter of the true and false Church, I
must confess unto the reader, that I am vnwyllinge to wade any further with
John Nicolls in contention about particular controversies. Cau^es whye^ Nicolls
is noe further answered in particular controversies.
Frste, for that all the rest which he has, is oulde broken ware, patchte
up with pieces of soondrye books, either answered or rejected long ago,
which notwithstanding is made worse, by his vnorderlye insertinge of it
here, without just occation: and especially, by his adioynders unto it of
unseemly raylinge. As, after he has uttered the objections before mentioned,
against the true marks of the Church, he followethe with full mouth, for diverse
leaves together, against Rome: alleaginge Mantuan the Po^t, and Budeus, with
Barnarde of Cluni^^, without citinge any place, to prove, that Rome had vices
in it: wherefore he con^^udethe, and exhorte^he his bre^hren, the preistes, and
other prisoners in the tower, to leave Rome, and cleave to England, seeinge
the Church of England, had not so many heretics and churchrobbers in it, as
the Roman Church has.

Secondly, he rouethe so wide from the point of each matter that he handles,
as he seems to be ignorante, both what we and his own fellows hold. For
about miracles and revelations he labors much, to prove that false miracles
and revelations are not to be credited, which we grant unto him without
proof. And touching Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, and invocation of
Saints, he affirms them to be late inventions of Popes and papists, whereas
his own companions, In his book against P^rgatorie

Page 306. 115.316.320 and against articles page 39.


namly Fulke in his late answers to Doctor Allen and Doctor Bristoe,
confesses, that all those three erroures wear received i^ the Church above
1200. years paste, that is, in the times of Augustine, Jerome, Ambrose, and
vppwarde, and that those Fathers with other, believed them also. In oppugninge
Images, he brings a great heap of quotatio^s against idols, and thinks yt
sufficient. Against the Pope he disputes not, but raileth, and co^ncludeth in
the end with an impudent lie out of Phillip of Mornay, saying: That the Pope
has caused men to dispute, that he is not simply a man, but a partaker of the
divine nature with Christ. A malicious lie against ye Pope.
See the shameless foreheade I pray you, of men blinded with malice. The very
words of the decretall alleged, are these: talking of seperating of a
Bishop from a certain Bishoppricke which he held unlawfully. Not man, but
God does separate, whom the Bishop of Rome (vicegerent in earth, Prope
Innoce^tius de transl. cap. quanto.
not simply of a man, but of him which is also true God) does separate, rather
by Gods authority then man's, upon consideration either of the necessity or
utility of Churches.

Thyrdly, he has a property either of ignorance or malice, to tire his
answerer by cyting of things which are not to be found, albeit they be such for
the most part, as we would grant without citing. As for example he alleges
S. Austen li. 2. ca. 20. de consens. euang. against seeking of Christ in
painted walls: but noe such thing is found there, nor yet occasion of any
like matter. He alleges S. Chrysostom hom. 30. in Math. repeting the
Pharisees words to Christ: which, albeit it touches not the matter: yet noe
such thing is to be seen there. He cites William Nubridge li. 2. ca. 15. and
25. for S. Thomas of Canterbury his words to the Bishop of Menze against
Rome: A new kind^ of alleaging^ doctou^s.
but noe such matter appears in that place, nor any mention of the Bishop of
menze. He cites Allen Cope dial. 1. page 18. for false miracles before Images
in our Churches: but read the place, and you shall see there noe like argument
handled. He alleges S. Basil mistrusting his own works in psa. 32. which
although it be not against us: yet must I note, that noe such thing is there
to be seen. I could give diverse other examples, but this is sufficient: to
which do you add, that he names almost twenty authors without citinge any
place: and many things without naming any author. As for example, where he
urges his fellow prisoners, the priests that came from Rome, with this great
authority in latin, and after englished. One sayethe: that whiles the Romish
preistes, endeavor as much as they can to preach things, in show, agreeable
to health of souls, then, teach they noe few things, tending to perpetual
destruction of souls.

This one, that says this, is either John Nicols only, or else some other of
less credit then himself, if it be possible to find a creature of less
credit. And was not this a forcible text trow you, to be recited in latin,
out of the pulpet, and to be translated in english, and to be urged in that
audience, for the stirring of hatred against those learned and virtuous
priests?

Fowrthly, it is a world to see, what his demeanor is in the places rightlye
alleged: Nicols conclusio^s.
for first, of nothing he will infer any thing: and commonly, his conseque^t
has noe coherence or affinity with his antecede^t. I have given some examples
before: as, because Iobe says, that old men understand not always
judgment, therefore antiquity is no good mark of the true Church. Because
Christ said to his desciples little flock, therefore the lesser congregations
amongeste Christians have always the better faith in religion. I could show
you hundredes of these illations through out his book. Secondly, if his wit
serve him not to draw some false consequente from the place, then audacitie
supplieth to corrupt it by translation: whereof, besides that which has been
noted before, I will breeflye show one example here, in steed of many which I
omit. He cites a place out of S. Austen, against prayer to Saints: where he
says his words are these, talking of Saints departed: Aug. lib. de spiritu
and anima ca. 29.
Such is their care for the living, that they know not what we do: even as
our care is for the dead, that we know not what they do. By which words,
Nicols would have men think that S. Auste^ disalowed prayer to saints which
is contrary to Fulks opinion, In his book against Purgatory page 315. 316.317.
who confesses Auste^ to have defended this superstition, as he terms it,
and rayleth on him for it: but we shall easily reco^cile the matter: for S.
Austen is not contrary to him self, though he be contrary to Fulke and
Nicolls.

The occasion of S. Auste^s words was this, he had said immediately before,
that Saints in heaven did not understand or see our state here of their own
power, or absolutelye of them selves, but by other means which he puts
down a^t^r: yet, lest upon this his saying some man might take occasion to
dout whether they had any care of us, or were to be prayed unto or no: he
preuenteth the matter thus. Compare this with Nicols translation.
Ita tamen ect eis cura de viuis, quanqua^ quid agant omnino nesciant,
quemadmodu^ cura est nobis de mortuis, quamuis quid agant vtique nesciamus.
nesciunt quidem mortui quid hic agatur: sed dum hic agitur, postea audire
possunt ab eis, qui hinc moriendo ad eos pergunt etc. ab angelis qui hic nobis
presto sunt etc. spiritu etiam dei reuelante etc. Which is truly translated
thus. Albeit (the saints departed) know not at all what the living do: yet
have they care of them in such sort, as we have care of the dead, albeit we
know not what they do. The dead know not in deed what is done here: but
yet, when it is done here they may hear it after, How Saints know our
neces^ities
from those which depart hence to them by death, or from Angels who are
preseent here among us, or by the spirit of God reueling it unto them. Now by
this little, considder our adversaries dealinges I pray you, Against Purgatory.
page 306.315.316 349.78. 279.435. 247.194.
who, albeit at other times, being pressed, do confess all the old Fathers to
be of our side, and to have erred with us, as Fulke does of S. Ambrose,
Austen, Tertulian, Origin, Chrisosto^e, Gregory, and Beade, by name, with most
reprochful and contemptuous words against them for the same: yet, when any
thing passes from the^, to the simple people, they are so gredy to color it,
with so^e credit of the old Fathers assent, New Doctor^ desirous of antiquity
in shewe^
as they will rather venture to corrupt some place or other, then to lack some
little show of antiquity. So they are not ashamed, holding the heresy of
Uigilantius, about invocation of Saints: to cite S. Jerome in defense of it,
who wrote aganist Uigila^tius for holding the same. So, houlding the heresies
of Aerius, about prayer for the dead, and of Iouinian about fasting,
virginity, and marriage of Uotaries: they blushe not to cite, Epiphanius,
Austen, and Ierom, who are open enemies to them for the said heresies.

But yet John Nicols has one gift-more, which is also an usual talent amongst
his compagnions: and that is, to enter freely upon a place, manifestly and
directly against him self. And perforce to rent therhence some little doutful
speech or oother, sounding toward his purpose, and to set it forth for the
authors own meaning, without all scruple of conscience in the world: as though
our writing in controversies were iugling, only to deceue the reader and not
to instruct him for his salvation. Good Lord into what desperate times are we
come? this cannot be but obstinat wilfulnes, and full, determinat, resolute
malice: but let us see an example of this. I may not stand to recite much, for
that I hasten, and sumwhat may be gathered by that which has been said
before: but yet one place I can not let pass, whereby you may easily judge of
the rest.

Ihon Nicols was fighting against the blessed sacrament of the altar, and
lacking furniture, was so bold as to lay hands on holy S. Ambrose, and by
violence to borow some argument from him: and finding him in deed very pore for
that purpose, was feign to be content with two doutful lines, which might be
wrested to his opinion, amongst more then two hundred, plain, and evidently
against him. The words aledged by Nicols are these, A notable ex^mple of
abusinge the Fathers.
As thou have received the similitude of his death, so do thou drink the
similitude of his precious blood. By which words simple people must
believe, that S. Ambrose heald not the real presence Christ his very body and
blood in the sacrament, but only the similitude forsooth. Which, how true it
is, and what consciences these men have which allege these things for
deceauing the people, shall appear by the rest of S. Ambrose his words in the
same place, which are these. First making the question.

Thou perhaps will say, (of the sacrament) it is my usual bread. Amb. li. 4.
de sacr. ca. 4.
To which he answers. This bread is bread, before the Sacramental words: but
after the co^secratio^ is added unto it, of bread, is made the flesh of
Christ. This therefore let us prove: how can bread become the body of Christ?
by Consecration. The consecration, by wbat words, and by whose words, is it
made? By the words of our Lord Jesus: the speech of Christ makes this
sacrament. But what spech of Christ? that forsooth, whereby, al things were made.
God gave his commandment, and the firmament was made: God gave his
commandment, and the earth was made: How bread b^ cummeth the flesh of Christ
God gave his commandment, and the seas were made: God gave his commandment,
and all creaturs were made. See thou the^, how powerful the speech of Christ
is? why the^, if the speech of Christ had so much force as to make things be,
that were not before: how how much more powerful shall it be, to make those
things be, that were before, and to be changed into other? The firmamente was
not: The sea was not: the earth was not: but hear him speak: Psalm. 148.
He spoke the word and they were made: He commanded, and they were created.
Therefore now to answer thee: (I say) It was not the body of Christ before
consecration: but after consecration, I tell thee, that now it is the body of
Christ. He has spoken the word, and it is made (his body:) he has
commanded, and it is created. Thus far are S. Ambrose his own words.

After this, he uses many examples to prove the same, especially four. The
first, that Christ against all reason and nature, was borne of a woman without
hurt of her virginity. The second that Christ against natural reason, made
the red sea divide it self, at the touch only of Moses rod. The third,
that Christ with putting a piece of wood into a bitter well, changed the
nature of it. The fourth, 4. Reg. 6.
that Christ caused Elizeus to make iron to swyme upon the water against his
own nature. Of al which examples, he infers that we ought not to doubt of
this miracle in the Sacrament. For thus he says: Of all these things thou
see, what the heuenlye speech (of Christ) is able ^o work: so that, thou
have learned now, that of bred is made the body of Christ: water and wine in
the chalice.
and that wine and water is putt into the chalice, but by the consecration of
God his word, it is made bludde. And after this, follow imm^diatelye the words
alleged by Nicols, and they follow by way of objection, as from one which
says, that he seeeth not the form of blood, but of wine. For these are the
words: But parhappes thou will say, I see not the foorme of blood: to which
he answers. The form of wine has the similitude of blood in the Sacrament.
But yet it has the similitude: for as thou have received the similitude of
death, so also do thou drinck the similitude of precio^s blood, to the end
that their should be noe horror of raw blood, and yet it may work the price
of rede^ptio^. Thou have learned therefore, that, that which thou receaueste is
the body of Christ. Thus far S. Ambrose.

In which words he yeldeth a reason, why (though in the Sacrament be true
blood) there does remain the form of wine: and the reason is, (as he says)
for the avoiding of horror, which men would have conceived if they should drink
his blood in natural form. Wherefore, seeing the form of wine, has the
similitude of blood, it was appointed that, that shape or form should remain
still. And so, albeit in the sacrament we drink very blood, yet in external
form we drink but the similitud of blood: for avoiding of horror, even as in
baptism we receive but a fimilitud of death, Romans 6. Colos. 2.
by putting water upon us, albeit our soul does dye in very deed, from the
state and common wealth of the devil, sin, and bondage wherein it lived before
as a subject. This reasone of the forms of wine and bread, remaining after
consecration in the very body and blood of Christ, S. Ambrose in diverse other
places expounds diligently, as namely, after in the same work. Lib. de sacr.
cap. 1.
Even as (says he) our Lord God Jesus Christ is the true son of God, not by
grace only, as men are, but as his son of the substance of his father: Mark
this r^^son and comparison o^ S. Ambrose.
so is it true flesh which we receive, according to his sayeinge. And his
true blood is our drink. But perhapes thou will say, as some times his
desciples said, when they heard him say, Except ye eat my flesh. etc. Ioh.
6.
How are these things true? I see the similitud, but not the verytie of blood.
First I have toulde thee, how Christ his speech, is able to change and
convert the kinds of nature. Secondly when Christ his desciples could not
bear his speech but departed, hearing that he would give his flesh to eat,
and his blood to drink, etc. Least more should say the same, because of the
horror of raw blood, etc. therefore thou do, receive this sacrament in
^imilytude, etcet.

Now I appeal to the consciences of all Christians which read controversies
for desire of truth, and not of contention, whether it be likely, that Nicols
could pick out those two lines amongst all the rest in S. Ambrose and not to
see or read the other: especially, that long discourse which follow the
imediatly^ upon the same matter in the chapter followinge? where having
handled the very words of institution of this sacrament, both out of the
gospel and also of Paul, he adds: Ambr. li. 4. de sacr. ca. 5
Vide singula. etc. Consider al: before consecration it is bread, but after the
words of Christ ended, it is Christ his body. So So, before the words of
Christ, the chalice is full of wine and water, but when Christ his words have
wrought their effect, there is made that blood which redeemed the people. Is it
possible (I say) that Nicols and his fellows did not see th^se things in
Ambrose? or if they did, what graceles impudency is this, to make a show as
though S. Ambrose made for the^ whom they saw so euedently, so abunda^tly, and
so earnestly against them? These things and the like, as I said before,
have, discoraged me from following Iho^ Nicols any further in these
controversies. wherefore I will leave him here, only adding two or three words
to a few places of Fathers, which may seem to the unlearned, to make some
what against us. About the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome he aleageth one
Nilius, Of the Supremacy.
de primatu Ponti Roma. who should say, that the bishop of Rome has no more
authority over other Patriarchs, then they over him. But I find not this
authore, and I think he erreth, for Hanmer, out of who^e he took the most part
of this matter, alegeth him by the name of Nilus, and sumwhat other wise in
words then Nicols reports. But nether find I any such work under the name
of Nilus. For of that name I know but two of any antiquity, and they both
martirs: the one mentioned in Eusebius li. 8. ca. 22. This Nilus works the 2.
Nicen counsel affirms to be corrupted in that time by heretics
. the other in Nicephorus li. 14. ca. 14. nether which, have any such work
reported. Wherefore when we shall have better intelligence of the authore, our
answer shall be more particular.

Secondly he allegeth confusely out of Ciprian two places together as one text
which are in diverse books and in diverse matters. Lib. de sim. Prel.
But the last is only of any importance (for the first is against him self
directly) which last, is taken out of the bishopes sentences gathered in the
prouincial Counsel at Carthage, where S. Cipria^ says, Vide Ciprian. Li. 1. ^p
3. ad Cornel.
That noe bishop in that Council made him self bishop of bishopes, or did by
tirannical fear compel others to his opinion, but that it was lawful for every
bishope there, to think and speak what he would. Which he says, ^or yt the
Nouatio^s had given out the contrary of him, that is, that he compelled men to
his opinion and played the tira^ over other, which was false: but yet that he
denied not by this ye Bishop of Rome to be Primate, and to have authority over
them all, it appears both by that he sent all their determinations in this
Council, to be admitted, or rejected, by Stephanus, Bishop of Rome: as S.
Jerome witnesses. And Stephanus used his authority: Iero dial. cont. Lncif.
For he condemned most worthily this Council as S. Austen affirms. The same
also, appears by that, Aug. li. 3.6. 7. de Bapti.
that Felicissimus the Nouatia^ with his companions went to Rome, to complain
to Cornelius the Bishop, against Cyprian, to have him deposed. Cy. li. 1. ep
3 ad Cornel.
And that the Bishop of Rome, as general pastor of all, might upon causes
depose any Bishop of an other country: it appears by Cyprian him self,
who desires Stephanus Bishopp of Rome, to depose by his letters, one
Martianus a Nouatian, Cyp li. 3. ep. 13. ad Steph
Bishopp of Orl^ans in France, and to substitute an other in his room. And
for the liberty here mentioned by Ciprian, for Bishops to say and think what
they list in matters of controversy: Aug. li. 3 de Bap. ca. 3.
S. Austen expounds it, not to be understood generally in all matters, but in
controversies not yet discussed.

By this also is answered, that which follows in Nicols, out of Cipra^
without citing the place. That Cypria^ should complain of some lewd men's
runninge to Rome against him: which is true. For he complains to Cornelius
the Pope, of Felicissimus and Fortunatus Nouatia^s yt without just cause, came
to complain of him, to ye said Cornelius, Cy. li. 1. ep. 3 ad Corneli.
and he co^me^deth Cornelius for not acceptinge their accusatio^s, nor yet the
letters which they brought against him. By which act, as also in all ye epistle,
he confirms most plainly ye Primacie of Rome. Wherefore, al ye which follweth
in Nicols is most impudently inserted of him self, to wit: That Cypria^
complained of profane men, and schismatics, which withdrew the^ selves to the
Bishop of Rome, wickedly persuading them selves, that the Bishops of Africa
had less power, the^ the Bishop of Rome. But S. Cipria^ has no such thing.

The last yt he cites about this matter out of S. Chrysostom: Chri. ho. 83.
in Math. ^a. 23.
Who soever shall covet primacy over bishops in earth, shall find co^fusio^ in
heaven: and he that shall co^te^d to be head of al, shall not be reckoned in the
number of Christ his servants. Although it may be trewlye spoken of him, which
shall couetouslye and ambitiously contend to be Primate, having no right to it:
yet I find noe such thing in the place alleged, nor in any other place that
this quotation might lead me unto: for the 83. homely is not upon the 23.
chapter of Mathewe, but upon the 26. where noe such thing is^ but all against
them, of the Sacrifice of the Euchariste. Secondly, upon the 23. chapter, there
are the 73.74. and 75. homelies, wherein also noe such thing is found. Finally,
that Chrysostom acknoweledged the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, Chris. ep.
1. ad Innoce^.
it may appear plainly by his epistle to Innocentius the Pope: by whom he
desires to be restored again to his Patriarchship, (being unjustly deposed)
and that his deposers might be punnished by him. And that the said Innoce^tius
practiced this authority, appears by that he excommunicated from Rome,
Niceph. li. 13. ca. 34.
both Arcadius the Emperor, and Eudoxia his wife, for their unjust dealinge
against Chrysostom, in Constantinople.

Towching Images, he erreth altogether, in heapinge up matter against Idols,
which we more deteste then they: but yet h^ brings a long place out of
Arnobius against the Gentiles, where, among^st other things he says to them:
Arno. li. 8. cont. Gent.
We nether worship nor wish for crosses: you that consecrate wooden godds, do
adore in deed wooden crosses as parts of your gods, In which words (to let
pass Nicolls corrupt translation almost in every line,) Arnobius only
tells the Gentiles, that Christians nether worshipped, nor wished for crosses
in that sense, as they objected, to wit, to make them Gods: for so the
Gentiles (being reproved by Christians of their idolatry) replied, that the
Christians were Staurolatrae, Mark this reso^ for images.
yt is, idolatours to crosses, as much as the Gentiles wear to other things:
which Arnobius denies. And yet, hereby it appears that Christians used some
honor and reverence to crosses in those days, or else ye Gentiles would never
have obi^ct^d idolatry of crosses unto them, as both Arnobius in diverse
places, and Tertullia^ tes^ifie that they did. Tertu. in apolo. ca. 26.


After this, he obiecteth two places of Epiphanius against Images: The first
is without quotation: but yet it is found in the second Council of Nice, Sy.
7. Act. 6
objected by heretics then, as it is now, and there it is answered by another
Epiphanius, in the name of the Council, and proved by many arguments to be
none of Epiphanius his words, but foysted in by the wicked Iconomachians. The
other place also, Epip. ep. ad Ioa^. Hieros.
which is against the hanginge up of men's pictures in the Church, is added
by heretics, to a certain epistle of Epiphanius, and is parhaps that second
place, which the Council affermed to be inserted, Act. 6.
(for it speaks of two) but whether it be that or not, it is evident, that it
is added by heretics as the other before was: both for that, the epistle of
Epiphanius was perfectlye ended before these words ensewe: Hier. ep. ad
Pa^mac. co^t. Ioa^. Hiero.
And S. Jerome to Pammachius recites almost all this epistle of Epiphanius
translated by him, and yet makes noe mention of these words. And it is
reported in the seuenthe general Council, how that the scholars of Epiphanius
after his death, builded a church in his honor, Synod 7.
and putt his image in the same, which they would never have done, if he had
taught them, that it were ido^atrie to have any man's image in a Church. And
this shall suffice for this third part. For all the rest which Nicols bringethe,
either is against him self, or impertinent to the purpose, or so plain, as each
man may easily answer ye same.

Touching his oration and sermon presented in the Popes consistory.
Having ended my former answer to John Nicols reca^tation, there came unto my
hands a new book of the same author (for now he has gotten the name of an
author, and promises fertility in printinge books hereafter) The title
whereof was: The title of Nicols second book.
The oration and sermon made at Rome, by commandment of the four
Cardinals, and the Dominican Inquisitour, upon pain of death, by John Nicols
latelye the Popes scholar. Which after I had read and a little considered, I
could easily have broken into some extremity of laughter, had not co^passio^
stayed the same, co^ceued partly, toward ye man him self, whose end I did
see must needs be subject to sha^e and confusion, by publishing such untruths
as were not long justifiable, but especially toward those, whom so miserable
a fellow (by reason of their parciall affection) had deluded in so gross and
palpable absurdities, as partly by yt which already has been spoken, and partly
by these lines following, may appear.

Before I enter to speak of his oration and sermon, I will breefely run over
an epistle of his, to the Merchant venturers, containing a narration of his own
adventures, with denial of certain informations given of him in writing by
some man, belike, that knew his behaueour and detested his doings. Where,
albeit he seems to disaduouche some little points reported of him by me
before, yet the matter is not so rejected: for that there are witnesses of his
own speech here in, from which only we received intelligence of these things:
and by denying yt which follows, of his voluntary repair to the Roman
Inquisitio^, Nicols volun^arie offering him self to ye Inquisition.
a thing so euedently known to the world: he shows of what verity his other
denials are. He was before his coming to Rome, reconciled to the Roman church
as he says: and he had dwelt with a bishope the Popes Protonotorie, a good
space: what the^ had the Inquisitours to do with him now, who meddle with none
after reconciliation, although they had bin ministers and preachers of herestes
before: as may appear by diverse English ministers returned to the faith, of
later years. How could also the Popes Protonotorie, give Nicols entertainment,
or keep him in his service so long space, if he had not seen him free from ye
Inquisition? but Nicols strugleth the more in this point, to cover thereby that
manifest false lie, which he has put in the very title of his book, About
the pain of death assigned to him, if he first made not that sermon and
oration. By which invention, he pretends two things: the one to excuse his
own abusing the protestants in Rome, as done upon fear: the other to bring
the Pope into opinion of cruelty, and thereby to deminish in her Majesty
compassion toward afflicted Catholics in England. But all men, though of
very mean understanding, know, that pains of death are non proposed to
them which any way yeald, to forsake ^her heresies, and much less to him,
who confesses him self reconciled before, and in favorable credit with the
Popes Protonotorie. Wherefore, take this among the rest, as a malicious and
wicked machauelian lie.

Nicols confession of his own folly.
To other matters in the same epistle he aunswerethe diversely. For some he
grants, albeit with qualifications: as that he was ridiculous to the
college in his excercises: but (he says) it was the point of an orator to
move laughture. Also that he preached on a stool to his fellows: but yet not
often (as he says) but only being merrily disposed^ Other things he cloketh
with vaunting him self and slaundering of others: as his not goeing forward in
logique, he atribureth^ not to his own inhabilitie, but to the malice of one
Ferdinando his Prefect in studies, euel affectioned to welshe men, as he
reports: but it has noe probability of truth, that either he, being an
Italian and a good man, had such partial affection in our diversity of
countries: or if he had, that he would use it in such a matter, as this is.
But yet to make this more credible, or rather more ridiculous, he vaunteth him
self over all the students in the College or Seminary, affirmming: Nicols
vaniti^
That he was the best orator amongst that rowt, and taught the most of them
all to speak true latin. Adding also to diverse of them certain foolish
nicknames according to his small discretion, as though he had been preaching
under a may pole, and not writing a book to present unto a Princess. But
the latin epistle before the said book unto her Majesty, as also the other,
written to his Patron before, well shewethe us the skill of John Nicols in the
latyne, and disclosethe the man's intolerable vanitye, in bragging of that,
wherein he knowethe nothing.

The rest which Nicols adds in his defense, implies so manyfeste falshode
and contradictions, Nicols con^tradictions.
as may teach us how little credit is to be given to that, which he has
spoken before. For where as I have sheewed in mine answer, See page 38. in
his first book taken out of hanmers first book.
that he has taken whole pages out of other men's books, yet says he, Not
so much as one sentence or clause hadd I by other men's industrye. Fol. 115.
And whereas he writes in his former ^ooke thus: Fol. 11.
You may easelye gather that I was noe true lover of the true ghospel, when as
I so sharpelye spoke and preached against the professors thereof: Being
towched now for the same, he writes in this book: Fol. 19.
As for defaminge the protestants, I never opened my mouth to use any such
speech. Again in his first book, his words were these in the beginning of
his narration. Fol. 10.
A discouerye or layinge open of my zeal in poperye, and how I preached
before that Antichrist in Rome: Now in the second book, being charged with the
same, he denies it thus. Whereas thou wryteste, that I wrote in my book, that
I preached before the Pope: Fol. 20.
I wrote noe such thing, the book is extant, who that will may read it.
Again he writes in his ^ormer book: Fol. 13.
I had before that time made an oration and sermon, presented before the Pope
and four Cardinals in the Co^sistory: Now he writes in this book: I made an
oration and sermon presented before the Pope, and al his Cardinals in the
Consistory: To these absurd contrarieties is Nicols driven so soon^, for
defendinge his auowched lies, notwithstanding in his last book he says thus:
Four things have caused me, to be circumspect in writing this book: to wit:
fear, care, necessity, and affection^ Fear afflicted me, care compelled me,
necessity bound me, affection wounded me. In the Epistle to the Reader.


But now, to reason a word or two with Nicols, about this feigned sermon and
oration: How durst you John, be so bold, as to abuse the whole state of
England with so manifest and obsurd a lie? What probability is there in your
report? You made this sermon and oration (as you say) in Rome: where? in whose
company? what one English man knows of it? where had you books to seek so
many authors as you cite? you confess you were not yet of the College: and we
know that the hospital where you lay, had not books to lend you: where could
you have so many books without the knowledge of any one English man? But
suppose you made it mi^aculously: how came it into the Consistory, as never
any such matter before it? how and wh^ came it to be presented to the Pope, and
Cardinals? to read it over, it was to long, being twelve sheets of printed
paper, and much more in written hand. And your self confess, that you
pronounced it not: how then? how could the Pope, and Cardnales, and all the
Consistory thank you, if they knew not the contents of your sermon? Or if
they had understood it, how could they have thanked you, for so many foul and
slanderous reproaches, uttered against them, and Gods cause, in this your new
divised sermon? Does the Pope give men leave to revile him and Gods church,
and afterward rewards them with thanks? It is to euidente, how much you
abuse your new friends, Ihon, and yet it will be much m^re evident er many
weeks pass, when autentical testimonies shall be published of this matter.
Letters are gone to Rome as you prophesied, and will return such news thence
shortly, as will make your best friends ashamed of your doings.

I can not but marvel at certain of my country men, who otherwise being of
a very great capacity, for partial affection in religion, can be content to
be abused by such absurd scroles, as John Nicols casts abroad. Wherein,
besides the lack of truth, ground, and learning, there wants also common
judgment and discret^^on. Mark I pray you what decent kind of speech he uses
in a book, which was for the Queens Majesty to read. Speakinge of the
students of the English^ College, (most excellent young men and such as
contend in learning, with the Spanishe and Italian, and give admiration to
other countries, whereof Nicols was absolutely the worste, and rejected thence,
as unable for that company: Nicols speec^ absurd to a Qu^ene.
) after his brag, that all learned the latin tongue of him, he says. They
have such blockheades that studdye philosophy there, as M. Dodipole Oliuerius,
M. Doater, Docter, I would say, Mushe, with twentye more etc. And again. They
cannot preach, either for that they quaffe to much wine, or supp to much
potage etc. And again, making odious comparyson betwixt these students of
Rome, and the hand-craftye ministers of England, whom he disgracethe with
the reproach of stitching, and cobling preachers: he says. What Preachers in
England by Nicols report.
There was not one amongst threescore, that could preach as well as our common
taylers and shomakers in England. And again, talking of his own state h^e
says very gravely: I mean to abide in England, hap well or hap ill, England
has no fellow, better it is to live in poverty, then to be whipped on the
seas (as I should if I went over again) and be taught to row, Nicols grave
and wit^ye speech.
having thereunto as good towardnes, as Tom Colliar thy fathers man. And again,
talking of his book he concludes wittily in these words. This book is
ended, Momus hold thy peace, for there was never Momus that ever thriued
unless he became a mome for his labor. But perhapes you will say, this was
in English: his vein may chance to be better in latin. In deed he affirmethe
him self to have been the only orator of the Roman College, but me thinks
his latin epistle to the Queen refuses to bear him witness, except it be for
that I understand it not, as in deed I do scarsly in diverse places of the
same, as for example this houge heap of flatering words in ye title. Nicols
vein in latyne.
Augustssimae serenissimaeque Principi cunctis honoris dissemina^i dispersique
sermonis celsissimae sedis dignitatis su^mae amplitudinis atque amplissimorum
graduum maiestatis ^itulis dignissimae, etc. Marye, as his beginning is very
hard and loftye: so is the ending, somewhat easy and familiar: for having
prated for the Queen, thus he endith. Papista tacet, Christianus dicit Amen.
Sic concluditur Epistola: det Deus bonu^ euentum. Which in English is thus: The
Papist houldeth his peace: the Christian says amen: so the epistle ends:
God send us good luck. And what luck Iho^ means by this, he signifies
before in the same epistle, where he exhorts the Queens Majesty, Nicols
lab^^rethe for wages.
ad pauperum Scolasticorum inopiam subleuandam, incredibili animi studio
contendere et incumbere, to contend and apply her self by all meenes, to ease
pore scholars needs. And this is that perhaps which has caused many good
prelates (as is reported) to make public collections for him, in diverse
sheeres abroad: which if they continue, and do pay him well his stip^^d, we
shall want no books against Rome, nor new invention of lies from time to time.
Nicols promised book of pilgramage how true it i^ like to be.
For so he promises that we shall look shortly for a book of pilgrimage,
wherein we are al to be undone: and for a taste of the truth of that book, he
has put down 3. or 4. manifest lies, which he promises to repeat again in
that book. For first: he calls this Pope a murderer, and proves it only
by the wars in the lower countries, whereof he says, that this Pope is the
only cause. As who would say, the King of Spain had not warre^ there, before
this man was Pope. Also he calls him an adulterer, saying: the Cardinal of
Sansisto in Rome to be his bastard, whom al men know to be borne of his own
sister. Besides this, he calls him a thief: for causinge some Abbotes and
Priors in Italy, to disburse some money toward the maintenance of the
English Seminaries in Rome and Rhemes: as though this had been theeuerie, if he
had done it, as he did not: or as though the English Seminaries did press
the Pope more, then so many other as I have named before, maintained by him
with greater charge.

But are not our adversaries ashamed of these dealings? do they not see the
tail of these stratagemes, to reflect the discredit upon their own heads?
what a miserable cause is theirs, which can not stand but by such devices? It
is a world to see, what pillars of defense they have, what grave writers in
their cause: what books they suffer to come out against us daily.

Of late, in the midst of our persecutions, there came forth a weighty
work of 40, sheets of paper, made by one Thomas Lupto^, Luptons perswation
from Papistrie.
entitled A persuasion from Papistry, (he would have said, a disswasion, but
that Papistrie and persuasion began both with a letter.) Of this authors estate
and calling I can not yet learn, but that he seemethe to have been some
Musician in time, for that much of his matter passes from him in rhyme: In his
epistle to y^ Queen.
To the great comfort and joy (as he hops) of her highness, being framed by
him not trowblingly, but lovingly unto her subjects. This man's drift is, (as
he says) to prove all Papists to be english enemies, and extreme enemies to
England: which in effect he proves thus. Papists do love the Popes law:
Luptons arguments against Papists.
the Pope he loves not God almighties law: ye Queens Majesty she loves God
almighties law, and her law is al one with his: how the^ can ye Papists love
their Queen, and country? Again: ye Papists cry upon their Queen Mary: and
we cry upon our Q. Elizabeth: And is not Queen Elizabeth, I pray you, as well
a Kings daughter as Queen Mary? as well a Kings sister, as Queen Mary? as
lawful Queen of England (I will not say more) as Queen Mary? why then, how can
Papists be otherwise but eng^she enemies, and extreme enemies to England?
These and the like arguments in sense, though not altogether in the same
words, he dilateth according to his kind of eloquence, through out all the
first part of his book, though he make noe parts at all.

In the second part, he wandreth by certain controu^rsies: but, as without
al wit and l^arning, like an english doctor, citing all his matter out of
Jewels defense of the Apology. For his Martyrologe, and Cowpers Epitomye of
the Cronicle: so, without al modesty, or limitation of lying For he says,
that the Papists hold: Page 99. 96. 99.
The Pope to be very God: the light of the world, and the Saueour of mankind:
that they printe him in their books: L^ptons lies.
Our Lord God the Pope: that the Pope also acknowledges the thing, taking him
self in deed to ^e a God. 100. 98. 172. 193. 131. 171. 5.6.
That he dispenses both against the oulde and new Testamente: See of this the
society of the name of God before men^ioned, and let not the Puritanes glory,
as though they only did ^orbid swearing.
That he bids us not to forbear swearinge any day: that he aloweth al
priests to have harlots: that he gives license for monye to keep as many
concubynes, as a man will that his fast is, to cra^me in as many banquetinge
dishes as men can: that all Papists are wor^e and deserve more death, the^
dru^ckerds^ thieves, murderers, and pirates. This is Luptons charitable
doctrine with many things more which I omit.

In his third part, he proves his religion b^ evident and manifest miracles,
out of M^ For his Acts and Momuments. As for example: that one Bu^ton bailiff
of Crow^and in Lincolneshire, LuPtons miracles.

Page 294.


for compelling a Curate to say Mass, (upon zeal of papistrie) in the
begininge of Queen Mary's days: was afterward for his punnishmente, called
K. by a crow that fl^w over his head, and besides that, his bearde embrewed
with the crows dou^g, that she let fall upon him, which doung did so stincke
upon his b^arde, as made him continuallye to vomit for diverse days, Simple
fellow^ that ^org^t ^y cutting o^ his b^arde to save his life

Page 92.


until he died most miserably. Again, that in King Henry's days, the Earl
of willshyre and others, goeing to Rome as Embassatours to the Pope, refused to
kiss the Popes foot, when he held it out to them: at what time the Earls
dog (having more devotion to it, as he says, then they) not only went and
kissed the Popes foot, but also snatched at his great toe, Poor Pope: y^ had
no chamberlain to ^epe out dogs
signifiing thereby, that it was a part more fit for dogs to kiss then men.
All these things, and many more the like, he proves out of M. For his
Martirologe, otherwise called Acts and monuments, tied with long chains in all
Churches of England, to be read with devotion.

After Thomas Lupto^, follows Thomas Knell, of the same predicament, but in a
higher degree. For he, to the utter extirpation of Papistrie, from the face of
ye earth, takes upon him to prove, that: Al Papists, whether they be teachers
or hearers: are in doctrine Schismatics, in faith heretics, in religion
hypocrites: in worshipping Idolatours, in obedience traitors, by nature dogs, in
ma^ners hogs: unfaithful to all men: common persequutors of the scriptures and
Church of God.

Do you not think we shall be vanquished, when our adversaries army has such
captains and champions? especially, if ryming Elderton join with them,
Elderton^ ^^^^tle Ierkes for a ^esuite to become a trew^ Israelite^
assaultinge us with his Ientle Iirckes, and co^demning our cause from ye
tribunal of an ale bench. Is not this a beggarly war^rap trow you, which
pawneth out such rags for robes? what miserable poverty are our adversaries
brought unto, when they are feign to publish such scurrility, for divinity,
riming for reasoning, shameless railing for orderly disputing? but let them
proceed on still: they can by no way pleasure or profit us more: let the^
publish Nicols book of Pilgrimage, wherein he promises to revile us from top
to toe: to ring the larme bell against us, to power out al his venom at once,
and to empt the very sincke of slander upon our cause. What shall this anoy us,
or whom shall all this filth defile? As long as their shall be either honest,
virtuous, learned, wise, modest, noble or gentle mind in Enland, so long shall
we gain by these their proceedings.

A new information from Rome of I. Nicols.
As I had finished and delivered this treatise to y^ print, there came unto me
an honest, discreet and learned ge^tlema^ from Rome who affirmed yt upon ye
sight of I. Nicols book there, and other informatio^s of his doings in
England, search was made for his oration and sermon of ten sheets of paper,
presented in Rome before the Pope and regestred (as he says) in three paper
volumes in the office of Inquisition. The matter was easily found out, and a
coppie taken word for word by public Notaries: the common scale also of the
office, was added unto it, and (as this man remembers) the most of all the
chief officers names subscribed: but yet for some other further approbation
(as I think) the thing is not hitherto sent from thence, or at least not yet
come unto my hands. Wherefore the Printer being not able to stay, nor I
certain how soon it will come, I judge it not a miss, to give the reader some
general intelligence of the matter (until the thing it self may be published
in print) upon the report of this discreet gentleman, who both saw it and
read it, and remembers well the principal contents thereof.

First therefore he reports, that John Nicols made nether oration nor sermon
in Rome, nor that any such thing is there regestred or remembered. But only
his recantation is there to be seen, of less then a sheet of paper in written
hand, Nicols oration and sermon of ten sheets become an abiuration of less
then one sheet.
together with a long preface, which preface is an ordinary thing of that
court, containing the causes of his repentance and voluntary offering him
self thither and the like. After this Ihon Nicols comes to put down his own
faults committed before in England, both in doctrine and life. And for
doctrine, the reporter says, he has numbered up all the particular heresies
which ever he heelde or taught, and this, with very significante words: as
that he taught the detestable heresy of Luther, against prayer for the dead:
the blasphemus heresy of Calvin against Christ's real presence in the
sacrament, or the like. About life, the reporter remembers not much in
particular, but only that he says there. Ego possedi duo benefici^ vnum
simoniace and alterum gratis. That is. He reported notwithstanding afterward
that he had them both by Simonie.
I possessed two benifices, one by simonie, the other freelye. Having declared
his faults, he takes in hand the detestation of them: especially, of those in
doctrine. And there (as the reporter says) he besturreth him self in deed:
for he uses such vehemency of words, as recantation, renunciation,
abnegation, detestation, abiuration, an^ protestation, as he never heard nor
could imagine the like, with thundering amplifications of condemning those
heresies with their authors and folowers, to the bottomeles pit of hell.

Last of all, ensew his penance, enjoined him for his faults confessed, which
he then promised to perform, so far, as in him lay: what they were in
particular, the reporter remembers not, but only in general, that they were
of fasting and prayeing and other good exercises, whereof now I think Ihon
Nicols takes little care. But yet one thing more there is, not to be omitted,
which the reporter merilye toulde me, of the beginning of Ihon Nicols
abiuration, which was thus. Ego Johannes Nicolaus filius alterius Iohannis
etc. I, John Nicols son of an other John: Whereby the Romans learned, what was
latin for John ap John.

An example of John Nicols talent in raylinge at both sides.
THAT the pages folowinge should not be empty, and for the readers better
instruction in John Nicols good qualities I thought it not a miss to put down
an example or proof of his ability, or rather facility, in speakinge yuel
of both parts as his occations have served hertofore, or may here after.
That which I will put down, shall be his own words taken out of his last
book, that is, out of his forged oration and sermon, which oration and sermon
seeinge he never made in Rome, as I have proved before: it is evident that he
has divised them in England for his excercises, Pro and Con, to geat some
admiration and speech of him thereby, without disfauoure. And therefore he has
tempered his talk so, as he has spoken some what worse of Catholics then
of protestants, and yet bad enough of them both.

Of Protestants.
IN his oration against the protestants he calls them: Out of his oration
before the Inquisitours^
Prating and babbling preachers, corrupt livers, usurpers of ecclesiastical
liuinges, ambitious of promotion, proud and statly, ruffians in apparel,
pamperours of their gorges, lavish and ryotus, unstable of promise, swering and
forswearing them selves for a straw, wanton and lascivious followers of
alebenches, heret^ckes and sectaries, one a Zwinglian, another an Anabaptist,
one a Libertine, another a Puritan, one a Caluinist, another a Lutheran, of
wicked, profane, rechelesse, and lewd life, and their religion correspondente
to the same, more abhorringe the name, then the natures of ^picures and
Saduces, not esteeming of the immortalitye of the soul, and in life inferior
to the beasts of the filde, far worse then Jews, instruments of Satan,
murderers, enemies of Gods truth, and his Church, bubles of water, flourishing
for a time, and believing what they list, but continuance shall deface them,
and destroy them with worse deaths, then it has done Arrius, Pelagius, and
all other heretics. And of England in particular he says: Of England in
particular.
This monstrous Realm contemns and dispiseth the truth, and being full of
blind ignorance, and a Chaos or heap of all kind of heresies, knows not
whom to believe, upon whom to call, what trade of life to lead, Gods blessed
doctrine, nourture, direction and rule of man's life, is little known there:
wickedness, iniquity cogginge, and couzening, and corruption are horrible in
her.

Of Papists
Against Catholics he says: Out of (...)mon before Pope.
The Church of Rome persecuteth all Christians: her sentence is burn burn:
her badge, let us lay wait for blood: her head blasphemy: her sheeld
tyranny: her breast injury: her eyes, fire: her girdle fornication: her
breath, poison: her tongue, the stinge of death: her feet ready to sheed
innocente blood: her sword violence: her cross persecution: her pardons,
iniquity: her triple crown presumption: her keys ambition: and all her
doings abomination. Her champions and vpholders are great swarms, of
Cainites, Gyantes, Sodomites, Egiptians, Scribes, Pharasies, Herodians, Monks,
Pretty stuff for ye Pope to thank him for.
Friars, Cardinals, Adulterers, Idolatours, Parasites, Poyseners, Pardoners,
Bawdes, Flatterers, Traitors, Rebels, Murderers, Thieves, Canibals, Varlets,
Shauelings, Eategods, Makegods, Hypocrites, Illuders, Coniurers, Wiches, Knaves,
Enchanters, Exorsistes, Monsters, Worshippers of a wheaten cake, horrible,
abominable and detestable Blasphemers, and chosen children of the Diuil him
self.

These are John Nicols modest, sober, and charitable words: witnesses of his
new hearty conversion, and declaringe the spirit that now possesses him. For
(...)thstanding, his hap wa^ (...) and almost incredible, but that he tells
it him self, to wit, yt he should receive thanks and reward at the cheifest
^^^^^^es hands of the world, for them: (...) he does also now comendation
from the Protestants, for his inuectiue and abiuration against them before. He
is a very fortunate man, yt what soever he does turns to his gain: he may
welsay, that both Papists and Protestants observe ye rule, Math. 5. Romans 12.
Of restoring good for yuel: but yet ye Papists more thenthe Protestants for
that they rewarded him best, being most injured, and that to their faces.

A question upon the Premises.
Iaco. 1. ve. 8. Gal. 2. ve. 18.
DOES a fountain out of the same hole, yealde both sweet and bitter water?
And: IF I build up again the things which I destroyed, do I not make my
self a preuaricator or dubble offender?

The answer.
Iaco. 1. ve. 8. P^o. 20. v. 3.
A dubble hearted man is inconstant in all his ways: And, All fools are full
of Contumelyes.

Eccl. 27. v. 12 Eccle. 10. ve. 12. and 13.
A fool does chaung as the Moon. And, His own lips shall overthrow him:
The beginning of his words is folly, and the last that comes from his
mouth, is a wicked error.

FINIS.

