The Gentleman's Exercise.

Or An exquisite practice, as well for drawing all manner of Beasts in their
true Portraittures: as also the making of all kinds of colors, to be used in
Lymming, Painting, Tricking, and Blason of Coats, and Arms, with diverse
others most delightful and pleasurable observations, for all young Gentlemen
and others.

As also Serving for the necessary use and general benefit of diverse
Tradesmen and Artificers, as namly Painters, Ioyners, Free-masons, Cutters and
Caruers, etc. for the farther gracing, beautifying, and garnishing of all their
absolute and worthy pieces, either for Borders, Architecks, or Columns, etc.

By HENRY PEACHAM Master of Arts.

LONDON, Printed for John Brown, and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleet Street in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL AND WORTHIEST PATRON OF ALL Learning and
Excellency, Sir EDMUND ASHFIELD Knight, one of his Majesty's d^putie
Lieutenants o^ the County of BVCKINGHAM.
SIR, as to be excellent in any skill is very rare, so the favorers of
excellency are not every where to be found, whom when by our good hap we
find; I know not by what Sympathy we are drawn to admire and honor them above
all other creatures, as the Saints and Sovereigns of our affections and
devices: few they are I confess, and so few, that if by events fore-past we
may judge of things to come, I fear me ere many years, even the most
necessary Arts to our posterity erun^ pos^liminio reuocandae, so great a
coldness has benumbed our times. I cannot much blame the Italian, though he
accounts us ^ull, and other nations, that have the wit to work upon our
idleness, which I can impute to none other cause, then the want of
encouragement from the better sort. Our countrymen being as happy in their
invention as the best stranger of them all. For mine own part, I hope I shall
not be imagined to speak as Demetrius did for his silver Images, as gaining
ought hereby, since by profession I am a Scholar. Only I am sorry that our
courtiers and great personages must seek far and near for some Dutchman or
Italian to draw their pictures, and invent their devises, our Englishmen being
held for Vaunients. To which end as well for their sakes who are as yet young
practitioners, as in regard of many young Gentlemen in this Kingdom, who being
naturally inclined hereunto, want fit directions to the attaining of this
commendable skill, so many ways necessary, (favored in times past of the
greatest Monarchs, and of late days practiced even by Princes, and the
greatest personages themselves, as Francis the first, king of France, Charl^s
Emanuel Duke of Sauoy, with many others who are reported to have been
excellent with the pencill) I have drawn and collected together the most true
and easy grounds of drawing, mingling and ordering all manner of water colors
for limming, certain obseruatio^s for perspectiue and the light, the manner of
annealing in glass etc. together with a short discourse of Armory, all which
together with my self (in regard as well of that duty I owed to your self for
many favors toward me at your Chesham, as that you are generally known to be
a principal favorer of all skill and scholership) I offer up unto your
censure, of whom most humbly I take my leave from Richmond.

Who is most affectionately devoted unto your Worship, HENRY P^ACHAM.

To the Reader.
IT is now three years since (friendly Reader) I published this short
discourse of the Art of drawing, for the benefit of many young Gentl^men, who
were my Scholars for the Latin and Greek tongues, which when I saw it found
some savor generally with the world, being since quite worn out of press, I
was encouraged to take some further pains in the same, not with any desire of
Title in this age of blotting papers, since I affect nothing more then silence,
and desire nothing less then ^he censure of the vulgar. But that I might hanc
ornare Spartam, and finish with a more polished hand the model, which before I
had so rawly begun, I have (it is true) bestowed many idle hours in this
well-busied Art, which perhaps might have been worse spent, yet in my
judgment I was never so wedded unto it, as to make it my profession, but
rather allowed it the place inter splendidas nugas, and those things of
accomplement required in a Scholar or Gentleman. I speak not any whit to the
disgrace of so worthy a skill, or to discommend the true and necessary use
thereof, but to give my scholar an It^m, that like a simple woer he should
neu^r leave the Mist^esse to court the maid, but esteem himself better graced
by propounding at the table Aliquid Cedro dignum (as King Alphonsus of Arragon
was wont merrily to say) or making good an argument in Diuini^ie or Philosophy,
then by intimating his skill with the pencill or insight in the Chordes of
Music, which perhaps he that holds his trencher can excel him in. Quintus
Fabius could draw and paint, Fidibus praeclare cecinisse dicitur. Tusc. Quaest.
lib. 1.
yet he was a grave Counsell^r. Epaminondas could play or sing excellently to
his harp or Viols, but Iustine (which was his true glory) adds that he was
a man endued with such learning, and so great experience in Military affairs,
that in him alone, and at once, sprang up, and died the glory of the Thebanes.
Socrates being above three score years of age, Xenophon lib. vlt. rerum Graec.
spent one hour in a day with Conus a Musician in playing upon the Organs, if
he had spent above, I think we had not known him by the name of Philosophorum
Parens. Arist. Politic 8.
And whereas Aristotle designing four principal exercises, wherein he wou^d
have all children in a well governed City or Commonwealth, brought up and
t^ught, as namely Grammatice or Grammar, Gymnastice, or exercising the body by
wrestling, running, riding, etc. Graphice or use of the Pen in writing fair,
drawing, painting, and the like; lastly, Music, his meaning is, Vt ad seria
magis studia capessenda idonei reddantur. The same use and none other I wish to
be made of drawing.

Concerning th^se directons I have given, they are such as I thought, in
respect of their brevity and plainen^^se, fit for the cap^citie of the young
learner, for whom they were first and principally intended, they are mine own,
not borrowed out of the shops, but the very same Nature acquainted me withal
from a child, and such as in practice I have ever found most easy and true. I
may perhaps be snar^^dat by some few obscure Artizans, that affect their base
private gain before a general commodity: but if any thing herein (Reader)
shall content thee, I care not what the other say: the worst hurt they can do
me is to draw my pic^ure ilfauoredl^: and perhaps I could requite them as
Hipponax the Satyrist did: But knowing envy to rest in none but the most base
and degenerate mind^s, I hope of thy kind acceptance of what I here of^er
thee, since it proceeds from no private respect, but from a willing and free
mind, either to pleasure or to profit thee.

The most assured friend to all that love or learn this Art, Henry Peacham.

Authoris ad Zoilum Epigramma.
ZOile, vicat^m dum Criticus ^mnia lustras,
Blattaque li^ents dente aliena voras,
Vsque licet nostrum ieiunus rode libellum
Qui tibi, (ni fallor) Pigmenta fere omnia venena.
mill venen^ dabit.
Eiusdem de multiplici picturae vsu ad ingenuos adolescentes.
QVisquis es, antiquam quem discere iunerit artem,
Mentiri e^figies r^rum nitidoque color;
Non te poenite at nostrum triuisse libellum.
Seu te delectet diuinilectio verbi,
N^sse locos, vbi prima dedit fundamina mundi
Conditor omnipotens, regni quis limes Ede^^;
Structura ingentis templ^, q^^lesque fu^ssent
Illius ornatus, Sanctiquae foederis arca,
Indignumque solun^ recut^tae visere gentis,
Quasue redux coelo, te^ras c^lcauit Jesus.
Seu cup^^ herbarum Medicus cognoscere formas,
Fructuum and ignotas species, quas Indica tellus
Gignit, and ad nostras toties aduexerit or as:
Sieve doces stellas radio, coelique mea^us,
Qua micet Andromedae igniculus, qua frigidus Axis:
Quaque patent Hyades rutilae, ^^mb^sus Orion,
Candid^ quo proper^t nitidoue Galaxia flexu.
Aut mu^t Occanum, fi^^ tent^sse carina,
Littora v^surus, tot Persi^^ ^oeta l^pillis:
Quaeue stupenda vomant s^pic^^fl^a flumina Nili;
Africa and horrendis enixa est monstra figuris:
Infames scopulos, immania sc^ptra profundi,
Quae fuerit Troiae facies, vbi Pergama quondam,
Quis Romae antiquae locus, and Carthaginis altae,
Laurifer^ cingant qui colles Thessala Tempe.
Hinc numerosa tibi contingant stemmata, long
Ductaque ad ignotos olim ventura nepotes,
Pignora non ingrata, animi ac virtutis auitae,
Oraue dehi^c cupias Dominae gestare decorae,
Cum qua nec forma, certet Priameia virgo,
A^t fidi amissos vultus lugebis amici,
Cui dabis amplex^s frustra, frustra oscula figes,
Ingemis at que animum specie dum pascis inani,
H^c PICTVRA tuis vel singula reddet ocellis.
Ad D. Henricum Peachamum amicum singularem, and in pictura exercitatissimum.
GRammaticus, Pictor, dum Music^^, esquire Poeta,
His cunctis mira dexteritate vale^s:
Instruis atque alios his cunctis, nemo meretur,
De patria melius, iudice Aristotele.
Ioannes Thorpe.

H P ICH DIEN


THE FIRST BOOK of Drawing and Limming.
CHAP. I. The excellency, and antiqu^tie of Painting, the manifold uses, and
necessity of the sam^.
PAinting in general called in Latin Pictura, in Greek (...), is an Art,
which either by draught of bare lines, lively colors, cutting out or
embossing, expresses any thing the like by the same: which we may find in the
holy Scripture both allowed and highly commended by the mouth of God himself,
where he calls Bezaleel and Aholia, Exodus 31.
men whom he has filled with the spirit o^ God in wisdom and understanding,
and in knowledge, and in all workmanship, to find out curious works, to work
in gold, and in silver, and in brass, also in the art to set stones, and to
carue in timber, etc. There plainly showing, as all other good Arts, so caruing
or drawing to be an especial gift of Gods Spirit. In another place he goes
farther, and as it were challenges solely to himself the mastership of the
company in that his Maiestique Erotema in Job in these words. Job. 39.16.
Have thou given the pleasant wings unto the Peacocks? and wings and feathers
unto the Ostrich? whereas disabling the wit and skill of man by his own
excellency, he gives us to admire that ad^irable wisdom of his in
distinguishing so many beautiful colors from the wings of the proud Peacocke
and Ostrich, eue^ unto the poor Butterfly, so that astonished with Aristotle,
I may say even in these little painted creatur^s there is (...), some wonder or
other, and in the very border of one of their wings an evident ^aste of the
divine omnipotency.

But as Picture has been allowed of God, so it has as well among the
Christians as heathen been honored from all antiquity, and ever found favor
with the greatest wits and mightiest Monarchs of the world, insomuch as
Aristotle in his Poli^iques accounts it amongst those liberalia Paideumata,
and counsels it as an especial thing to be taught unto children, and not
long after by the authority and labor of Eupompus a learned Geometrician, it
was taught in all Schools throughout Greece. But some will tell me Mechanical
arts, and those wrought with the hand are for the most part base, and unworthy
the practice of great personages, and Gentlemen: I confess Divine D^ Bartas
has said of such L'e^r esprit ^e'n ^uit a^ bout des doigts. ^ar^as. Semaine. 1.
But for as much as their ends are honest, and themselves but the exercises of
pregnant and the finest wits, I see no reason (as one says) why nature should
be so much wronged in her intention, as not to produce at her pleasure that
into action whereto she is well inclined. E^am. de Ingen^^.
And surely it can be no more disgrace to a great Lord to draw a fair
Picture, then to cut his Ha^kes meat, or play at Tennis with his Page. Achilles
thought it no scorn to be so cunning in cookery, that when certain
Ambassadors came unto him, he with his own hands dressed them a great and
royal Supper. And Homer to no small commendation of his Ulysses (under whose
person he ma^keth an absolute wise man) reports, that he could make his ships
himself.

Qu^nt^s Fabius (whose family was one of the noblest in Rome, Ru^ilius in
vitae Quint. Fab^^ pic^or^^.
and after had the surname of Pictores) with his own hands painted the walls of
the Temple of Salus, and wrote his name under his own work.

Pomponius Atticus a man of singular wisdom, and so much beloved of Cicero,
after he had composed a Poem of sundry devises, beautified the same with
pictures of his own drawing.

The Emperor Constantine got his living a long time by painting, Sigebert in
Chronicis.
and in Plinies times certain festival days were yearly appointed at
Corinth for the exercise of picture for great prizes and wagers. Since Painting
then has been so well esteemed, and of it own nature is so linked with the
other Arts, as many of them can hardly stand without it, I think it not for
pleasure only, but of necessity most needful to be practiced of all such,
that either study the Mathematikes, the art Military, or purpose to travel
for the benefit of their friends and country. I have heard many excellent
Captains and Scholars lament so great a want in themselves, otherwise being
most absolute.

My Scholar then I would make choice of, should be a young Gentlman, if it
might be, naturally inclined to drawing, at least a welwiller and lover of it.
And I would have in him, as Tully wishes in his Orator, aliquid redundans and
quod amputem, Cic^ro 1. de Orator^.
A pretty ^antasticall head, and something, as chippes from the sound timber to
be pared off, to which commonly the best wits are subject, withal daily and
contnuall practice, were it but Apelles his vnica linea, without which it is
impossible for him to attain to ready draught, much less to excellency in
general.

The beginning and progress of Painting. CHAP. II. A comparison between the
Painters of old times, and the latter, the great value and prizes of Pictures,
etc.
AElian de varia Historia. lib. 10.
AElian says, Painters at the first were such bunglers, and so rude, that when
they drew a Cow or a Hog, they were feign to write over the head what it was,
otherwise the beholder knew not what to make of it; but in short time they grew
to that excellency, that they were honored welnigh as Gods, as Metrodor^s the
Athenian, of whom, as of some other that were the most famous in their times I
will speak a word or two, as well for method, as the recreation of my Reader.

Apollodorus among the Athenians was the first that did express the life with
colors.

Euphranor has attributed unto him the invention of Emblemes, Impr^sa's, and
the like heroical devises, and was the first obseruer of Simetry, whereof he
wrote many volumes.

Parrhasius most of all excelled in black and white.

Pyreicus (as Volaterane says) was only famous for counterfaiting all base
things, as earthen pitchers a scullery, Rogues together by the ears, swine
tumbling in the mire, etc. whereupon he was surnamed Rupographus. That is
Painter of base things.


Aristides was the most excellent of his time for expressing sense and passion,
as in that piece of his, of a mother deadly wounded, and giving her child
suck, in whose face he expressed a deadly fear, as loath to deny it food,
and unwilling to give it the teate for fear of killing it with her blood,
which with the milk issued forth in great abundance. This Table Alexander
carried with him to Pella.

Protogenes was the first that could lay his colors so artificially, that one
being worn off, a fresh should succeed to the number of four or five, when
he would undertake any excellent piece, he used to di^t himself with pease,
lupines, and the like, that his invention might be the more quick and refined.

Amongst his works his Ialysus or Bacchus was the chief taken at the Rhodes by
Demetrius Poliorcetes; Plutarch in Demetr.
which he so esteemed, that (as Plutarch reports) he swear he had rather loose
all his fathers Images then that Table, AElian says it was seven yea^es in
making.

Ap^lles who lived in the 1012. Olympiade^ excelled all the rest, yet for
action he gave place to Amphion: Among his pieces, the picture of Alexander at
Ephesus, and his Venus which he left at his death imperfect in Chios were the
chiefest.

I will pass over the artificial pieces of Zeuxis, L. Manlius, De quo Cicero
lib. 1. de Oratore.
Pacuuius a Tragedian Poet, Metrodorus before named, an excellent Painter, and
withal a great Philosopher, who when Lucius Paulus a great man in Rome wrote
unto the University of Athens to provide him a grave and learned Schoolmaster
for his sons, was chosen by the general consent of the whole University, as
the fittest man both to bring up his children, and to adorn his triumphs.

Nothing inferior to these rare Artistes (in my judgment) have been our
painters of late time, and many now living in sundry parts of Europe, who if
they could find an Alexander or another Demetrius, would remain as famous to
posterity, as Apelles, or the best of them all have done to us, neither do I
suppose every thing to have been excellent, which over credulous Authors have
writ, and ignorant antiquity admired, the best arts being then in their
in^ancie, whose perfection is not distilled to the purity, until it has
run through many ages: what times shall not ever admire that excellent piece
of Raphael Vrbine in the Church of S. Victore in Millane: the workmanship of
Michael Angelo of the last judgment in the Popes Chapel in Rome, Her^ole di
Ferrara, and his notable art seen at this day in Bononia Pisanello, who so
beauti^ied ^he Church of Laterane in Rome, Bellino the Ven^tian, whom the Turk
so royally rewarded, what Apelles could excel Petro de Burgo for perspectiue,
Albert Durer for drapery, Michael Angelo for action, Goldzius for good
standing, and bold action, Hans Holben for sense and the life, Marcus de Siena
for Sandtschap, with infinite others, as Titianus, Antonio de Corregio, Caesar
Sestius, Zenale Triuiliano, Francesco Melzi, nor must I be ingratefully
unmindful of mine own counrriemen, who have been, and are able to equal the
best, if occasion served, as old Mr. Hiliard, Mr. Isaac Oliver inferior to
none in Christendom for the countenance in small, my good friend Mr. Peake and
Mr. Marqu^s for oil colors, with many more unknown unto me. Neither does our
country want her Patrone^ and favorers of this worthy skill, as first the
Kings most excellent Majesty, Noble Prince Henry, to whom I presented not long
since his fathers Basilicon Doron, which I had turned a little before
throughout into Latin verse^ And Emblemes limmed in lively colors, which he
graciously accepted. The Right Honorable Robert Earl of Salisburie, and Lord
high Treasurer of England, who as he favors all learning and excellency, so
he is a principal patron of this art, having lately employed Mr. Butler and
many other excellent Artistes for the beautifying of his houses, especially his
Chapel at Hatfield. The right Honorable the Earls of Arundell, Worcester,
South-hampton, Pembrooke, Suffolk, and Northampton, with many Knights and
Gentlemen, to whom our masters are daily beholden. Now least you should esteem
over basely of this art, and disdain to have your picture, because you may
have it for a trifle (which I account a fault in many of our good workmen) I
will tell you the prices of some pieces of note as well in ancient times, as of
late days.

Caesar the Dictator redeemed the tables of Ai^x and Medaea for eighty
talents, which amount to 24000 French crowns: I speak with the least, because
take the lesser Athenian talent (for generally where you find this word
Talentum in any Latin Author, as in Tullie his Oration pro C. Rabirio Postumo,
and in Act: in verrem, and some other places, where you shall find it
oftenest, you must understand the Athenian talent, except you have the addition
of AEgineum, Syrium, Babylonium, etc. ^udaeus in Ass.
) the greater (as Budaeus says) was bigger by a third part.

King Attalus paid for one of Aristides pieces an hundred talents.

Hortensius the Orator gave for a table of the Argonauts 144. talents.

Mnason paid to Asclepiodorus for the twelve Gods after three hundred pounds
sterling a piece.

Candaules King of Lydia gave to Bularchus for a piece of his, the weight of
the same in gold.

The Duke of Millane rewarded Raphael Vrbine as many ducats as covered the
picture of a great breadth which he had made for him.

Pope Innocent the eight, a worthy lover of all learning, and ingenious arts,
bestowed upon Andrea Mantega his painter in the Beluedere of Rome two thousand
ducats for a months pains.

I have also heard what a round sum was offered by strangers for the Altar
cloth of St. Magnus in London; sundry other examples I might allege, but I
have said enough to show that art has ever been well paid her hire, and the
professors thereof been had in esteem with the worthiest and wisest men.

CHAP. III. A Painter not privileged to draw what he list, the manifold abuses
of painting: whether the picture of the Trinity, of our Savior Christ,
according to his humanity, the Images of the Saints and their passions: The
sign of the Cross may be lawfully drawn or not, etc.
AS I would have my young Scholar take his pleasure, so I would not have him
to buy it at over dear a rate, either with loss of over much time in the
maine profession, or of his ears for a libeller, neither to think with
Horace, he may quidlibet audere, for there be many things which as well Nature
or Religion would have freed from the pencill; what hurt has that beastly
book of Aretines done abroad in the world, and what lewd art is there shown
in many printes and pieces that are daily brought over out of Italy, Flanders,
and other places, which are oftener enquired after in the shops then any other,
little use else is there of most of the wax pictures of Curtizans in Rome and
Venice being drawn naked, and sold up and down as Libidinis Fomenta, surely I
cannot but commend art in them, as many times there is excellent good, but
verily do hate their wicked makers and abominable ends.

Touching the picture of the Trinity, as commonmonly it is drawn, first God
the Father like an old man, between his knees Christ upon the Cross, and
over his head a Dove resembling the holy ghost, I hold it basphemous, and
utterly unlawful, and whatsoe^er the Roman Catholics think of it, both the
Scripture, Councels, and fathers, nay many of the best Divines of their own
side are either utterly against it, by Bellarmines own con^ession, or speak
very slende^ly, for it as tolerable by the Church, but no ways allowable by
the word of God: as namely, Abulensis, Abulensis in 4. cap. Deutero. Qu^st. 5.
Durandus, Durand. in d^st. quaest. 9.
Peresius, Pe^esiu^ de traditionibus part 3
and many others, though in plainest terms: Lorichius a man of great learning
and sound judgment amongst them, Lorichius Cathol. Institut. in praecept. 1.
utterly condemns the same in these words.

Est praeterea abusus imaginum, quod sanctam Trinitat^m praesumpsimus
exprimere, quod haeresis est pestilentissima, quid enim magis sanctae Trinitati
aduersum, atque Patrem effingere senis silicernij effigy, filium iuuenis
formam habentem, Spiritum Sanctum alitis speciem volitantis referentem? Quid
Idiotae ex tali libro didicisse poterint? errorem sane and Haeresim.

Wherein Calvin and our Protestant writers do agree strongly and truly
maintaining the contrary by these places of Scripture, Calvin Ins^it. 1.-
Places o^ scripture against the painting or e^pressing of the T^inity.
Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 4. Esaias. 40. and 46 lastly. Act. 17.

To these places it is again answered by Bell^rmine, Cardinal C^ietanus,
Ca^^tan. in 3. pot. quaest 25. a^t 3.
Catharinus, Catharinus in cult^ Imag.
Diegus, Pay^ia, Pay^^ co^^r^ K^m^^t^um.
and others, that it is lawful to express the Trinity or the picture of God
the Father, in such form as he visibly appeared, sometime like a man, and
sometimes like an Angel, the places they allege are. Genesis 1. Genesis 3. Genesis 28.
Exodus 33. Isaiae. 6. Micheae. 3. Regum. vlt^ Amos. 9. Daniel.7. B^lla^m l^b. 8.
de Im^g.
Moreover they allege Saint Augustine, who thought that the Trinity appeared
unto Abraham. Genesis 18.

But howsoever these and other places do seem to make for the lawfulnes of it
we are to hold it an impious thing, and not to be tolerated, as being expressly
forbidden by the word of God, and giving occasion of the infinite errors in the
Church.

Va^ro in his time, August. de Ciuit^t^ D^i. lib. 4. cap. 19.
said that the Images of the Gods, took away the fear of them, and increased
error.

Of the Pictures of our Savior Christ, the Apostles and Martyrs.
NEither by any means may the pic^ure of our Savior, the Apostles and Martyrs
of the Church be drawn to an Idolatrous use, or be set up in Churches to be
worshipped.

Says the Elibertine Council: Council. Eli^e^t. Canon. 36.
Placuit in templis non haberi picturas, ne quod colitur, vel adoratur, in
parietibus depingatur: which is, It has pleased us (says the Counsel) that
pictures be not set up in Churches, nor any thing be painted upon the walls,
which is reverenced or worshipped.

Epiphanius moreover in an Epistle to John Bishop Bishop I^w^l against Harding.
of Jerusalem, says it is against the authority of the Scripture, that an
Image be hanged up in a Church, there speaking of the Image of Christ, or some
other Saint which he found painted upon a cloth. AElius Lampridi u^ in vita
Alex.


Adrian the Emperor caused Churches to be built for the Christians without
Images.

Beside the holy Scripture, these with many other be the arguments of our
writers: whom Bellarmine after his manner answers severally. That pictures of
these kinds may be drawn, and set up to draw the beholder ad Histo^icum vsum,
and not ad cultum, I hold them very lawful and tolerable in the windows of
Churches and the private houses, and deserving not to be beaten down with
that violence and fury as they have been by our Puritanes in many places.

Touching the picture of Christ according to his humanity I would scarce change
it for the best Jewel in the world, if I had it truly drawn, neither of the
lawfulness thereof I think any wise man will make question.

Tertul. in lib. de pudic^tia.
Tertullian who has lived within the first five hundred years reports that
the picture of Christ was engraven upon the communion Cup carrying the lost
sheep upon his shoulder.

Gregory Nyss^nus in his Oration for Theodorus the Emperor, says, the
Emperor was delighted when he saw the Temple of God beautified with stately
buildings, and with sundry ornaments within, where the pain^er had showed the
excellency of his art in setting forth the valiant sufferings of the Matyrs,
their torments, the cruel countenances of Tyrants their violence, the fiery
furnace, the blessed end of those valiant champions. etc.

Zozomen and Nicephorus write that in the time of Julian the Apostata, ^^zom^^.
lib. 5. cap. ^0.
the Image of Christ, which was at Panneades, was brought by the Christians
into one of their Churches and there preserved.

Nazianzen grieved much that a City of Dioecesaria was to be razed and
destroyed, N^zianz^n. Epist. 49. ad Olympium.
wherein was a Temple, which himself had adorned with sundry statues.

Of the Cross.
THough the cross be of the same nature with the other forenamed, I am moved
to say something particularly of the same, since being lately in company of a
Gentleman of this land wholly devoted to Puritani^me, a reasonable good
Scholar, and one, who, as he told me in his time had been a burgess of the
Parliament house, we had a discourse of the Cross, I affirming that it was an
ancient and honorable bearing in arms, naming many of our Nobility and
Gentry that bare it: yea but (quoth he) our heralds in former times were to
blame, for giving allowance to such relikes of Idolatry, and suffering them so
publicly to be carried up and down upon Coaches.

But leaving such pure judgments to their singularity, we are satisfied,
since we know from time to time^ it has been allowed by the Church, not to
any superstitious use, but because the ancient Christians thought that their
glory wherewith the Gentiles had so long scorned and di^graced therewithal

Euseb^ lib. ^. de vita Const^nt.
Constantine the Emperor gave the Cross in his standard, as Eusebius
witnesses, who also having overcome Max^ntius, erected a Cross in the
chiefest place in all Rome with these words, hoc salutare signum. Moreover he
caused his statue to be made with a Cross in his hand.

Theodosius forbad it should be painted upon the ground. Z^zomen. lib. 1. c^p.
8.


Arcadius his son caused it the first to be stamped upon his coin in gold,
(which kind of Cross I make no question but of all sorts is loved well
enough) as Prosperus writ^th, August. ser. 18. de v^rbis Domini.
de praedict. and promis. part. 3. cap. 34.

Tiberius, when he saw the Cross cut in Marble, and lying upon the ground,
Paulus Diaconus lib. 18.
caused it to be dug up, and set upright, saying, we ought to sign our
forehead and breast with the Cross of the Lord, and we ^read it under our feet.

In Honcil. quod Christus sit Deus.
Chrysostom says, that in his time (beside the Ceremony of using it in
Baptism and the Lords Supper) it was painted upon beds, Armor, Ships, etc.
Touching the Ceremony of signing with the same, as we use it in Baptism to say
any thing thereof, were beside my subject, neither were it needful since the
meanest divine can tell, that it has anciently been used and allowed by the
Fathers, as Basil (who affirms it to be one of the Apostolical traditions)
Cyrill, Tertullian, St. Cyprian, August. Tractat. in Joan. 118. Nihil little
rite per^icitur.
and lastly, Saint Augustine, who says, that except the foreheads of the
believers (as children baptized) be signed with the sign^ of the cross, the
form of baptism is not as it ought to be, but enough if not so much of this
subject.

CHAP. IIII. Pencils and other Instruments necessary for drawing.
MAny ways I know there have been devised to teach draught, as namely, by
crossing the pattern, then your own papers with equal spaces, filling the
same as you find in your example: also drawing upon a lantern horn with a
paper blackt with a torch, and such like: neither do I mislike any such
convenient help to a young learners furtherance; but to learn to the purpose,
and to grow cunning in short time, you should rather fall to it only by your
own conceit and judgment, and let those toys go, you must first get you
black lead sharpened finely: Black lead in quils.
and put fast into quils, for your rude and first draught, some ten or twelve.

Moreover you must not be without as many Sallow coals, Sallow coals.
sharpened at the ends: you shall choose them thus, they are more blew and finer
grained then the other coals, smooth (being broken) like satin: you shall
sharpen them upon one of your ^ingers, as also your black lead; other coals
will quickly break, and never point sharp.

Get you also a small pair of brazen compasses and fine rule, Rule and
compass.
for taking the distance, if you follow a print; and be not without the crumbs
of fine manchet or white bread, to rub out your lead or coal, when you have
done amiss, or finished your work.

Scriueners and writing Schoolemasters in the country that teach to write,
have diverse small pensils of broom, Broom pencils.
with which they shadow great letters with common Ink in copy books very
pretily: they are made in this manner, take a broom stalk about the bigness
of a spoone ^andle, and cut it even at the end, when you have done, chew it
between your teeth till it be fine and grow heary at the end like a pensill,
but I care not how little you use them, because your pen shall do better, and
show more art.

For your drawing pens, never be without twenty or thirty at a time, made
of Ravens and goose quils; your Ravens quilles are the best of all other, to
write fair, or shadow fine, your goose quils serve for the bigger or ruder
lines. To draw with dry colors, you may make long pastils, which you shall
do by grinding red lead, or any other color with strong wort, and so roll
them up into long roules like pensils drying them in the Sun, some put heereto
a little new milk.

CHAP. V. The first Practice.
Having these in a readiness, you shall practice for the space of a week or
there abouts, to draw Circles, Squares of all sorts, a Cilinder, the ouall
form with other such like solid and plain Geometrical figures with a swift
hand till you can do them indifferent well, but after using the help of your
rule and compass: the reason of exercising you first in these is, when as
Symmetry or proportion is the very soul of picture, it is impossible that you
should be ready in the bodies, before you can draw their abstract and general
forms, and have wonted and made your hand ready, in proportions of all sorts,
which are co^pounded of the same, as for example, your circle will ^each you,
to draw even and truly all Sphaericall, bodies which are, (...), of like parts
and forms, as the Sun, Moon, Stars^ etc. The most flowers as the Rose,
Marigold, Helitropiu^, Daisie, etc. the most vessels as cups, basins, bowls,
bottels etc. The use of the Ci^cle, Square Cylinder or O^thogonium and Pyramid.
The square will make you ready for all manner of compartments, bases,
perystiles, plots, buildings, etc. your Cylinder for valted ^urrets, and round
buildings; your Orthogoniu^ and Pyramid, for sharp steeples, turrets and all
things, in mucronem fastigiata, your Ouall form will help you in drawing the
face, a shield or such like: so that you may reduce many thousand bodies to
these few general figures, as unto their principal heads and fountains. After
you are cunning in these figures (beginning wi^h the circle) and imitate
something of circular form, what you shall think good, in which as in all the
other aforenamed proportions you shall work and help your self by the
Diameter (which is a strait line, drawn long ways just in the midst of your
circle or square) and which will guide you maruellously in your work for example
if I would draw the Sun, so soon as I have made a fair circle I draw (with cole
or lead that I may rub it out again) my diameter or line down the midst, over
which if you will again, you may draw a cross line, both which divide your
Circle equally into four parts, as you see. Which Diameter with the cross
line, are not only your directors, for the equal placing of the greater and
lesser beams, on the side as you may perceive: but also for the drawing of the
nose, mouth and eyes even in the midst of the face.

I will give you another example of a goblet or cup. First I make a half or
semicircle for the bowl, down the midst of which (as low as I would have the
foot to come) I draw my Diameter or straight line, which being done, the worst
is past: you must now mark: I am not tied to make my bowl as round as the
circle, but long or what fashion I list, no other use has the Circle there
then to guide me even on either side, whether I make it broad or narrow, long
or short, embosse it, or how, soever, the other part of the line causes me to
make the foot even as you see.

Which line and Circle (as I said before) you may with your white bread rub
out, when you have done.

In these and such like, you may at your pleasure find infinite variety to
^set your self a work with, till you are able to fall to work by your own
judgment; which you shall do in your next and second practice.

CHAP. VI. The second practice.
YOu shall, next after your hand is grown ready in the foresaid proportions,
practice to draw small and easy things, coming as near your former examples
as may be, by your conceit only: as a cherry with the leaf, the shaft of a
steeple, a single or canker Rose, etc. wherein you shall begin to take some
delight, and find no great difficulty.

But in drawing these and whatsoever else, I must not forget to tell you; that
you must be perfect and quick in the general or outward lines, and give them
a reasonable good proportion, ere you fall to shadowing or tricking your work
within: wherefore I would have you make an assey six or seven times at the
least for the general proportion only: if at first it be not to your mind,
as for example in drawing of a Rose, be sure that the compass of it be not
faulty, ere you cast out the leaves by five equal lines, or in making a woman's
ruff, that you score it out first narrow in the neck, then wider from the
cheeks, and narrow again under the chin very truly, ere you add^ the lace of
setting, a^l which is done with one line, which I call the g^nerall or extreme.
For those forms that are mixed and uncertain, and where your circle and
square can do you no good (being left only to your Idea) as in a Lion, a horse
or such like: you must work altogether by your own judgment, A strong
imagina^ion required in a good painter.
and win the proportion by daily practice, which will seem very harsh and
strange unto you at the first, but to help your self herein you shall do
thus: having the general notion or shape of the thing in your mind you mean
to draw (which I doubt not but you may conceive and remember as well as the
best painter in the world, though not express according to the rules of art)
draw it with your lead or coal after your own fashion, How to help you in
your Idea.
though never so badly, and lay it from you for a day: the next day peruse it
well, bethink your self where you have erred, and mend it according to that
Idea you carry in your mind, in the general proportion: when you have thus
done, lay it by again till the next day, and so continue for five or six days
together, correcting by degrees the other parts eue^ so ^mal vains as your
discretion will serve you, this may you do with forty papers at once, of
several things, having done what you can (though not to your liking) confer it
by the like, some excellent print or pattern of the same, using no rule or
compass at all but your own judgment in mending every fault lightly, and
with a quick hand, giving every place his due; whereby you shall of all sides
meet with your errors, and find an incredible furtherance to your practice:
though hereunto is required I must confess, a strong imagination, and a good
memory, which are the midwiues to this art and practice as in all things else,
the nurse that brings it to full growth and perfection.

CHAP. VII. Of drawing the face or countenance of a man.
SInce a man is the worthiest of all creatures, and such pleasing variety in
countenances so disposed of by the divine providence, that among ten thousand
you shall not see one like another (as well for breeding delight, as for
observing a method after you have practiced according to your former
directions in other things) you shall begin to draw a man's face, in which as
in all other creatures you must take your beginning at the forehead, and so
draw downward till yo^ have finished.

The visage or countenance is (for the most part) drawn but three manner of
ways, the first is full faced, The full ^ace.
as commonly we see King Henry the 8 drawn:

The second is three quarter faced, as our Flanders and ordinary pictures are,
that is when one part of the face is hid by a quarter as thus:

The third is only half faced, Half face.
as you see the pictures of Philip and Mary upon a twelve pence, or as this
Caesar's head.

For draught of a full face you must bear in memory, and narrowly observe the
breadth of the forehead, and the compass of both the cheeks, all which are
composed of two lines as thus:

And be careful to give as precise an evenness to one side as to the other;
causing both your lines to meet at the tip of the chin: your Diameter guides
you for the even placing (as I said) of nose and mouth, your other line for the
just opposition of the eyes between which in distance for the nose, always
leave the space of an eye.

The end of the nose in ordinary proportion must be brought no lower then the
middle of the cheek, The space of an other eye to be le^t between the eyes.
from whence to the chin is for the most part as far, as from thence upward
to the eyebrows.

The nose of a full face must not be expressed with apparent lines, but with a
very fine shadow on each side, as you see.

An eye is commonly drawn in this manner.

To make an angry or stern countenance, let your brow bend so, that it may
almost seem to touch the ball of the ey; at what time you must also give the
forehead a fine wrinckle or two, and withal the upper part of the nose
between the eyes.

A great conceit is required in making the eye which either by the dullness or
lively quickness thereof gives a great taste of the spirit and disposition of
the mind, Great difficulty in the eye.
(which many times I will not deny may be as well perceived by the mouth, and
motion of the body,) as in drawing a fool or idiot, by making his eyes
narrow, and his temples wrinkled with laughter, wide mouthed, or showing his
teeth etc. A grave or reverend father by giving him a demisse and lowly
countenance, his eye beholding you with a sober cast, which is caused by the
upper ey^lid covering a great part of the ball, and is an especial mark of a
sober and stayed brain within. Nic^phor lib. 10. cap 3.7.
Nazianzen when he beheld a Iu^ian (long time before he was Emperor, at
Athen^, at the very first sight of his countenance, (Presaging his future
disposition) burst forth into these words; Deus bone, quantum malum souet
Romanum imperium: Nazianz. in ^. auect. contra Iulianum.
for (as he witnesses himself) there was not any sign of goodness or
towardnes in him, his eyes ^owled in his head, wandering and turning fearfully
now this, now that way; sparkling with fury and anger, his nose was grown
wrinckled with scoffing and deriding, the rest of his countenance tending to
mockery, his laughter so immoderate, that his whole body would shake
therewith, his shoulders shrinking to and fro, to his neck: his legs and feet
seldom standing still; his questions and answers supitious, rash, and often
interrupted by short fetching his breath; by which signs the good man foresaw
his inbred tyranny and vile disposition, which after burst forth into an
horrible persecution and open rebellion against God and his Church. A Grecian
Captain in like manner noting very often the cast of the eye and countenance
of Scylla, Brusoni^s. lib. 7. cap. 20.
together with his gesture and motion of body, used these words: it is
impossible but this Gentlemen one day should prove a great commander, and I
marvel that he is not adua^ced all this while. D^gonius an Earl of Flanders,
when he should have been put to death by the Turk, a Phisiognomer wished that
he might not die by any means, because if he lived he would sow much
dissension among the Christians, which after fell out to be true, by which
examples and the like, I prove that there is a certain Indictum, or notice of
the minds disposition inly imprinted by nature even in the countenance, and
many times in the eye or mouth, which (as I have said) you must be careful, as
you shall have occasion, warily to observe.

Now for the mouth (though least of all other any general rule may be given
for it, The mouth.
) it consists principally of two lines, whereof one expresses the mouth it
self, the other the nether lip: the ouerlip is best shown by a shadow cast
over the cross line as you see; which shadow and cross line if you draw by
the life must be hit at an hairs breadth, and if your picture be little, you
cannot think so small a thing as gives or quite takes away the touch and
resemblance of the mouth: and to say truly^ it will be the hardest piece of
cunning that ever you shall meet withal: therefore you had need cause the
party whom you will draw, to sit as we say, Vultu composito, without stirring
or altering the mouth were it never so little: I have many times been much
troubled about expressing the mouth as it ought, wherein you shall find great
difficulty, wherefore you shall best take it when the party minds you not,
and to say the truth it is the best time of taking a picture. I have never
drawn any more truly, then when they have been busy in talking, at dinner,
viewing some thing or other, and in this manner I have often taken his
Majesty's, sitting at dinner, or talking with some of his followers. I have
many times wondered why I could among so many never find any true picture of
his Majesty, or that did any thing near resemblie him: I know not, but
generally in his picture I ^inde two principal errors, the one in the
complexion and hair, the other is in the mouth, which commonly they draw with
a full and great nether-lip very apparent, wherein they commit the chiefest
error, which good observation having avoided, I have drawn him often with my
Pen and Ink only upon a fair piece of paper in an hour, more truly and like
then the best pieces in oil about the town.

CHAP. VIII. Of expressing passion in the countenance
THe passions of the mind being diverse as love, fear, joy, anger, hatred,
despair, desire, boldness, etc. must be expressed with great judgment and
discretion, though you shall better express them in lively colors then with
the pen, because palenesse redness, fiery eyes etc. are adjuncts to the same.

You shall express love by making vultum sere^um, fair and pleasant, no where
clouded with wrinckles, or furrowed with unpleasing bendings, which are
commonly effects of care, melancholy, anger, despair, and the like: first you
are to give the forehead a Maiesticke grace and height, a full eye which you
shall make very pleasing by shadowing it, with a fine shadow at the bottom of
the eye lid, and a little at the corner, a small and proportionable nose, the
nosethrils not too wide, a clear cheek which you shall make by shadowing the
same on one side, the mouth smiling which you shall do by making a thin
upper lip, and shadowing the mouth line a little at the corners, and for as
much as the kinds of beauties are infinite, if you would draw some rare piece
for beauty, you should as Apelles was wont, frequent the Court or City, and
imitate some excellent beauty or other. I was not long since extremely
troubled with a piece of the Sea Nymp^es being all sisters, in whose faces I
was to express a singular and several beauty, yet so like one another, that
they might be known to be sisters, the history is in the second of Ouids
Metamorphosis. And Vi^gil describing the countenance of AEneas, AEn^^d.1.
express^^h with singular art the beauty and comeliness which his mother
Venus had bestowed upon him in this manner.

Os humerosque D^o similis, namque ipsa decoram
Caesariem gnato genetrix, lumenque ^uuentae,
Purpureum, and laetos o^ulis afflarat honores.
You shall show ^eare in the countenance, by making of the eyes to look
hollow, heavily and downward, the cheeks fallen, the mouth close, the hair
staring or hanging carelessly about the ears, I saw an excellent piece of this
kind done by Leonard Vincentio, done to the imitation of an ancient painter,
which was a company of young men swimming, and upon the sudden surprised by
the enemy, where you might see one putting his head into his shirt sleeue for
have, another running away half naked. Fear is described by our excellent
Spencer to ride in armor, In hi^ Fa^ry Queen.
at the clashing whereof he looks deadly pale, as afeard of himself.

The like observations you are to keep in the rest which you shall naturally
find described by our Poets, by Lomazius, and lastly in mine Emblems, so that
it were needless for me here to re^terate the same.

CHAP. IX. Of the whole body.
WHen you are grown something perfect in the face, and can draw the head
indifferent well, you must be careful to proportion the body thereafter, then
the error of which, no one fault is more common with the most Painters: for you
shall scarce see one among twenty but will draw the head too big, Making the
head too big, a common fault
which if you observe, you shall find in most pictures: help your self herein
by ^e^ting a boy before you, causing him to stand which way you list, The neck.
and so to wont your judgment to the proportion by little and little: having
finished the head, draw the neck, beginning it with one line from about the
tip of the ear, then draw the other down from the ball of the cheek (which
is lessened on the other side) as far as you think good to the shoulder,
where stay, till you have shadowed it: the shadows of the neck in a child or
young woman are very sine, rare and scarely seen, but in a man the sinews
must be expressed, with the veins, by shadowing the rest of the neck, and
leaving them white. For the proportion of the other parts (because Lomazius
has prevented me: whose book though it be somewhat obscure^ in any case I
would have you to buy, after you are well entered) I will omit and show you
only such eminences which by shadow must be necessarily expressed: after you
have done the neck: you are to express the wing or upper part of the shoulder
by shadowing it underneath, The s^oulder.
the brawne of the arm must appear full, shadowed on one side, The arm.
then show the w^i^t bone thereof, ^he w^ist.
and the meeting of the veins in that place, the veins of the back of the
hand, and the knuckles, The knuck^e^.
are made with two or three hair strokes with a fine touch of your p^^^ the
pappes of a man are shown by two of three fine strokes given underneath, The
paps.
in a woman, with a circular shadow well deepned, the ribs are so ^o be
shadowed, The ribs.
as you doubt whether they appear or no: except your man were starued, or you
should draw death himself: the belly shall be eminent by shadowing the
flank, The be^ly.
and under the breast bone: the brawne of the thigh shall appear, The thigh.
by drawing small hair strokes from the hip to the knee, The knee.
shadowed again ouertwhartly: the knee pan must be shown with the knitting
thereof by a fine shadow underneath the joint; the shinbone from the knee to
the instep, is made by shadowing one half of the leg with a single shadow, The
leg.
the ankle bone will show it self by a shadow given underneath as the knee; the
sinews must seem to take their beginning from the midst of the foot, and to
grow bigger the nearer they are to the toes.

There is a great art in making the foot, wherein your shadows must take
place as occasion serves, and to say the truth, so they must in the other
parts, but naturally they fall as I have said; for teaching you the true
shadowing of a naked body; The foot.
Goltzius is one of the best, whose prints above any other I wish you to
imitate.

CHAP. X. Of shadowing and observing the light according to the rules and
infallible principles of perspectiue.
A Shadow is nothing else but a diminution of the first and second light.

The first light I call that which proceeds immediately from a lightened
body, as the beams of the sun.

The second is an accidental light dispreading it self into the air or
medium, proceeding from the other.

Under this division are comprehended the other lights, as the light of glory
is referred in the first. The light of all manner of reflections to the second.

Shadows are threefold: the first is a single shadow, and the least of all
other, and is proper to the plain Superficies, where it is not wholly possessed
of the light; as for example.

I draw a four square plate thus, that shadow, because there is no hollow, but
all plain (as nearest participating with the light) is most natural and
agreeable to that body.

The scond is the double shadow, The double (...).
and it is used when the Superficies begins once to forsake your eyes as you
may per^^iue best in a c^lumne as thus: where it being dark^ned double, it
presents to your eye (as it were) the backside, leaving that vnshaddowed to
the light. Your treble shadow is made by crossing over your double shadow
again, which darkeneth by a third part in this manner, as follows.

It is used for the in most shadow and farthest from the light, as in gulfes,
chinkes of the earth, wels, caves within houses (as when you imagine to look
in at a door, or window) under the bellies and flanks of beasts to show the
thickness or darkness of a mighty wood, that it may seem nulli penetrabilis
as^ro: consequently in all places where the light is beaten forth, as your
reason will teach you.

General rules for sh^dowing.
YOu must always cast your shadow one way, that is, on which side of the body
you begin your shadow, you must continue it till your work be done: as if I
would draw a man, I begin ^o shadow his left cheek the l^ft part of his
n^^ke, the le^t side of the left arm, the left side of the left thigh, etc.
leaving the other to the light, except the light side be darkened by the
opposition of a^ot^er body, as if three bowls should stand together, that in
the mi^st must receive a shadow on both sides.

2 All circular and round bodies that receive a concentration of the light, as
the light of a burning glass, when it does gath^r it self into a small
center, must be shadowed in circul^r manner as thus:

3. All perfect lights do receive no shadow at all, therefore he did ab^u^dly,
that in the transfiguration of our Savior in the Mount gave not his garments a
deep shadow, but also thinking to show great Art, he gave the beams of the
light it self a deeper, both which ought to have been most glorious, and all
means used for their luster and brightness; which has been excellently well
obserud of Strad^^e and Go^t^ius.

4. Where contrary shadows concur and strive (as those cross winds about
AE^eas his ^^^ip) for sup^riority, let the nearest and most solid body be
first se^ued. In the double and treble shadows, let your first strokes be very
dry for fe^re o^ blotting e^e you cross them.

5. It will seem a hard matter to shadow a gemme or well pointed D^^^^n^^ that
has many sides and sq^^^^s, and (...) ought: but if you (...) give you, y^^
(...) easil^ do it without (...).

6. All the (...) pa^ticipate in the medium according to the grea^n^^^e or
^^akn^sse o^ the light.

^. No body between the light, and our sight can ef^ect an absolute da^knes,
wher^^re ^ said a ^hado^ was but a diminution of the light, and it is a great
question whether there be any dar^nesse in the wo^ld or not. Bu^ beca^se all
manner of shadows depend upon the light; I will briefly for your memory teach
you by general propositions what you are to observe in the nature of the same,
it being a matter of the greatest moment in picture, and wherein you shall
exercise your judgment with an incredible pleasure, it being one of the most
delightful secrets in nature.

1 Proposition.
All light does disperse it self upon the object circularly, and again the
object enlightened affects the air or medium in the same manner, the reason
is, because the round or Sphaericall figure as to all heavenly bodies, so it
agrees naturally to light, as the most absolute, the most perfect, and
conseruatiue of all others, we find this to be true if w^^ but view the light
through a hole or cre^ise in a sunshine morning, or about the ^^ame of a
candle, hence you must learn in shadowing all circula^ bodies to give a
circular light, except by some accident you are compelled to the contrary.

2 Prop^sition.
Every greater light dimmes and diminishes the lesser, as for example the
stars shine in the day time, yet we perceive not their light, by reason of the
great^r light of the Sun, yet if you stand in the bottom of a well, you shall
easily perceive them and their motion, the reason is the light or beam of the
star being perpendicular or direct over your head, is of greater force then
the beams of the Sun coming oblikely or sideway (for you must take it for a
general rule, that all beams or reflections from the p^rpendicular are o^ more
force then the other broken and oblique, for example a ball being stricken hard
down with your hand, reboundeth back in the same line with greater force then
when it flies sidewaies, so does an arrow shot against the stone wall.)
Moreover in an evening at a bonefire in the street you shall hardly discern
any thing beyond the ^ire being your light hindered by the light thereof which
otherwise you might well do.

3 Proposition.
Bodies lighted by night by ^ire, must have a brighter ^ustre given them then
by day, as I have seen many excellent pieces of that nature, as the taking of
Christ by night, sacking of Cities, bat^owling and the like, the reason is,
because ^ire in the n^ght being compassed about with darkness, enlightens the
med^um more forceably and nearly.

4 Proposition.
According to the diversity (or as the Logicians term it) the intention and
remission of the light, the colors of bodies are changed, as the ^eathers of
birds wings, cloth of sundry colors, the Sea at morning and even, and the
like.

5 Proposition.
Lights never mingle in their Medium, as we prove by the shadow of many
candles lighted once.

6 Proposition.
In all concaue and hollow bodies that are capable of light as silver basens,
bowls, and the like, the light must be strongest and brightest in the center,
the reason is from every point of the concauity, the perpendicular lines meet
and join together in the Center.

7 Proposition.
Every Sphaericall body that gives light, enlightens a lesser Sphaericall
body according to the quantity of his Diamete^: for example, by how much the
Diameter of the Sun is brother then the Diameter of the earth^ by so much the
earth is enlightened beyond his Diameter or middle.

Alhacen and Vitellio have taught the making of artificial instruments for
taking of the light which with the manner of making Albert Durers gl^sse, I
will teach you in a discourse of perspectiue I will shortly publish.

8 Proposition.
If the light penetrateth any clear body (which we call Di^phanon) that is
colored as painted glas^e Amber, Cristall, fair water, a glass of Claret
wine, and the like, you must remember to give the light the same color that
his Medium is of, as if we look through red or blew glass, every thing
without appears red or blew to our sight.

9 Proposition.
Every beam direct reflected or broken is so much the more weak in the
lightning or burning, by how much the less time it stays upon the object:
this is proved if we dry a thing in a paper over a ca^dle which we do a great
while without burning, or by the swift motion of rivers, who take not the heat
of the Sun so much as standing waters: wherefore those countries under the
Equinoctial, by reason of the equal presence and absence of the Sun are
very temperate, whereas on the contrary in Lituania and thereabouts, where it
is in a manner day continually, they have extreme hot Summers, and most bit^er
cold Winters.

Of Foreshortning.
The chie^e use of perspectiue you have in foreshortning which is when by art
the whole is concluded into one p^rt, which only shall appear to the sight^
as i^ I should paint a ship upon ^he Sea, yet the^e should appear unto you but
her fore part, the rest imagined hid, or likewise an horse with his breast and
head looking full in my face, I must of necessity fo^eshorten him behind^
because his sides and ^lanks appear not unto me: this kind of draught is
willingly ouerslipt by ordinary painters for want of cunning and skill to
perform it; and you shall see not one thing among an hundred among them drawn
in this manner, but after the ordinary fashion side ways, and that but lamely
neither.

The use of it is to express all manner of action in man or beast, to
represent many things in a little room, to give or show sundry sides of
Cities, Castles, Forts, etc. at one time.

CHAP. XI. Certain Questions of the manifold deceptions of the sight by
perspectiue.
ALL errors of the sight proceed from a threefold cause, the first exterior,
or being as I may say in the false apprehension of distance opposition,
proportion or the like, the second from an inward cause, as the weakness of
the eye it self, or the decaying of the Spirits, the third from the affection
of the eye from some outward humor of hurt, but we are only to entreat of
the first.

1. Why the Horizon appears to our sight bigger th^n any part else of the
Hemisphere.
All quantity of distance is known by bodies interposed, but between our eye
and the vertical point of heaven over our heads we perceive nothing, between
our sight and the horizon, there appears the breadth of the earth, the space
therefore seems greater.

2. Why in round and Sphaericall glasses every thing appears crooked to the
eye.
In all glasses the form of the figure seen, follows the form of the
figure reflecting, but the reflection from the superficies or outside, is after
the form of the Superficies which is crooked, therefore must the thing seen
needs appear crooked.

3. Why in the said Round glasses all things appear less then in plain
glasses.
Because the concourse or meeting of the beams, with the perpendicular line in
orbicular glasses is nearer to the eye then in plain glasses: Euclide gives
another reason which is this. Because (says he) in plain glasses, the
reflection is greater and more forceable then in the round, for as I said the
Idolon or Image is of the nature of the Superficies reflecting the same.

4 Why in a glass broken to pieces, in every piece you see a several face,
and but one, if you join them together.
The reason is the diversity of position or situation, which may be gathered
by a concaue or hollow glass, wherein you shall see your face in sundry
places at once there being a reflection from every part of the glass. Hereupon
in uneven glasses, your face will appear to be monstrous.

5 Why square things by distance seem unto us to be long as Courts, the roofes
of Churches and houses, etc.
Because the excess or multitude of beams falling upon the sides of the
square body indirectly presented to the eye, is not proportionate with a
sensible proportion to those beams that fall upon the side directly against the
eye by comparison with the whole distance. Besides sight is not able to
discern the obliquitie of the sides, because it is seen sidewaies under
longer beams, and a lesser angle.

6 Why the Sun and Moon appear bigger at their rising or setting, then when
they are in our vertical point.
One reason is, because as I said before, any thing that has a relation to a
greater space, is imagined greater, the other is the corruption (as I may say)
of the air or medium being at morning, and ^uening more subject to vapors and
exhalations then at any other time, the same reason may be given; an apple in
the water, of birds and stakes upon the Sea sands, which being four or five
miles off appear bigger unto you, then near hand, the like of trees that
appear twice as big in a mistie or rimie morning then indeed they are,
hereupon a friend of mine was notably cosened in a bargain of timber he
bought by the great, in a mistie morrning, but I fear me within these few
years, the mistes will be so thick, we shall see no timber at all.

7 Why a burning glass causes fire.
The reason is the concurse and concentration of the broken beams with the
perpendicular in the midst of the glass being round and thick.

8 Why all things appear downward in the water.
Every thing seems downward in the water by reason of the fall of the other
beams in the Catheton or perpendicular.

CHAP. XI. Of Lant-skip.
LAndtskip is a Dutch word, and it is as much as we should say in English
landship, or expressing of the land by hills, woods, Castles, Seas, valleys,
ruins, hanging rocks, Cities, Towns, etc. as far as may be showed within
our Horizon. If it be not drawn by it self or for the own sake, but in
respect, and for the sake of some thing else: it falls out among those things
which we call Parerga, which are additions or adjuncts rather of ornament, then
otherwise necessary.

General rules for Landtskip.
YOU shall always in your^ Landtskip show a fair Horizon, and express the
heaven more or less either ouercast by clouds, or with a clear sky, showing
the Sun rising or setting over some hill or other: you shall seldom, except
upon necessity, show the Moon or Stars, because we imagine all things to be
seen by day.

2 If you show the Sun, let all the light of your trees, hills, rocks,
buildings, etc. be given thitherward: shadow also your clouds from the sun:
and you must be very dainty in lessening your bodies by their distance, and
have a regard, the farther your Landtskip goes to those vniuersalia, which as
Aristotle says (in respect of their particulars concealed from our senses) are
notiora: as in discerning a building ten or twelve miles off, I I cannot tell
whether it be Church, Castle, House, or the like: So that in drawing of it, I
must express no particular sign as Bell, Portculleis, etc. but show it as
weakly and as faintly as mine eye judges of it, because all those particulars
are taken away by the greatness of the distance. I have seen a man painted
coming down a hill some mile and a half from me, as I judged by the
Landscape, yet might you have told all the buttons of his dublet: whether the
painter had a quick inu^ntion, or the Gentleman's buttons were as big as those
in fashion, when Mounseur came into England, I will leave it to my readers
judgment.

If you lay you Lantskip in colors, the farther you go, the more you must
lighten it with a thin and ayerie blew, to make it seem far off, beginning
it first with a dark green, so driving it by degrees into a blew, which the
densitie of the air between our sight, and that place does (only
imaginarily) effect.

Of the fairest and most beautiful Landtskips in the world.
Of Landtskips by land the fairest may be taken upon mount Libanus near
Jerusalem, whence you may discern all those holy places where our Savior
lived, and in a manner all over the holy Land, moreover you may plainly view
all the towns upon the Sea coast, and into the Sea, as far as Cyprus, being
distant from Ioppa, or Iaffa (the first entry or landing place within the holy
land) two hundred and fifty miles.

At Constantinople you have as fair a Landtskip as any where else in the
world, as well in regard o^ the beautiful places behind, as the goodly
prospect into both Seas.

Upon the mount Ida in Candie called by the Inhabitants Psilloritie, where you
shall see underneath you the most goodly country of the world affording all
manner of delight Nature can afford, shadie woods of all manner of trees
bearing fruit as Olives Orengies, and Figtrees, Cedars, Sis^is. (that bears
that excellent gum Ladanum being made of the dew of heaven falling upon the
leaves) valleys, tapistry with innumerable sorts of flowers great store of
rocks, and little hills whereon grow most fruitful wines in great plenty,
yielding that excellent wine we call Malmseie, and from whence descend a
tho^sand small rivers that water the whole country, none of them so big as
they are able to ca^ry a boat. The chief towns of the whole Island Candia
(being the chief, and situate at the foot of the said mount Ida,) Cania
Sit^io and Rethymo, and the fair haven of Meleca, into the Sea Eastward toward
the Cape Solomone, you have in your view the gulf Satellia or Siriatica,
westward a goodly prospect from the Adiatique Sea, to the North the
Archipelago, and to the South the Sea of Carthage.

The fairest prospects of Italy are about Naples, Millane, Lago d^ Como, and di
^uarda near Peschera, also upon Monte d^ Santa Croce, as you come from Genoa,
upon the Appenines (being the ridge or back bone of the country) and upon
those Alps that are adjoining to Piemont.

In Spain if you would try your skill in Landtskip, or perfect an excellent
piece in this kind, I would send you to the magnificent Escuriall. About
Valledolid, and toward the Sea side near Cartagena.

In France about the Constables house ten miles off from Paris, Amiens, A^ignon
(belonging to the Pope) Fontainee-bleau many places in Normandy, Bordeaux, and
Rochell.

In Germany you have no fairer prospeects then upon the bank of the Rhine.

In England I like best at Windsore and the country there abouts, the prospect
which you take of the City of London upon high gate all the country about
Roiston with many other places.

Of the Graces of Landtskip.
Though invention and imitation in this kind are infinite, you must have a care
to work with a sound judgment, that your work become not ridiculous to the
beholders eye as well for true observation of the di^tance as absurdity of
accident: that is, though your Landtship be good and true in general, yet some
particular error ouerslips your judgment either in mistaking or not ob^eruing
the time and season of the year, the true shadow of your wo^ke with the light
of the Sun, the bending of trees in winds and tempests, the natural course
of river and such like.

To settle therefore your judgment in these and the like, I wish you first to
imitate the abstract or labor of every month. Not as a foolish Painter
undertaking the like, and beginning with January, drew him sitting in wicker
chair like an old man, with three or four night caps on his head, by the fire
his slip shoes by and one foot upon the tongues within the chimney, and
without doors hay^ocks, green trees, and as if it had been in the midst of
July. Wherefore I say such a winter piece should be graced and beautified with
all manner of works and exercises of winter, as foot ball, ^elling of wood,
sliding upon the ice, ba^fowling by night, hunting the bears, or fox in the
snow, making you trees every where bare or laden with snow, the earth without
flowers, and catell the air thick with clouds, rivers and lakes frozen, which
you may show by carts passing over, or boys playing upon the same, and a
thousand the like. The same method observe in the other seasons.

If you draw your Landscape according to your invention, you shall please very
well, if you show in the same, the fair side of some goodly City, haven,
forest, stately house with gardens, I ever took delight in those pieces that
showed to the like a country village, fair or market, Bergamas^as cookerie,
Morris dancing, peasants together by the ears, and the like.

For your Parergas or needless graces, you may set forth the same with farm
houses, water milles, pilgrims traveling through the woods, the ruins of
Churches, Castles, etc. but you shall find your conceit seconded with a
thousand inventions.

CHAP. XIII. Of Draperie.
DRapery (so called of the French word Drap, which is cloth) principally
consists in the true making and folding your garment, giving to every fold
his proper natural doubling and shadow; which is a great skill, and scarce
attained unto by any of our country and ordinary painters: insomuch that if I
would make trial of a good workman; I would find him quickly by the folding
of a garment, or the shadowing of a gown, sheet, or such like.

What Method is to be observed in drapery
The method now to be observed in Draperie, is to draw first the outmost or
extreme lines of your garment, as you will, full of narrow, and leave wide and
spare places, where you think you shall have need of foldes; draw your greater
foldes always first, not letting any line touch, or directly cross another,
for then shall you bring an irrecouerable confusion into your work: when you
have so done, break your greater foldes unto less, which shall be contained
within them: I would give you an example, but every print will show you the
like; all your foldes consistes of two lines and no more, which you may turn
with the garment at your pleasure: begin your maine and greatest foldes, from
the skirt upward, and the closer the garments sit, the narrower you must make
them: for the shadowing of every several fold, observe the first rule I gave
you in the Chapter of shadowing, and spare not to shadow your foldes, (be they
never so curiously contrived) if they fall inward from the light, with a double
or treble shadow; as you shall s^^ occasion: for the shadow take his place in
one and the same manner as well in folding as without: some have used to draw
the body naked first, and after to have put on the apparel, but I hold it as
an idle conceit, and to small purpose. I would herein above all other have you
to imitate Albert Du^er, if you can get his pieces, if not Goltzius or some
other.

General observations and rul^s for Drapery.
1 Your greater folds must be continued throughout the whole garment, the
lesser you may break and shorten at your pleasure. 2 The shadows of all
manner of silks, and fine linen are very thick, and fine, so that your
foldes must not only be little, but their shadow or deepening very light, and
rare, which commonly at the most is but a double shadow given with a new, and
the finest pen. 3 You must not use much folding where the garments ought to sit
close, or any eminency appear, as commonly there does in the breasts of a
woman, the arms, belly, thighs, legs, etc. but to show art, you shall leave
the form of the breast, leg. etc. to appear thorough, which you may do by
sha^dowing the breast or leg, (after you draw it) on one or either side,
leaving it white. 4 As I told before of the light, so must you in your draperie
have a care of the wind and motion of the air, for driving your loose
apparel all one way, as Ovid describes the garments of Europa, when she by
Jupiter carried over the Sea: The best drapery in the world is held to be, that
done by Michael Angelo in the Popes Chapel in Rome: and that by Raphael
Vrbane in Millane in the Church of St. Victor at Nostre Dame in Amiens, and
many other places.
CHAP. XIIII. Of Diapering.
DIapering is derived (as I take it of the Greek verb (...) which is,
traij^io or transeo, in English to pass^ or cast over, and it is nothing else
but a light tracing or running over with your pen (in Damask branches, and
such like) your other work when you have quite done (I mean foldes, shadowing
and all) it chiefly serves to counterfeite cloth of Gold, Silver, Damask
brancht, Velvet, Chamlet, etc. with what branch, and in what fashion you list.

If you diaper upon folds, let your work be broken, and taken as it were by
the half: for reason tells you that your fold must cover somewhat unseen,
which being drawn forth at length and laid plain, shows all fair and
perfect: as Ovid says of tapistry.

Sic vbi tolluntur festis aulaea theatris,
Surgere signa solent, primumque ostendere vultus:
Caetera paulatim placidoque educta tenore,
Tota patent --
You must moreover in diapering, let your work fall out so, that there may be
an affinity, one part with the other, maintaining one branch or the same work
throughout, setting the fairest in the most eminent place, and causing it to
run upward: otherwise one might imagine some foolish Tailor had cut out his
Ladies gown the wrong way.

To make a chamlet, you shall draw but five lines waued overthwart, if your
diapering consist of a double line; you may either shadow the ground, and leave
it white, or shadow your work, and leave the ground white: as you shall think
good, in this kind your filling may be with small pricks of your pens end,
which will show fair.

CHAP. XV. Of Antique.
ANtique so called ab antes, which are butteresses, whereon the building is
stayed, also the outmost ranges of vines, not ab antiquitate as some would have
it: the Italian calls it L'antica, it has the principal use in forefronts
of houses, in all manner of compartments, curious Architecture, Armor, Plate,
Jewels, Columns, etc. though you shall seldom have any great use of it, yet I
would have you know what it is, and what to observe in it: The form of it is a
general, and (as I may say) an unnatural or unorderly composition for delight
sake, of men, beasts, birds, fi^hes, ^lowres, The form of Anticke.
etc. without (as we say) Rhyme or reason, for the greater variety you show in
your invention, the more you please, but remembering to observe a method or
continuation of one and the same thing throughout your whole work without
change or altering.

You may, if you list, draw naked boys riding and playing with their
paper-mils or bubble-shels upon Goats, Eagles, Dolphins etc. the bones of a
Rams head hung with strings of beads and Ribands, Satyrs, Tritons, Apes,
Cornu-copia's, Dogs yoakt, etc. drawing Cowcumbers, Cherries, and any kind of
wild traile or vinet after your own invention, with a thousand more such idle
toys, so that herein you cannot be too fantastical. The late Dutch peers in
this kind excel all others, and certainly I know not by what destiny the
Germans have won^e unto them (above other nations) the glory of invention,
generally in picture: for except it be a Dutch piece, you shall have it either
lame, ill cut, false shadowed or subject to some such gross error. Where^ore,
not without reason, Bodine calls the country officinam hominum a shop of
men, as from whence a man might be had for all turns, Ge^m^nie a (...) of men.
either Divine, Physician, Soldier, Painter, etc. Though much I confess may
be imputed to the industry of that Nation: (for none in the world are more
painful then they) yet without question the people of themselves, as they are
ingenious and capable of all other arts, so naturally they are inclined to this
of Painting: Since the greatest persons among them as Duke^, E^rle^, and in a
manner all the Gentlemen do bear an inbr^d love of drawing, and of themselves
by their own practice grow many times wonderful expert herein: yet none at
this day, who favors a good picture, or any excellency in that kind, more
then Rodulph the Emperor now living.

CHAP. XVI. Of Drawing beasts, birds, flowers, etc.
YOU shall find among beasts some more harder to be drawn then others, for
two respects, one is for a clean making and shape, together with finenesse of
the cote or skin: the other for their nimblenesse and much action, both which
you may for example see to fall out in a horse, whose lineaments are both
passing curious, and coat so fine, that many sinews, yea and the smallest
veins must be shown in him, besides whose action is so diverse, that for
hardness of draught I know not any one beast may be compared to the horse; for
sometime you must draw him in his carreer with his manage, and turn, doing the
Cor^etto, leaping^ etc. which you shall not find in the Elephant, Cow, Bear,
or Hog, as being beasts heavy and sloathfull by nature: Moreover wanting that
finenesse of coat or hide, so that you shall escape a great trouble in showing
veins, knitting of joints, with the eminency almost of every bone in them
which you have in a horse and greyhound. Now for the manner of drawing these or
any other beast whatsoever; begin with your lead or coal (as before I told
you, and gave you a general rule) at the forehead, drawing downward the nose,
mouth, upper and nether chap, ending your line at the throat, then searching it
again where you began, from the forehead over the head, ears, and neck:
continuing it till you have given the full compass of the buttocke, but I will
give you an example.

I begin in this Lion my first stroke at A, bringing it down to B, making the
nose, mouth, and nether chap with one line, as you s^e there I rest: then fetch
I that line forward behind by C. making the compass o^ his mane by pricks
with my pen (because if I should make a line, I could not make it iagged)
then bring I the back down to the tail or D, leaving a little space for it,
I continue my line from thence to E, or the heel, where I rest: then begin I
again at B, and making the breast with the eminency thereof I stay at F,
bringing out his near sore foot, which I finish: then begin I at G, not
stirring my hand till I come to the foot or paw at H, where I finish it quite
at E, or the heel. I next draw from his belly two strokes at I and K: I make
the other leg behind, then the right fore foot issuing from the breast:
then I finish the tail, paws, tongue, teeth, beard, and last of all the
shadowing: which method you shall observe in all beasts howsoever they stand.

Observations of the shadowing.
YOu see him shadowed on the back side from CD, unto E, the reason is the
light beats on his fore part, wherefore of necessity the shadow must be in
every part behind, ear, mane, back, hinder leg, etc.

But you may say, how happens it then, that his nether chap and some part of
his throat and belly are shadowed being both with the light? I answer the
light of it own nature can n^uer fall under, but take the place above or the
upper part, which place is here prepossessed by the upper and nether chappe,
which as you see fall in between, as likewise the fore foot to the belly,
which cause a shadow in either of those places.

The treble shadow as it ought, is given to the most inward places: if your
beast be not in charge, that is, not in arms, and you arm to show the ground
under his feet; you must make his farther feet on the other side somewhat
shorter then those next you: the reason is, that distance of earth between the^
deceives the sight, causing the nearer to seem longest: as you may see by
opening or stretching your fore and middle finger like a pair of compasses
long ways from you, upon a board or table, drawing them with your pen as they
stand, and observing the space between.

Beasts more hard to be drawn for their shape and action.

The Lion. The Horse. The Rhinoceros. The Unicorn. The Stagge. The Lucirne.
The Greyhound. The Hiena. The Leopard. The Ownce. The Tiger. The Panther. The
Ape, etc.
Others more easy.

The Elephant. The Dromedarie. The Camel. The Bear. The Ass. The Hog. The
Sheep. The Badger. The Porc-^spine. The Wolf. The Fox. The Cow. The Ottar.
The Hare. The Coney. The Al manner of rough and shag hair dogs.
In drawing these and all other beasts, the better you observe their shape and
action, the better shall you please, and your judgment be commended^ wherefore
a Painter had need to be well seen in natural Philosophy. The meanest
workman can draw the ordinary shape of a Lion, when scarce the best of them all
know, that his hinder parts are so small, that there is in a manner a
disproportion between his forepart and them: so that if I should draw him in
this manner among our ordinary painters, my work would be condemned as lame,
when I deserved most commendation.

Moreover if you ask a country painter whether he could draw a Crocodile or
no, The ignorance o^ (...) common pa^nte^s.
he will make no question of it, when as except he traveled through Egypt, or
met with Aristotle in English, all the wit he had, could not so much as set the
chaps right, or give the suture truly in the head, to s^ew the motion of his
upper chap, which no other creature in the world moves, save only he.

If you draw your beast in an Emblem or such like, A Landtskip must be given
to every beast according to his country.
you shall sometime show a Landtskip (as it is ordinarily observed by judicious
workmen) of the country natural to that beast, as to the Rhinoceros an
East-Indian Landtskip, the Crocodile an Egyptian, by laying the ground low
without hills, many woods of Palm trees, here and there the ruin of a
Pyramid, and so forth of the rest.

Of Birds.
There is less difficulty in drawing birds then beasts, and least of all in
flowers, yet art and needful directions to be observed in all of them: begin
your draught in a bird, as I said, at the head, and beware of making it too
big: Van Londerseet's pieces are much to blame for this fault, for in most of
them the heads of all his birds are too great by a third part, neither is that
fault proper to him alone, but to many good workmen else. You shall best
remedy that by causing a bird to be held or tied before you, where you shall
take with your compasses a true proportion, which afterward you may conclude
into as small a form as you list: there is not the same reason of proportion
(it is true) in the heads and bodies of all birds alike, but hereby you shall
ever after be acquainted with a reasonable proportion, which though you hit not
justly, you shall come very near: having drawn the head, bring from under
throat, the breast line down to the legs; there stay: and begin at the pineon
to make the wing, which being joined with the back line is presently finished:
the eye, legs, and train must be at last, and (as I told you before in
beasts) let the farther leg ever be shortest, the feathers as the hair^ in
beasts, must take their beginning at the head very small, and in five ranks
fall one way backward greater and greater, as this your example shows.

The birds that are most easy to be drawn, are Planipedes, or water foul, as
the Mallard, Shoueler, Sheldrake, Goose, Swanne, Herne Bitter, etc. the next
are those which are called Oiseaux du Proye, birds of Prag, as the Eagle,
Hawke, Puttocke, Cormorant, etc. The hardest are the tame birds, with some
other, as Cock, Turkicocke, Peacocke, Phesant, etc. the action of birds is
flying, pruning themselves, bathing, fishing, swimming, etc.

For flowers, flies, and such like, I will leave them (being things of small
moment) to your own discretion, counselling you a^ your leisure, when you
walk abroad into the fields, to gather and keep them in little boxes until
you shall have occasion to use them. To draw a flower, begin it ab vmbone, or
the bosse in the midst: as in a Rose, or Marigold, there is a yealow tuft,
which being first made, draw your lines equally divided, from thence to the
line of your compass, which you are the first to give, and then the worst is
past.

You may show your flower, either open and fair in the bud, laden with deaw
and wet, worme-eaten, the leaves dropped away with over ripeness, etc. and as
your flower, so first draw rudely your leaves, making them plain with your
coal or lead, before you give them their veins or iaggednesse.

For butterfli^s, bees, waspes, grasshoppers, and such like, which we call
Insecta, some of them are easy to be drawn, and not hard to be laid in
colors: because the colors are simple, and without compositio^, as perfect
red, black, blew, yellow, etc. which every ordinary painter may lay, who if
they should be put (by mixture of many colors) to make that purple of a
pigeons neck, or give the perfect color but of a flesh-flie or mallards wing,
you should see them at their wits end.

In the months of June and July I was wont at my leisure to walk into the
fields, and get all manner of flies, flowers, herbs, etc. which I either put
presently into colors, or kept preserved all the year to imitate at my
pleasure in close boxes.

CHAP. XVII. The most notable absurdities that our Painters ordinarily commit.
THE first absurdity is of proportion natural, commonly called lamenesse, Of
lamenesse.
that is, when any part or member is disproportionable to the whole body, or
^eemeth through the ignorance of the Painter, to be wrested from his natural
place and motion: As in Peter-brough Minster, you may see Saint Peter painted,
his head very near, or altogether as big as his middle: and it is ordinary
in country houses to see horsemen painted, and the rider a great deal bigger
then his horse.

Of local distance.
The second is of Landtskip, or Local distance, as I have seen painted a
Church, and some half a mile beyond it the ^icaredge; yet the Vicars chimney
strawne bigger the^ the steeple by a third part, which being less o^ it self,
ought also to be much more abated by the distance.

Accidents of time. Iud. 7.
The third absurdity is of accident of time, that is, when we fashion or
attribute the proprieties of ancient times to those of ours, or ours to theirs:
As not long since I found painted in an Inn Bethulia besieged by Holophernes,
where the painter, as if it had been at Ostend, made his East and West
batteries, with great ordinance and small shot playing from the walls, when you
know that ordinance was not invented of two thousand years after.

The fourth is in expressing passion or the disposition of the mind, In
ex^^essing the passi^n or disposition of the mind, Q^ali^ equos Th^^issa
^atiga^ H^rpalice.
as to draw Mars like a young Hippolitus with an effeminate countenance, Venus
like an Amazon, or that same hotspurd H^rpalice in Virgil, AE^^id. 1.
this proceeds of a senseless and ouercold a judgment.

The fifth is of Drapery or attire, Of drapery
in not obs^ruing a decorum in garments proper to every several condition and
calling, as not giving to a king his Robes of estate, with their proper furs
and linings: To religious persons an habit fitting with humility and contempt
of the world; A notable example of this kind I found in a Gentleman's hall,
which was King Solomon sitting in his throne with a deep laced gentlewomans
Ruff, and a Rebato^ about his neck, upon his head a black velvet cap with a
white feather; the Queen of Sheba kneeling before him in a loose bodied gown,
and a French hood.

The sixth of shadowing, Of shadowing.
as I have seen painted the flame of a candle, and the light thereof on one
side shadowed three parts, when there ought to have been none at all, because
it is corpus luminosum, which may cause a shadow but take none.

The seventh of motion as a certain painter absurdly made trees bend with the
wind one way, and the feathers of the Swanne, upon which an Eagle was praying
to fly an other Albert Durer was very curious in this kind, as in the hair of
S. Hieroms Lion, and S. Sebastians Dog.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Sense of seeing, and of the Eye.
NOw before I come to entreat particularly of colors, it shall not be amiss
as well for method as for pleasure, to speak somewhat of that sensitive part
of the soul which we call sight, without which it were in vain for me to
discourse of colors, or you to read what I have written concerning the same,
therefore in brief I will declare the worthiness of this sense, and of the
Eye the Organe or instrument thereof.

To begin with the definition, the Sense of seeing is a faculty of the
sensible soul, whose Organe is the Eye, and object is whatsoever may be seen.

Now since the soul is far more worth then the body, I must of necessity
first speak of this most ex^ellent sense before I come to the baser and
corruptible instrument, or the object thereof.

It has been a great and ancient controversy amongst the best Philosophers,
I mean Plato, Aristotle the Stoics, and Academicks, whether visus fieret,
extra vel intra mittendo, that is, whether we receive the object or that which
we see into our eye, or whether our eye by a secret faculty of the soul casts
and sends forth certain beams to apprehend that which we look upon, which
question as it is hard to decide, so it is most pleasant and not beside our
purpose to be resolved in the same. Hear I pray you the variety of opinions
among excellent men.

Plato thought that the sight was caused by Emission or casting forth beams
against the object. In Tim^^.


The Mathematicians in Aristotle's time agreeing also with Plato, The opinion of
the old Mathematicians.
affirmed visum fieri extrami^tendo, by sending forth from the eye: and all
sight to stretch it self forth in the form of a Pyramid, the Conus or point
whereof was in the eye ball, and the Basis dispersed upon the object.

Empedocles (as also Plato) thought there was in the eye a certain little fire
not burning, but which yielded as it were a light, the beams whereof, meeting
with the beams of the air or medium, grew united, and more strong between
both which beams the sight was effected.

Democritus said (the truest) that it proceeded of water, but he is taxed of
Aristotle, because he though, visionem in rei spectabilis simulachro tantum
consistere: Others thought that it cast forth a certain animal spirit with
the beam.

Others again supposed that that s^^e (...) stretching it self unto the
object, and beaten back to be possessed of the same form, and afterward the
soul as it were stirred up to perceive the forms of things by means of that
secret faculty it sent forth.

Neither did the Platonicks and Stoics want arguments of strength and
probability as they thought to maintain the same against Aristotle: I will
propound some, and after answer them letting or receiving.

1 First say they, if sight be caused by emission, then the nearer and closer
the object is to the eye, the more perfectly it is perceived, but this is
false. 2 Secondly, if sight be caused by intromission or receiving in the form
of that which is seen, contrary Species, or forms should be received
confusedly together, and at the same instant, as white and black, which thing
how absurd it is, Aristotle shows in his Metaphisickes and other places. 3
Thirdly, the eye is easily wearied with beholding, therefore something
proceeds forth from the same. 4 Fourthly, how can that Pyramid, whose point
is in the superficies of the eye, be carried and drawn forth with a smaller
sharpness. 5 Fifthly, we find by experience, that a menstruous woman infecteth
with her sight a looking glass, causing the same to become faint and dim,
therefore of necessity something must needs proceed out of her eyes. This
Aristotle himself confesses, Lib. de somnijs. 6 Sixthly, a Basiliske kills
with his sight. 7 Seventhly and lastly: Cats, Wolves, Owls, and other
creatures, see best in the night to run and catch their prey, which they
discern most perfectly, they cannot see by intromission or receiving inward
the form of their prey be it mouse, hare, or whatsoever, because light (by
means of which only the object is received into the eye) is wanting, Ergo^
their eyes send ^orth the beams, and Aristotle's opinion is utterly false.
To the first argument I answer out of Plato, as also out of Aristotle, that
to the affecting of the sight, there must be medium illustratum, a clee^e
medium, that is, such a distance that there may be light enough between the
eye and the object, which there is not, if you lay your eye close to the same.

To the second I answer, that species or forms be not contrary, for were
that granted, the medium should have in it infinite contrarieties from every
part of the air compassing it about, and continually multiplying the forms of
things.

To the third, the sense of seeing is so far forth weakened and made faint^
as the eye, the Organe or Instrument thereof becomes unable to endure
beholding, for the power of the sight suffers not, nor grows old, as were
an old man's eyes young, his sight would not fail him.

To the fourth argument I answer, that distance being not perceived by the
eye, but by the common sense, the point of the Pyramid is not lesser to mine
eye, by removing or going back, but always one and the self same.

To the fifth, it is not the sight of the woman that infecteth the glass, but
certain gross and putrefacted vapors, that issue from the eyes, as we see in
those that do laborare opthalmia.

To the sixth, of the Basiliske, I answer the most have held it fabulous, yet
suppose it to be true, the best authors have written that infection proceeds
from his breath not his eyes.

To the seventh and last, it is replied, that cats and wolves retain a
certain natural light in N^ruo optico, which serves them as a Medium to
^iscerne plainly any thing by night.

To conclude to these and all other objections for emission of the sight, in
brief I answer with this dilemma unanswerable.

If any thing be sent out from the eye it is either corporeal or incorporeal,
if corporeal, it has motu^ locale^, or moving in place and time, which motion
seems to be swifter then the motion of the heaven, for the eye in a minute
can discern from one part of the heaven to the other, which were repugnant to
truth and all Philosophy. Say it were light and no corporal substance, it
followed, though that a sensitive part of the soul went forth with the same,
and that an accident should become the subject of the soul, nothing can be
granted more absurd. If incorporeall, as Metaphysicall, it cannot move the
sense: Now it remains, that according to Aristotle and the truth, we decide
this controversy concerning the sight, wherein so many famous Philosophe^s
have been blind.

How sight is caused according to Aristotle.
Aristotle says, that the motion which passes or comes between the eye,
and the object, whether it be the light or air, is the efficient cause of
sight, his words be, (...).

To explain his meaning better, there concurreth to sight a double motion one
from the object into the medium, the other from the medium (air or ^ight) to
the eye, so that I may say the eye receives the form of the object at a second
hand, as it were from the medium, being conveyed as it were half the way by a
former motion. For Aristotle in his second de anima, strongly proves against
Democritus (...) non pati ab obiecto sed a medio. So that sight is caused by
receiving the color or object into the eye by a second motion against Plato,
Plato v^^ius ^emper and v^e si^i constans.
Empedocles, the Stoics, and all other that have held the contrary.

Of the eye, the Organ or Instrument of sight.
Some and amongst those before named, Empedocles have supposed the eye to have
been fiery, Aristotle as I remember alleges one of his arguments, which was
this, the eye being ruled or having received a blow seems as it were to
sparkle with fire, the ^est are of like force, whom after he has confuted
with two good reasons, the one is, that if the eye were fiery; it should see
it self; the second, it should see clearly in the dark, as a candle in a
lantern, he determines the question, and affirms it to be of a watery
substance. The Physicians also cold, and of the nature of the brain.

The parts and wonder^ull composition of the eye.
The eye being the most excellent Organ of the noblest sense, and the tend^est
part of the body, is by nature as it were a pearl shut up within a four fold
casket, that it might the better be preserved from injury as the most precious
Jewel and sole treasure of the body, for it is defended with four coats or
skins, the first whereof is called (...), which is adnata, or close-bred by
this, the eye is fastened and joined, the second is called (...) or cornea, as
it were of horn, compassing the eye round, it is transparen^: this de^endeth
the humor and water of the eye, and is placed about the ball, least the
outward light meeti^g with the Cristaline humor should dazell and o^fend the
sight, and to keep this humor from drying Tunica v^^e, or (...) compasses it
about, this again does compass another coat like a cob-web of bl^cke color
called (...) of Arachne, under which lies a moisture like molten glass, which
they call (...), and it is thick, within this remains a little pearl (as in
the center unmoved) most hard, rese^bling ice or Cristall, whereon it is called
(...), it is round, but more flat toward the ball of the eye, that it might
give the watrie humor a better luster, and defend it from injury. The ball of
the eye is fat and thick, neither has that fat of it self any heat in it,
but warmeth by the force of heat it receives from the muscles that serve the
eye, who also are covered with fatness, hence the eye never freezeth. Why the
eye ^euer fre^^eth.
Thus much of the sense of seeing, and of the eye.

CHAP. XIX. Co^our what it is, of the object of the sight, and the division
thereof.
Color according to Scaliger is a quality compounded of the element^ and the
light, so far forth as it is the light Auerrois and Auenpa^e, said it was
actus corporis terminati, others a bare superficies. Aristotle called it
corp^ris extremitatem, the extremity or ou^most of a body. The object of the
sight is any thing whatsoever may be visible, Plato deuideth visible things
into three heads, which are Equal. are Greater. are Less.


Equal are all transparent things, which let the sight through, and are not
properly said to be seen as the air, water, ice, cristall, and the like.

Greater, which he calls (...) which spread or scatter the sight by that
means, hurting the same as all white things.

The less (...), which gather the sight together, and which are improper, or
rather no obiectes at all, as all blackness.

Whether all colors be compou^ded of white and black or no.
Theophrastus has long since labored to prove black to be no color at all,
his reason is, because that color is proper to none of the elements, for says
he, water, air and earth are white, and the fire is yellow, but rather would
fetch it from white and yealow, whereto Scaliger leaving Aristotle, perhaps for
singularity sake, seems to give consent, who sets down four primarie or
first colors, viz. White in the dry body as the earth. Green in thick and
moist as the water. Blew in the thin and moist as the air. Yealow in the hot
as the fire.
Yet not without reason, for Aristotle affirmed that black was the privation of
white, as darkness of light, to whom Scaliger replies, that nothing can be
made of privation and habit, but we will leave their arguments, and proceed to
the species and several kinds of colors, showing by their Etymologies, their
several nature, and after declare the manner of their mixture and composition.

CHAP. XX. Of the choice of your grinding stone, Mullar, Penc^ls, making your
gummes, gylding, etc.
Having hitherto as plainly as I could, given you those directions, I have
thought most necessary for drawing with the pen: I will show you next the
right mingling and ordering of your colors, that after you can draw
indifferent well (for before I would not have you know what colors means)
you may with more delight apparel your wo^k with the lively and natural
beauty: and first of the choice of your grinding stone and pencils.

I like best the porphytie, white or green Marble, with a muller or upper
stone of the same, The choice of your grinding stone and mullar.
cut very even without flawes or holes: you may buy them in London, of those
that make toombes, they will last you your life time, wearing very little or
nothing: some use glass, but many times they gather up their colors on the
ground: others slates, but they with wearing (though never so hard at the
first) will kill all colors: you may also make you a mullar of a flat pibble,
by grinding it smooth at a grindstone, if you do it handsomely, it is as good
as the best^ your great muscle shelles commonly called horse muscles are the
best for keeping colors, you may gather them in July about rivers sides, the
next to ^hese are the small muscle shelles washed and kept very clean.

Choose your pencels by their fastness in the quils, and their sharp points,
after you have drawn and whetted them in your mouth; you shall buy them one
after another for eight or ten pence a dozen at the Apothecaries.

CHAP. XXI. Of the several Gummes that are used in grinding of water colors.
Gum Arabicke.
THE first and principal is Gum Arabicke, choose it by the whiteness,
cleerenesse, and the brittlenesse of it being broken between your teeth: for
then it is good, take it and lay it in very fair water, until it be quite
resolved, and with it grind your colors: you may make it thin or thick, as
all other Gummes, at your pleasure, by adding and taking away the water you put
to it.

2. Gum Hederae, or of the Iuie.
There is another very excellent gum that proceeds from the Iuie, which you
shall get in this manner: find out first an Oak, or house that has a great
branch of Iuie climing up by it, and with an axe cut it a sunder in the midst,
and then with your axe he^d bruise both ends, and let it stand a month or
thereabouts, at what time you shall ^^ke from it a pure and fine gum, like an
oil, w^^ch issues out of the ends: take it off handsomely with a knife or
spoone, and keep it in a vial; it is good to put into your gold size and
other colors for three respects, first it allaies the smell of the size,
secondly, it takes away the bubbles that arise upon your gold size, and other
colors, lastly it takes away the clamminesse, and fatness from your other
colors: there is moreover great use of it in the confection of pomander.

3 Gum lake.
Gum lake is made with the glaire of eggs, strained often and very short,
about March or April: to which about the quantity of a pint you must put two
spoonful of honey, and as much of Gumma Hederae as a hasell nut, and four
good spoonefuls of the strongest woort you can come by: then strain them
again with a sponge, or piece of wool, so fine as you can, and so long, till
that you see them run like a fine and clear oil, keep it then in a clean
glass, it will grow hard, but you may resolve it again with a little clear
water, as you do gum Arabicke: it is moreover an excellent vernish for any
picture.

4 Gum Armoniacke.
Take Gum Armoniacke, and grind it with the juice of Garlic so fine as may
be, to which put two or three drops of weak Gum Arabicke water, and temper
it so, that it be not too thick, but that it may run well out of your pen,
and write therewith what you will, and let it dry, and when you mean to gyld
upon it, cut your gold or silver according to the bigness of the size you have
laid; and then se^ it with a piece of wool in this manner: first breath upon
the size, and then lay on your gold upon it gently taken up, which press down
hard with your piece of wool, and then let it well dry, being dried, with a
fine linen cloth strike off finely the loose gold: then shall you find all
that you drew very fair gold, and clean as you have drawn it, though i^ were
as small as any heir: it is called gold Armoniack, and is taken many times for
liquid gold.

CHAP. XXII. Of gylding or the ordering of gold and silver in water colors.
YOU may gyld only with gum water, as I will show you, make your water good
and stiff, and lay it on with your pencel, where you would gyld, then take a
cushion that has smooth leather, and turn the bottom upward, upon that cut
your gold with a sharp knife; in what quantity you will, and to take it up,
draw the edge of your knife finely upon your tongue that it may be only wet:
with which do but touch the very edge of your gold, it will come up, and you
may lay it as you list: but before you lay it on, let your gum be almost
dry, otherwise it will drown your gold: and being laid, press it down hard
with the skut of an hair, afterward burnish it with a dogs tooth.

I call burnisht gold, that manner of gylding which we ordinarily see in old
parchment and Mass books (done by Monks and Priests who were very expert
herein, as also in laying of colors, that in books of an hundred or two
hundred years old you may see the colors as beautiful and as fresh as if they
were done but yesterday.) A very fair manuscript of this kind Sir Robert
Cotton my worshipful friend had of me, which was King Edward the fourthes,
compiled by Anthony Earl Rivers, and as Master Cambden told me, it was the
first book that ever was printed in England: it lies commonly embos^ed that
you may feel it, by reason of the thickness of the ground or size, which size
is made in this manner.

Take three parts of Bole Armoniacke, and four of fine chalk, grind them
together as small as you can with clean water, three or four times, and every
time let it dry, and see it be clean without grauel or girt, and then let it
be thoroughly dry, then take the glaire of eggs and strain it as short as
water; grind then your bole, and chalk therewith, and in the grinding put to a
little gum Haederae, and a little ear wax, to the quantie of a fitch, and
five or six shiues of saffron, which grind together as small as you can
possible, and then put it into an ox horn, and covered close, let it rot in
hot horse dung, or in the earth, for the space of five or six weeks, then
take it up and lay it in the air, (for it will have an ill savor) and use it
at your pleasure.

To set gold or silver.
Take a piece of your Gum, and resolve it into a stiff water, then grind a
shiue of saffron therewith, and you shall have a fair gold: when you have set
it, and you see that it is thoroughly dry, rub or burnish it with a dogs tooth.

To make liquid gold or silver.
Take five or six leaves of gold or silver, and lay it upon a clean Porphiry,
marble stone, or pane of glass, and grind it with strong water of gum Lake,
and a pretty quantity of great salt, as small as you can, and then put it
into a clean vessel, or vial that is well glazed: and put thereto as much
fair water as will fill the glass or vessel, to the end it may dissolve the
stiff water you ground with it, and that the gold may have room to go to the
bottom, let it stand so three or four hours, then power out that water, and
put in more, until you see the gold clean washed: after that take clean
water, which put thereto with a little Sal Armoniacke and great salt, so let it
stand three or four days in some close place: then must you distill it in this
manner, take a piece of glouers leather, that is very thin, and pick away the
skinny side, and put your gold therein binding it close, then hanging it up,
the Sal Armoniacke will fret away, and the gold remain behind, which take,
and when you will use it, have a little glaire water in a shell by you, wherein
dip your pensill, taking up no more gold then you shall use.

CHAP. XXIII. The Etymology and true mixture of colors. Of Black.
Black is so called from the Saxon word black, in French No^r, in Italian
Nero, in Spanish Negro, from the Latin Niger, and from the Greek, (...) which
signifies Dead because all dead and corrupted things are properly of this
color, the reason why they are so, Aristotle plainly shows where he says:
(...), which is, blackness does accompany the elements, confounded or commixed
one with another, as for example of air and water mixed together, and consumed
with fire is made a black color, as we may see in charcoales, oil, pitch,
linkes, and such like fattie substances, the smoke whereof is most black, as
also in stones and timber, that have lain long under water, which when the
water is dried up, they lie open to the sun and air, and become presently of
the same color: these be the blacks which you most commonly use in painting,
this color is simple of it self.

Hearts horn burned. Ordinary lamp blacke^ Date stones burned. Iuory burned.
Manchet or white bread burned. The black of walnut shells.
The making of ordinary lamp black.
Take a torch or link, and hold it under the bottom of a latten basen, and as
it grows to be furd and black within, strike it with a feather into some
shell or other, and grind it with gum water.

Of White.
This word white in English comes from the low Dutch word wit, in high Dutch
Weif, which is derived from W^sser, that is, water which by nature is white,
yea thickened or condensate, most white, as it appears by hail and snow which
are compounded of water hardened by the coldness of the air in Italian it is
called Bianco, in French Blanc, if we may believe Scaliger, from the Greek
(...), which as he takes it, signifies faint or weak: wherein happily he
agrees with Theophrastus who affirms omnia candida esse imbecilliora, that
all white things are faint and weak, hence I believe it is called in Latin
Candidus, from the Greek (...), i. confundo, because whiteness confounds or
dazeleth the sight as we find when we ride forth in a snow in winter. It is
called also albus of that old Greek word (...) the same, hence had the Alps
their Etymon, because of their continual whiteness with snow. The Grecians
call this color (...) of (...), video, that is, to see, because, whiteness is
the most proper object of our sight according to Aristotle saying, (...), that
is, whiteness, or the object or sight, whiteness proceeds from the water,
air, and earth, which by nature is also white, as we prove by ashes of all
ea^th^y matter burnt, though to our sight it seems black, brownish, and of
other colors, by reason of the intincture and commix^ure of other elements
with the same: the principal whites in painting and limming are these. viz.

Ceruse. White l^^d. Spanish white.
Of whites and their temp^ring Venice Ceruse.
Your principal white is Ceruse, called in Latin Cerussa, by the Italian
B^acea. Vitr^ui^s teaches the making of it, which is in this manner. The
Rhodians (says he) use to take the paring of vines, or any other chips, and
lay them in the bottoms of pipes or hogsheads, upon which they power great
store of vinegar, and then lay above many sheets of lead, and so still one
above another by ranks till the hogsheads are full, then stop they up again
the hogsheads close, that no air may enter: which again after a certain time
being opened, they find between the lead and chips great store of Ceruse: it
has been much used (as it is al^o now adaies^ by women in painting their
faces, whom Martial in his merry vain skoffeth, saying, Cerussata timet
Sabella sol^m. AEtius says it being thoroughly burnt, it turns into a fair
red, which he calls Syricum, grind it with the glaire of eggs, that has lien
rotting a month or two under the ground, and it will make a most perfect white.

White Lead.
White Lead is in a manner the same that Ceruse is, save that the Ceruce is
refined and made more pure, you shall grind it with a weak water of gum
Lake, and let it stand three or four days, Roset and Vermelion makes it a
fair Carnation.

Spanish white.
There is another white called Spanish white, which you may make your self in
this manner, take fine chalk and grind it, with the third part of Alome in
fair water, till it be thick like pap, then roll it up into balls, letting
it lie till it be dry, when it is dry, put it into the fire, and let it
remain till it be red hot like a bu^ning coal, and then take it out, and
let it cool: it is the best white of all others to lace or garnish, being
ground with a weak gum water.

Of Yealow.
Yealow is so called from the Italian word Giallo, which signifies the same
Giallo, has his Etymology from Geel the high Dutch, which signifies lucere,
to shine, and also hence comes Gelt, and our English word Gold, in French
Iaulne, in Spani^h Ialde, or Am ^illo, in Latin Fla^us luteus, of^ lutum, in
Greek, (...), which is Homers Epithet for Menalaus, where he calls him (...),
and Silius imitating him, attributes the same to the Hollander whom he calls
Flauicomus Batau^s, by reason of his yealow locks, it is called (...) ab
(...), a flower as if he should say (...), a beautiful head of hair, which in
times past was accounted the bright yealow, which H^rod^an so commends in the
Emperor Commo^u^, and the Romans supposed in the same aliquid numinis ^esse:
And it seems AEneas his hair in Virgil, which his mother Venus bestowed upon
him for a more maiestical beauty to have been of the same color, or it may be
called (...), hair worthing the kembing, but I dare not be too busy in
Etymologies, least catching at the shadow I leave the substance, yelow has his
primary beginning from the Element of fire, or Sunbeams, Aristotle's reason
is, because all liquid things concocted by heat become yealow as lie, wort
urine, ripe fruit, brimstone, etc. so that black, white, and yealow according
to Aristotle are the four primary or principal colors as immediately
proceeding from the elements, and from those all other colors have their
beginning. Your principal yealowe be these.

Orpiment. Masticot. Saffron. Pinke yealow. Oker de Luce. Vmber.
Orpiment.
Orpiment called in Latin Arsenicum, or Auripigmentum, (because being broken,
it resembles God for shining and color) is best ground with a stiff water of
Gum Lake, and with nothing else: because it is the best color of it self,
it will lie upon no green: for all greenes, white lead, red lead, and Ceruse
stain it: wherefore you must deepen your colors so, that the Orpiment may be
the highest, in which manner it may agree with all colors: it is said that
Caius a certain covetous Prince caused great store of it to be burned, and
tried for gold, of which he found some, and that very good; but so small a
quantity, that it would not quite the cost in refining.

Mas^icot or General.
Grind your Masticot with a small quantity of Saffron in Gum water, and
never make it lighter then it is; it will endure and lie upon all colors and
metals.

Pinke yealow.
You must grind your Pinke, if you will have it sad colored, with ^affron; if
light, with Ceruse: temper it with weak gum water, and so use it.

Oker de Luke.
The fine Oker de Luke, or Luce, and grind it with a pure brasil water: it
makes a passing haire-colour, and is a natural shadow for gold.

Vmber.
Vmber is a more sad color, you may grind it with Gum water or Gum lake:
and lighten it at your pleasure with a little Ceruse, and a shiue of saffron.

Of Green.
Our English word green is fetched from the high Dutch ^^un, in the Belgic
Groen, in French it is called Coleur verde, in Italian and Spanish Verde, from
the Latin Vi^^ais, and that from vires, quia viribus maxim pollent in virente
aetate vigentia, in Greek (...) a (...), that is, grass or the green herb,
which is of this color, why the earth has this color above others Aristotle
shows which is by reason of the much and often falling of rain, and setting
upon the same, for says he, all water or moisture that stands long, and
receives the beams of the Sun at the first grows greenish, afterward more
black, after that receiving as it were another g^^ene, they become of a grass
color, for all moisture dried up of it self becomes black, as we see in
old wels and cesternes, and if any thing has lien long under water, and
afterward lying dry, may receive the heat of the Sun (the moisture being
exhaled and drawn away) it becomes green, because that yealow proceeding
from the Sun beams mixed with black do turn into a green, for where the
moisture does not participate with the beams of the Sun, there remains
whiteness, as we see in most roots and stalks of herbs, which grow near
or within the earth, now when t^^ moisture has spent it self far in the
stalk, leaf, and flower, that it cannot overcome the heat of the air and
Sun, it changes and gives place to yealow, which heat afterward being well
concocted turned into several colors as we see in flowers, mellow apples,
pears, plummes, and the like, the green we commonly use, are these.

Green bice. Vert greece. Verditure. Sapgreene.
Of the blew and yealow proceeds the green.

Green Bice.
Take green Bice, and order it as you do your blew bice, and in the self same
manner: when it is moist and not through dry, you may diaper upon it with the
water of deep green.

Vert-greece.
Vertgreece is nothing else but the rust of brass^^ which in time being
consumed and eaten with Tal^low, turns into green, as you may see many times
upon foul candlestickes that have not been often made clean, wherefore it
has the name in Latin AErugo, in French Vert de gris, or the hoary gr^ene: to
temper it as you ought, you must grind it with the juice of Rue, and a little
weak gum water, and you shall have the purest green that is; if you will
diaper with it, grind it with the lie of Rue, (that is, the water wherein you
have sod your rue or herbgrace) and you shall have an hoary green: you shall
diaper or damask upon your vert-greece green, with the water of sapgreene.

Verditure
Take your verditure, and grind it with a weak Gum Arabic water, it is the
faintest and palest green that is, but it is good to velvet upon black in any
manner of drapery.

Sap green.
Take Sap green, and lay it in sharp vinegar all night, put into it a
little Alome to raise his color, and you shall have a good green to diaper
upon all other greenes.

Of Blew.
Blew has his Etymon from the high Dutch, Blaw, from whence he calls
Himmel-blaw, that which we call sky color or heauens-blew, in Spanish it is
called Blao or Azul, in Italian Azurro, in French Azur of Lazur an Arabian
word, which is the name of a stone, whereof it is made, called in Greek (...),
from whence it is called (...), and in Latin Cyaneus a stone, as Dioscorides
says, Discorides lib. 5. cap. 106.
or sandy matter found in minerals in the earth, of a most pure and perfect
blew, whether it be our bice or no, I know not for a certain, but I remember
Homer calls a table, whose seete were painted with bice (...), Hom. Ili.
(...).
but howsoever I will not strive, since I am persuaded many of those colors,
which were in use with those excellent Grecian painters in old time are utterly
unknown to us.

The principal blewes with us in use are.

Blew bice. Smalt. Litmose blew. Inde baudias. Florey blew. Korck or Orchall.
Blew Bice.
Take fine Bice and grind it upon a clean stone, first with clean water as
small as you can, then put it into an horn and wash it on this manner: put
unto it as much fair water as will fill up your horn, and stir it well, then
let it stand the space of an hour, and all the bice shall fall to the bottom,
and the corruption will fleet above the water, then power away the corrupt
water, and put in more clean water, and so use it four or five times, at the
last power away all the water, and put in clean water of Gum Arabic not too
stiff, but somewhat weak, that the bice may fall to the bottom, then power
away the Gum water clean from the bice; and put to another clean water, and
so wash it up, and if you would have it rise of the same color it is of, when
it is dry, temper it with a weak gum water, which also will cause it to rise
and swell in the drying, if a most perfect blew, and of the same color it is
being wet, temper it with a stiff water of gum lake, if you would have it
light, grind it with a little Cer^se, or the muting of an hawke that is white,
if you will have it a most deep blew, put thereto the water of litmose.

Litmose blew.
Take fine litmose, and grind it with Ceruse, and if you put to overmuch
Litmos, it makes a deep blew: if overmuch Ceruse and less litmos, it makes
a light blew: you must grind it with weak water of gum Arabeck.

Indebaudias.
Take Indebaudias and grind it with the water of Litmose, if you will have it
deep, but if light, grind it with fine Ceruse, and with a weak water of gum
Arabe^k, you shall also grind your Engli^h Indeba^d^^^^ after the same manner,
which is not fully so good a color as your Indebaud^^^ is: you must Diaper
light and deep upon it, wi^^ a good litmose water.

^l^rey Blew.
Take Florey blew, and grind it with a little fine Rose^, and it will make a
deep violet, and by putting in a quantity of Ceruse it will make a light
violet: with two parts of Ceru^e, and one of red lead, it makes a perfect
Crane color.

Korke or Orchall.
Take fine Orchall and grind it with vnslekt lime and urine, it makes a pure
violet: by putting to more or less lime, you may make your violet light or
deep as you will.

To make a blew water to diaper upon all other blewes^
Take fine litmos and cut it in pieces, when you have done, lay it in weak
water of Gum Lake, and let it lie 24. hours therein, and you shall have a
water of a most perfect azure, with which water you may diaper and dammaske
upon all other blewes, and sanguines to make them show more fai^e and
beautiful: if it begin to dr^e in your shell, moysten it with a little more
water, and it will be as good as at the first.

Of Red.
Red, from the old Saxon Rud, as the town of Hertford, as my worshipful
friend Master Camden in his Britannia notes, first was called by the Saxons
Herudford, as much as to say, the Rud ford, or the red ford^ or water, the like
of many other places in England, in high Dutch it is called Rot, in low Dutch
Root, without doub^ from the Greek (...), which is the same, in French Rouge,
in Italian Rubro, from the Latin Ruber, (...) a corticibus vel grauis mali
punici, from the rindes or seeds (as Scaliger ^aith) of a Pomegranate, which
are of this color. In Spanish it is called Vermeio, of Minium which is
Vermilion.

The sorts of Red are these.
Vermilion. Synaper lake. Synaper tops. Red lead. Roset. Turnsoile. Brown of
Spain. Bole Armoniack.
Of Vermilion.
Your fairest and most principal Red is Vermilion, called in Latin Minium, it
is a poison, and found where great store of quicksiluer is: you must grind it
with the glaire of an egg, and in the grinding put to a little clarified honey,
and make his color bright and perfect.

Sinaper lake.
Sinaper in Latin is called Cinnabaris, it has the name Lake of Lacca, a red
berry, whereof it is made growing in China and those places in the East Indies,
as Master Gerrard showed me out of his herbal, it makes a deep and beautiful
red, or rather purple, almost like unto a red Rose: the best was wont to be
made, as Dioscorides says, in L^bia of brimstone and quicksiluer burnt a long
time to a small quantity: and not of the blood of the Elephant and Dragon, as
Pl^nie supposed: you shall grind i^ with gum Lake, and Turnsoile water, if
you will have it light, put to a little Ceruse, and it will make a bright
crimson, if to diaper, put to only Turnsoile water.

Sinaper Tops.
Grind your Tops after the same manner you do your lake, they are both of one
nature.

Red Lead.
Red Lead, in Latin is called Syricum, it was wont to be made of Ceruse burnt;
which grind with a quantity of Saffron, and stiff gum lake: ^or your
Saffron will make it orient, and of a Marigold color.

Turneso^le.
Turnesoile is made of old linen rags died, you shall v^e it after this
manner: lay it in a ^aucer of vinegar, and set it over a chasing dish of
coals, and let it boil, then take it off, and wring it into a shell, and put
unto it a little gum Arabeck, letting it st^nd three or four hours, till it
be dissolved: it is good to shadow carnations, and all yealowes.

Ros^t.
You shall grind your Roset with Brasill water, and it will make you a deep
and a fair purple, if you p^t Ce^use to it, it makes a lighter, if you grind
it with Litmose, it makes a ^aire violet.

Brown of Spain.
Grind your Brown of Spain with Brasill water, and if you mingle it with
Ceruse, it makes an horse flesh color.

^ole Armoniack.
Bole Armoni^ck is but a faint color, the chiefest use of it, is, as I have
said, in making a size for burnisht gold.

CHAP. XXIIII. O^ composed colors, Scarlet color.
IN French coleur d'^scarlite, Italice, color Scarlatino ^ porposi^o, H^sp.
color de grana, Belg^^e Kermesin of Scharlacken root, T^utonice Rosinfa^b,
Carmasinsarb Latin Coccineus color, Graec. (...) of (...) the seed of Kernel
of a Pomgra^^e, with which in times past they did use to (...) color:
Aristophanes says, (...) for to pick out the grains of kernels of a
Po^gra^ate. The Arabians call this color Che^meb, from whence comes our
Crimson, as Scaliger says, two parts of verme^ion, and one of lake make a
perfect Scarlet.

A bright Mur^e^.
In Latin Mur^hinus col^r, Gra^^^ (...), is a wonderful beautiful color,
computed of purple and white, resembling the color o^ a precious stone of that
name, which besides the ^a^e color yeelde^h a marvelous odoriferous and
s^eete smell: it is found in the Eastern parts of the world, the best among
the Par^hians, being all over ^potted with Rosy colored, and milk white
spots yielding a gloss like changeable silk of this color: of the incredible
price of these stone^ Pliny writes, Lib. 37. Martial. in like mann^r also
seems to number them among the precious things that were brought to Rome
where he says.

Surrentinabibis? n^^ murrhina picta nec aurum
Posce, dabunt calices haec tibi vina snos.
Some have mistaken and thought that color which we call Murinus color to be
this murrey which is properly the color of a mo^se or as some will have it an
ass color. Others that color which we call Morellus, the French Morea^ a
Moris as some would have it, but in my opinion they are much deceived. Lake
Sinast with a quantity of white lead make a murrey color, one part of white
lead, and two of each of the other.

A Glassie Gray.
The word Glass it self comes from the Belgic and high Dutch: Glass from
the verb Glansen, which signifies amongst them to shine, from the Greek
(...) the same, or perhaps from glacies in the Latin, which is Ice, whose
color it resembles, in French it is called Coleur de voir, in Italian v^^reo
color di vetro, in high Dutch Glasgrum, in Spanish Color vidrial, in Greek
(...), from (...) that is moist, and that from (...), pluere, to rain, from
whence also proceed those words in Latin, humus, vdus, etc. It is an aerie and
and greenish white, it serves to imitate at sometimes the sky glasses of all
sorts, fountains and the like: To make this, mingle white lead or Ceruse with
a little azure.

A Brown.
Brown is called in high Dutch Braun of the Netherlands Bruyn, in French
Coleur brune, in Italian Bruno, in Greek (...), from color of the
AEthiopians, for (...), is to burn, and (...) a face, for some have imagined
that blackness or swarthinesse in their faces is procured through the forcible
heat of the Sunbeames. In Latin it is called fuscus quasi (...), that is,
from darkening or ouershadowing the light, or of (...), which is to burn or
scorch, in which sense I have often read it in Hippocrates: this color in the
air is called by the learned (...) is sold as much as (...), terminus lu^is,
and indeed it is taken properly for that duskie redness that appears in the
morning either before the Sunrising, or after the same set.

A bay color.
In Latin it is called Ba^us aut castancu^ color, A bay or a Chestnut color,
of all others it is most to be commended in horses, it comes from the Greek
(...) which is a sl^p of the date tree pulled off with the fruit, which is of
this color, in French Bay, Ba^ard, in Italian Ba^o, in high Dutch
Kesten-braune that is Chestnut brown, it is also called of some Phoenicius
color from Dates, which the Grecians call (...), but as I take it improperly,
for color Phoeniceus, is either the color of bright purple, or of the
redness of a Summer morning according to Aristotle, of vermilion, Spanish
brown and black you shall make a perfect bay.

A deep purple.
From the Dutch purple, in French Purpurin, in Italian Porporeo, in the Spanish
and Portugal Purpureo, in Latin Purpurus, in Greek (...) from (...), a kind
of shelfish that yields a liquor of this color, wherewith in old times they
died this color, it is also called (...), as much as to say, (...) the work
of the Sea, whereupon Plato takes (...) to be of a deep red mixed with black
and some white, and so it is taken also of Aristotle and Lucian, it is made,
says Aristotle by the weaker beams of the Sun mixed with a little white,
and a dusky black, which is the reason that the morning and evening is for the
most part of this color.

Ash color or gray.
In Latin col^r Cinereus in French ^^l^ur cen^ree, ou ^ris^, Ital. Griso
ber^tino, German. Asch^n fra^, Hispan. color decen^z ^s, In Greek (...), that
is ashes, it is made by equally mixing white and black, white with Synaper
Indico, on^ black make an ash color.

A fiery or bright purple.
A fiery or bright purple is called in Latin ^uniceus color, in French
Purpurni ^elnissante, Ital. Rosso di Phoenice, in Greek (...), it is made as I
said before of black enlightened with the fire or beams o^ the Suune: the
words of Aristotle be these: (...). It seems by Virgil to be the same color
of which Roses are, or very near it, for he says, Puniceis humilis quantum
^a^unca Roseti^, and again in his AEneid^s to be that color in the morning,
Puniceis iniecta rotis Aurora rubebat, and the Poet Lucretius calls that
color on the side of ripe crabs p^niceum: where he says, Matura color
arbuta puniceo.

A grassy or yealowish green.
In high Dutch Grassgrun, in Belgic Gersgroe^, Gall. ver messee de iaulne,
Italice verde de giallo, Hispanece verde qui tiene pocode Rurio, in Latin
prassinus, in Greek (...) of (...) which is Leeke, a whose color it
resembles, there is also a precious stone called prasites of the same color.
This color ^s made g^^n^ing Ceruse with Pinke, or adding a little verditure
wi^h the ^u^ce of Rue or herb Grace.

A S^^^ron color.
Germanice S^ffr^n-gerb; B^lg. Saff^^n-geel, Gall. Iau^ne, come S^^fran.
Itali^e croceo, color di Saffrano, H^spanice color d^ a^^sran from the Arabian
word Za^r^n^ Lat^n^ Croc^^^ c^^or, G^^^^ (...) a (...), that is, Saffron, the
Etymon of that name in is (...) from flourishing in the cold, for in frost and
snow the Saffron ^lower, shows the fairest, and th^iueth best, the color in
washing is made of S^ff^on it self by s^eeping it.

A (...) color.
In high Dutch it is cal^ed Sewe^t^ro as you would say in English fire red, in
the Belgic or low Dutch vier-root, glinsterich ro^t, in French Rouge come feu,
resplendissante, In Italian color d^ ^uoco, Hispan. color de ^uego Latin
rutilus aut igneus, in Greek (...) a (...), which is fire: it is made of
vermelion and orpiment mixed deep or light at your pleasure.

A Violet c^lour.
In French col^ur Violette, Ital. Violato color di viola, Hisp. color de violet
^s, T^utonice viol bra^n, Latin. violaceus, a viola, which is a violet so
called of vitula, as some imagine, in Greek (...), from (...), a violet it
has the Etymon from Io the virgin transformed into a bullock, who grazed as
the Poets fayine upon no other herbs then violets, Roset, Ceruse, and Litmose
of equal parts.

A Lead color.
In the Belgicke Loot-verbe, Gallice coleur de plomb. Ital. color piombo, color
liuide, Teutonice bley-farb. Hispan. color catdenno, O color de plomo, Latin
liuidus of liu^r, which is taken for envy, because this color is most of all
ascribed to envious persons it is derived from (...).

CHAP. XXV. How to prepare your tablet for a picture in small.
TAke of the fairest and smothest pastboord you can get, which with a sleeke
stone rub as smooth, and as even as you can, that done, take the ^ine skin of
an Abortiue, which you may buy in Pater no^ter row, and other places, (it being
the ^inest parchment that is) and with starch thin laid on, and the skin
well stretched and smoth pressed within some book or the like, prepare your
ground or tablet, then according to the general complexion of the face you are
to draw, lay on a weak color, that done, trace out the ^ies, nose, mouth, and
ear, with lake or red Lead, and if the complexion be swarthy, add either of
sea coal, lamp black to deepen and shadow it, when you have thus done, lay
it by for a day, or till it be well dry, then by little and little, work it
with a curious hand with the lively color, till you have brought it to
perf^ction: but I will lay before you the practice of a rare Article in stead
of many, that you may imagine you saw it done before you.

CHAP. XXV. The practice of that famous Li^mer Hippolito Donato yet living in
Rome, in a small picture of Christ.
FIrst he took a Card or smooth piece o^ past boo^d, which after he had well
rubbed with a Sleeke stone, he with starch finely laid on, pasted an aborti^e
skin upon the same, which when it was through dry, smoothed, pressed and
prepared he did draw the form of the face with lines of lake then on the
complexion, which he composed according to the life of white and read lead,
adding thereto as occasion served, a little Lake, Vermilion, etc. Then he came
over the face with a little red Lead an^ Lake. That done and dry he mixed for
the shadow under the eyes, eie-browes and face read lead lake like a little
^oote with a small quantity of Lamp black. For the hair he laid on first
yealow oker very thin and after deepened with ^oot a little lamp black and
his own.

For the lips used a little vermillion with lake for the shadow and the mouth
stroke.

For the hands he used read lead and lake with which he mingled a little
lamp black and soote.

For the Drape^y which he termed Per panneare, he laid on first lake very
thin, which being dry, he deepened it with the same, which also he
observed in ^is blew. Although most commonly it is deep^ed with Indice or
Turnsoile.

O^ mingling Colou^s ^or all manner o^ G^^ments and Drapery.
Yellow.
FOr a Garment of yellow, take Masti^o^, deepned with brown oker and red lead.

Crimson.
For Crimson, lay on your Lake very thin, and deepen with the same.

Blew.
For Blew, use Azure deepned with I^die blew, or lake heightened with while.

Cloth of gold.
For Cloth of Gold, take brown Oker and liquid Gold water, and heighten upon
the same with small strokes of Gold.

Changeable silk.
For changeable silk, the water of Masticot and read lead for the heightning,
deepen the same with sap green.

Of other sorts.
A light blew, heightened with white, and deepned with Lake.

Straw color.
For a straw color, Masticot and white heigh^ned with Masticot, and deepened
with Pinke.

Another, red lead deepened with Lake.

For yellowish garments, thin pinke and deepned with pinke and green.

Another verditure deepned with sap green and heightened about the edges with
gold.

For a Sca^let, Scar^et.
vermillion deepned with Lake, and heightened with touches of Ma^ticot.

For a black Velvet, Black V^luet.
lay first your garment over with Iuory black, then heighten it with
Cheristone black and a little white.

For a black satin, Black Satin.
use Cheristone black and white steepened again wi^h Cheristone black,
lastly with Iuory black as Elephants tooth burned etc.

Another, a fair blew deepned with lake and pursled ^ith liquid gold.

For a white S^tten, White Satin.
first very fine Ceruse, which d^epen with Cheristone black, which height^n
again wit^ Ceruse and fine touches where the light falls.

For a russet satten^ Russet Satin.
Indie blew and lake first thin after deepened with Indie again.

To shadow russet, take Cheristone black, and white for the russet lay a
light russet then shadow it with white.

For purples, Purple.
grind lake and smalt together, you may also make them of blew bice, red lead
and white light or da^ke as you will.

For an orient violet, An orient violet.
grind Litmose blew Smalt, somewhat light Ceruse ground heerewith makes an
orient color for violets, Colombines and the like, but in their mixture let
the blew have the upper hand.

To m^ke a most pure green, The most excellent.
take Verdigrease, and bruise it in a linen cloth, and steep it in Muscadine
or Malmesie for twelve hours, or somewhat more, then strain it into a shell,
and put therein a little sap green, and it will be perfect, but put (I wish
you) no gum at all herein.

To make a carnation or flesh color, grind Ceruse well washed with red lead,
or Ceruse and vermillion Lake is not so good.

Out of Masticot, Vmber, yealow Oker, Ceruse Oker de Rous and Sea coal are
made for the most part all manner of hair colors.

With a perfect and fair green mingled with Masticot is made a Popingaie
green.

For a sky color Venice Ceruse and blew bice.

A dark sky color you shall make of stone blew and white, orpiment burned
makes a marigold color.

For a peach color take Brasill water, L^gwood water, and Ceruse.

To make a Craine color, mingle Ceruse with Indie blew.

For a dark sky color as in a thick foggie and cloudy day mix stone blew
and white.

To make a light purple mingle Ceruse with logwood water. You may moreover take
Turnsoile with a little Lake: mingled together with Smalt or bice.

Take Ceruse and Sa^fron, it makes a deeper shaw color.

Read lead thinly laid and shadowed with brown of Spain, makes a walnut
color.

There be certain berries to be bought at the Apothecaries called Venice
berries, bruise them and put them into a shell with Alome, then put into a
little fair water, and within an hour it will be a fair yealow to wash
withal. In grinding lamp black put into it a little sugar, and into the rest
if you will excepting blew and green.

Grind your blew verditure but lightly.

Your stone blew steep only in water, and it will be sufficient. To make
your saf^ron show fair steep it either in fair water or vinegar.

White is shadowed with black and so on the contra^y.

Yellow is shadowed with vmber and the okers.

Vermillion with Lake.

Blew bice with Indie.

Black coal with Roset, etc.

Other instructions for the coloring of some other bodies.

To resemble the fire take Masticot and deepen it with Masticot for the flame.

For a tree take Vmber and white wrought with vmber and deepened wi^h black.

For the leaves, Sap green and green bice, the heightning verditure and white,
or Masticot and white.

For water, blew and white, deepened with blew and heightened with white.

For banks, thin vmber, deepened with vmber and black.

For a feather Lake, ^rizeled with red lead: and so by your discretion you may
judge of the rest: but I wish you every day to do somewhat in practice, but
first to buy some fair prints to exercise your pencill withal.

CHAP. XXVI. The manner of Annealing and Painting upon glass.
THere be six principal colors in glass, which are Or, or yealow Argent, or
white, Sables, Azure, Gules, and Ver^, black, blew, red, and green.

How to make your Or, or yealow upon glass.
Your yealow is made in this manner, take an old groate, or other piece of the
purest and best refined silver, that you can get, then take a good quantity of
Brimstone, and melt it, when ye have done, put your ^^luer into the Brimstone
melted, and take it forth, gain with a pair of pliers or small tongues, and
light it at the fire, holding it in your tongues until it leave burning: then
beat your silver in a brazen Mortar to dust, which dust take out of the
Mortar, and laying it on your Marble stone, grind it (adding unto it a small
quantity of yealow Oker) with gum Arabeck water, and when you have drawn with
your pencell what you will, let it of it self thoroughly dry upon the glass.

Another fair Gold or yealow upon Glass.
Take a quantity of good silver, and cut it in small pieces: Antemonium beat
to powder, and put them together in a crucible or melting cruse, and set them
on the fire, well covered round about, with coals for the space of an hour:
then take it out of the fire, and cast it into the bottom of a candlestick,
after that beat it small into powder, and so grind it.

Note when as you take your silver, as much as you mean to burn, remember to
way against ^it six times as much yealow oaker as it waieth, and seven times
as much of the old earth, that has been scraped of the annealed work, as
your silver waieth: which after it is well ground, put altogether into a pot,
and stir it well, and so use it, this is the best yealow.

Argent or white.
Argent or silver, is the glass it self, and needs no other color, yet you
may diaper upon it with other Glass or Crystal beaten to powder and ground.

S^bles.
Take let, and the scales of Iron, and with a wet fether when the Smith has
taken an hea^, take up the scales that ^lie from the Iron, which you may do by
laying the feather on them, and those scales that come up with the feather, you
shall grind upon your painters stone, with the let and Gum water, so use it
as your gold above written.

Azure, Gules, and Vert.
These three colors are to be used after one manner, you may buy or speak
unto some merchant you are acquainted withal, to procure you what colored
beads you will, as for example, the most and perfectest red beads, that can be
come by, to make you a fair red, beat the^ into powder, in a brazen Mortar,
then buy the Goldsmiths red Ammell, which in any case let be very transparent
and through-shining, take off the beads two pearls, and of the Ammell one
part, and grind them together as you did your silver, in the like sort may you
use all the other colors.

Another fair red upon Glass.
Take a quantity of Dragons blood, called in Latin Sanguis Draconis, beat it
into fine powder in a Mortar, and put it in a linen cloth, and put thereto
strong Aquauitae, and strain them together in a pot, and use them when you
need.

Another excellent green upon Glass.
Take a quantity of vert grease, and grind it very with Turpentine, when you
have done, put it into a pot, and as often as you use it warm it on the fire.

To make a fair Carnation upon a Glass.
Take an ounce of Tinne-glasse, one quarter of gum, of Iet three ounces, of red
Oker five ounces, and grind them together.

Another black.
Take a quantity of iron scales, and so many copper scales, and way them one
against another, and half as much Iet, and mix them well together.

Before you occupy your scales, let them be stamped small, and put them into a
clean fire shouell, and set them upon the fire till they be red hot, and they
will be the better.

Another Carnation.
Take a quantity of I^t, and half as much silver, scumme, or glass tinne^
and half as much of Iron scales, a quar^er as much of gum, and so much red
chalk as all these do way, and grind it.

The manner of annealing your glass, after you have laid on your colors.
Take brickes, and therewith make an Oven four square, one ^oote and a half
high in this manner: and raise it a ^oot and a half high^ when you have done,
lay little bars of Iron overthwart it thus: three or four, or as many as
will^serue, then raise it above the bars one foot, and a half more, then is
it high enough: when you purpose to anneale, take a plate of Iron made fit for
the aforesaid O^en, or for want thereof, take a blew stone, such as they make
Hauer or Oten cakes, upon which being made fit for the aforesaid Oven, lay it
upon the cross bars of Iron: that done, take sleekt lime, and fifth it
through a fine ^iue into the Oven, open the plate or stone, and make a bed of
lime, then lay your glass which you have wrought and drawn before, upon the
said bed of lime, then ^ift upon the said glass, another bed of ^ime, and upon
that bed lay other glass, and so by beds you may lay as much glass as the
Oven will contain: providing always, that one glass touch not another. Then
make a ^o^t ^ire under your glass, and let it burn till ^t be ^u^^iciently
annealed: it may have (you must note) too much or too little of the fire, but
to provide, that it shall be well, you shall do as follows.

To know when your glass is well anne^l^d.
Take so many pieces of glass, as you purpose to lay beds of glass in your
Oven or furnace, and dra^ in colors what y^u will upon the said pieces, or if
you wipe them ^uer with ^o^e color, with your finger only it is e^ough: and
lay with every bed of your wrought and drawn glass one of the said pieces of
glass, which are called watches, and when you think that they are
sufficiently annealed with a pair of pliers or tongs, take out of the first
watch which is the lowest, and next to the fire, and lay it upon aboard until
it be cold: then scrape it good and hard with a knife, and if the color goes
off, it has not enough of the fire, and if it hold it is well annealed.

When you would occupy any oyled color i^ glass, you shall once grind it
with gum water, and then temper it with Spanish Turpentine, and let it dry as
near the fire as may be, then it is perfect.

THE SECOND BOOK of Drawing and Limning.
CHAP. I.
Teaching how, according to truth to purtract and express, Eternity, Hope,
Victory, Piety, Prouid^nce, Ve^^^e, Time, Peace, Concord, Fame, Common
Safety, Clemen^ie, Fat^, etc. as they have been by Antiquity described
either in Comes, Statues, or other the like Public Monuments.

Eternity.
THE most ancient picture of Eternity, was expressed in the form of a fair
Lady, having three heads, signi^ying those three parts of time, viz. Time past,
Present, and to come, in her le^t hand a Circle pointing with her right
forefinger up to heaven, the Circle shows she has neither beginning nor end,
and those three heads not altogether improper to her, ^or says Petr.

Non haura luogo, fu, Sara, ne era In Trion^i.

Ma e solo in present, et hora et hoggi
Et sola eternita racolta, e vera.
In the Meddals of Traia^ and Domitian, she is figured sitting upon a Sphere,
in one hand the Sun, in the other the Moon, by her sitting is signified her
perpetual constancy.

August^s Caesar caused her to be stamped in his coin in the form of a Lady
with two heads crowned under her feet, written AEternitas Augusti, and these
letters S C.

In the Meddals of Faustina, she is drawn with a veil, and in her right hand
the Globe of the world.

In another ancient Meddall I have seen her drawn in green, with a spear in
her left hand, with her right hand reaching for^h with th^se letters. Clod.
Sept. Alb. Aug.

Hope.
Hope by the Ancients was drawn in the form of a sweet and beautiful child
in a long Roabe hanging loose, standing upon the tip^toes, and a treyfoile or
three leaued grass in the hand. Hope has her infancy and increase, the
amiable countenance, the pleasure and delight she brings the loose garment
shows she never pincheth or binds, truth, but allows the largest scope,
the treyfoile of all other herbs first appears green, her standing on
tiptoe, shows she never stands ^irme and certain.

In the Meddals of Gold of the Emperor Adrian and Claudius, she is is draw
like a Lady all in green, with one hand holding up the skirt of her garment,
in the other a goblet with a Lilly in the ^ame, and these leters R. P.

Elsewhere she is drawn in yellow with a flowery plant in her hand, her
garment also embroydered with sundry flowers as Roses, Vi^lets, Daffadils etc.
in her l^ft hand an Anchor.

She is al^o expressed all in green with a Garland of sundry flo^^rs upon her
head gi^ing a Cupid, or Love suck, for indeed she is the ^ood of love. Amor
sinespe, non attin^t ^inem desider^, says S. Augustine.

Victory.
Victory (as ^^liodorus reports) was expressed by the ancients in the form of
a Lady, ^lad all in Gold, in one hand a Helmet in the other a pomgranate, by
the h^lmet was meant force and strength of the body by the pomgranate unity of
wit and counsel, in the Meddals of Octauius she is portra^tured with wings
standing upon a base, in one hand a Palm, in the other a Crown of Gold, with
these words, Asia re^epta.

The sea victory of Vespasian, was a Lady holding a Palm in her hand, at her
foot the prow of a ship.

The same Vespasian caused also a Column to be erected in Rome, upon whose
top there was the prow of a ship, which being called in Latin Rostrum gave
the name to the common pulpit or pleading place in Rome, where those excellent
Orations of Tullius ^orte^sius and others were made being framed and built of
the prowe of those ships of Anti^m which the Romans overthrew and took in the
river of Tiber in memory of so notable a victory.

The victory by land of Vespasian was a Lady winged writing these words in a
shield (near a palm^ tree) Iudaea Capta.

Titus his son gave her without wings, (as Pa^^sanias reports the Athenians
did, who drew (her p^^^iond^ because she could not sly awa^e but ever ^^^maine
with him.

Augustus would have her with wings ready to fl^^ standing upon a Globe, with a
Garland of b^^es, in one hand, in the other the Corne^ of ^he Emperor with
this word Imperator Caesar.

Luc^us Verus drew Victory in the form of a tall Soldier a helmet upon his
head, in his right hand a spear, in his left hand a Trophey laden with the
spoils of the enemy.

Domitian devised after his Germane Conquest Victory in form of a Lady writing
within a shield hanging upon a tree, near whom sat a comely virgin mourning
and leaning with her cheek upon one hand.

Piety.
Piety is drawn like a Lady of Solemn cheer, and a ^ober countenance, in her
left hand a storke, her right arm stretched over an Alter with a sword in her
hand, by her side an Elephant and a child.

The Storke is so called o^ (...) which is the natural or reciprocal love the
child bears to the parent, or the parent to the child, of which this bird
has ever been an Emblem for the love and care she has of her parents being
old.

The sword and Alter declares her readiness in offering her self for the
defense of Religion.

The El^phant above all beasts is thought to have a secret and natural
instinct of pity, Plutarch and AElian affirm that they adore and worship the
Sun at the rising, Pliny adds the new Moon: AElian moreover reports that
they have a care of inter^ing their dead, and that if they ^inde one dead, they
will do their best to cover him with earth, and no marvel, if it be true,
which Oppian writes of them that they can prophecy, and which is more as Dion
says, that they have knowledge of what is done in Heaven.

The AEgiptians resembled P^ety by B^tonis and Cleobis, drawing by the neck^
their mother in a chariot to the Temple of Juno.

A^t^n^^s P^us gave her in his money, like a Lady with a Censer before an Altar.

P^a^e.
Peace (as I have yet to show in an ancient piece of coin stamped about
Augustus Caesar's time) is drawn like a Lady, in her right hand holding a
Caduceus downward toward the earth, where lies an hideous serpent of sundry
colors, with her other hand covering her face with a veil, as loath to behold
the serpent: the word under is Pax Orb. Terr. Aug. It being the time of the
birth of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, when there was a general peace over
the whole world.

Caduceus among the Romans was the name of a wand so called a Cad^ndo, because
at the sight thereof presently all quarrels and discord ceased, and it was
carried by their Herralds and ambassadors, as an ensign of peace.

Traian gave a Lady in her right hand an Olive branch, in her left a Cornucopia.

The Olive is given as the Emblem of Peace, because of all other trees if it
may grow free from annoiance as in times of peace it becomes the most
fruitful.

In certain pieces also of Sergius Galba, she is resembled by a fair Lady
sitting with an Olive bow in one hand, and a Club in the other, underneath Pax
Aug^st. Et S. C.

Her beauty and sitting signify the quiet of the mind in times of peace, by
her Club is meant bodily strength.

In the Medals o^ Titus she is figured like a Lady in one hand, an Olive
branch with the other, leading a lamb and a woolfe coupled by the necks in one
yoke.

Virtue.
Virtue in most of the old Roman statues and coins (as in those of
Maximinus, Geta, Traian) was represented by Hercules, naked with his Lions
skin, and knotted Clubbe, performing some one of his labors (as at this day
he is seen in a goodly statue in the palace of Cardinal Farness in Room)
Hercules being nothing else: but Virtue has his name in Greek (...) Iunonis
gloria vel quia (...) Celebrat aut commemorat Heroas, which is the property of
Virtue, he is drawn naked to show the simplicity of Virtue, being as the
common saying is nudo homine cortenta.

In the pe^ces of Geta he is drawn offering to strike a Dragon keeping an
Apple ^ree, by the Dragon are meant all manner of ^^^^s, by his Lions skin
magnanimity, by his oken Club is signified Reason ruling the Appetite, the
knottines thereof, the difficulty they have, that seek after Virtue.

In the Capitol in Rome he was framed in a goodly stature guilt al over, in his
hand three golden Apples designing the three Heroical v^rtues, which are 1.
Moderation of Anger, 2. Tempera^ce in Covetousness 3. The despising of
pleasures.

Domitian Gal^^nus and Galba gave her like an Amazon with a sheeld and sword
holding a lance, setting one foot upon the World.

Lucius Verus a Bellephoron, and the Chimaera taken by Alciate for the Emblem
of virtue and Heroical Fortitude.

Providence.
A Lady lifting up both her hands to Heaven with this word Prouidentia Deorum.
In the Meddals of Probus a Lady in a Robe in her right hand a Scepter, in her
left a Cornucopia, a Globe at her feet.

Of Maximinus carrying a bundle of Corn, with a spear in one hand.

Time.
I have seen time drawn by a painter standing upon an old ruin, winged, and
with Iron teeth.

But I rather allow his devise that drew him an old man in a garment of
stars, upon his head a Garland land of Roses, ears of Corn and dry sticks,
standing upon the Zodiac (for he has his strength from heaven) holding a
looking glass in his hand, as beholding only the present time) two children
at his feet, one fat, and well liking, the other lean, writing both in one
book upon the head of one, the sun upon the other, the Moon.

He is commonly drawn upon tombs in Gardens, and other places an old man
bald, winged with a Since and an hour glass.

Concord.
Concord was drawn sitting in her right hand a charger, or platter ^or
sacrifice in her self, a Cornucopia, the word Concordia Augg. Et. S.C.

Concordia Militaris Neruae Imp. A Lady in her right hand the beak of a
ship, upon which stands a flagge about the middle of the staff of the
same, two hands joined, the word Concordia Exercituum.

Pierius Valerianus out of Democritus would have Concord like a fair Virgin
holding in one hand a pomgranate, in the other a bundle of Myrtle, for such is
the nature of these trees, that if they be planted, though a good space one
from the other, they will meet, and with twining one embrace the other.

In Faustinas meddals she is represented by crows, as may be seen in Alciates
Emblems.

In another place s^e is showed with a Scepter, having flowers bound to the
top of the same, and in her arm a bundle of green rods.

Fame.
A Lady clad in a thin and light Garment, open to the middle thigh, that ^he
might run the ^aster, two exceeding large wings, her garments embroydered
with eyes and ears, blowing of a trumpet^ as she is described by the Poet
Virgill.

Captiu^ Fame.
A Lady in a long black robe painted with Puttines, or little Images with
black wings a trumpet in her hand.

Salus publica, or common s^fe^y.
A fair child holding a goblet in the right hand, offering the same to a
serpent, in the other hand a wand, the word Salus. Pub. August^.

Clemenc^e.
A Lady sitting upon a Lion, holding in one hand a spear, in the other an
arrow, which she seems to cast away from her with these words, Indulgentia
Aug. Incar.

Among the Meddals of Nitellius she is expressed sitting with a bay branch in
her hand, and a staff lying by her.

Fate.
Fate is drawn like a man in a fair long flaxen robe looking upward to
certain bright stars compassed about with thick clouds, from whence there
shall hang a golden chain, as it is described by Homer in the eight of his
Illiades, which chain signifies nothing else but the conjunction of divine
with humane things on which they depend as on their cause Plato holds this
chain to be the power of the divine spirit and his heat Flax was the
hieroglyphick of Fate among the AEgiptians, as Pierius Valerianus notes.

Felicity
Lulia Mamme^ gave Felicity like a Lady sitting in an imperi^ll throne, in one
hand a Caduceus, in the other a Cornucopia.

^ecundity.
Among the M^dd^^les of ^austina she is described in the form of a Lady
sitting upon a bed, two little infants hanging about her ne^ke.

Security.
Is expressed among the Meddailes of Gordianus by a Lady lea^ing against a
pillar, a scepter in her hand before an Altar.

Mon^y.
Was among the Graeci^ns represented by a Lady, in a garment of white, yellow,
and tawny or copper color, in her hand sundry stamps by her side a Ciuet cat
which was stamped in the Grecian coin, and was (as Plutarch says) the A^ms of
the Athenians.

Dissimul^tion.
A lady wearing a vizard of two faces, in a long Robe of changeable color, in
her right hand a Magpie, the Poet Spenc^r described her looking through a
lattice.

Equality.
A Lady lighting two torches at once.

Matrimony.
A young man standing upon his shoulder a double yoke, his legs fast in a
pair of stocks, in his hand a Q^ince, in token of ^ruitfulnesse, which by the
laws of Solon was given to the Brides of Athens upon the day of their Marriage,
for further variety of these and the like devises, I refer you to my Emblemes
Dedicated to Prince Henry.

CHAP. II. The manner o^ expressing and figuring ^louds, Rivers, all so^ts of
Nymphs: The M^^^s, Pl^nts, ^indes, Faun^s, and Satyrs, the Sea^ons and
M^nth^s of the year, etc.
Of Floods and Rivers.
IN describing Floods and Rivers, you must principally obse^ue the adjuncts and
properties of the same, which consist either in some notable accident done
near them: Some famous City situate upon their banks, trees, fruits, or
reeds, by show of some fish proper to their streams only, their heads or
first fountains, their windings and turning noise in their ^alles, etc you
shall best place the City upon their heads, their fruits in a Cornucopia,
reeds, flowers and branches of trees in their garlands, as for example.

The River Tiber.
The river Tiber is seen expressed in many places in Rome, but especially in
the Vaticane, in a goodly statue of Marble lying along (for so you must
^emember to draw them to express their leuelnesse with the eateh) holding
under his right arm a shee-wolfe with two little infants sucking at her teates
leaning upon an vrne or pitcher, out of the which issues his stream, in his
left a Cornu-copia with all manner of delicate fruits, with a grave
countenance, and long beard, a garland of sundry sweet flowers upon his head,
resting his right leg upon an Oar, to show it was nauigable and commodious for
tra^^ike.

The River Arnus
Arnus is another famous river of Italy, and is drawn like an old man, leaning
upon his pitcher, pouring forth water upon his head, a ga^land of beech, by his
right side a Lion holding forth in his right paw a red Lilly or flower De luce,
each b^ing the ancient arms of the chief City of Toscanie, through the which
this river passes: by his beechen garland is signified the great plenty of
beech trees, which grow about Fasterona in the Appenines, where Arnus has his
head.

The River Po, or Padus.
Po is drawn with the ^ace of an Ox a garland of reeds upon his head, or
rather of Poplar as well for the great abundance of those trees upon his
banks, as in regard of the fable of the sister of Phaeton, whom the Poets
feign stricken with lightning from heaven, to have been drowned in the river,
he has the head of an Ox, because of the horrible noise and roaring, he makes
his crooked banks resembling the horns, as Serui^s and Probus writes.

The River Nilus.
Nilus at this day is seen in the Vaticane in Rome, cut out in white marble,
with a garland of sundry fruits and flowers, leaning with his left arm upon a
Sphinx from under his body issues his stream, in his left arm a Cornu-cop^^
full of fruits and flowers on one side, a Crocodile on the other, six^^ene
little children smiling and pointing to the flood.

The Sphinx was sometime a famous monster in Egypt, that rem^ined by conjoined
Nilus, having the face of a Virgin, and the body of a Lion, resembling bodily
str^ngth and wisdom.

The Crocodile, the most famous S^rpent of Egypt, who has his name (...) from
the fe^re he has of S^^^ron, which he cannot endure, wherefore those in
Egypt that keep Bees set great store of Saffron about the hiues, which when
he sees, he presently depa^teth without doing any harm.

The sixteen children resemble the sixteen cubits of height, being the utmost
of height of the flowing of Nilus, their smiling countenances, the commodity
it brings, gladding the hearts of the dry and poor sunburnt inahbitants.

The River Tigris.
Tigris (as appears in the Meddals of Traian,) was drawn like an old man as
the rest, and by his side a Tiger.

This beast was given him as well in regard of his swiftness, as of the place
which he passes, where are said to be great store of Tigers.

This river has his head or beginning in Armenia the greater, in a large
plain named Elongosin, and winding through many countries, at the least with
ten branches or st^eams disburthens himself within the Persian Sea.

The River Danubius, or the Donow
Danubius among the ancient Meddals of Traian the Emperor afore^aid, is
represented with his head covered with a veil.

He is so drawn, because his beginning or head is unknown, whereupon as I
remember A^sonius says, Danubius perijt caput occultatus in ore.

The River Achelous.
Achelous is described by Ovid to be crowned with willow, reeds, etc. he has
two vrnes or pitchers, the one pow^ing out water, the other empty, with a
horn upon one side of his head, upon the other the appearance of another
broken description being grounded upon that sable of Hercules, who for
Deianiras sake turned both his streams into one shadowed in his combating him
in the likeness of a Bull, and breaking off one of his horns: Whereupon one
of his vrnes are empty.

This river is one of the most famous of al Greece, dividing AEtolia from
Arcadia, and so falling into the Sea.

The River Ganges.
I have seen this river with wonderful art cut out in white Marble, bearing
the shape of a rude and barbarous savage, with bended brows of a fierce and
cruel countenance, crowned with Palm, having (as other floods) his pitcher,
and by his sides a Rhinoceros.

His crabbed looks signify the savage vnciuility of the people in those par^s
being for the most part cruel, runnagates, and notorious thieves.

This river runs through India, and has his head from a fountain in
Paradise.

The River Indus.
Indus is co^only described with a grave and Ioniall aspect, with a garland of
his country flowers by his side a Camel, the beast has his name from (...),
that is, on the ground he is represented pleasantly grave, because the East
Indians are held to be the most politic people of the world, as our
countrymen have had good experience among those of China, Iaua, Bantam, and in
other places in those Eastern parts.

This is the great^st river in the world, receiving into his channel
threescore other mighty and famous rivers, and above an hundred lesser.

The River Niger.
This river is pourtracted like a tawney or black Moore, with a coronet of
Sunbeames ^esting upon his vrne by his side a Lion.

The Sunbeames represent the exceeding heat of that clime lying under the
burning Zone whose Inhabitants are the Moors.

The Lion is proper to M^^ritania and Barbary, where are bred the fie^cest in
the world.

Thus have I broken the Ice to invention, for the apt description and lively
representation of floods and rivers necessary for our Painters and Poets in
their pictures, poems, comedies, maskes, and the like public shows, which
many times are expressed ^or want of judgment very grossly and rudely.

CHAP. III. The N^mp^es i^ gen^r^ll.
THis word N^mphe in Greek (...) properly signifies a bride having the et^mon
from (...) and (...), because she appears to the world, as it were a fresh
and new creature, hence those virgin goddesses of the woods, and waters had the
name of Nymphs, or as some will from water, Nympha quasi lympha by changing L.
into N. after the dorick dialect which may very well be, since by this word
Nymphe is meant nothing else but by allegory the veget^tiue humor or mo^^ture
that quickneth and gives life to trees, plants, h^rbs and flowers, whereby
they grow and increase, wherefore they are samed to be the daughters of the
Ocean, the mothers of floods, the nurses of B^cchus, goddesses of Fields, who
have the protection and charge of Mountains, feeding of herds, woods,
meadows, trees, and in general the whole life of man.

Nap^^e or Nymphs o^ the mountains.
They are called of (...), which is the top of an hill or woody valley, they
would be drawn of a sweet and gracious aspect in mantles of green girded
about them upon their heads garlands of hunnisuckles, woodbine, wild roses,
sweet Marioram and the like. Their action should be dancing in a ring,
composing a ga^land or gathering flowers.

Dryades and ^am^d^yad^s, Nymph^ o^ the (...).
They have their name of (...) an Oak, these must be drawn not of ^o fair a
hew, but of a brown o^ tawny complexion, no o^nament upon their heads, their
hair thick like mos^e, their attire of dark green, of the color of the
ba^ke of trees. They are called Hamadryades, because as they have their birth
and beginning with the trees, so (says Appolloniu^) they die together with
them.

N^^iades or the Nymphs of f^ouds.
You shall make them very beautiful with arms and legs naked, their hair
clear as Cristall, upon their heads garlands of watercresses, and their red
leaves with pitchers pouring out water.

They have their names from Nao to flow or bubble as the water does from a
fountain.

Dianas Nymphs would be arraid in white, in sign of their virginity, their
garments gyrt close a^bout them, as Virgil and Claudian describe them, their
arms and shoulders naked, bows in their hands, and quiuers by their sides.

Diana has her name of (...) which is to moysten which is proper to the Moon,
being by nature cold and moist, and is fained to be a goddess huntresse^
because they thought in times past the night to be fittest time for that sport,
whereupon Horace perhaps thought hunters wives had wrong lying many a cold
night without their husbands.

CHAP. IIII. The Ocean^
HE is represented like a surley old fellow with a thick beard, long and
vnkembed locks, quite naked, save gyrt ab^ut the middle with a Seals skinn^
or ships ^aile laying his leg over a Dolphins back, in his hand the stern
of a ship, Anchor, Oar, or the like.

He is painted old, because he is of equal age with our common mother the
earth, of fearful and four aspect, by reason of his often commotion and
raging, he has his name from (...), which is swift, and suddenly violent.

Thetis.
A Lady of something a brown complexion, her hei^e d^sheueld about her
shoulders, upon her head a Coronet of Periwinckle and Escallop shelles in a
mantle of Sea^water green about her neck and arms, chains and bracelets of
Amber, in her hand a branch of red Corrall.

Her name importes a nurse, because she gives moisture to every thing, her
complexion agrees with the color of the Sea, being many times at the Sun
rising and setting, as Aristotle says, of a dark red or purple color

Galatea.
A most beautiful young Virgin, her hair with a careless grace fal^ing about
her shou^ders like threads o^ si^uer, at each ea^e a fair pea^l ^anging, of
which al^o s^e shall have a chain many times doubled about her n^^ke and left
arm, a M^^t^e of most pure, thin and ^ine white, wa^ing as it were by the
gentle brething of the a^r, viewing in her hand a sponge being made of the
^^oth of the Sea.

S^ee has her name from (...), which is milk, as being of the ^^llour of the
same f^oth.

Ir^^ ^r the Rain^bow.
A Nymphe with large wings dispred in the form of a semicircle, the feathers
set in ranckes of sundry colors, as purple yellow, green, read, etc. Her
hair hanging before her eyes, her breast in form of a cloud, drops of water
falling from her body, standing if it ^ay be so devised in a just or thick
cloud in her hand, Iris or the flower deluce, some give her wings to her feet
agree^ble to Homers (...) she is said to be the messenger of the Gods, Virgil
often makes her the Messenger of Juno, allegorically taken for the air, when
he says.

Irin de coelo m^sit Saturnia Juno.
Aurora or the Morning.
Aurora i^ drawn like a young maid with carnation wings, in a mantle of
yellow, in her forehead a star with the appe^r^nce of certain golden
sunbeams from the crown of her head r^ding upon Pegasus some give her a
light in her hand, but in^stead of that I rather allow her a Viol of deaw,
which with sundry flowers she scatters about the earth.

Her dressing agrees well with those Epistles of Homer (...), and o^ Vi^gil
Croc^o velamine sulgens. Her Carnation wings with her Epithet of (...), or the
rosy fingred Morn.

Her riding upon Pegasus shows her swiftnes, and how she is a friend to all
studies especially to poe^trie and all ingenious and pleasant inventions.

CHAP. V. The Nine Muses.
THe Muses in ancient time were repr^sented by nine fair, young, and gracious
Virgins, they had the name of Muses, as Eusebius says (...) which is to
instruct, because they instruct and teach the most honest and commendable
disciplines and Orpheus in his himnes declares how they first taught religion
and ciuility amongst men.

Clio.
Clio the first has her name from praise or glory and is drawn with a Garland
of baies in her right hand and a Trumpet in her left, a book, upon whose
outside may be written, Thucidides or the name of some other famous Historian.

^ut^rpe.
Euterpe is crowned with a wr^ath (...) sweet ^lowers, h^lding in each hand
sundry wind instruments, she has ^^r name ^^om giui^g delight, Dio^o^us
attribute^ unto ^er all kind of lea^ning.

T^^lia.
Th^li^ should be drawn with a wanton and s^^^ling cou^tenanc^ upon h^^ ^ead a
Garland o^ Iuy^ in her le^t hand a ^^zard on a ro^e of Ca^nation embroydered
with light silver twist, and Gold spangles: ^er my shows her prerogative over
Comical Poe^sie: her mask Man^^e and pum^es are ornaments belonging to the
stage.

Melpo^^ne.
Melpomene would be ^epresented like a Virago or manly Lady, with a Maiesticke
and grave countenance upon her head a most rich dressing of Pearl, D^amonds^
and Rubies holding in her le^t hand scepte^s with crowne^ upon them other
crowns and scepters lying at her feet, in her right hand a naked poniard, in a
pall or mantle of changeable Crimson, and black bu^kins of silver, with
Carnation blac^e and white Ribands, o^ her feet her high Cothurn or Tragic
pantofles of read Velvet and gold beset with pearls and sparks of Rubies,
her gravity be^itteth Tragike Poesy, her pall and pantofles were invented for
the stage by the Greek Poet^ AEschilus, as Horace t^stifyeth.

Polymnia.
Polymnia shall be drawn as it were acting her speech with her forefinger all
in white, her hair hanging loose about her shoulders, resembling wie^y gold,
upon her he^d a Coronet of the richest and rarest jewels en^ermixt with sweet
flowers, in her le^t hand a book, upon whose outside shall be written Suad^r^.

To this Muse al Rhetorician^ are beholden, whose patron is the Coronet of
pretiou, stones signif^ing those rare gifts which ought to be i^ a Rhetorici^n
viz: Invention, Disp^sition, M^mory, and Pronuntiation, her white habit
declares the sinceri^y which ought to be in Orators, her name imports much
Memory.

Erato.
Erato has her name of Eros which is Love, draw her with a sweet and lovely
counten^nce, her temples gy^^ with Myrtle and roses (both of aunci^nt time
Dedicated to Venus) bearing a heart with an Iuory key, by her side a pretty
Cupid or Amorino winged with a Torch lighted in her hand, at his back, his bow
and qui^er.

Terpsichore.
Terpsichore would be expressed with a merry countenance playing upon some
instrument, upon her head a coronet of feathers of sundry colors, but
especially those green feathers of the Poppiniaie, in token of that victory,
which the Muses got of the Syrenes, and the daughters of Pieri^s and Euripus,
by singing (as P^usanias reports) who after were turned into poppini^es or wood
peckers as Ovid writes.

Urania.
Let Urania be shown in a robe of Azure, imitating the Heaven upon her head a
Coronet of bright stars, in her hand a Globe rep^esenting the c^l^stiall
spheres. Her name imports as much as heavenly, for it is her office to describe
heaven, and the spheres, urania ^oeli motus scrutatur et Astra.

Calliope.
Calliope would be painted richest of all the rest, upon her head a Coronet of
gold as queen of her fellows howsoever we here give her the last place upon
her left arm, many garlands of bay in store for the reward of Poets, in her
right hand three books, whose titles may be Illiadoes, Odysseos, and AEneidos,
as the worthiest of Poetry.

I have thus briefly given you the draught of this fair company, as Fulu^us
Vrsinus reports they are described in the Middals of the ancient family of
Pomponia, the rather because their description agrees with the invention of
Virgil, and the rest of the ancient Poets.

CHAP. VI. Pan and the Satires.
THis word Pan in Greek signifies All, or the V^iuersall, and indeed he is
nothing else but an Allegorical fiction of the World, he is painted with a
Goats face, red blown cheeks, upon his head two horns standing upright,
about his shoulders a panthers skin, in one hand a crooked sheepehooke, in
the other a pipe of seven reeds, compact with wax together: from the middle
downwards he bears the shape of a Goat, in this manner he is expressed by
Boccace and Silius Italicus.

His horns signify the sun and Moon.

His red and fiery face the Element of burning fire.

His long bearde notes the air and fire, the two Masculine Elements,
exercising their operation upon Nature being the Feminine.

His Panthers skin represents the eight sphere or starry firmament, being the
highest sensible Orb covering the earth.

The rod shows the sovereignty of Nature, guiding and destining each
creature to his proper office and end: his pipe, how that he was the first
i^uentor of Country Music according to Virgill, P^n primu^ calamos, etc.

His nether parts of a Goat declare the inequality of the earth being rough
and ^hagged as it were with trees plant^ hills, etc.

The Satyrs have their names from (...), and as Pliny testifies were found in
times past in the Eastern mountains of India Lib. 7. cap. 2.

S. Hierom in the life of S. Anthony reports, that he saw one of these in his
time: vid^ homunculum (inquit) aduncis ^aribus, et front cornibus aspera cui
extrem^ corporis in caprarum pelles desinebant etc. but the truth hereof I will
not rashly impugn, or ouerboldly affirm.

The 4 Winds.
Eurus or the E^st wind.
Eurus as all the other Winds must be drawn with puffed and blown cheeks,
wings upon his shoulders, his body the color of the tawny Moore, upon his
head a red sun.

The Moorish color shows his habitation to be in the East, the red sun,
an effect of his blowing.

Zephyrus or the West wind.
Zephorus you shall show a youth with a merry countenance, holding in his hand
a swan with wings displaied, as about to sing, because when this wind blows,
the swan sings sweetliest, upon his head a Garland of all manner of sweet
flowers of the spring: thus he is described by Philostratu^, for with his
gentle and warm breath, he brings them forth, which Petrarch as lively
depain^eth in that sonnet of his, which with Gironimo Conuersi and many mo
excellent Musicians I have lastly chosen f^r a ditty in my songs of 4. and 5.
parts being a subject far fitter then foolish and vain love, to which our
excellent Musicians are overmuch addicted.

Zephiro torna e'l bell temporimena
Ei fi^ri, e'l he^ be sua dolce famiglia
E^g^oir pr^gne, ^pianger Filomena
E^primauera cand^d^ e vermiglia, etc.
Zephyrus is so called of the Grecians, qu^si (...) bringing life, because as I
said, it cherishes and quickneth all things.

Boreas, or the North wind.
Boreas is drawn like an old man with a horrid and terrible countenance, his
heir and beard quite covered with snow, or frozen with Iseickles, with the
feet and tail of a Serpent, as he is described by Ovid in his Metamorphosis.

Auster or the South wind.
Auster is drawn with head and wings wet, a pot or vrne pouring forth water
with the which shall descend ^rogs, grasshoppers, caterpillars, and the like
creatures as are bred by much moisture. The South wind of his own nature is
cold and dry, and passing through the burning Zone ere it comes to us, it
receives heat and moisture from the abundance of rain, thus the nature of it
being changed, it comes unto us hot and moist, and with heat it opens the
earth, whereby the moisture multiplied causes clouds and rain.

CHAP. VII. The tw^lue months of the ^eare.
March.
MArch is drawn in tawny with a ^ierce aspect, a helmet upon his head to show
this month was dedicated to Mars his father, the sign Aries in his right
hand, leaning upon a spade, in his left hand Almond blossoms and scients upon
his arm and basket of garden seeds. The Spring begins in the sign,
whereupon says Arios^o.

Ma poi che il sol uell animal discreto
Che porto Phrisio illumio la ssera and.
April.
April a young man in Green with a garland of Myrtle, and hawthorne buds
winged (as all the rest of the months) in one hand Primroses and Violets, in
the other the sign Taurus, this month has the name ab aper^endo says Varro,
because now the earth begins to lay forth her trea^ures to the world.

May.
May must be drawn with a sweet and ami^ble countenance, clad in a Robe of
white and green, embra^dered with D^ff^dilles, Hawtho^ne, blew-bottels, upon
his head a garland of while dama^k^ and red Roses, in one hand a Lute, upon the
forefinger of the other a N^ghtinga^e, with the sign G^mini: it was called
Maius a maioribus, for Romulus having divided the people of Rome into two
parts, Maiores and Minores, whereof the younger were appointed to defend their
country by strength, the elder by counsel: May so called in the honor of
one, and June of the other, whereto Ovid agrees saying: Hinc suae maiores
tribu^re vocabula Maio,
Iunius a Iuuenum nomine dictus adest.


June.
June in a mantle of dark grass green, upon his head a garland of bents,
king-cups, and maidens hair, in his left hand an angle with a box of
Cantharides, in his right the sign Cancer, upon his arm a basket of the
fruits of his season, it has the name, either a Iuuenibus, as I said, or of
Iunius Brutus.

July.
July I would have drawn in a Iacket of light yealow, eating cherries with his
face and bosom Sunburnt, on his head a wreath of Centaurie and wild time, a
since on his shoulder, and a bottle at his girdle carrying the sign Leo.

This month was called July in the honor of Julius Caesar the Dictator, being
before called Quintili^ or the fifth month, for the Romans began with March.

August.
August shall bear the form of a young man of a fierce and choleric aspect
in a flame colored garment, upon his head a garland of wheat and Rye, upon his
arm a basket of all manner of ripe fruits, as pears, plummes, apples,
gooseberies: at his belt (as our Spence^ describes him) a sickle, bearing the
sign Virgo.

This month was dedicated to the honor of Augustus Caesar by the Senate,
because in the same month he was the first time created Consul, thrice
triumpher in Rome, subdued Egypt to the Roman Empirer and made an end of
^^uill wars, being before named Sextilis, or the sixth from March.

September.
September with a merry and cheerful countenance, in a purple roabe upon his
head, a wreath of white and purple grapes: in his left hand a handful of
Millet^ Oats, and Panicle, withal carrying a Cornu-copia of ripe Peaches,
Pears, Pomgranates, and other fruits of his season, in his right hand the
sign Libra.

His purple Roabe shows how he reigns like a king above other months,
abounding with plenty of things necessary for man's life.

The sign Libra is now (as Sir Philip Sidney says) an indifferent arbiter
between the day and night, peizing to each his equal hours according to
Virgil.

Libra dies, somnique pares vbi fecerit hor^s.
This has the name as being the seventh month from March.

October.
In a garment of yealow and carnation upon his head a garland of Oak leaves
with the Akornes, in his right hand the sign Scorpio, in his left a basket of
Seruises Medlers and Chestnuts and other fruits, that ripen at the latter time
of the year, his robe is of the color of the leaves and flowers decaying.

This month was called Domitianus in the time of Domitian by his edict and
commandment, but after his death by the decree of the Senate it took the name
of October, every one hating the name and memory of so detestable a Tyrant.

November.
November in a Garment of changeable green and black upon his head a garland
of Olives with the fruit in his left hand bunches of parseneps, and turnips, in
his right the sign Sagittarius.

D^cember.
December must be expressed with a horrid and fearful aspect, as also
Ianua^y following, cladde in Irish rugge, or course freeze, gyrt unto him, upon
his head no Garland but three or four nightcaps, and over them a Tu^kish
Tu^bant, his nose read, his mouth and beard clogd with Iseckles, at his back
a bundle of holly Iuy or Misletoe, holding in furd mittens the sign
Caprico^nus.

Ianua^y.
January would be clad all in white, like the color of the earth at this time
blowing his nails, in hi^ le^t arm a billet, the sign Aquarius standing by
his side.

This Month and the next were added to the yea^e by Numa Pompilius, and had
the name from Ianus a Roman God painted with two faces (signifying providence
or wisdom) judging by things past of things to come.

February.
February shall be clothed in a dark sky color, carrying in his right hand
with a fair grace the sign Pisces.

Numa Pompilius gave February his name either a Febribus from Agues, to which
this time is much subject, or from Febr^^, which were sacrifices offered for
the purgation of the souls of the dead, for Februo was an old verb, and
signified to purge.

You shall rather give every month his instruments of husbandry, which
because they do differ, according to the custom (with the time also) in
sundry countries, I have willingly omitted, what ours are here in England
Tusser will tell you.

Moreover you ^ust be sure to give every month his proper and natural
Landtskip, not making (as a Painter of my acquaintance did in several tables
of the months for a Noble man of this land) blossoms upon the trees in
December, and Schoole-boyes, playing at nine pinnes upon the ice in July.

THE THIRD AND LAST BOOK, CONTAIning by way of Dialogue, a Discourse tending
to the Blazon of Arms, with a more Philosophical and p^rticular examination
of the causes of Colors and their p^rticipation, with the light, according to
the opinions as well o^ Ancient as late writers.
The speakers. Cosmopolites, E^daemon. Cosm EVDAEMON well met: what make you
hee^e so solitary all alone, Come, you have some point of Music in your
head, or inuenting some Impresa or other; this B^^se was never built to study
in.


Eud. To tell you troth, I was thinking how Luc^an could make ^is opinion good,
concerning the s^u^es of wealthy usurers, and covetous persons, whom after
their death he verily believes, and affirms to be Metemphychosed, or
translat^d into the bodies of Asses, and there to remain certain thousands of
years, for poor men to take their p^niworth out of their bones and sides with
the cudgel and spu^re.


Cosm. There is no better physic for melancholy then ^ither Lucian of the
heathen^ or of eternal memory. Sir Thomas Moore among the Christians for
witty conceit and invention, neither think I ever shall we s^e their like. But
what book have you there?


Eud. It is a part of Giouan de Ramellis, one of the best enginers in Europe.


Cosm. I have no skill that way, but what think you of this work?


Eud. Surely an ^ffect of Magnisicence her self.


Cosm. Have you been above.


Eud. Yes, but I bought nothing.


Cosm. Such a customer the Epigrammatist Martial meets withal, one who after
he had walked through the fairest street twice or thrice cheapening Jewels,
Plate, rich hangings, came away with a wodden dish: well since we are met so
fitly together, I will now challenge you of your promise which was, to give me
cer^aine rules as the principles of Blazonrie, it being a skill I have long
desired, and as I imagine quickly learned.


Eud. With all my heart, yet I am loath to thrust my sickle into another man's
corn, since it is in a manner beside my subject (which Pliny wishes a writer
always to bear in mind) and which is more, it has so plentifully been
written of already (especially of late, by that worthy and honest Gentleman
Master Guillim) that little or nothing remains to be spoken hereof,
notwithstanding rather then I will deny so reasonable a request, I will say
somewhat hereof in general, what I imagine, it is fitt^st for you to know for
farther skill I re^erre you to the pro^essors he^reof.


Cosm. Faith^ the principal use I would make of thi^ skill is, that when I
come into an old decayed Church or Monastery (as we have plenty in Engl^^d) or
Gentleman's house, I might rather busy my self in viewing Arms, and matches
of Houses in the windows or walls, then lie boots and spurs upon my bed
in mine Inn, or ou^r-looke mine Hosts shou^der at Irish. Moreover being a
Gentlem^n ^y self, I have been many times asked my Coat, and except I should
have showed them my ier^i^, I knew not what to say.


Eud. Very likely, many of our English Gentlemen are in your predicament, but
to say the truth, I must i^ge^i^usly confess, it has the most necessary use
to the knowledge and imitation of the virtues and atchieuements of our
Ancestors, it being besides a most gentlemanly ornament to our selves, when
occasion of discourse hee^eof shall be offered.


Cosm. But first I pray you concerning the word Herald, let me vnde^stand what
it signifies.


Eud. It has the Etymon from the Dutch or Saxon here, which is a Lord or a
principal man, for in times past they were among the Romans in great
reputati^n, being by their office priests, created at the first by Numa
Pompilius king of the Romans appointed to denounce war against the enemy, by
striking a spear^ into the ground at what time they wore Garlands or wreaths of
Ver^en, concerning the beginning and Antiquity of bearing Arms, and the first
inuentors hereof, I will say nothing, at all, since so much has been said
already by Leigh, Sir John Fern, and others, to whose labors I refer you.


Cosm. Acquaint me I pray you with an Escotcheon, and if it please you, with
the sundry forms of shields, since I have seen many differing, seuer^ll one
from the other, as the Italian gives his Arms in an Ouall form.


Eud. Very willingly: this word Escocheon is a French word derived from the
Latin Scutum, and that from the Gre^ke (...), which is leather and hence
comes our English word Buckler, Lere in the old Saxon, signisying Leather,
and Buck or Bock, a bucke or stagge of whose skins quilted close together with
horn or hard wood, the ancient Britains made their shields, of which sort it
seemed the shield o^ Nennius to have been, wherein Julius Caesa^s sword stuck
so fast, that Nennius had taken of his head, had not Labienus the Tribune,
stepped happily between them in the mean time and rescued his master.

But of shields the first and most ancient was that same among the Romans,
which they call (...), an elbow, where it was worn, or from (...), which
signifies a remedy because it was a great r^medy and also a help to that
grievous pestilence in Rome, falling down from Heaven into the City in the
time of Numa Pompi^ius, wherewith a voice was herd saying, in what City so^uer
that shield should remai^e, the same should become the most mighty of the
falling down of this shield, I remember this of Ovid when I was a Grammar
scholar. Ecce leui Scutum versatum leniter aura
Decidit, a populo clamor ad astra venit.


The form of i^ was long, and round at the ends, without any corner, as Ovid
shew^th in another place. Atque ancil^ vo^ant q^o^ ab omni part^ r^^^^um est,
Quaque oculis sp^^les ^ngulus omnis abest:


A second kind was that which Suid^^ calls (...), in Latin Parma, so called
(as Varro says) quod par in omnes parts esset, meaning, that it was round,
and ^quall from the vm^e^iqu^ or middle point, to eu^ry side this shield was
used most by the Trojans as Virgil testifies. Ense leuis nudo parmaque in
glorius alba.


A third kind was a short Target made in form of a cressant or half Moon,
called in Latin Pelta, used by the Amazons, as the same Virgil notes, where
he says: Ducit Amazonidum lunatis agmina peltis
Penthesilea furens --


It was also in great use among the old Roman Soldiers, as L^uy testifi^th.

A fourth kind was called cetra, used by the African Moors and the Spaniards,
in Caesar's time who in his Commentaries calls those Legions Vlterioris
Hispaniae, cetratas.

Some other kinds there have been which for breuity, and your memory sake I
omit, I will proceed to ^olours, and then to variety of charges.


Cosm. How many colors be there in Arms?


Eud. Six principal, (of which two viz. yealow and white, Or, and Argent, are
termed metals: that is, Gold and Silver,

viz. Or Azure and Vert. that is, yealow, white, read, black, blew, and
green. Argent Azure and Vert. that is, yealow, white, read, black, blew, and
green. Gules Azure and Vert. that is, yealow, white, read, black, blew, and
green. Sables. Azure and Vert. that is, yealow, white, read, black, blew,
and green.


Gold is the most precious and dearest of all metals, the reason is, it
remains longest uncorrupted, and without rust, and since man by nature
desires immortality, and to preserve his Memory, he holds so this metal,
as most worthy of his love and respect, I have seen the moneys of Augustus
Caesar, (who was Emperor of Rome, when Christ was born) as fr^sh and as fair
as if they had been stamped in the Tower of London but yesterday, as also of
Nero Domitian, Const^ntine and the rest, it is begotten by the heat of the
sun upon the purest earth.

It is called Gold in our English tongue, either of Geel (as Scaliger says,)
which is in Dutch to shine, or of an other Dutch word, which is Gelten, and
signifies in Latin Valere, in English to be of price or value: and hence
comes their ordinary word Gelt, for money Gold was of such ^stimation and
price among the Romans, that it was provided by a Law, that it should be worn
of none, but of the greatest persons, and of them but at certain times.


Cosm. I would the like laws were amongst us here in England, where if those
infinite sums and expenses which are consumed in gold lace and fringe upon
petticotes and garters, were bestowed in iron and steel, great horses, or
poor scholars, it were better for our common wealth. Nay so ordinary is
excess in this kind, that even shop keepers, and which is more, their
apprentices, with seruingmen, and chamber maids think themselves fowly
disgraced if they be not in the fashion. I have my self met an ordinary
tapster in his silk stockins, garters deep ^^nged with gold lace, the rest of
his apparel suitable with cloak lined with velvet, who took it in some
scorn I should take the wall of him, as I went along in the street, what
shall now our Courtiers and gentlemen think of themselves?


Eud. It is a fault in the Magistrate, that so good Laws ^s we have (God be
thanked) in this land be so ill executed, I verily believe if this fellow had
lived in the time of Cato Censor in Rome, he would have been followed as a
monster, and for his punishment have been confinde to the bottom of a Sellar
during his life.


Cosm. But I pray you proceed to say something of Silver.


Eud. Silu^r next unto Gold, is of greatest account being called in Gre^ke
(...), in Italian Argento, in French Argent, of the Latin Argentum, in Spanish
it is called Plata of (...)^ by reason of the beating of it into broad pieces
or Ingots, our English word silver without doubt proceeds of the Greek (...)
to shine, it is the second Metal, and signifies purity, innocence, and
chastity, among the planets it holds with Luna, among precious stones with
the Margarite or pear^e.

Gold signifies to the bearer Riches, Honor and pre-eminence, among planets it
holds with the sun among stones with the Tapasion.

They are called Metals because they fall among metallica corpora which are
numbered by Aristotle, compound the pur^st part of the earth growing one near
to another according to the Etymon of the word met^lla which is qu^si (...)
for one vein or mine being found another is underneath it far off, or as
some would have it from (...) is to search diligently as those do that search
for mines, and because their shining not as colors but as bright metals are
mingled wi^h the other colors they might the farthe^ be discerned either by
day or night in the field: for of themselves either does confound the sight,
and had need to be allaied wi^h color, which on the other side without any of
these colors, is as much displeasing and o^fensiue to the sight being as it
were a body without a soul, and take it for a general rule there is no coat
without a mettell, or any without color one only excepted, which is the same
of Godfrey of Bulloigne, it being a cross Jerusalem or in a field silver
which you must not take as a president it being given him as a singular mark
of honor as if some one attorney at the common Law should be privileged by^
both the Universities to speak false Latin, and his to be held for most pure
and good, that of the rest most absurd and barbarous.


Cosm. But I pray you what is the reason that I may not, notwithstanding call
them by the names of yealow and white.


Eud. Because those colors of the metals are certain bright splendors
begotten of a singular and one only reflection from an outmost an^ continuate
superficies, as in lead, tin, quickesi^uer, etc. the whiteness of color
proceede^h from a light often reflected and pen^t^ating many small clear and
transparent bodies as we ^ee in salt, I^e beaten small the foame of the sea and
the like, for this is a general rule that every transparent body which we
call Diaphanon beaten and divided into small parts or pieces yields a white
color as snow, which white is a continuate body in rain or water is
transparent but being divided by the cold ai^e in the falling down into
discreet parts, it forthwith turns white, the like we may see in the
shauings of horn, which the finer you cut them the whiter they appear so that
in these and the like bodi^s the cause of whiten^sse is nothing else (as I
said) then an o^t r^flection of the light possessing our ^ies and the air or
medium with many beams reflecte^.


Cosm. I pray you now proceed to Black, which I think to be the next color.


Eud. You say true, this color in Arms is called Sables, which is a most rich
^urre worn of Princes and great personages, it is brought out of Russia and
Muscouia, it is the furre of a little beast of that name esteemed for the
perfectness of the color of the hairs, which are in summitate nigerrimi.

In Arms it denotes sadness, grie^e and constancy, among the planets it has
Melancholy Saturn, among precious stones the Diamond.


Cosm. But me thinks now you are contrary to your self, for even now you
said that those clear and transparent bodies, as Diamonds, Glass, water, ice
and the like were the subjects, rather of whiteness then blackness as being
most capable of light.


Eud. It is true I said so, but you must know that these clear bodies, as
Cristall, Ice, the Diamond etc are subjects of both, for as white proceeds
from a clear and transparent body, divided into many parts, as in snow, so
black is caused in the same body by a shadow dispersed into the smallest
bodies beyond the light, or whether the light cannot come. For the light only
possessing the one half of the superficies, draws it self with the broken
beams into a center, which when it possesses the eye with stronger and more
forcible b^ames, the other on the sides pos^essing the sight with weker and
fainter, can ha^dly be discerned: so that black color in these bodies is no
thing else then a certain privation of the light, by over shadowing, and heerin
differs darkness from black: da^kness^ is not bounded and circumscribed,
(as we say) by other objects enlightened, whereby it appea^eth of less
blackness then black color for contrarium contrarto oppositum m^gis
clucescit. So that herein it is worthy consideration, to see how as sometime
contrary causes produce the like effects so even the same to proceed from black
and white, for the clear and perspicuous body effects white, and that white
a black, again with contrary affections they beget like effects, for the
clear body broken to small pieces (as I said) produces white, and becomes
most black, while it is continuate and undivided, as we see in deep waters,
(which are ever blackest) thick glasses and the like. It is the opinion of
some, that contrary to Aristotle, that the color white does gathe^ the beams
of the sight together (as I said in my former book) and that black does only
dispe^se and scatt^r them, as for example, if one beholde^h ^he light, or some
very whit^ ob^ect, he vieweth it win^^^gly, as we see those do, that are
purblind^ but if any thing that is black, he looks upon it with a broad and
a full eye, and we see by experience in a Cat, so long as ^he beholds the
light she does, contrahere pupillam, draw the ball o^ her eye small and long
(being covered over with a green skin) and let it forth or dilate at her
pleasure.

Now as Cristall, Ice, etc. by reason of their perspiscuitie, are the subjects
of whiteness, so are quicksiluer, silu^r, lead, steel, Iron^ tin, and the
like, by reason of their opacitie of blackness, as we see in their dust, and
in the blacking o^ our hands with much handling the same.

And that they are the most shadowie bodies, we know by experience, for if the
thinnest lea^e of tin, laid over with quicksiluer be laid upon a Glass or
Cristalline superficies, it hinders the light so much from passing through,
that it is constrained to reflect it self to the adverse part, which other
bodies though of a far greater thickness cannot do, and hence at first came
the invention o^ looking glasses.


Cosm. I am well satisfied in these three colors, viz. or, Argent, and Sable,
what I pray you is the next.


Eud. Mar^, Azure, Guiles, and Vert, which I will pass over with as much have
as I can, because I will come to our matter.

Azure is a fair light blew so named from the Arabian word Lazul, which is the
same, it betokens to the bearer a zealous mind, it is also proper to them as
David says that occupy their business in great wate^s, as travelers by Sea
and the like of the planets it holds with Mercury, among precious stones with
the Saphyre.

This color blew does participate less of the light then the white color,
for striking it self upon this color it is rarefied and dispersed, as on the
contrary it is thickened and more condensate in red, as by a most pleasant and
delightful experiment we may perceive in a three square cristal prisme,
wherein you shall perceive the blew to be outmost next to that the red, the
reason is, that the extreme parts of a perspicuous body shine and yield a
more faint light then the middle as appears by Opticke, and the light is
received by fewer beams in the outmost edges then into the midst, so that ye
perceive first while in the midst then red and blew in the extremes seen.
This again is most manifest by the light of the Sun, through a thick cloud
which then appears red, and by the higher parts of the air which b^^ause
they are more rarefied and pure, then the nether appear to be most blew which
Theophrastus in his book of colors witnesses saying.

(...).

Again while a candle, oil, wood, or any thing that consists o^ fatness
burns, the flame next to the candle it self at the nether end of the week
appears blew, because there is but a thin and a weak light joined with a
thin, weak, and ae^ic moisture, the top of the ^lame is red, because it
there adh^reth to a smoakie and thick, earthy body, whereupon all earthy and
sooty flames are red, the ^l^me of Aqu^vil^ is most blew, because it is so rare
and thin that it is scarce able to burn, but heat i^ coals, Iron, and the
li^e is most red, because it is contained in think, drossie, and ea^thie
bodies.

Red is named in' Armory Geules, it signifies a warlike disposition, a
haughty courage, dreadlesse of dangers among planets it is attributed to Mars,
among stones to the Rubie.


Cosm. Proceed (I pray you) to green, and then I think we have done with
those colors proper to Arms.

Green is termed by the name of Vert, and it is composed of white a thin
red: and lastly blew, for if you mingle blew with a little yealow you shall have
a Poppingay gree^e, if with much blew and yealow a sad or black green if but
a little more blew then yealow a Seawater green, etc. It is called Vert of the
Latin word viridis, contracted into the French, it signifies hope and youth,
it appertains to Venus among stones to be emerald.

There the also other colors borne in arms, in number three, viz. ten or
tawney sanguine and pupre very ordinary in French coats (but not in such use
though honorable bearings with us he^re in England.

Now you have done with the colors, I pray you proceed to those things that
are borne.

You mean the charge for so is that termed which is borne upon the color,
except it be a coat divided only by partition, falling in among those honorable
ordinaries whereof the accidence of armory speaks: which are in number (as
Leigh reckons the^) nine.

viz. The Cross containing the fifth part of the Escotcheon being charged the
three. The chief containing a third part. The Pale also a third part. The Bend
a fifth part. The Fesse a third part. The Escotcheon a fifth part. The Cheueron
a fifth part. The Salteir a fifth part vncharged. The Bar a fifth part.


The Cross is called in Latin Crux, a cruciando, for it was nothing else then
an Instrument of execution among the old Romans, it has been a very ancient
bearing, yea even before the birth of our Savior Christ among the Paynims
themselves. Though they knew it not but in their blazon, they made the field
gules, and called the charge four cautions, bilfets or cantonez, touching the
dignity of the Cross, and the worthiness of the bearing, I will, wanting
words to express the same, refer my self to the ancient Fathers, who have
had this sign in such estimation and reverence, That one may serve in stead of
many, I will as far as I can remember, report unto you the words of
Chrysostom in a Sermon of his: Chrysostom. in sermon. quod Christus sit De^s.
The Cross (says he) which was wont to be reputed the only sign of
disgrace, is now become the glory and boasting of us Christians, insomuch as
the most noble part of our body is signed therewith in our baptism, we use it
in our prayers, in divine service, we set it up in our houses, yea at our beds
heads, brides and bride grooms are adorned therewith, soldiers when they go
to the wars, mariners carry it on the tops of their ships, yea the bodies of
brute beasts ill affected are marked herewith, so that I cannot imagine (these
being the words of a devout and most learned father of the Greek Church, and
Archbishop of Constantinople who lived twelve hundred years since) that the
sign of the cross is so perilous a thing as most Puritanes would make it. I
should fill more sheets of paper then they would be willing to read, or my
self to write, if I should report what has been said by Saint Augustine,
Athanasius, Saint Hierome, and others in defense of lawfulness of the same.
But I remember that I am writing of Heraldrie, not of those things that
concern controversies in divinity.


Cosm. Be there no more crosses then one borne in arms?


Eud. Yes sir.


Cosm. I pray you only name them. I will learn them out hereafter of my self
out of the Accidence of Armory; The honor of arms or some where else.


Eud. The most ordinary are these.

A cross Patee. Potenc^e. Cro^see. Fleuronce. Composee. Vair co^tre vaire.
Nelle or Nylle. Bourdonnce. de 4. hermines. B^santie. Florencee. Frettee.
Lozangce. Pommee. Fitchee and some few others which I remember not.



Cosm. I pray you proceed to the chief, and why it is so called.


Eud. The chief is so called of the French word Chief, and that from the
Greek (...), which is the head or upper part, this possesses the upper third
part of the Schocheon, and is divided by one line in this manner.


Cosm. I understand this very well, proceed, I pray to the pale.


Of the Pale.
Eud. The Pale is the third middle part of the Scocheon, being divided from the
chief to the base, or nether part of the Scotcheon with two lines as thus: Is
called from the Latin palus, which is a Pale or piece of wood, wherewith we
fence about Gardens, Parks, Fields and such like. This in ancient time was
called a tierce, and you should then have blazed it thus, he bears a fierce
Sables between two fierces, or which will seem strange to some of our Heralds.


Of the Bend.
The French Heralds call this Band, it resembles a kind of Baudricke or
girdle, which knights wore in times past over the right shoulder, and under the
left, whereat their swords hung. Some unknown Godfather long since has named
it in Latin Bend^, it has a fifth part of the Escotcheon, beginning from the
dexter part, or the right corner of the l^ft, the Species or kinds it
contains, are bendlets which are, if there be many, a Cotize, which is the
third part of the bend, and a b^ston, which is like, and the same with a
Cotize, save that it must not touch the Scotcheon at both the ends, this is
reserved for a difference of kindred or alliance among Princes, as it is to be
seen in the house of Burbon in France.

Cosm. I have heard say that a bend sinister is the mark of a bastard, it has
been taken so, but I hope you will not make that proposition, conuertibilis:
For I have known it borne by some lawfully borne, whose ancestors before them
were legitimate.


Eud. Here is a bend sinister.


Cosm. If it had been brought then from the other side, it had been dexter and
right.


Eud. Very true.


Cosm. Proceed I pray to the fesse.


Of the F^sse.
Eud. The fesse is so called of the Latin word fascia a band or girdle,
possessing the third part of the Scotcheon over the middle, as thus, If there
be above one, you must call them bars, if the field with there be odd
pieces, as seven or nine^ then you must name the field, and say so many ba^^es,
if even, as six, eight, or ten, you must say barwise or barry of six, eight,
or ten, as the King of Hungary bears Arg. and gules barry of eight: mark this
coat, how would you blaze it?


Cosm. To tell you true, I know not.


Eud. I will tell you: he bears barry, counterbarrie of eight, Or and gules. You
see here an even number of pieces.


Cosm. I pray you proceed, I shall carry this in mind, and think of those
odd and even pieces.

The next is a Ch^ueron called in Latin Tignum, or the ra^ter of an house.
Howbeit it be a very honorable bearing, yet it is never see^e in the coat of a
King or Prince, because it pertains to a Mechanical prof^ssion: none of
which kind may touch the coat of a Prince. For nothing may touch the coat of a
Prince save a border a sable or a baston. If there be many, you must call them
by the diminutiue cheueronelles. Here is a cheueron.


Of the Salteir.
A Salteir is made in the form of a Saint Andr^ws cross, and by some is taken
to be an engine to take wild beasts with all: In French it is called un
sautoir, it is an honorable bearing, it is borne in England by that most
honorable family of the Neuels: amongst whom I must never forget my duty
toward that noble and worthy-minded Gentleman, Master Doctor Neuell our master
of Trinity College in Cambridge, who has ever retained and showed in all his
life those, Igniculos vertutis au^tae^ as a Poet speaks, and Homer auerreth
to be a thing incident to those that are descended of generous and noble
houses. The S^ltier is drawn in this manner.

But one thing I must remember to tell you of these nine honorable bearings^
Four are never borne, but single, and by themselves, viz. the Cross, Chief
and Salteir; the rest are borne in many pieces, as the Bend, F^sse, Bar,
Cheueron, and Gyron.

Of the Gyron or Guy^on.
The Gyron is a point of triangular form, whose basis on every side of the
Escotcheon and point or comes in vmbelico or the midst, they are commonly borne
in the number of the eight pieces, as in the ancient coat of Bassing^orne,
which by chance I found in a window at the Vicaredge in Fulham.

O^ the partit^ons.
There is a division or partition by all these aforesaid places, which is
drawn in the Sco^cheon with only one line, as for example, party per bend is
when the field is divided into two colors by a single line drawn as the bend
from the point, Dexter to the sinister in base, so likewi^e is the partition
per pale, per Cheueron, Saltier and the rest.

Cosm. The single line is sometime indented enuecky wauey embatteled etc.

I pray you now acquaint with the furs, which are given in Arms, I have
heard great discourse of the same, but understood not well what they mean.


Eud. I will tell you what they are, and how many, there be in number nine,
whereof there be five kinds of Ermines, the sixth is the Escotcheon plain
white, the other three vaires or of varry, the first ordinary and natural
being compounded of Argent and Azure, which is the coat of Beauchamp of Hach
in the county of Somerset, and now quartered by the Right Honorable, the Earl
of Hartford, the other two compounded of other colors, it is drawn in this
manner.


Cosm. I pray you what is Ermines.


Eud. It is the furre of a little beast about the bigness of a Weasell, called
in Latin Mus Armenius^ for they are found in Armenia it is not Mus Ponticus,
as some have written, who though it be all white, and somewhat like it, the
furre is nothing so white and fine, neither has it that spot at the tip or end
of the tail, which is that which we do call Ermines, many of them being set
together, it is held of all furs in nature the most precious, because they
write, that when this beast is hunted, rather then he will run over a puddle,
or any dirtie place, where his skin may be enda^gered to be spotted with mire,
he will stay there, and be torn in pieces with the dogs: which gave me an
occasion of an Emblem (what time I turned his Majesty's ASILIKON DOPON^ into
Emble^e^ and Latin verses, presenting the same after to Prince Henry. The
word was cui candor morte redemptus, the v^rses. Quod maculae impatiens
flammasque agitere per vndas,
Candidulae i^sano pellis amore, fera,
Hoc Tyrio Heroas superaris murice tinc^os,
Vos, quibus aut men's est laesaue fama, fides.


None may wear this furre but Princes, and there is a certain number of
ranks allowed to Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, which they must not exceed in
lining their caps therewith, in the time of Charles the Great, and long since
the whole furs in the t^iles dependant, but now that fashion is left, and the
spots only worn without the tails.

There be now certain compositions or mixtures of the field, wherewith I would
have you acquainted ere we proceed further, which are called Checky, M^sculy,
Fusile, Nebule, Lozengee.

Checky is called of the French Eschiquette, resembling the chesse board, in
Latin it may be called Scacc^atum of Scaccia, the play at chesse, the squares
thereof in a coat must not amount above the number of five and twenty, or
six and twenty, as also Lozenges and Fusils.

Masculy is termed so from the dutch word Masch^n, it is nothing else, but the
resemblance of the mashes of a net, they are borne commonly pierced.

Fusilee is like unto Masculi, but your fusile must be made long, and small in
the middle, they are seen in the ancient coat of Mountague, who bears arg.
three fusils in fesse gules. A fusill is so called of fusus, a spindle, whose
form it resembles.

Nebulee is so called from nebula a cloud, and that from (...), the same,
because it resembles the clouds. It is borne in the ancient coat of Blondus
or Blouut.

Lozengee, so called of Lozenges certain cordials made by the Apothecaries,
and given in Physic. They are like unto the Mascles, but somewhat brother they
are given round in the coat of the family de Medices, Dukes of Florence. If
there be above the number as I said of five and twenty or six and twenty,
you must say Semi-lozengie. Remember to make your Lozenges more high then
broad, they are given for the most part in bend or in fesse, says Bara the
French Herald.

There be certain rondles given in arms, which have their names according to
their several colors. If they be Or, they are beasantes; if silver, plates; if
Gules, Tortoixes; if Sables, Pellets, if Azure, Ogoesses; if green, Emeralds,
if purpure, Pommes, if Ten, Oranges; if sanguine, Gules. There is seldom
borne above nine in an Eschotcheon that must be numbered, if there be above, you
must call them semie or besantie.


Cosm. I have seen sometimes staples of doors, nails, and the like borne.
How can they be honorable to the bearer?


Eud. Yes very honorable and ancient.

As the Cross Moline (given by the worshipful family of Molineux) Mil
peckes, and most yrons appertaining to the mill, nails, keys, locks,
buckles, cabassets or morians, helmets, and the like.


Cosm. What is that you call a labell or lambeaux?


Eud. It is a kind of fillet (some have taken labels for candels or lights) it
is the difference of the elder brother, the father being alive, it is drawn of
two, three, four, and five pendants, not commonly above. You may in Master
Guillims book an ong the difference of brothers read more of this subject.

A Canton possesses for the most part the dexter point of the Scotcheon. It is
called a Canton from the Greek word (...), which is a corner properly of the
eye, and hence came the Cantons of the Suitzers. It is the reward of a Prince
given to an Earl.

A border in French called un bordure, in Latin, ^^mbria, has his place
within the Escotcheon round about the same, it must contain the sixth part of
the Scotcheon.

An Orle is much like a border save that it stands quite within the
Scotcheon, the field being seen on either side.

A Fillet the fourth of an Orle.


Cosm. I pray you be there not trees and herbs, sometimes given for good
Armorie?


Eud. Why not?


What Herbs are most commonly borne in Arms.
Of herbs you shall find commonly borne the Cinquefoile but most often pierced
the field, the Treyfoile, Mallows, Rue, Sparage, Fennel, the white Ellebore,
Pie de Lion, with many others.

What Trees are given usually in arms.
Of trees you shall have the Palm, the Olive, Sicamore, Apple and Pear tree,
the Pine, Ash, the white thorn, Pomgranate, Orange, Quince, Nut-tree, the Oak
with some others.

You have Times roots, as the Mandragoras, Burgony, L^vesse, and such like.

What Flowers.
Of Flowers you have Roses, Gilliflowers, Violets, Nenuphar, Lilly, Saffran,
Columbine, Borage, Line, Buglosse, Alleluia with others.

What Serpents and creeping things.
Of Serpents you have the Crocodile, who has his name (...) from the fear he
has of Saffron which he cannot endure, wherefore nere Nilus, they plant it much
in their garde^s, and nere their Bees, which the Crocodile continually lies in
wait for. For he loves honey above measure. Otho Duke of Millane in the year
1099. took from a Sarazen his arms: which was a Serpent, a child issuing out
of the mouth of the same, which to this day is yet the arms of Millane.

The Scorpion, the L^zard, yea the old Arms of France were the three Toades or
Crapauds, Crabs, Creuisses, Frogs, Snailes, and such like.

I have seen in an ancient coat three Grasshoppers, but the owner I could
never learn.

The Grasshopper is called in Latin Cicada, (...) from singing, with a little
skin upon his side, against the which he rubs the thick part of his leg, and
so makes that noise, wherewith he so disturbs the sleepy hay-makers. When I
found this Etymology first, I would needs make trial: which I found very
true; so significant, and witty were the Grecians at first, inuenting names to
all things from their nature.

Of fishes you shall find in Arms the VVhale, the Dolphin, the Salmon, the
Trout, Barbel, Turbot, Herring, Roach, Remora Escallop shells.

Cosm. What means the bearing of Escallop shells?


Eud. It betokens unity and friendly love, for as they close so nearly they
can hardly be separated, so should friends and true lovers: whereupon it is
wor^e in the colors of the knights of the order of Saint Michael.

You must be very heedful in the blazoning of fishes, by reason of the variety
of their natures.


Of those birds that are born in Arms.
Of all bearings among these winged creatures, the Griffon is the most ancient,
and yet to this day in Pomerania, of great esteem. But since the AEgle has
got the sovereignty, and is held for a far more honorable bearing, it being
the arms of the Empire and of many other kingdoms.

Cosm. I pray what is the reason the Emperor gives in his Arms an Eagle with
two necks, which is against nature.


Eud. So is a Lion with two tails: yet they have their reason. The cause why
it is given by the Emperor was this. The kingdom of Romania being united
unto the Empire gave an Eagle Sables displaid, and the Emperor giving the same
likewise, united them into one, giving that two necks as you see.


Cosm. This is very pretty and more then I knew before, but is the Eagle of
such antiquity among the Romans?


Eud. Yes before the time of Julius Caesar; do you not remember since you were
a scholar that verse of Lucane writing of the civil wars between Caesar
and Pompey, Signa pares aquilas et pila minantia pilis.


The Pelican is more commonly borne with us here in England then in other
countries. Other birds that are usually borne are the Swan, the Raven, the
Cormorant, Heron, Faulcon, Cock, Pigeon, Lapwing, Swallows, Martle^s, Cornish
choughes, Spar-hauke, Larkes with some others. The Spar-hauke Crowned was the
Arms of Attilas King of the Hunnes, and five Larkes were found depainted in an
old Trojan shield. You must note then that seldom or never the female o^ any
thing is given in Arms.


Cosm. I remember I think a rule for it in mine Accidence, not of Armory but of
Lillies english rules, where note that the Masculine gender is more worthy then
the Feminine etc.


Eud. Indeed it is the reason because the Masculine gender is the worthiest.
One rule is worthy the obse^uation, that fishes birds and diverse beasts have
been given to bearers for the names sake, to preserve it either really or by
accident: really or immediately as Heron gives the Heron, Fox the ^oxe heads,
which was the coat of Bishop Fox, Bullock of Barkshire the bullocks head,
Herring, and Her^ingham a coat quartered by the Ea^les of Bed^ord, the three
herrings, Roch the Roches, Troutbeck the three Trouts braced, quartered by the
right Worshipful and that worthy Gentleman so well deserving and beloved of
his Country Sir Ralphe Conn^ngsb^^ Knight o^ Northmims in the county of
Hertford, Lucie tres lucios pisces or three pikes, quartered by the Earls of
Northumberland, and the coat of that noble Gentleman Sir Thomas Lucey of
Warwickshire knight, B^rrisford the Bear with infinite the like some have
their names accidentally from the property of the bird or beast, or by an
Onomatopoea, or allusion of the voice to the name, as Terwhit gives the three
Lapwings who in a manner express the very same (neither is it any
disparagement to the bearer, since there be of these very Honorable and
ancient:) and Chanteur a French Gentleman very well d^scended who gave the
three Nightingales.

Excellent have been the conceit of some Citizens, who wanting Arms, have
coined themselves certain devises as near as may be alluding to their names,
which we call Rebus. Master Judge the printer, (as you may see in many of his
books) took to express his name, a Nightingale sitting in a bush with a
scrole in her mouth, wherein was written Judge Judge Judge.

Master Bishop caused to be painted in his glass windows the picture of a
Bishop in his Rochet, his square cappe on his head, by which was written his
Christen name George.

One Foxe-craft caused to be painted in his Hall and Parlour a Fox,
counterfeiting himself dead upon the Ice, among a company of ducks and
Goslings.

Every scholar can show you in the first page of his Grammar Harrisons name,
expressed by a Hare sitting in a shea^e of Rye, and upon that the Sun: al
which made Harrison.

One Master Gutteridge drew for himself a Giant standing in a gutter, and
looking over the ridge of a house, which could not choose but make Gutteridge.

There was not long since a Grocer in London his name I have quite forgot, but
I am sure for an allusion thereto he gave for his Rebus a Sugar lofe standing
upon a flat steeple, and I think it was Paul's.

A Church warden who shall be nameles, of Saint Martins in the fields, I
remember when I was in that parish, to express Saint Martins in the fields
caused to be engraven a Martin (a bird like a swallow) sitting upon a Molehill
between two trees, which was Saint Martins in the fields. It is there yet to
be seen, upon the Communion Cup:

These and a thousand the like, if you be a diligent obseruer you shall ^i^de
both in City and Country, especially in Town halls, Churchwalls, and
VVindowes, old Monasteries and such places, which many a time and often I have
enquired after as the best receipt against Melancholy, wher^to I am much
addicted.


Cosm. I think it the best Physic you could take, for even these conceits
and passages of mi^th have their times and seasons as well as the most grave
discourses. I remember the Poet Martial spe^king to his book of Epigrams
says, there is a time, Cum te vel rigidi legant Ca^ones.

But leaving these Parerga I pray you proceed unto those beasts that are given
in Arms, and as near as you can, teach me what I ought to observe in their
blazon.


Eud. The beasts that are borne in Arms are very many, whereof the Lion is
esteemed the most nob^e, and worthiest bearing^ next the Unicorn, the ^art,
the Horse, the Bear, the Bull, the Wolf, the Greyhound, the Antelop, the
Porcespine, the Hare the Coney, the Squirrel with many others which I cannot
upon the sudden remember:


Cosm. What must I observe in the blazon of beasts, because I take it they are
somewhat harder then birds to be described?


Eud. So they are: You shall first begin with the Lion, who is borne these
ways, Rampant, Passant, Saliant, Seisant or couchant.

Rampant is said when the Lion is arreared up in the Scotcheon as it were ready
to combat with his enemy being drawn in this manner: his right forefoot must
directly stand against the dexter point of the Escotcheon, Saliant down Lower.

Saliant is when the Lion is sporting himself and taking his pleasure.

Passant is drawn as if he were going.

Seisant is sitting.

Couchant couching or lying down close with his head between his legs like
a dog.

A Lion is given sometimes but ha^fe, then you must call it a demi-Lion.
Sometime but his head only, which is neu^r born but side-waies, and with one
eye, the Leopards heads always with the full face, as in the Arms of
Cantelupe with both the eyes.

The Elephant is seldom borne, yet says ^ierom de Bara, a Trojan Captain
gave an Elephants Trunk in his shield.


Cosm. I never heard of any that gave the Ape.


Eud. Yes the Ape has been a very ancient bearing and so has the wild cat,
which being That is leaping at his prey.
Herisonne was the ancient Arms of the Kings of Burgundy.

Bucks, Goats and the like are said to be tripping or saliant, that is, going
or leaping. You shall say rampant and saliant but of those which are Bestes du
proy, and those of the bigger sort.

The heads of birds for the most part are giu^n erazed, that is, plucked off;
of beasts, Coup^e or erased, that is cut or plucked off. You shall know them one
from the other because the head that is Coupe is even underneath; erazed has
three tuftes of feathers, or hair hanging down. The tong^e and nails of a
beast are always different from the color of the beast as if the beast be of
a color, they are of a metal, if the beast be of a metal, they are of a
color: so likewise in birds, you must say of a beast armed and langued, of a
bird membred.

Thus you see I give you a taste of every thing. For further knowledge I refer
you to those learned books that have lately been written of Armory, neither
do I wish you as Aulus Gellius said, ingurgitare in i^ta scientia sed tantum
delibare, to know something rather then nothing.


Cosm. It was my desire only to learn but the first grounds, and as I ever had
a desire to have an insight in all a^tes and sciences, so more especially in
this because nothing more beseemes a Gentleman then the knowledge of Arms.


Eud. You say well, I hope you are not unmindful of that old proverb Chi tutti
abbracci^, and it has my fault to entertain too many such guests at once of
which I cannot so soon be rid off^ For. Turpius eticitur quam non admittitur
hospes.



Cosm. I pray resolve me of one thing of which I have long doubted.


Eud. What Is that?


Cosm. Are the same laws and rules observed in Arms among other nations, with
those which we have here in England?


Eud. Yes doubtless, and more strictly: only they d^ffer in ^ome small
particulars; as some use stains as much as colors, some charge their
Scotcheons after a strange manner with diaper as the french: some use round
Scotcheons as the Italian, and such like: otherwise it is all one, as you may see
by the Arms of every kingdom.


Cosm. I pray let me request one thing more since you speak of kingdomes^ that
is, to acquaint me if your leisure ser^e, with the Arms of every kingdom in
Christendom: which I think are about ^^ue and twenty.


Eud. Yes if you count those kingdoms in Spain as Leon, Aragon, Castile, and
the rest, I will; but to no end: you are so young a scholar in Heraldry you
will ^ca^ce understand me.


Cosm. So I think: but these being most eminent coats, I shall ma^ke and
remember them the better, but now I remember me, I have a pair of tables.


Eud. The first is the Arms of the Emperor of G^rmanie, which has upon it a
crown imperial (the difference of Crowns I will tell you anon) the Emperor
bear^th Or, an Eagle displaied with two necks membred Gules.

The King of the Romans bare Or, an Eagle displaied Sables.

The king of Hungary bears barry of eight, Argent and Gules.

The king of Polonia bears Gules, an Eagle displaied, membred and crowned Or.

The King of Bohemia ^eares Gules, a Lion double Queue^ Arms langued and
crown^d Or.

Arragon bears Or, 4. pales ^ules.

Sclauonia bears Sables a Cardinals hat Argent, stringed and tasselled Or.

Sueuia bears Azure three Crowns Or.

Dalmatia bears Azure three kings heads proper crowned Or.

Morauia bears Azure an Eagle eschecky, Or and Gules, membred of the same.

Castile bears Gules, a Castle triple towred Or.

France bears Azure three flower delices, Or.

England bears Gules three Lions Pass^nt, Gardant, Armed and langued Azure.

Navarre bears Gules, an Escarboucle Accolled and pometted Or.

Scotland bears Or, a Lion enclosed with a double tressure fleurty and
counter fleurty Gules.

Sicilie bears party per Salteir, the point and chief, Arragon the other two
Argent, in each, an Eagle displaied Sable, membred Gules.

Denmark bears Or Semie de cuers or hearts, Gules three Lions passant armed
and langued of the second (or as some will have it nine Hearts.)

Portugal bears Argent 5. Escotcheons Azure: charged with five plates in
salteir (in remembrance of five deadly wounds a certain King of Portugal
received in the field whereof he was cured, or of the five wounds of Christ
which they say appeared unto him) in a border Gules seven towers Or.

Legion or Leon bears Argent a Lion Rampant Sable crowned Or, armed and
langued Gules.

Ireland bears Azure, an harp Or, (though the a^ncient coat of Ireland bare
the field Sables a king sitting crosseleggd in his throne in his right hand a
Scepter Or.)

Toledo bears Gules a crown imperial Or^

Naples bears Azure semie flower delices or a lambeaux of four Argent.

Galizia bears Azure semi crosses fitche es Argent, a covered cup Or.

Granado bears Argent a Pomgranat with the stalk and leafes proper.

Norway bears Gules, a Lion Rampant Argent: crowned Or, holding a battle Axe
of the second.

I have thus briefly given you the blazon of the coats of all the kingdoms in
Christendom. Now because we will not Altum Sapere, I will oppose you in the
blazon of some few coats to try your cunning, and to see what you have
profited by your master: here is a coat, what say you to this?


Cos. I should blaze it thus. He bears Azure a star Or between 3. crescents
Argent.


Eud. Very well, you must take heed^ that you take not a star for a mullet
and the contrary, for a mullet is the rowell of a spur, and has never but
five points; a star has six and some times 8. beside, the mullet is often
pierced of the field and the mullet never.


Cosm. Whose coat I pray you is this?


Eu. It did belong to the Abbot of Tame, whose name was Thorpe, and now borne
of Master John Thorpe of the parish of Saint Martins in the field, my especial
friend, and excellent Geometrician and Surueiour, whom the rather I remember,
because he is not only learned and ingenuous himself, but a furtherer and
fauorer of all excellency whatsoever, of whom our age finds too few.

Nor must I here be unmindful since now I speak of that great and honorable
parish (having as many, and as substan^iall parishione^s in the same as any
else beside in England) of the friendship that I have ever found at the hands
of three especially in that parish, to whom above all the rest I have been
most beholden, as well in regard of my self in particular, as that they are
lovers of learning, and all virtue, viz. Master Christopher Collard (whose
son my Scholar is now of Magdalen College in Oxford) Master Simon Green
Purueyor of his Majesty's stable: And lastly the aforenamed Master John Thorpe
his son, to whom I can in words never be sufficiently thankful.


Cosm. Herein you do well. There is no vice more hateful to God and Man, then
ingratitude: whereupon it is well said of one. -- Gratis seruire libertas.



Eud. Well I must now think my pains not ill bestowed, for, est aliquid
prodire tenus^ si non datur vltra. I am invited to dinner here over the way,
and I think it almost twelve a clock: wherefore I am constrained abruptly to
break off this discourse which willingly I would have continued, but Time is
moderator betwix^ us, and we can go no further then he permits. If it shall
please you to take the pains to walk with me: I know you shall be heartily
welcome, and the rather, because you are a Scholar.


Cosm. Sir a thousand thanks: I cannot, I have some business with a Dutch
Merchant, who has stayed all this fore noone of purpose for me at home, I am
to receive money of him by a bill of Exchange, and I dare not deceive his
expectation.


Eud. Marry Sir, I pray you take the benefit of so good an opportunity: Adieu
good Sir.


FINIS.
The Author to the Reader.
LEt me entreat thee (Iudi^ious Reader) to amend either in thy reading, or
with thy Pen the faults ensuing, which by reason of my often absence (having
ha^ extraordinary business) have escaped the Press, they are these that
follow.

In my Latin verses at the beginning: for regni quis l^mes Edeni, read, ^egui
qu^s limes Ed^n^. Page ^. ^or A^olia, r. A^oliab. p. 7. for Sandscape, r.
Landscape. p 47. for. ^iue lines, r. fiu^: lines. p 50. for Dutch peers, r.
Dutch pieces. p. 56 for Birds of Prag. Birds of pray. p 62. lin. ^. for
^mission, r. intromission. p. 89. for chermeb, r. chermes. p. 125. r. (...). p.
126. for, those Epistles Homer, r. those Epi^hites of Homer. p. 129. for
Illiadoes, r. Illiados. p. 130. for the red, r. the rod. p. 131. for
Zephorus, r. Zepbyrus. p. 133^ for illumi^^a S^era in those verses of Ariosto,
r. illumino la S^era Ibid. for vel animal, r. n^l animal. p 140. r. through the
fairest st^ee^e in Rome. p. 146. for Tapasian, r. Topazion. p. 151. r. to the
Emerald. p 156. for sable, r. labell. p. 157. for Neuell, r. Neuil. If Reader
thou meetest any where else with the like, let me entreat thee to correct them.

Vale, hijs f^uere, meliora expecta.

