THE IMAGE OF BOTH CHVRCHES, HIERVSALEM AND BABEL, UNITY AND CONFVSION.
OBEDIENC AND SEDITION.

By, P. D. M.

PRINTED AT TORNAY, By ADRIAN QVINQVE'. M. DC. XXIII.

WITH LICENSE.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES PRINCE OF WALES, DVKE OF CORNVVALE,
EARL OF CHESTER, etc.
SIRE,

It haith ever bean the custom of England, at the Marriage of the Prince, to
present unto him a contribution, beneuolenc, and a free will offering, as a
token of there joy. And therefore I have presumed, among the rest, to offer to
your Highness the poor oblation of Virgils Shepehard, mitia poma, Castaneas
nuces; ov^t of my devvtie, service, and loyalty to you. and the rather,
because this first Scene: of your actions abroad in the world, upon the high
stage of glory (your journey into Spain, and your marriage in a family vnde
nescit aliquid mediocre nasci: haith affoorded hear, many occasions of
discou^se to every man in his humor, (for it is proper to the multitud to talk
de ente and non ente, and to be curious to know any thing but that they
should know.) And bycaus also at your return, you may peraduentur find many
that like vvatermen, vvil look forvvard and row backwards: apter to censure
that which is best done, then able to apprehend the reasons why it is done.
Therefore to flopp the mouth of Polipragmus, and dravv this stood of discourses
into the right chanel, that neither the course, nor the cavvse may be mistaken:
and that men may learn rather to obey, then dispute of Arcana Imperij: I have
bean hold to touch voon some points and reasons for the match, (quod faelix
faustumque sit.) Astorm of tongues, can not shake virtue, nor cancel the
records of fame: and vnpartiallie suum cui que pretium posteritas rependet.
Great persons ar like the planets, the more glory they have, the less rest
they have: clovvdes ofe overshad ovv them, but the beams of virtue breakovvt at
last. And bycaus that building is perpetual, vvhear God lays the foundation:
your H. can not do a more heroical act, then to be a Mecaenas to religion,
(if not to give it privilege, yet to get it liberty:) and solicit Cyrus, that
Israel may return, and build up there temple. So shall they be obliged to pray
for the life of Cyrus and to write your H. name, upon there alters and Church
doors, that Deus nobis haec otia fecit.

Your H. most humbl beads man.

GRATAE POSTERITATI.
GENTL reader, I present unto the in lieu of a preface, a most ingenious
invention (borrowed from our English Lucan) full of judgment and proper to my
argument. The which (iudiciouslie conceived will serve as a fit introduction,
to illustrate this discourse: and as a fair portall to let the in with more
delight, into this great amphitheater, whear thou shall see the tragedies and
tumults of this latter age, (for the quarrel of religion) as trewlie
represented as they wear acted.

The reason of the Poem is this. The world haith bean ever (tho most of late)
possessed with three euel spirits, combined together to break the peace:
curiosity, singularity, and faction. The first is the moother of innovation,
the root from whenc springs all fancies haereses opinionum commenta. The second
nurces that issew, and as the harbinger of ambition, takes up such hearts; as
ar fittest to lodge presumption and Philautia. Ever in love with it self only,
and contempt of others: seducing men by new opinions of applause, as if it
only had bean created to guide the Carriot of the son. Faction, (wonn and
corrupted by the other,) is the champion of them both, to defend the monsters
they beget, masked under the forms of truth and reformation. Curiosity, bred
in the brain, by pestilent vapors rising from a proud stomach) makes a quere,
and quare, of all principles, and received Truth.

Singularity, apprehending the theoremes of curiosity, as a censor and
Dictator will judge and rule all, and labor to steal the hearts of men, and
persuade there sowles, that eritis sicut d^^. Faction, as flagellum Dei armeth
them both with power to afflict all there contradictors. None of them ar apt to
obey, and singularity will command, making her own judgment her idol: and yet
it is co^monlie, like a tomb of glory full of rotten bones, or like a fair
eye to show, and yet purblynd at hand. But faction ever pretends zeal of
spirit, which if it become conqueror shows no mercy: if subdewed, no patienc:
how ever mutinous, and a boutefew. These ar the three furies, that torment the
world at this instant: that Triceps ^erberus that set open Helgates, to fill
the world with impostors, seducers and calumniation. if you ask me quorsum
haec? read this discourse, and thereby you shall learn how to apply them. Cave
and vale.

EX L. VI. OF THE CIVIL wars betwean Lancaster and york, by S. Daniel.
FEarce Nemesis, moother of fate and chainge,
Svvordbearer of the eternal prouidenc etc.
Turns her stearn look at last into the west.
At greaued to see on earth such happy rest.
And for Pandora calls pres^ntlie
Pandora loves fair gift, that first deceived
Poor Epimetheus in his imbecillitie
That thought he had a vvondrous boon received
By means vvheareof Curious mortality
Was of all former quiet, quite bereaved:
To whom being come, Decked with all qualities,
The vvrathefull gods, breaks ovvt, in this wise.
Do thou not see in what secure estate The oration of Nemesis.

Those floorishing fair vvestern parts remains
As if they had made covenant with fate
To be exempted, free from others pain.
At one with there desires, friends with debate,
In peace with Pride, content with there own gain.
There bovvnds contain there mynds, there mynds applied,
To have there bovvnds with plenty beautified.
Devotion (moother of obedienc)
Bears such a hand on there credulity:
That it abates the spirit of eminency,
And busies them with humble piety.
For see what works, what infinite expens
What monument of zeal they edify.
As if they would, so that no stop vvearfovvnd
Fill all with temples; maik all, holy grovvnd.
But we must cool this all beleauing zeal
That haith enjoyed so fair a turn so long, etc.
Dislike of this first by degrees shall steal,
As upon sovvles of men persuaded vvrong.
And that the sacred power, which thus haith wrought,
Shall give her self the svvord to cut her throat.
Go therefore thou with all thy stirring train,
Of Swelling sciences (the gifts of greafe)
Go loose the links of that soul binding chain
In large this vninquisitiue beleafe
Call up men spirits, that simplenes retain
Enter there hearts, and knowledge maik the theafe,
To open all the doors, to let in light,
That all may all things see, but what is right.
Opinion ar me, against opinion (grown:)
Maik new born contradiction still arise,
As if Thebes fovvnder Cadmus tongues had sown
In stead of teathe for greater mutinies:
Bring new defended faith against faith known
VVearie the soul with contrarieties
Till all religion become retrograde,
And that fair tire the mask of sin be maid.
And better to effect a speadie end,
Let there be fovvnd, two fatal instruments
The one to publish, the other to defend
Impious contention, and provvd discontents. Printing.

Maik that instamped characters may send
Abroad to thovvsands, thousand men's intents,
And in a moment, may dispatch much more
Then could a world of pens perform before.
VVereby all quarrels, titles, secrecies,
May unto all be presently maid known,
Factions prepared, parties allured to rise,
Sedition under sayr pretenses sovvne:
Whereby the vvlgar may become so wise
That with a self presumption ouergrovvn
They may of deapest mysteries debate,
Control there betters, censure acts of state.
And then when this dispersed mischeaf shall
Have brought confusion in each mystery,
Called vt contempt of st^tes in general,
And ripend the humor of impiety:
Then take the other engine vvhervvith all Co^nes.

They may torment there self wrought misery,
And scourge each other in so strainge a wise
As time or tyrants never could devise, etc.
BABEL, OR, MONARCHOMACHIA PROTESTANTIVM.
NOT many years since, Reasons for the match with Spayn.
upon the divulging of a letter written by master Aldred, against the match
with Spain: and of that scandalous libel against the ambassador Count Godomer;
as also by the instigation of some whote-spoors in therpulpits, (men often of
more feruor, then judgment:) The people of London, was much incensed to snarle
and murmur, even at the verrie name of Spain: and every artificer presumed,
as an Aristarchus, to censure the king for that negotiation, as for an error of
state, vvch vvear like to cast the whole: body of the kingdom into a
distemper. As if the kings Zeal to the realm and to his issevv, had bean
unnaturally frozen, and his judgment had failed him, and that those great
planets of the counsel, had also lost there light and erred in there course.
Whearupon I was urged, by diverse of my good friends, to write the Apology of
that actio^, and proceading: because sum of them had hard me, deliver, not
only a full answer to all the objections of the contrary faction, but also
diverse reasone in defenc thereof, fovvnded upon a rock and growndwork subject
to no battrie, nor undermining.

And to speak trevvlie and freely: the benefits, which the realm may reap
by that match, ar so maine and so aduantagious; as I vvish yt rather done, then
disputed on. For it setleth a firm peace betvvean, both the kingdmes; and
aliquid amplius then they apprehend, who oppugn yt: Traffic shall thereby be
establisthed and increased; the seas, by a concurrens of both the kings, may
be purged and cleared, from Turks and pirates. The kingdom shall also be again
stored and enriched, with threasour and coin, (if it be locked up infraquatuor
maria, and not still offered to that Idol of Cambaia.) The crown shall be
disingaged, from a burdensome weight of debts, and consequently the subjects
ar like to be much eased of contributions and taxes.

And is the renewing and confirmation of the treaties, with the house and
Princes of Burgondie, to be accounted, as a Cipher? or is it nothing to have so
great a Monarch, as the king of Spain, a firm allie and friend, whom England
knows, what it is to have an enemy? It is true, that England was never so
full of moonie, as it was by spoils and depredation, betwean the years 1576.
and 1590. but how dearly had that prochase been bought, if god (who had
predetermined, to dispose the crown of England, to her issew, who had suffered
death and disgrace for his glory,) had not maid the wynds, and sea fight for
England.

Virginia (a Colonie now, to be tenderly regarded) shall hearby, setle her
staples and mart, with more security: and aduanc there traffic, both by a
fafer passage, and entercours with the Islands. But above all arguments, nothing
moves me more, then that is for the honor, Safety, and commodity of Prince
Charles (the darling of England) which every true Patriot, is bownd in
co^scienc, to further and advance. But so we shall be said to leave Holland in
the briars, (an old and assured friend, and of power to assist the realm, upon
all occasions.) god grand the prince may never stand in nead, to use them: and
remeniber, how small furthernas, nay rather how great hindrance, they have
bean to the traffic of this realm: and what great losses and damage, by
there means our merchants have sustained in the Indies, Moscouie, and
Groenland. In ead not tell you, how chargeabl a neighbor, they vvear, and how
unsure a friend; ever preferring france; and for England, cum nemini obtrudi
potest, i^ur ad me. And not with standing wise men may easily discern, what
favor they may yet reap, at his majesty's hands: if they deserve not the
contrary, by inconsiderate courses.

But, what cavvse can they instlie pretend, that repyne and murmur, at the
name of Spain? They obiecte the sin, the curse, and the disparagement, to
match with a Catholic. What is the reason for that bar? because the Jews
might not be tolerated, to match with the Ammorites; nor religions persons,
with the profane. That opinion taisteth too much of Iudaisme and the Tabmud,
the bar is removed, for now vvear under the law of grace; both Jews and
gentiles; circumsision and uncircumcision, ar all united to Christ by faith and
Charity, and incorporated into his body and Church. The Jews might not
marry with of there trybes, for the promise was maid to Abraham and his sead,
which was not to be stained with vnpure blood, and a commixtion of paganism:
but now the promise is already performed, and the judicial law is abrogated.
Yea, but that shows, that god disliketh, that his Children, should be defiled
with the mixture of a superstitious people. True, but, who ar the
superstitious, and which is the true religion, is an other quaestion. Both ar
Christians, both ar baptized in that name, both lay hold on the promises,
testaments and the gospel, both say one Pater noster, and one Credo; both
reuerenc the 4. first general counsels but who is the Catholic, is filius
Christ's, of the surer side, by the moother Church. And of the elder house.
Besides, is it so strainge, to hear that a protestant should match with a
Catholic? To pass over Queen Elizabeth's treaty with Monsieur, ded not Henry
the king of Nauarr, the protector of the reformed churches in France, marry
with the french kings sister a Catholic, in regard of bonum publicum, and yet
the Elders and consistory of Geneua, ded not condemn that, nor reprove him
for that. Ded not the same king afterward, match his sister (a famous
protestant,) with the Duke of Lorraine, (one of the Champians of the Catholic
church? Ded not Jews the Prince of Conde, (the Archipiller of the french
church) apprehend with great applavvse, the overture of a marriage, with
Marie, Queen of France and Scotland, which certanlie had bean performed, if the
Admiral for his own particular, had not laid a block in his vvays. But above
all others, it is memorable, and worthy to be remembered, what a bloody
quarrel it was maid, that king Edward the sixth, (the first protestant king in
England, might not marry Queen marie of Scotland, (who was ever honored and
esteamed a Catholic), and yet the protector would have maid no scruple of
Conscienc in that. Caluinisme and Lutheranisme, ar as opposite as Antipodes;
and yet they have matched often together, and there Issews ar the records thereof.
And was it then tolerable in the reformed churches, and is it intolerable
with Spain? what then is the cawse of this great scrupulositie and fear? Is
it for the state of the kingdom, or fear of alterations? The husband is head
of the wife, and tho the Infanta vvear born in familia Imperatrice, yet there
is no soverainetie invested in her, she can maik no mutation of State, without
the censent of the state. And you have the les cavvse to distrust that, having
a president before of king Philip, who being king of England, yet neither
could nor, would attempt any alteration. And if the protestants ar sure to
hold there religion; it is inhumanitie to repyne, that she shall be suffered to
enjoy hers. No man of honor vvil offend a lady of such honor, for a quarrel
to her soul, to her faith, and her worship of god. What then is the reason,
why this match is so distaist full? Is it for the hate and odiousnes of the
name and qualities of a Spanyard? surely, ab initio non fuit sic, that is
neither an ancient quarrel, nor a natural impression in the English. For in
the time of king Edward the 3. There was a firm and fixed amity betvvean
England and Portingal, and of Lancaster there king ar descended. And for Castil,
they matched Constance the Daughter and heyr of king Peter to John of Gaunt, by
whose right, the crown appertained to him. And his daughter Catharin married
with Henry the third king of Castil: and thereby, the which remains in the
Sauoye records, resignation of that crown, was maid by John of Gannt, and so
all the controversy was ended, betwean them; and the kings of Spay^ne as
floorishing brainches of the tree and stock of Lancaster have peacablie
possessed that kidgdome. So as Prince Charles shall by this match, vvarme his
bed with his own blood.

I may add further that king Henry the seventh, married his sonn^, to king
Ferdinando his daughter, to continue the succession of amity. I, might
remember, the treaties of 1505. betvvean k. Henry the 7. and king Philip, for
the preservation and noorishment of that league and friend ship. And how much,
and how tenderly Charles the 5. embraced and esteamed yt, well appears by
the Treaty arctioris amicitiae 1543. And by the renoumed treaty of Callice,
(the greatest honor that was evver done. to the crown of England:) and by the
treaty 1507. bevvean Maximilian the Emperor, Charles king of Spain, and king
Henry the 8. by the treaties for intercourse 1515. and 1520. by the treaty of
Cambray 1529. and by that famous treaty, 1542. Thus the two kings and
kingdoms still renewed, and noorished mutuallie, and vvarmelie, a perfect
friendship, and kind correspondencie: till the schism of Henry the 8. the
divorce, disgrace, and dishonor of Queen Katharin: and the co^federation
thereupon with France, cooled the zealle of this seruent affection. So as there
was at that time no such cavvse of hatred, disfauor or unkindness; bevvean
these two kingdoms. nor any national dislike or contention: which first,
brake out end appeared in England in Queen Mary's time, principally for the
quarrel of a new religion (then fiuee yarres old.) For there was no pretenc but
only that to maik the breach, which Wyat desired. Yet this is not the true
and sole motive of the grudg: there is and impostume which can not be cured,
till it be lanched. The hatred and remembranc of 1588. Manet alta mente
repostum. It is true, Hinc illae lachrimae. But let us be indifferent, look
upon the wrongs done to them, as well as there attemps for reueng. And
impartially consider who gave the cawse, and forced them to taik arms? The
Moonie intercepted, which the king had sent to the Duke of Alua: the Assistanc
of the princ of Oreng, by Gilbert, Morgan and others (there seconds): the first
voyage of Sir Frances Drake: the invasion and sacking of S. Domingo; the
protection of Holland, by the Earl of Leicester: the infinite depredations and
letters of mart, (to the wnspeakable damage of Speyne): the Philippicae and
inuectiues in every pulpit: ballets and libels in every press against king
Philip; wear such prouocations, as flesh and blood, nay crowns and scepters
could hardly digest. I speak nothing of the Portingal vorage, of the surprise
of Cales, nor of the Island viage: and can any wise man imagine, that the king
of Spayn, was not sensible of such indignities? was it not probable, that he
would send a futie, to Kinsale to revenge that?

Yet for all, this hostility, when his majesty: came to the crown: how
friendly and quickly ded the king of Spain alter his course, and send the high
Constable of Castil, as the dove out of the Ark, to see if the flood of malice
vvear fallen, and with an Olive brainch in his hand, to seak for peace: to
maik an Amnestia, and perpetual oblivion of all unkindness past: to cover all
offenses, to bury all quarrels, and to reconcile the two crowns, and the
subjects thereofs. And surely Cursed vvil he be, who shall seak to violate
that peace; and under the coolor of religion, to banish peace and Charity (the
badges of religion.) a malicions Cayn he is, that maiks all contentions
perpetual: and searsehe can he be holden loyal, that reme^breth only the
sudes and quarrels with Scotland, and not what, and how dear wnto us it is
now, and so should be ever embraced and esteamed. Furthermore, the Crown of
England, shall hearby, be thus more, beautified and magnified. But stay. My pen
shall intrude no further, into the secret Cabbienet of counsel, wthowrt
warrant. Because I kow not, whether it be agreeable to the kings pleasure: or
whether it be sit, to be discoursed: and specially because I hold it
impossible, form to satisfy so profovvnd a Judge, vvithovvthis own
instructions, and directions. For I consider well, how unsearchable the
secrets of princes art, which lie often in abisso, and ar too deape to be
sovvnded by every shallow discourser. And I remember also, both what praying
and preaching, was used, against the match of Queen Elizabeth with Monsieur,
(in the like case, and for fear of alteration, and afterclaps): and yet some,
who ded then most impugn it, under pretenc of religion: ded in dead, least of
all other counselors regard religion. Sir Philip Sydnie, like a noble and
vvourthie courtier) labored by a short treatise, to present to her Majesty's
judgment, the vntfitnes, disproportion, and inconvenience of that match, both
to her self, and the realm: but he ded it, privately, and with discreat
circum spection. Stubs, like a professor of an unseasoned zeal) took the
question in hand? and as a punishment of his presumption, for feited his hand
for that, (being rather published, to incense and corrupt the people, then to
advise and inform the Queen). And tho some of the greatest and vvisest
consellors, ded earnestly solicit, and seake to further the match, because it
was like both to vnithe the kingdom of france to England: and was sure, that
the possession of the Netherlands, would also be offered unto the^ by the prince
of Oreng and the states, whearby England was like to be a most potent
Monarchy: yet was the whole body of the kingdom cast into much distemper,
only which bare conceapts and iealosies. Some upon partiality and faction:
some for distrust of the practices of France: some for there own or there friends,
sinister ends and ambition: as Iam persuaded, even in this case there ar men
posseded, with the same diseases and humors. And if I ded not well know, the
nature of the multitude, (a beast of many heads, and mad brains: I should
wonder, how they durst oppose the desseins of a king of that experienc, and
judgment, who haith managed this busienes, with so great warienes, caution, and
prudence, that this great Conjunction can portend no other effect, then honor,
confort, and prosperity. He is the sit to judge of his own cawse: and his
own cavvse, being the Commonwelths cawse; if any private Man, should arrogate
to him self, either more wisdom to control his proceeding; or an opinion of
more affection to the state: or more prouidenc to foresee and prevent, daingers
thereby: I see not which way he can avoyde, not to fall into the custodia of
the court of wards, till he come to him self again. But to leave this matter,
as a deliberatiue, which requires a Crassus, or Antonius; I will come to that
which, gave the occasion, of this treatise.

There met at a merchants house in London, The occasion of this ^^ea ise.
(wheare merchants, for there table, and hospitality, bear worthily the bell
above all merchants in Europe) diverse persons of excellent quality, met there,
in a garden, before dinner, T. Aldreds letter, the pamphlet aforesaid, and some
strainge rumors, and seditious practices from Amsterdam, being perused,
examined and discussed; A fine Chaplain to a great person, and one of the
merchants acquanitance, came into the company, and hearing but a litl of this
discourse (which at that time was the subject of all tabletalk) with much The
ministers or ation.
vehemency, he ded affirm this match, to be like to bread great incombrance,
and mischeafe to the kindome: both ni regard, of the increase.

1. Of Catholics in the Realm, and in respect of Spain, (which he
ignorantly called an ancient enemy.)

2. Whearupon he took occasion, to rage and rail bitterly against the church
of Room, (as the Seminary of all commotions in Europe, and the Contriuer and
plotter of all treason in England.

3. And (because he would shovv his Rhetoric in the ruff; and omit nothing,
which might exasperate the company against the Catholics: he alleged in
thunder and vehemency, the death of king Edward, (and that sillielie:) the
many conspiracies against Queen Elizabeth: and specially that horrible
project of the Gunpovvder treason, by a fevv private hotespurres, (which in
justice is rather to be buried with the offenders; then objected and imputed
to innocent men, who generally with great sorrow abhor the memory of it.)

4. Besides he urged, that princes be both disquieted, and endaingered, by the
excommunicats ans and bulls of popes, by the Catechismes, and doctrine of the
Jesuits. And that the subjects of England, ar withdrawn by them, from there
obedienc, to there prince: and ar so full of treacheries, and disloyalte, as no
nation can be paralleled with them.

5. You may think also, that he forget not, to arm him self with the
authority, of D. Murtons censure, (for which I think he ded not study much)
We may now as well expect a white Ethiopian, as a loyal subject of that
religion. He produced a book entitled. A discovery of Romish doctrine, in the
case of conspiracy and Treason. Whearin the Author plays his master prize,
against the professors of the Catholic religion, with an Hyperbole of
criminal accusations, and scandalous imputations, able to drive men into
despair of the kings grace unto them, and to bread in his majesty's Royal
heart, a diffidenc of them.

6. He urged parson vvhytes, vndiscreat untruth, and vncharitabl sentenc, that
all there religion is full of doctrine, whence procead monsters of Conspiracies
against the state, and that they teach men to murder the king, and blovv up
the parliement. And that since Bells time, there was never such a rave nous
Idol, as the preasts and seminaries.

7. He ded not omit the like allegation out of Ormerode, the picturemaker, who
upon erroneous misconceauing, condemned that singular and renoumed Doctor.
Allen, for affirming, that princes might be slain by there subjects, by the 25.
Numeri.

8. And so he concluded all, with that Rhetoritall sentenc, of monsieur Jews
baylie in his book of the practice of Piety, page 783. which he produced with
such ostentation, as if it wear able to cast all the learned society of the
fathers, into a fit, of a quartane.

Jesuits and preasts (says he) ar sent to withdraw subjects from there
allegiance, to move invasion, and to kill king^: if they be Saints, who be
Scithians? Who ar Canibals* if they be Catholics? Which conclusion, for the
art, and the wit, worthily deserves, both a praemium and a Plaudue, s^c
pueri crepundia gestant.

After this, delicate oration they went to dinner: and presently after dinner,
the minister departed in great haist. Thereupon all the company vehemently
desired one gentlman of there company, (who ded well understand the world, and
was a freeman not obliged to any religious orders, but as films Ecclesiae) to
deliver his opinion of the ministers Inuectiue. Which he was, at last
contented, at there importunity, and for the satisfaction of there Conscienc, to
vndertaike: and which with his license and information, I taik upon me, as his
Amanu^n^^s and secretary, to set down, and deliver the same to you.

After a long pavvse, quoth he; (lodius The true state of the Qu^stion.
accusat Machos, Catalma Cethegum. Is not this ridiculus? who can endure to
hear a Grace hus, complain against sedicion? I perceive by the premises, that
the protestants set this down, as a Decree against Catholics, and labor to
imprint that, in the hearts of the people, as a perpetual scandal and stayne,
That the Catholic religion and doctrine, is daingerous and prejudicial to the
safety of kingdoms, and an enemy to Sooueraintie: and so they censure it, as
neither allowable, not tolerable in a well governed monarchy. Now this being
a matter of so great importanc, as it is in dead to be esteamed (for Querelam
Eccles^ae, quilibet Catholicus facit suam:) I will endeavor therefore, to fifth
out the truth, and what is therein to be holden, for an infallible conclusion:
as well to instifie them, as to resolve my self in that point, which haith maid
many good and virtuous men, in England, to stagger much.)

And that I may not wander in my discourse, nor leave you in a laborinthe: I
will set down, the true state of the quaestion, to be argued, (as they
propownd it.

1. First, whether to be a Catholic, who professes dew reverence, to the
church of Room) and to be a true subject to his Prince and Contrie, be
incompatible or no?

2. Secondly if they be incompatible, whether that incompatibilitie, be
generally in all states, or but in some particular states, and kingdoms?
whether originallie, and ever, or but at some times only? and Whether
simpliciter as malum in se, or acciden, tally only, as malum prohibitum, upon
consideratio, of particular circumstances, and enacted by particular statutes
and laws, upon occasion.

3. And Lastly, Whether I uteranism and Caluinism, be not more incompatible
with loyalty, more opposite, and almost contradictorie, and that ab origin?
ffor the better deciding and manifestation of these high points: I will maik my
first discourse, upon the last Quaestion: and will examine, whether the factions
and tumults, which have filled all the kingdoms of Europe, with blood and
Calamity, these hundred yearres; have sprung from the opinions, practices and
procurement of the Catholics, as an inseparable property always to them: or
else rather, was this mischeafe, and the egg of this Cockatrice, laid first at
wittenbergh (for the which they worthily of late celebrated there Iubilee,)
hatched at Smalcald, and fostered and Nourished at Geneua.

And this point, I will argue, not as a divine, (for I will not arrogate so
much to my self) but historicallie, sincearlie, and legallie: as one that
desires, to defend the loyalty of religious and innocent men, rather then there
opinions, and assertions, which they can best mantaine them selfs, and which
so many ages have embraced with dew reverence: and that plainly, and with
integrity, and truth (which is ever best graced, with her own beauty, and
neads no paynting and coolers.)

In the year of our lard 1514. The whole estate of the church, enjoyed peace,
and The peace of the Church 1514
there ancient privileges: all princes with great devotion vvear nurcing
fathers and protectors thereof. No storm ded shake it, no schism ded break the
unity: there was harmony and good correspondenc, (for matters of religion and
faith) betwan the church of Room, and the princes and common welths of all
Christendom: and till that time, thorough ovvt all Europe, specially in
England from S. Augustines coming hither: this quaestion, was never maid, nor
proposed either in the schools, or courts of common law.

Anno 1515 Martin Luther, an Augustine Luther.
Friar, (a man of a turbulent spirit, learned, and yet no famous Clark,) was
the first, that broke this long and settled peace: who having interposed him
self in that fatal busienes of the Indulgences, (sent by Pope Leo the tenth
into Germany) not properly appertainning to him, but as a proctor for the
order; he begonn first to inuaigh against the injury do one to his
fraternity, His revolt.
against the abuses and covetousness of the collectors, and against there
authority which ded nominate them, and required such a levy of mooine in that
nature. This was a popular, and plausible introduction, to vvin the vulgar
sort, who can not endure the pressure of extraordinary contributions; and
always hate, the rapine of such collectors. And therefore he quiklie fownd many
fauores: but much more, when he began to exclaym against the ambition of
prelates, the riot and disorders of religious men; taxing some for tytannie,
some for avarice, some for idleness and ignoranc, and all for corruption and
abuses. Thus he stood in arms, and as a challenger for a fow yearres, only
against the defects of the clergy, and with out much dainger, for diverse good
men conceived at first, that he had only intended and sought reformation of
disorders, renouation of discipline, punishment of irregularitie, and
amendment of life. And that not with out sum cawse, tho withowt good arder.
For S. Hildegardis, had foretold, a storm to the church for there sins:
Sauonarola a Dominican had wakened Italy, with prediction of terror: friar
Thomas of Guien, prophesied, a vae, vae, a scourge, a desolation to Bourdeaux,
an inundation of misery, to France and the world.

So then after that Luther ded find, populo placere quas fecisset fabulas, (as
novelty is ever at first well entertained in the world, and that the people
applauded his actions and desseins, and that many of the best wits (specially
those, that wear bred and framed in Erasmus his school, wear inclined to second
him: and perceauing also, that some of the greatest Princ^s in German, ded
give him both hearing and harting, in his proceadings: The vain glory
thereof, raised the ambitious conceit of him self, many straynes higher then
he was in dead: all men encooraging him, who whear ticled with new fancies and
conceits, (which side always carries most voices:) for natures most affected
to leuitie and chainge, ar best pleased with innouations. Thereupon, as a man
sick in his spirits, and of a fiery disease, he begonn to rave, and defame all
church government. He abondaned his cloister, cast of his habit, and renounced
all obedienc to his superiors. For now he preaches against the His seditions
doctrine.
whole clergy, against the tyranny and superiority of the Bushop of Room
(whose authority in matters ecclesiastical, was then generally holden for
sacred): persuading the people, not to render any obedienc to them. The Pope
he termed Sathanissimum papam, messer Asino: the Prelates, he called blind
guides; the religious, Porcos, and candles set vndet a bushel: thus seaking,
non purgare abusus, sed tollere ordinem, Triticum cum Zizanio euellere
studebat. And why, ded he preach such homelies to the people? Because, so
should they (said he) still live in darkness, and in the shadow of death, with
out the light of the gospel: and be fed, and missed by ignorant guides, and
dry nurces, and still remain in Aegipt (the house of bondage) and in the
captivity of Babylon. This Prologue, maid attentive auditors, by a fair
show and promise of great matters: then he begone the Tragedy, acted with
incredible sedition and insolency. His whole study was now to demolish the
walls of the church, and abolish all ecclesiastical orders: and so (by
participation) to shake the verrie foundations of the state.

In this humor, he fed him self, with great hopes, to conquer the world with
the sword of the spirit; and to subdew the Pope (whom he was the first that
affirmed to be absolutely, Antichrist, the man of perdition, and insignis
praestigiator.

And the rather because now 1519. Maximilian the emperor was lately dead,
(whose power, and wisdom, he had great cawse, and worthily, to fear): and
Charles the fifth, was chosen to succead him (a young Prince not twenty
years of age) whom he hoped to persuade, to ruin the Papaltie, to keap his
court at Room, and maik the castl of St. Angelo subject to his commands. And
then he dreamed, that he might easily reform the church and cast it in a new
mould. Specially being assured, to have the Duke of Saxony, old John Frederic
the elector, his secret friend and patron: who for his riches, strenth, allianc,
and abilities, was far superior to any Prince in the empire.

What follovved then? observe his course, I Luthers bull against the Bushops,
and Bushopricks.
and judge vnpartiallie, vvheter it was modest and devvtifull, or seditious and
arrogant. First he ptoclaymes open vvart against the Bushops of Germany,
endeavoring to suppress there authority, abrogate there jurisdiction, and maik
them odious and contemptible to the world. Therefore in his book, contra Statum
Ecclesiae, and aduersus falso no minatum ordinem Episcoporum: among his works
printed at Iena, tom. 2. Latin. He fends ovvt his bull, against the said
Bushops in these vvores. Attendite vobis Episcorum vmbr^. Doctor Lutherus,
vislt nobis bullam, and edictum legere, non valde teneris vestris auribus
placiturum. His lecture was worth the haring. First he uses an exhortation:
Secondly, he geues direction what the godly, auditors should do: and lastly
his benediction, and the blessing which shall follovv, by obeying his covvnsell.
And this was his grave and modest counsel. Omnes, quicunque opem ferant, bona,
famam and sanguinem in hoc impendunt, honoremque suum in hoc exponentes, vt ^^.
Episcopatus Pompatici deuastentur. tam remo^^ and alieni ab omni functione
Apostolica: totumque hoc Sathanicum regimen Episcoporum extinguatur: Ili sunt
dilecti ^^lij Dei, and vere Christiani, obseruantes praecepta Dei, whosoever
will hazard there lives honor and fortune, in so Christian a work, as to root
out and destroy all Bushops and Bushopricks, Satan's ministers: and pull up by
the roots all there authority and jurisdiction: these ar worthy to be honored
and esteamed the true children of god, and such as obey his commandments. And
in libro contra Siluest. Prieratem. tom. 1 Lat. witteberg. Si fures furca,
latrones gladio* haereticos igne tollimus: Cur non magis hos magistros
perditionis, hos Cardinal^s, hos Pap^s and totam istam Romanae Sodomiae
colluniem, omnibus armis impetu^us, and eorum sangume manus nostras lauemus? So
hear he will sight against the whole ecclesiastical Hierarchy; and wash his
hand in the blood of Bushops. But says he obijci^nt periculum esse ne
excuetur, tumultus: en respondeo, an ideo negligetur verbum Dei, and peribit
populus? as if Luthers doctrine with out tumult coult not be preached. Martin
Marprelat of England, and John Marprelat of Scotland, wear not possessed with
so wicked a spirit, and tho they wear mad enong, yet they camm not to the
height of this surie. Let Brunus, Minsinger, and Gayl, judge: whether thy,
sermon and proclamation of Luthers, will bear an action of sedition and
conspiracy: and whether it wear consonant, to the peace and laws of the
empire. For hearby the people was taught and animated, to pull down the
principal pillars of the state: to overthrow the ecclesiastical regiment, the
Archbushops of Ments, Coolen, and Trier, the Primate of Magdeburgh, the
Archbushop and Princ of Saltzburgh, the great master of Prussia, Wirtzburgh,
and many others, who have voice and place in the diet, and a power full hand
in the government. Think you, that this can be avovved to be the act of a
loyal subject of the empire, or vvarrantable by any laws or example in a
civil government: that a private man should thus insolentlie attempt of him
self against all authority, for a subject against the cheafe magistrates; for
a sheap to depose the pastor; and by such means and advise, to stir up
rebellion, and insurrection against persons of that quality, and inso high
place and calling. Neither ded he ever cease, or give over practicing, til
effectually he procured the expulsion and banishment both of the jurisdiction
and name of Bushops, ovvt of Saxony, Hessia, Wirtenberg, and vvhear soever he
prevailed. which paradox I am assured the Lord Bushopes in England, will not
allow: nor patronise such seditious proceading, for there own safety, and
there Baronnies.

But hear he stayed not, he proceaded further: 2. Against the
He took upon him to deface and Canon Laws.
burn, the Canon Laws, Indulgences, and bulls of Popes, at wittenberg. If you
ask, Quo warranto? he ded that, by this own authority; his own private spirit,
was his commission. And the pretenc of the gospel was his Apology. But was
that a sufficient warrant* Though most of the Canon Laws, wear the
constitutions of Popes, (whom he now both contemned, and condemned:) yet some
wear decreed by provincial Synodes, some by general counsels, and all of
them wear ratified, both by praescription, general approbation of that
contrie, and the Imperial Laws.

And so it appears, they could not be lawfully, and orderly suppressed in
the empire, withwt the authority of the empire. But as he ded seak to abrogate
the Canon Laws; so he ded also vilefie, and abase the Civil laws of Germany,
as shall more pertinentlie appear hearafter.

Furthermore, as if it wear to bring in 3. Againsts universities.
Barbarism, and to pull out the eyes of the Almains, that they might not see
his folly, and errors: he endeauored, to abandon, deface, and ruin all
universities. Which Oxford and Cambredg will hardly beleaue, if I could not
produce his own words. Libro contra Ambrosium Catharinum, he writes thus, Vt
videatur ad Euangelium funditus extinguendum, nec astutius, nec efficacius
inuenisse Satan commentum quam erigendarum vniuersitatum. Be universities, then
an invention of the deuel? and a subtle devise, to oppress the gospel Is it
not likely? That no man might coolor and excuse this gross paradox, with
some fair pretense; as they often labor to do: read his opinion, libro de
Abroganda Missa; there he disswades the people, from sending there children to
the universities, and generally condemns them all by these words Academias,
per Idolum M^loch figura^a^ puto. Universities, resemble the Idol Moloch. By
wat reason? because says he, Existo enim fumo, prodeunt istae locustae, quae
omnes Cathedras occupant. Would he then have all universities, suppressed,
only because therein the Catholic religion, and school divinity is taught?
no in dead, for why ded he shut up the school doors, formanie years
together? why ded he neglect the teaching and education of yovvth, in his own
religion, and profession? why ded he banish Tullie and Aristotle, who medl with
no religion? why ded Carolostad go to the plough rather, then he would read a
lecture more. Nay to conclude, his fidus Achates, Philip Melancton, in his book
called Didimus says. Equidem sapient em virum, iudico fuisse vviclesum Anglum,
qui omnium primus, quod ego sciam, vidit vnmersitates, fuisse Sathanae
Synagegas. And this I wonder master Philip Would so generally affirm, and
aprooue vviclefs error, that universities arr the Synagogue of satan, being so
skillful an artist him self. But at the beginning they wear all vncertan, what
to mantain for sownd and true doctrine: and above all, Melancthon was ever an
Academick, and never long co^stante: and that you may see, by this, that libro
ad waldenses, he recanted that opinion, and revoked his error; which
Carolostade, never ded.

So as you may, perceive, that at therfirst rising, and preaching reformation,
the spirit had not in many years fully illuminated there under standing, nor
directed there judgment, with full perfection: as he ded the prophets, and the
apostles, and S. Paul. Hearby it appears, that at threblowes, Luther labored
to cut down, the three great Cedars of the empire, The Cleargic, The Canon
^avves, and the universities. For with ovvt universities, the clergy covvld
not be in structed: nor with out Laws be governed: and so being necessarily
chayned together, he could not break the link with out subuerting all for he
ded not seak a reformation of them, but a total extirpation and destruction,
as appeared by the Bushopricks.)

And this I dare affirm, that all the Hundred His behavior to Caesar and the
Princes.
Grauamina Germany, presented to the Emperor Charles, at Norembergh: ded not
contains, articles of that dainger, greauances of that loss, and such an
oppression of the state, as the se three had bean.

And yet a greater mischeafe, follows. For now I will lay down his
positions of state and declare to the world a prodigious inciuilitie, and his
arrogancy, disobedienc, and presumption, toward the Emperor, and the Princes
of Germany. Desiryng your patienc, that I may but a litl digress to maik his
spirit more plainly appear in his likeness: and how immodestlie and
irreverently he ded esteame Regiam Maiestatem, by the exampl of his usage of
king Of k. H. 8.
Henry the VIII. of England libro cont^a Regem Angliae. He calls king Henry in
his preface, An envious madd fool, full of Dastardie, and with out one vain of
princely blood in his body.

After that, he says, He is a Basilisk, to whom I den^unc damnation.

And page 335. This glorious king, lies stowtlie like a king. (Note his
morality, for which he is famous.) And again, he is a lijng Scurra, covered
with the title of a king, and a chosen vessel of the Deuel. And page 338. Thou
art no more a king, but a sacrilegious theaf. And most sloouenlie and like
himself, page 333. Ius mihi erit Maiestatem tuam stercore conspergere, etc. I
am ashamed, to procead, I will omit infinite, and these ar too many: which it
wear incredible, to have bean uttered by the Elias of Almaing, but that both
his own books ar extant, and S. Thomas Moor, (the most famous Chancellor of
England) recapitulates them, with a number more, in his lattin work against
Luther, printed at Loouain, 1566.

And these places, I have selected and cited: not only because they touched
Henry the eight, as he was a king (and at that time, one of the most mighty
and Renoumed Princes in Europe:) but because also, thereby you might discover
the modesty and Holy disposition of Doctor Martin, and how like a man he was,
to preach and persuade obedie^c to magistrates

Now note, how he ded behave him self, to the princes of the Empire: and
whether he ded give to Caesar (his sovereign lord) that which is Dew to Caesar?
It is worthy the observation, to see his religious and civil respect of an
emperor. Libro contra duo mandata Casaris, he writes. Turpe quidem est Casarem
ac Principes, manifestis agere mendacijs. It is, a shame for Caesar, and the
Princes, to lie so palpablie, and in the same book, and with the same spirit,
says he, Deus mihi dedu negotium, non cum hominibus ratione praeditis: sed
Germanicae bestiae debent me occidere. (Meaning, that the Princes, the Savages
and beasts of Germany, should murder him.) But he shows therein, yet more gall
and bitterness, Oro cunctos pios Chrisitanos, dignentur simul rogare Deum pro
eiusmods ex^aecatis Principibus, quibus nos ma no trae su^ furore corripuit, ne
vl^o pacto eos s^quamur, vel in militiam ire, vel dare aliquid contra Turcas:
quod^quid^n. Turca decies prudentior* probiorque quam sunt Principes nostri;
quid ^alibus fa^^^s, contra Turcam prospere euen^at, qui Deum tam al^etentant,
and blasphemant? Was this but a Peccadilio, Caesar, and the Princes, to be
censured with such scandalous comparisons, and reproaches? but this is not all,
in libro artic. 500. in articulo 367. Quid ergo boni, in rebus diumis, vel
decernant, vel constituant, tyranni tam impij and prophant? Before they wear
fools, now he ma^ks them tyrants: and then he goes a degree higher still.
For libro de seculari potestate, he delivers his opinion of all princes and
kings in general, and how they are to be esteamed: Sc^re debes quod ab initio
mundi, raris^ma auis est prudens princeps, ac multo rarior probus, sunt
communiter, maxim faiui, and nequis^imi nebulones in t^rra.

And there also, because his good meaning might more perspicuouslie appear, he
interprets him self planilie. Quis nes^^t, Principes esse carnem Ferinam in
Caelo? As if it wear, as great a dayntie as vennieson, to Head of y church.
see, that a prince should be saved. And in his book de belio contra Turcas.
Casarem negat esse Caput reipublicae Christiana, and defensorem fidei ac
Eu^ngelij: and oportere sane Ecclesam, habere al^um defer sorem, quam sunt
Imperatores and Reges. And mark his reason, Eos namque esse pe^imes hos es
Christianismi and fidei. the which concludes my assertion, for he mantains
doctrine, opposite to all king: and contemns government. And as if he would
Unking and depose them; he does encoorage the people, to dravv there swords,
against all crowns and scepters. Therefore lo. 1. contra Rus^icos, he sends
this greating to the princes.

Sciatis boni ^omini, Deum s^c procurare, quod subditi, nec po^su^t, nec
debent, nec volunt, ty^anniden^ vestram far diutius. Mark that debent, as a
good encooragement to the Bowers.

Who can mantaine such Paradoxes, or that they proceaded from the spirit of a
prophet of God? can any Lutheran justify these wild propositio^s, or coolor
them with tolerabl glosses? Ded ever any prophets, Apostles, or Martyes, use
such a barbarous liberty of speech, against Nero, Dioclesian, Julian, tho the
greatest persequutors? Ded Elias, rage so madlie against Achab, and Iesabel? S.
Paul gave him a better exampl, who used Festus with more reuerenc a great
deal. And with out dowbt no Christian and true zeal can be so irregular, so
rude, and so intemperately passionate. To give the lie to Caesar his Soouerain,
and the princes, was a personal, and an intolerable contempt, yet to proclayme
him and the princes, to be Savages, Babons, and Fools; Tyrants; blind
buzzards; and that the Turk was a vviser and honester man, then they; was a
more horrible, scandalous, and seditious assertion. But to give out to the
world, in print, and dogmaticallie to affirm, as it wear in skorn and hatred
of Majesty and royalty, that a wise and good prince is as rarely fownd as a
black svvann; that commonly kings and princes, be the most. Dot^ing fools, and
reprobate knaves in the world: that they are a damned crew, as if there wear
no place in heaven vouchsafed for kings: What is it, by such epithites,
disgraces, and execration, to annichilate and abase the sacred function of
kings? to taik the crown from there heads? to expose Regalitie and there
progatiues, to malice and contempt of the people; if this be not?

But it may be, he ded use more civility, and reuerenc, to his friends of the
howof Saxony. Surely for Duke Georg, of Leipswig, he calls him, the Apostl of
Satan: and skorn fully entitles him, Illustrissima mclementia vestra.

And fot his, respect, to old John Frederick his protector; it appears by the
commission, given by the Duke, to John Plaumitz (a noble man) Hierome
Schurffius (a lawyer) Philip Melancthon, and Erasmus Hawbitz; to maik a
visitation of Saxony, (then full of discorders:) for when they returned there
commission, together with the acts of there visitation, Luther in contempt of
them, T^otz (quoth he) eis visitato^ibus. An why? only for ambition. How
appears that? Nescio qua de causa, proterierit me in hoc negotio princeps. (Lo.
in sermon. Dommico, inuocauit.) And Lo. contra Ambrosium ^atharmum, says he:
Silicet mihi decretales Papae, Conciliorum decreta, Leges and Mandata
Imperatoris, omniumque principum, pro liberate Christiana, nedum contemnere,
sed and conculeare: vestras ne res gestas, praeclarae visitationis, legum vice
acceptem? What could dravv from him so vain and insolent a speech, but
ambition? He maiks small reckoning of the emperors ma^dats, or the imperial
laws afwel as the Canon, pro liberate Christiana: and for that also, he him
self must and will be judge, what to receive and ratify; neither the duke, nor
his commissioners mist prescribe rules to him.

I will alledg only one place, (locis com. class. 4. c. 30. to Spalatimus.
Non s^ram quod ais, non passurum principem, scribi in Moguntinum, nec quod
publicam pacem perturbare posset: potius te, and principem ipsum perdam, Si
enim creatorieius Papae restiti, cur cedam creaturae^ and post. Pul^hre vero,
non turbandum pacem publicam arbitraris, and turbandum pacem aeternam Dei? non
sic Spalatine, non sic. What is this, but ambition? not zeal furelie, which as
it should ever have faith for a schoolm aister, so it haith Charity for a
guide, and humility for a witness, whearof hear is verrie small proof, and
apparenc.)

And by the opinion of Spalatinus, (a famous Lutheran) and of his Lord (the
Elector of Saxony) you see, that Luther is dissuaded and conselled, from
writing against the Archbushop of Ments) an Elector Likewise; because it could
not, but disturb and break the peace of the empire: and yet is it to be noted,
how Luther reiects with contempt, both there opinions: as if the peace of God,
and the peace of the empire: the new gospel of Luther, and the old laws and
government of the empire, vvear not Compatible. Which concludeh the
Affirmative of the Quaestion, now to be proved.

For the present, I will produce out of the Cornucopia of Luther, no more of his
irreligious and turbulent Propositions, (sufficient arguments, both of his
unquiet spirit and seditious doctrine.) For it is, fitter first to examine these
exactlie; and to discern, how well the fruits thereof ded realish in the taist
of the people, and what effects and operation they wrought.

After that the vvildbore, had thus violently broken down, the pale of order
and discipline, and rooted up the vinyeard: and that the vulgar people, had
received so pleasing a new gospel, that they wear exempted from all the Canons,
and injunctions of the church, (maid to restrain disorder and licentiousnes:)
that true Christians wear freed from the captivity of Babylon, and all
co^stitutions and ceremonies, which cuthralled and snared the conscience: that
there was a more compendions way fownd to heaven, by faith only, and freedom
from merits, and the heavy burden of good work: that Room was Babylon,
Bushops wear seducers, religious men Idolatours, and the princes wear tyrants,
who protected them all:) and that God would not suffer, the poor commonaltie
longer to bear so heavy a yoke, and subjection, under such oppressors. Upon
these seditious principls, the people begonn to rise, and committ ryots: each
man was a drom to an other, each man ded strike an alarm, to root out so
corrupt a clergy, and to depose so unworthy princes. The Bowres Sue^ia.
and paisants of all parts of Germany, runn accoding to the byas of the time,
and maid a general insurrection. First in Swaben, Then in Franconia, after in
Alsatia, and in diverse imperial towns. They of Franconia, a pretended that
they took arms, to expel all nobility ovvt of Germany, to cut down the
Oaks of the church, (the Degree of Bushopes:) to abolish the old law and
establish a new religion and law. In these tumults, the heads and Tribunes of
the people, wear Thomas Muncer, and his Camerado Phifer, and Christophor
Schaplerus. Muncer, was an audacious fellow; and of a preast becomed an
apostata some report, he was scholar to Carolostad, but Melancthon in his
historic, says, that he came to Luthers lectures. This man in Alsatia, preached
against the Pope, and yet dissented from his master Luthers doctrine: because
as the Popes laws wear too austeare, so Luthers gave to much liberty. There
he first preached against the Mass, and against the baptising of children
(because it was not expresslie commanded in the scriptures:) and that Christ,
ded not taike flesh of the Virgin Marie: and that Magistrates ded loose and
forfaict all there authority, if they committed mortal sin; and lastly, that
the people might correct princes if they offend, (as appears by the Centur.
9. and 9. page 445. This Muncer, to maik his name powrefull with the people, he
bragged that his vocation was extraordinary, by the revelation and perpetual
assistance of the holy ghost: and that he had received from God, Gladium
Gedeonis, cogere vniuersum orbem, ad nouum Christi regnum instituendum: to
fight for Israel and depose Idolatrous magistrates. Upon these fantastical
suppositions, he drew the people of Fra^conia into the feald: he vvonn the town
of Winspurgh: they slew Count Lodouic of Helphe^steyn; and ded either murder,
or captiuate, all the noble men they could encounter. Besides, they sacked and
destroyed all churches, and (as Conradus VVimpin testifies) only, in that
one circle of the empire, they pilled, pulled down, and spoiled near three
hundred, monasteries, castles, and forts. And yet these reformers, pretended,
that they took arms for edification; is it not licklie? But for want of
victualis and other necessaries, (as multitud and fury, arr seldom
provident:) they vvear forced to divide there camps; and sum of them marched
to wards the Duchy of Wittenbergh, (who, by Truch^es, general of the league
of Sweuia, vvear all put to the svvord, or to flight:) but the greatest number
remained in Franconia. And because these tumults, tended so directly, to a
deuastation of allstates, and laws: therefore John (Duke of Saxony) who had
before tolerated Muncer^ preaching in Alstadt: and his uncle Duke George,
together with other princes, joined there forces together (the emperor being in
Spain): and at frankhuisen, maid a bloody execution and slaugh terof all the
Paisants in the camp: Whear Muncer and Phifer vvear taken, and executed; and
above a hundred thousand men lost there lives, in these tumults and rebellion.

Yet could not this fear full warning serve, to cool the heat, of those
zealous vvarriers; for in Alsatia, they maid a new vproare: vvhear above
twenty thousand of them vvear slain, by the count Palatine, and Anthony
Duke of ^orram. And after that, an other multitud put them selfs in arms, at
Petersheim (in the territory of worms:) who vvear likewise defeated and put
to the sword. To conclude, no part of the body of the empire, was clear from
that plague of conspiratie: for as the bowers in the contrie, so the common
people in the imperial towns, conspired together to reform religion, and to
remove such magistrates, as supported the old. At Erford, the people, degraded
and committed all there officers. At Frank-fort, with more fury, they spoiled
the churches, banished the clergy, and placed all authority and government
of the city, in twenty four commoners, (to whom they gave all command
and rule^: they created all new magistrates: maid new laws; expelled the
ancient senators and the whole clergy, (not withowt terror, and menaces) and
they selected and set down forty seven articles, out of Luthers gospel,
which they decreed should be religioustie observed and obeyed: and which they
imparted to there fraternity at Coolen, and Mentz, (wheare three whole days,
the people stood in arms together, locked up the gates, and maid them selfs
lords and masters of the cities).

And the same spirit like wise moved diverse private men, by there own meand, to
attempt reformation. So Frances Sicking, a Lutheran, out of his zeal, (yet
some give out, that he was incited by Bucer and Oecolampad, to that action)
levied diverse companies, invaded and spoiled the territories of the Bushop of
Trier; took by assalt a strong place, of the princes possessions, and marched
with his army to the verrie walls of Trier, (purposing to beseage that)
withowt any just cawse of war, or particular quarrel. Whear if he had
prevailed, the riches of that place, and some others depending of that, would
both have encooraged and enabled them to greater attempts. But he was forced
to retire; and so being apprehended, he and his accomplices vvear justly
attainted, and there lands confiscated.

And to maik up the total some of all the miseries of Germany, in full
measure* this inundation of fury, was so general, that they maid all church
goods a pray and booty, broke Down Cathedral churches, ransacked all
monasteries, and robbed and subverted both Bushops and Bushopricks, as
Magdeburgh (the seat of the Primate of the empire) Bream, Lubeck, and fourten
more (such is the fury, and deformite of sedition.) So as the Imperial chamber
at Spyres, was long afterward much disquieted, and trovvbled, with Actions,
complaynts, and petitions, for these spoils: And Charles the Emperor, himself
was maruelloustie perplexed, how to taik order for a cessation of these
disorders; how to stay the violent course and torrent of these reformers; and
how reparation and satisfaction, might be maid. And therefore he ded appoint
Commissioners long after (by his edict 1544.) to enquire of bona Ecclesiae
inuasa; for before he could not, having had his hands full, and enough to do,
to defend, him self.

All which things, arr recorded and testified by Cochlaeus, (whose writings
vvear published, before Luthers death, and yet was never hither to challenged
for any false information) by Pontanus, Surius, Hortensius, Montfort, Flor,
Raemond, Sleydan, and others. I protest and profess, I have used sincearitie,
in reporting and citing the euidenc I had from so many worthy witnesses: and
as the Romans used to say, at there making of leagues, Ita me Jupiter, si sciens
fallo.

But I fear, you ar tired, with hearing Liuius.
so much calamity at once, and in one contrie; which was wrought partly by
Lutherans, partly by such as had drawn there doctrine, out of Luthers
fountains (for how can the water be uncorrupted, when the spring was so
poisoned, and infected at the head?)

I know hear will be great exceptions Whether Luther may trevvlie be accused,
to have bean the Cavvs of all the^^ troubles.
taken against me, that I lay these tumults to Luthers charge, (as well the
insurrection of the Anabaptists, as of the rest aforesaid) who writ vehemently
to reprove there actions; and gave them neither occasion nor harting; and ever
disliked the illusions and fantasies of M^ncer and his followers: and never
was deservedly accused for any doctrine of sedition, having often preached in
the defenc of magistrates, and civil government, as Doctor bilson affirms.

Thouching these excuses, or rather fables; if you find them all sufficiently
disprooued: I leave it to yowr iugment, how to censure D. Martin, and his
Champions. First examine seriousslie, whether Luther, 1.
was a cawse of these trowbles; and you shall discern plainly, that his
positions and exhortation gave the principal grovvnd and occasion of all: that
his bull against the Clergy, his inuectiues against all Ecclesiastical
persons and orders, blew the coals that fyred all, and animated the people,
under coolor of zeal and reformation to pull down all. For what man is so
senceles, that would not be moved to contemn all authority, and seak to
enfranchise him self, and fight under the banner of liberty? when he shall
hear such a popular sermon, that princes ar tyrants, Bushops blind guides,
Religious men Idolators; and that all Christians have and ought to enjoy the
great Charter of free liberty, and are not bownd in conscienc to any man's
laws and constitutions? And if he preached such doctrine (as before you have
partly hard he ded,) then was not he the Primative and cheafe Boutefeu of all?

Cochlaeus in his Miscellanea, cites this one place of Luthers lib. 1.
Exhortat ad pacem. In seculari regimine, nil amplius facitis nisi excoriatis
subdito^, ad susimendam pompam vestram, donec diutius far non possunt. And
afterward. non sunt (...) boni Domini, quisese vobis opponunt: ^^^us ipse est
ad visitandam tyrannid^m ves ram. A man can no devise, to give the people
better harting, to ronn into ryots; then out of the puipit, to tax the princes
for so cryng a sin, as tyranny: and to maik God the author to reueng that:
specially being not bownd in conscienc, to obey any humain laws. But D.
Whitacre, 2. Resp. ad Campian ratione 8.
says, It never came into Luther mind, to pluck in peaces the authority of
magistrates, which he ded all ways defend against the Anabaptists: and (as D.
Bilson affirms, Luther ded hold, that the Gospel does not bar the politic
laws of any contrie.

I wonder these two great doctors, would affirm this so confidentlie; knowing
first, that though in some places of his books (to bleare the eyes of the
world) he had persuaded subjects to obedience, (the contrary wheareof, it had
bean too gross an error to mantaine:) yet that his practice, and actions vvear
fully contradictorie to that course. And knowing also, that Luther him self,
set it down as a divine decree l. de captiu. Babylon. c. de baptismo. Ab
omnibus hominum legibus exempts sumus, liberate Christiana nobis per baptismum
donata. Was this only from the Canons, or as well from Municipall laws? I
know your Jewel of England, labored to cover the deformity of this
proposition: which by a slight evasion, he sought to avoid, by comparing S.
Paul's phrase with Luthers, Galat. 2. Litl to the purpose. But it was more
fayrlie and conning lie shadowed, by D. whitacre, thus (loco predicto:) says
he. By faith men ar free, not that, they may not obey laws, and live ouelie
to them selfs: but that they may understand, there consciences and mynds ar
freed, from making the laws of men to be religion (1. to bynd the conscienc.)

And after ward he says again, Man's laws bynd not the conscienc, for then
they should bynd in all places alike. And so he concludes in general, The
magistrate is to be obeyed for conscienc, but his particular laws bynd not
the conscienc: that is as in an other place he interprets it, We must obey
humain laws, bycaus they arr necessary for peace; but we must distinguish
them from divine, which ar simply to be obeyed, vvithovvt defferenc of time,
place, or circumstanc, as man's laws ar.

Thus he defends Luther, by interpreting his words: and his interpretation
quite overthrovves bot Luthers meaning and words.

For so we are not by D. withaker exempted from obeying man's laws, but from
obeying them simpliciter, and as divine; (for it is not the quaestion, which
laws bynd most; secundum magis and minus, Gods laws or man's, for of that,
there can be no quaestion, no man dovvbts it. But whether man's laws bynd the
Conscienc at all; and whether simply it be a true proposition ab omnibus
hominum ^gib^s exempti sumus? And if man's laws do not bynd the conscienc; why
ded you think preasts bownd in conscienc, to obey the paenal laws of England,
or to be put to death, for not obeying?

But it is best and playnest dealing to maik Luther, his own expositor, and so
try if he can be cleared; or if he prove not worse, and an enemy to humain
laws.

For in the same book, cap. de Matrimonio. S^io (inquit) nullam rempublicam,
legibus faeliciter administrari: and in c. de sacris Ordini. Turpe enim est and
iniquiter servile, Christianum hominem qui liber est, alijsquam caelestibus,
and diuinis subiectum esse legibus. In both which places, he is quite
contrary, to D. whitacre, and maiks small accounpt of the statuts of common
welths; but as a thing servile, to be subject and tyet to obey them.

And S. Thomas Moor, in his Latin book against Luther, affirms that Tindal
(one of Luthers principal disciples in England) in his book of Obedienc taught
the same lesson: and he cites a place from whenc it seams Tindal derived his
opinion. Sc. Dico itaque, neque Papa, neque Episcopus, Not.
neque vlius hominum, habeat ius constitu^nd^ vnius sillabae, super hommem
christianum, nisi sit eiusdem consensu.

So then observe it well, and you shall see, that it both came into Luthers
mind and his penn, to pluck in peaces, the authority of magistrates and laws.

And the words of Luther litterallie import as much, else what english can you
maik of, ab omnibus hominum legibus exempti sumus? Is it against the Canon law
only? the words omnibus hominum, teach you the contrary; is it to prefer
Gods law, and religion, comparatiue, before man's? the word (Exempti) used
simply, shows the contrary: and that as we are freed from the law of the
Pope, or constitutions of Bushops: so and in the same degree, we are (as he
holds) exempted from all man's laws, so as neque vllus hominum, haith power to
enact one syllable, whereto he shall be obliged.

Again, if we be exempted from all laws; and the magistrate but by law, can
claim no obedienc: what conclusion, can you maik to defend Luther, but in a
mood and figure bad enough?

Furthermore, I am persuaded all men of under standing will think the verrie
words of Luther, plainly, and in the litteral sense to be daingerous; if they
be not qualified, and bettered by such an interpreter, as D. whitakers. And the
plain common people stand not to vvaigh words, but taik them in cortice, as
the letter imports.

The Bowers could not wrest and strain them by learning, and maik a gloss
quite contrary to the text: but they took hold of that exposition, which was
best agreeable to there appetites, and served most fitly to open them a passage
to liberty, (which was there end and scope.)

And D. Whitaker him self, seeing he could not justify the words, sought to
defend the meaning thereof, by a devise and sense of his own making, which he
inspireth into the words.

But Luther excellently expresses his own meaning libro ad nobilit atem
Germany; for as of the Imperial chamber at Spyres, he had given this sentenc,
Tribunal Camerae Imperialis, ecce quam diabolica est meretrix: so hear he
says, Ferunt nulium esse pulchrius regimen, quam apud Turcam, qui tamen neque
Canonicum neque civil ius habet, sed solum Alchoranum. At nos fateri oportet
nusquam esse turpius regimen, quam apud nos per ius civil and Canonicum.

Now balance and examine this well; end that vvil determine the controversy;
we accuse Luther, that he would abolish all laws, and that men should be
ruled only by the gospel, and that upon such his doctrine the paisants wear
incooraged to taik arms.

No says master whitaker, it was not Luthers meaning (for the words he
could not deny) to abrogate the authority of laws; but his meaning was they
ded not bynd the conscienc.

Now what Luther meant, appeared by several places before, but now he
explayneth all, and leaves no dowbt. For hear he rejects all laws both
civil and canon, and setts this brand of infamy upon them, nusquam turpius
regimen: and ioynes both the laws sub eodem iugo, to dravv after the
Alchoran, and come short of that: and so he rejects and disgraceth the
positive and politic laws of Germany.

For who would obey laws worse then the Alchoran? or obey magistrates,
who govern by them, worse then the Bashavves? Now seeing no man can defend
Luthers words, and the fruits and effects thereof (the conspiracy of the
Bovvers) being inexcusable: I may well conclude, that Luther was much, if not
most to blame, for these the first tumults of Germany. But I will yet maik
that, a litl more plain, by the testimonies of learned writers. Hospinian, (in
historia Sacramentaria:) Iutherus (haith he) belli Germanici causa non leuis.

O^ ander centur. 16 p. 16. Rustici iuramento confoederati seditionem
excitarunt, contra quosdam proceres Ecclesiasticos. Causam pretendebant quasi
Euangelij doctrinamtueri, etc. and he adds this, that ad ^utheri iudicium
prouocauerunt. (For they ded altogether build upon his grownds, and writings;
specially the bull; which no man can defend by law; how soever they may cloak
that, by pretenc of the gospel.)

How Erasmus in Hyperaspite, condemns him for that, his words declare. Populus
(inquit) iste Euangelicus, quos tumultus excitat? quoties, quam leuibus de
causis procurrit ad arma* nesuis quidem Ecclesiasticis sat is obtemperans, nisi
dicant blandia auribus.

And in an other place. Excussa est obedientia Episcoporum, which was only
Luthers work,) sed ita vt ne profanis quidem magistratibus pareatur. And Menno
Simonius an Anabaptist, libro de cruce Christi. Quam sangumolentas seditiones,
Luther any, ad comprobandam doctrinam suam, annis aliquot proximis excitarunt.
Which they alleged; as well for the war of the Bowers, as for the leaguers of
Smalcald, both which he occasioned.

And touching that objection, that Luther ded write contra rusticos, and
against there vproares: and preached obedienc, persuaded them to that: and
vehemently condemned the Anabaptists; it is true, he ded so. But it was only
a fallacian, to avoid the scandal: for when he see, they wear not like to stand
and mantain there quarrel, he left them in the briars, though they appealed to
him: and because at that time, he was much condemned, as a medium and
instrument of that sedition.

And there for he reproved Pacimontan (a principal Anabaptist) for diuulging,
that he was there friend, and favored there proceadings: and reprehended them
all, as if they had transgressed his bull (there commission) in committing
owtrages against secular Princes and Magistrates, (though he him self, ded most
seditiouslie inuaigh against them also.)

Neither can you think justly, that all (who ded rise with Muncer and caused
the tumults after) wear only Anabaptists: for what was Fra^ces Sicking, and
his fellowers? Lutherans. What wear those of Frankfort, Mentz, and Coolen,
Lutherans.

The Bowers also, used for there defenc, Luthers Homelies, and sermons: they
wear all for reformation, and novelty: all against the Church of Room, and
there own Bushops: all for Liberty: and there watchword, was viuat Euangelium,
as if it had bean, a feald fough for religion, and the Church.

And this confirms me strongly against Luthers praesumptuons intention, to
abrogate all laws; because he took upon him to enact new laws in disgrace of
the ou^d, as if he had bean the head of the Church, and Christ; vicegerent. For
after he had burned the Popes Canons, and abolished the Mass: he maid a new
form of the Mass him self; and ded institute new ceremonies propria
authoritate* which before he denied that the Pope could do.

And what was his pretenc? Libro de formula Missae, Coactus sum (says he)
propter leaves and fastidiosos spiritus, sc. his own fellowers, qui sola
nouitate gaudent, atque statim vt nouitas desijt, nauseantes; alios Canones,
aliamque missandi formulam perscribere.

Of which Erasmus, gave this opinion. Interim constitutiones humanae,
constitutionibus humanis (imo parum humanis) mutantur Titul is modo mutatus
est, vocantur enim verbum Dei Luther, ded chaing and maik void the
Constitutions of men, by new constitutions of his own, (which had litl
humanity in them.) The title only was chainged, for he gave them the name of
Gods word.

But all this, quo vvarranto, was it done? Is it tolerable, for Luther a
private man, withowt any evident authority, or express commission, to
disanull all laws, and maik a Metamorphosis of the world, at his pleasure? but
his vocation, his ministerial power, his jurisdiction, was extraordinary: he
was sent, as an Elias, to discover and confwnd Antichrist. I think in dead he
was sent, and God permitted him to visit his church: as he permitted Satan to
visit holy Job.

That so by haeresie and tyranny, he might awake the world, revive devotion,
and be a mean to punish sin, and purge ill humors, (which could not but a litl
infect the natural bodies of the visible church, after so maine hundred years,
of peace and plenty.)

It may be, that he fownd the lights in the church burning some what too dimm.
Yet tho he ded snuff it, he had no power either to put out the candl, or
remove the candlstick. For haeresies do often give fit occasions, to stir up
the churchment to more discipline: to open and explain the senc of scripture:
and to exercise the patienc, wisdom, and piety of the Church.

And so Luther may be said to have preserved religion, as the Romans said, that
Anseres seruabant capitolium.

But of Luther, and Elias, his vocation and Apostleship; I shall have occasion
much fitter, to discourse hearafter and to Canonise him in a Calender more
proper for his holienes: being now desirous to declare the Catastrophe of this
miserable Tragedy, he set forth in Germany, rather to be lamented then
discoursed.

The former attempts, wear undertaken against the clergy, and the princes:
but I will now relate, an enterprise against both the Empire, and the Emperor
him self, and by the mightiest princes of Almaine whear in Luther, was causa
sine qua non.

Old Iolm Frederick, Duke of Saxony, together with the Lansgraue of Hessen,
and diverse others (all protectors of Luther, and his gospel,) first entered
into a league at Smalcald, (a town in Henssia, upon the fronters of Saxony)
only for there own defenc, and the maintenanc of there religion and liberties,
(for both of these jointly ar now maid the usual cloak, of conspiracies)
against all men, that should in vade, and seak to persequute them. (And in this
league wear comprehended the Duke of Wirte^berg and diverse Imperial tovnes.)

The which league, was again renewed at Frankfort; and confirmed with general
and solemn protestation, (vvhearupon there and at Auspurgh the name of
Protestants, was derived originallie.)

After that, anno 1536. fearing least the Emperor should either prevent, or
circumvent them, they prepared to come into the feald, with a mighty army
whearof the young Duke of Saxony, John Frederick, (his father being dead) and
the Lansgraue wear ganeralls: who resolved by arms to find right; or to maik
right. The Duke of Wirtemberg assisted them.

The Imperial towns, Auspurgh, Vlm, Strasburgh, and Frankfort sent them aid.

The Count Palatine, levied two hundred horse for them, (but wiselier revoked
them, being on the way:) the Duke of Brunsvvig and his sons, the Duke of
Lunenburgh, the young Marquis of Baden, the Princ D'Anhald, the Counts of
Furstenbergh and Mansfeald, joined with them, in person and power.

So as the army contained abovvt threskore and ten thovvsant men (vvheareof
there was 7700. horse,) and 112. Cannons and feald peaces, with infinite
provision, and almost the hope of an assured victory.

The eyes of all princes, vvear fixed upon this action: and all Germany
trembled, expecting the event, and success of this great army, (prepared to
swallow up the Emperor, who had only king Ferdinand, the Duke of Bauier,
and the Duke of Cleave, assured to him:) (for tho Duke Maurice ded follow, the
Emperor, yet was he son in law to the Landsgraue, and might be suspected also
for his religion.)

I will not tell you, a tedious tale and impertinent, the event was this.

The emperor (for all this huge preparation,) became master of the feald and
Conqueror: the two generals (a rare accident) vvear both taken prisoners,
and there army defeated.

The Duk of Saxony (an honorable man) and much pitied, had his life given,
and conniuenc for his religion. but his impregnable fort of Gotha was
Demolished, Ne^.
and the electorate and the lands thereto belonging, wear bestowed by the
Emperor upon Duke Morris.

The like mercy for his leyfe, was showed to the Landsgraue. The Duke of
Wittenbergh (for two hundred thousand Ducats,) and the Imperial towns, upon
there petition and submission, by the mediation of Angels and Ducats,
solicited and maid there peace with the Emperor.

And so by the prouidenc of God, and prosperity of Caesar: the Empire was
preserved, and keapt in statu quo prius: and the Electores Ecclesiastical and
Prelates, wear still continued, and there dignities mantained.

Tho by all probabilities, it may well be coniectured, that as these great
princes had in there own prouincies, extinguished, and buried, the title, state,
and Jurisdiction of Bushops: so if they had wonn the glory of the day, and
had bean conquerors, they would have used the same deformation in all the
empire.

If you ask, how this war of the That this war was vulavv. full.
Princes ded concern Luther, of Lutheranisme? Or how he, or his religion,
vvear to be condemned as the motives of that? Or whether the Actors them selfs,
could be justly accused, for that rebellion! I must answer, that Greathes,
and Innovation; never vvanted patrons to defend them, not wit to coolor there
falts.

D. Bilson, in his book of the difference 1. D Bilsons opinion.
betwean Christian subjection an unchristian rebellion, to palliat the falt,
and excuse both Luther, and the Confaederats, affirms that the lawyers of
Germany (but he names none in particular) ded permit Resistance: coninglie
insinwating that the Laws ded permit and tolerate the protestants to resist.
And secondly, that the States of Germany, wear not absolutely subject to the
Emperor, but Conditionally. And therefore he concludes with a quare, why should
not the states of Germany, enjoy the same liberties, and security there
forefathers ded: and so he concludes that, wheareof no man maid quaestion; and
is nothing, to the matter in question.

The Deuines of Magdeburg, held 2. Osi^^der Centur 16.
this opinion. That if the magistrate pass the bownds of his authority, and
command things wicked and unlaw full he may well be resisted, and not obeyed.

And Sleydan l. 19. fol. 263. says, we 3.
may resist Caesar, with good conscience, intending a destruction both of
religion, and liberty.

But Philip Melancthon, lib. Consil. 4.
Euangelic. part 1. page 314. confidentlie enableth, the inferior magistrate,
to alter religion, and overthrow Idolatry. And so they conclude this war was
lawful and allowable, both by gods law, and man's, se defendendo.

Hear is a harmony of four parts, and yet all to mantain Discords, and
impugn the magistrates authority: and they contain the substa^c of the
reasons, alleged by the Duke and the Landsgraue, both when the league was
first maid at Smalcald; and afterward, when they proclaimed war against the
Emperor.

Now if you examine well these several Doctors opinions, you shall find
thereby, that it must first be proved, 1. That Caesar passed the bownds of his
authority, (or else it is plain they passed theirs:) 2. Secondly that he
commanded things wicked and ungodly, and against gods commandment. Thirdly
that he went about to Destroy true religion, and there liberty; and all these
must be done, before it be lawful to taik arms and resisthym, (for to resist
only, is there pretense.)

I will first demand of them this quaestion. When Caesar or the supreme
magistrate, commands any thing to be done, (which is not apparentlie,
against the laws of the Empire, then in force) who is to be Censor, whether
Caesar passes the bownds of his authority? and whether the things he
commands be impious ar no? They answer he ded absolutely seak to overthrow
there liberties, and true religion, scilicet, Lutheranism (which is fownded upon
the true preaching of the word, and administration of the sacraments.) This
surely is not a sufficient answer, ad idem and to my question: and yet I may
reply, that it is, and haith bean an old and usual stratagem of Satan, to
oppose religion against religion: that so, he might bring in Atheism, and
leave us no religion. Besides they maik that there principal argument, (the
presumption, of the^ true religion whearof Caesar at worms, maid the greatest
quaestion, and so they infer ignotum per ignotius.

Add therefore to this, that they when they ded: presume to establish a new
religion; ded pass them selfs, the bownds of there authority.

The world might judge Caesar a verrie simpl Prince, if he wowld either have
changed his religion or tolerated theirs, upon the bare credit, of Luthers
private spirit and opinion, or upon the protestation of the Confaederates.

For think you them co^petent Judges of the Clergy; or to decyde what should
be received in the Empire, for true religion?

Can religion lavvfullie, and orderly be changed, by temporal magistrates
only? and when neither a general counsel, nor a national council has
decreed it, nor any Imperial Diet, haith established it? May euer^ie elector
or prince, frame for his prouinc by law, a religion of a new Cut, withowt the
consent of the Emperor and the states? Give me an instanc, show a president,
when any such innovation was maid in the Empire, withovvt an Imperial Diet; or
else as there taking arms was withowt Justice, so there quarrelis withovvt
lavvfull grovvnd. Further more, was it lavvfull for the Confaederates, to
coin a new religion and taik arms for the defenc of that: and was it not
more lavvfull for the Emperor to fedenc the old received religion, and to
reform them?

The Rustiks took arms upon the same pretenc, for religion and liberty: and
yet the Confaederates, with there own forces, and with great justice and
honor ded subdevv the Bovvers. Why then might not Caesar compel the leaguers
to exercise the religion established, with a Quousque, and to obey the laws
not a brogated, and keap the peac of the common wealth, vvithovvt disturbance?
For the degree and dignity of the persons: does not maik the same case
different.

But they object that Caesar intended and plotted to Destroy them, and there
liberties, for religion; and there for they vvear forced to taik arms. Weigh
this well and you shall see it wants weight. It was surely inexcusable
for Defendants, to levy and lead an army into the feald against Caesar, who
was not in the feald against them, nor had any forces ready a long time
after. They marched to beseag the Emperor, and ded Drive him to fortify him
self, and come into the feald with a handful of men; and then with great
fury set upon his camp, who had much a do, to Defend him self: far from
offending them.

But the Emperor (says D. Bilson) is not to be obeyed by the states, which
absolute obedienc, for they are his subjects, but ex condition. So then he
makes Caesar Emperor, but ex condition. And if master Bilson means thereby
to charge Caesar (as the Hollanders ded the king of Spain,) with the oath
taken at his coronation, to observe there laws, and defend there liberties: and
so taik that for a condition: the like oath is taken, by all kings and princes
Successiue, as well as Elective And if you have devised a trick to unking them,
when you think they perform not punctuallie, each article of there oaths:
surely you then may be justly termed a most learned doctor, to maik
nullities. And yet I think, if any man preach this doctrine at Powles Crosle,
he haith great luck, if he answer not for it, at Tower hill.

But I will leave skirmishes, and come to the maine point. It may justly be
affirmed, that Caesar ded observe the law: and that the leaguers ded violate
both the laws, and liberties of Germany. For what prince so ever stands
rectus in Curia, and haithe the ancient laws to back and warrant him; must
neads be judged to hold a better and lawful plea, then subjects armed against
there prince with private opinions only, novelties, and an Alchoran of there own
making.

But at that time, by law, Caesar was bownd rather to banish and extirpate
Lutheranisme, then to tolerate the same: for yt is manifest, that he was
obliged by the oath at his Coronation, expresslie and particularly, to defend
the Pope, the Catholic Church, and the religion thereof. This is a matter of
fact, and can not be contradicted, as yowr own Coldastus knovveth and
acknowledges.

Neither was yt a new oath: for the same in effect was taken, by Carolus 4.
Otho 3 Otho 1. and Carolus Magnus, which is a praescription, for time good
enough, and for reason vndisputable. And the like profession, you shall find to
be maid, by the ancient reverend Emperors, Justinian, Theodosius, Gratian, and
others both in the Code, and Nouel constitutions.

So then how could the Emperor either mantain or suffer any other religion (as
authentical) then that which he fovvnd established in the Empire, allowed by
all his predecessors, warranted by so many councels, continued so many
generations, racified by the diets, and confirmed by his own oath.

Yet because D. Bilson averreth, that it was co^sonant to the opinion of the
lawyers of Germany: examine whether, the Duke of Saxony and the Landsgraue
when they wear taken prisoners, used any such argument, for there excuse. No,
Syrabsolutelie they submitted them selfs, and craved his pardon at whose
pleasure they wear, to stand or fall: to die or live. There ill case, could not
maik a good cawse ill: but there ill cawse, maid there case ill and stand in nead
of commiseration.

And what a ridiculous reason had it bean for them, to have pleaded: that it
was lawful for subjects by the svvord to defend there religion.

For if it wear lawful for the elector of Saxony to taik arms of defenc of
Luthe ranisme, because he was persuaded, there was no other verity, no other
religion infallible, but Luthers: why might not the Count Palatine (with the
same pretext) taike arms for Caluinism; and a Halbeistat for Epicurisme, and a
Muncer for Anabaptisme? And so by an Anarchie, under coolor of there liberties,
and the prerogatine of conscience, rend in peaces the Empire, and open the
ports of Germany to let in the Turck. But to stopp the mouths of school
learned ignorance, I will discover and lay Down the fowndation of this great
quarrel, and the legal order and reason of Caesar's procreading.

Anno 1521. The Emperor having conferred personally with Luther at worms: and
out of his special grace and benignity, having required the Archbushop of
Trier, and the Elector of Brandenburgh, to treat with him, and persuade Luther
to conformity and peace: and perceauing his obstinacy, and insolency,
refusing to submitt him self: and finding that all his course, his books, and
his sermons ded tend to sedition: he maid a Decree, with the general consent
of the states, not to put him to death (such was his mercy:) but to banish him
out of the empire (wheatin he showed More lenity, then prouidenc.) In which So
God^astus and Cocleus.
decree, after that at large he had set Down the cawses and reasons of the act,
he concludes thus Mandates, de corumdem statuum consensu, sub crimmelesae
Majestatis, ac omissionis feudorum, dommiorum, bonorum, priuilegiorum, a nobis
ac sacro Imperio dependentium; ac proscriptionis and Banni, etc. Ne quis
vestrum, prefatum, M. Lutherum, recipere, sustentare praesumat, and vt libros
suos seditioso^ ac haereticos comburatis, etc. And this edict, was directed,
to the Electors, Princes, towns, and states. Now can you imagine, that the Duke
of Saxony or the Landsgraue, wear exempted from this edict? or that the
Emperor by virtue thereof, had not as full power to call them to answer for
there contempts, as any inferior persons? Do you taik the Princes electors to
be such Ephori, or transcendents, that they may bridle and curb the Emperor in
the execution of Justice? as if the Emperor wear but a shadow in Germany,
titulus sine re, and as if imperium in imperio quaerendum esset: (which by
Bodines leave, I will maik appear to be an error.) But after this Decree, the
Duke of Saxony ded harbor Luther at Alstat (a town of his own in Turingia,
which Luther called his Pathmos, whear he composed many revelations and
mysteries:) and there he provided for his rest and security, and in the
interim settled and planted Lutheranism in all his dominions) (notwithstanding
the decree: and entered into the league of Smalcald, for maintenanc thereof.

All which actions, that you may^ under stand how directly they are against
law, and Justice: Let Andrew Gayle deliver his opinion. Libro de Pace publica
cap. 10.. 36. Receptores Bannitorum, perinde puniantur, atque Banniti, Domini
praediorum tenentur reos exhibere, and learned Brunus lib. 1. de haeres. c. 4.
In excommunicatis, qui bannitis comparari solent, vnica receptio noxia est. Now
Luther was both banished, and excommunicated. And Gayle in an other place, Qui
bannito Commeatum and annonam suppeditat, paena receptorum ordinaria tenetur.
Per adventure, you may think, that the Duke (Luthers Mecenas) was not tied
with in this tedder: these laws vvear in force, for meaner subjects: there for
that learned Gayle, shall maik his own comment, lib. 1. c. 1.. 9. de Pace
publica says he, Conditio pacis publicae, omnes omnium ordinum status Imperij,
maiorum and minorum ge^tium; cuiuscunque dignitatis personas aeque obligat,
etsi contra Potentiores sit promulgata. So as the greater the person is, the
more he is bovvnd to obey the law. But the Duke not obeying the law, and
kovving that Caesar had often written ovt of Spayn, to have the edict of worms
strictly executed: fearing Cesars indignation, intred into a league, took
arms, and so ded aggrauate both his own, and his fathers offense, and thought
them unpardonable.

Yet after that league, the Emperors Ambassador, 1529. at Spyres, offered unto
the leaguers most aequall and moderate articles, viz. vtrinque ab omni iniuria,
and damno, and conuitijs abstinerent: and quod transgressores contrahaec sint
proscribendi. Who would not thing this a reasonnable offer, from the supreme
magistrate, to the inferiors, that stood in dainger of law? the Catholics
could never hope for so much in Q. Elizabeth's time. Yet was this refuled and
rejected.

Again at Auspurg 1530. Caesar verrie graciously entertained the Duke, and
received his petition exhibited, with as much favor and indifferency, as he
might with his honor. And there again he revived his Ambassadors former
motion, that no more innouations should be maid: nor more books to be by them
published: but that all things, should stand quietly and peacable, till 17.
May next. So much ded he yeald, to them, for desire of peace, and for the
public good of Europe (the Turk having so lately before beseaged Vienna, and
taken Rhodes.) Not with standing the Duke rejected the motion, and much
displeased the Emperor thereby: (who plainly replied, that if they obeyed not,
they should repent it. And yet again (tho thus provoked rather to dravv his
svvord) at Spyres, he ded labor by persvvasion to ^reuayle quietly with them
(but thither the Duke, ovvt of I ealousie and fear, would not come at all)
tho he was summoned.

By this course you may judge how vnwiling Caesar was, to disturb the peace of
the ^mpyre, or to enter into an offensive war, ^eaking to winn the^ so often,
and so graciou^lie. So as it was the more inexcusable, for men that pretended
only to defend them selfs: to reject peace, when it was offered: and then to
offend by taking arms, before they wear offended.

If I should relate the malice and contempt they showed of him? you might
conceive, that they could never have hoped, to have fownd a spark of mercy in
his heart, toward them.

For in all there public acts and letters, ^hey vouchsafed to give him no other
ti^le, then Charles of Gandt, usurping the name of the Emperor: whereby they
renounced all obedienc to him, and deposed him, as far as lay in there power
(which was an indignity, which a wise prince could ^ardlie swallow with
patienc.)

I may not forget, how the Landsgraue ingreat bravery, both by letters and
messagers, assured the cities and Princes of there confederation (perhaps
thereby, to procure a larger contribution:) and engaged his promise, that with
in three months they would force Charles to fly out of Germany, and abandon
the empire.

How then ded these things coheare? That this holy league was maid only se
defendendo, and to resist, for there law full protection: and yet to strike the
first blow, invade the Emperor, offend first, and promise to expel him out of
Germany; before he offered any toke^ of hostilie against them, or they had
just and evident cawse, to march into the feald. And long before that, they
solicited the kings of France, England, and Denmark, the Hans towns, and
Swisses, to ioyn with them in league against him: (whom they dishonored, and
provoked, with most infamous libells, and unworthy aspersions.) France (tho
an enemy) nobly denied them. Denmark lingered, expecting the succes: king
Harrie was not forwars, tho Cromwell diligently solicited there cawse, and
promised them 100. thousand crowns for there aid. And at that time D. Thirlebie
Bushop of westminster, and Sir Philip Hobbie, wear the kings Ambassadors with
the Emperor; and wear wituesses and spectators of the whole Tragedy.

Lastly to disprooue these there proceadings by law: Remember first the
decree at Worms: read the edict of Maximilian the 1. anno 1495. and 1500. the
words ar these. Consentientibus stautum and ordinum imperij votis, necessarium
de pace publica constitutionem, landifrieden promu^garunt: quapacem publicam,
armata manu violantibus, p^na proscriptionis, (quam bannum imperiale
appellamus) irrogatur: Scil vitae, necisque. And to explain that, A. Gayl l. 1.
c. 14. de Pace publica. Omnia bella (in quit) quae in^^^su summi principis
Imperatoris, puta, vel sine eius licentia geritur, priuata quadam vindicia, in
iusta sunt.

And afterward, cap. 5. he puts both Sleydan, Bilson, and the and by law,
ouerthrowers all there foundations. In crimen lesae maiestat is incidit, qui
bellum in imperio sine Caesaris licentia mouet: quia vsurpat sibi ea, quae sunt
solins principis, and mouere bellum ad solum imperatorem pertinet. So also
Goldastusl. 1. tit. 190. cites this ancient law, Nemo intra imperis fines, suis
alienisueditionibus, militem sollicito, nise de voluntate ducis isius circuli,
caeueatque fide iussione statuum, nihil se, in Caesarem, principes, subditos,
and clientes Impers moliturum.

And in tomo 2. he produces a decree of Ludouicus Pius, against the king of
the Romans, and his confaederates, guilty of high treason, for attempting
against the Emperor (whereby the king was judged to loose his head.) The like
ded Henry the first, against Arnulphus Duke of Bauier, who had rebelled
against him. And Otho the 1. ded as much, against Ludolphus king of the Romans.
I will conclude all with one exemble, late, memorable, and to our purpose.
Maximilian the 1. ded forbed all subjects of the empire, to gene aid to the
french king in his wars. Emicho, Earl of Lingen in contempt of the edict, went
into France, and took pay of the french king for him and his companies. The
Emperor being advertised thereof, proclaimed him traitor, gave the spoil of
his house, and confiscation of his lands to the princes of the empire,
irrecouerablie. Now if Maximilian, might thus punish Emicho by law, for going
to aid France, contrary to his proclamation: what might he have down, if he
had taken arms against him self, (as the confaederats ded against Charles.)
And for the Imperial towns, there fault was most gross, and deserved most
punishment. for Ciuium Imperalium, solum Imperator Dominus est, non magistratus
municipalis. And touching there liberties, ans freedom, Gayle said trewlie and
iudiciouslie, Germanicae libertatis iniqua est iactatio, against the Emperor.
So then I refer it to the Judgment, of any impartial Judge, whether the action,
and proceading, of these two noble and great persons, for there religion, and
defenc of Lutheranisme, wear warrantable by law, or no: and specially, being
directly against the Emperor, and the religion established in the Empire.

And concerning Luther him self: because he was the primum mobile, of all these
motions, in that Orb: and the malus genius, that inspired the people and
conducted and directed all; and for the defenc of whose doctrine, all these
swords wear drawn: cann you think, if the Princes wear faulty, that he is
free and innocent? If the flock ded err, that the shephard was not to blame? I
omit to charg him with small falts, as with publishing untruth to defame
Caesar: Wormaciam ingressus sum, etiam cum scirem mihi violatam a Caesare,
fidem publicam. A fable, and fiction. I omit that scandalous sentenc, in
hatred and contempt of the empire, Nouum imperium erexit Papa, transferens id a
Graecis ad Romanos, quod inter caetera opera Antichristi, vel principale, vel
maximum portentum est. (As if the empire, wear a new building framed by
Antichrist, and the sacred Imperial crown, wear as odious and irreligions, as
the Turbant of Soliman.) I will recapitulate nothing of his misdemeanors
which, I have alleged before, toward the Emperor and Princes: I will not
accuse him for usurping the regalities of Caesar, and for making and publishing
politic Laws De communi fisco, (one of the greatest marks of sooueraintie:)
and how the reuennues of the church should be employed, when the Abbeies wear
pulled down, (though that project wear as good, as an exhortation to ruin and
pull them down.)

1. Only I will lay to his charge, first that he counseled the Princes to
taik arms, and resist Caesar (seeing the extremity, and that religion could
not be otherwise defended.) The which Sleydan him self confesses to be true,
and there for neads no other proose.

2. Secondly, his endeavor, persuasion, and co^spiracie, to suppress the
Ecclesiastical Electors, subvert there estate, and so consequently, to
overthrow the Aurea Bulla (which is a fundamental law in the empire:) was
directly either an action of treason, or in the highest degree of sedition.
For seeing the three Ecclesiastical Electors (the three Chancelors of the Empire)
ar immediately subject to the Emperor, in respect of there regalities, so as
there is no appeal from them to the Pope, but to the Emperor, and Spyres: Luther
contriuing to ruin them, purposed to pull the fairest flower out of the
imperial crown. Besides he could not suppress them, but he must likewise
overthrow with them, all the grownds of there title and claim: and so should he
also for company, abrogate all the authority of the temporal Electors, (who
have no other charter to plead, then the Ecclesiasticals have:) and so should
master Whitakers, then have sean that (which he would not beleaue that Luther
had rent in peaces, all the whole state, laws, and majesty of the empire.

3. And now I will end with an intolerable trespass, recited by Cochlaeus
in Miscellaneis. Either Luther, (which by his style is likest) or a Lutheran
(which is aequiualent) thus confidentlie vvriteth, after the league of
Smalcald was concluded. Atque vt ora cis obturem, ex iure ipsorum seculari:
Papa and Caesar, non nati, sed electi sunt principes, and qui possunt deponi,
id quod propter eorum male facta sepe factum est, etc. And shortly after, an
non sunt in memoria hominum, reges and Caesares, etiam hoc modo, a suis
subditis expulsi? And then he logicallie infers, Hunc ergo exactorem
(meaning Caesar) hunc Moab, Phalarim, Neronem, sedibu^ deturbare, summum
beneplacitum est Deo. May not I now justly conclude, that both the Doctor and
the Doctrine ar seditious? For as his cawse, was not manifestly good in se, nor
quoad nos, and to our under standing (and surely it is requisite that so great
an innovation, should be evidentlie demonstrated,) before it be received and
publicly approved; so was his course most irregular and turbulent, neither
regarding laws, nor reuerencing and obeying princes. Now if the Ancients and
statesmen, well provided, for the direction and managing of temporal affairs,
that the private judgment of Solon Licurgus, or Cato is but held as opinion,
till by parliement it be enacted for a law: a fortiore, how can you hold it
fit, that in matters touching the soul and salvation, the private opinion of
Luther should be reverenced and received as an Oracle, before it be decreed
either by Council or Synod? And therefore, by the law of nations, and reason of
state, Mecaenas gave this wise counsel to Augustus, as an axiom contra
Nouatores, as Dyon records. Libro 52. Eos qui in Diuinis aliquid innouant,
od^o habe and coerce: non deorum solum causa (quos tamen qui contemnit, nec
sane aliud quidquam magni fecerit: sed quia noua quaedam numina i^ tales
introducentes, multos impellunt ad mutationes rerum. Vnde coniurationes,
seditiones, conciliabula, (res profecto minimum conducibilis principatui.) And
surely by such innovation ded Luther insinuate him self into the favor of the
princes, and thereby cast the whole empire into such conulsions; as it will
hardly ever recover the former strenth and vigor. But I will end this matter
fayrelie, and condemn him by his own mouth, and by the sentenc he pronounced
him self in the like case, against the Sacramentaries and Anabaptists, (for
some times this mad doctor, had lucida internalla, and could discern reason.)
tom. 3. VVittenber. fol. 488. Enarrat. in psalm. 82. says he. Neque is (se
sectarius) in quem animaduertitur, per magistratum, cogitur ad fidem etc. Sed
prohibetur and opprimitur impia doctrina, qua illum, in caeti^ existens
Christiano, contra Deum and doctrinam Christianam blasphemat, in summam
perniciem Christianae religionis.

^at alias, quouis gentium, vbinon sunt Christiani, ibi effundat sup^entiam
suam.

Nam vt sepe dixt, qui in aliqua ciuitate viuere Nota.
vult, is ^^ri alligatus est municipali: neque ferendus est, si contra illud
aget aut loquatur. Sic legimus quod patres in Concilio Niceno cum Arrianorum
audirent dogma recitari, protenus ^oc explodendum s^n^ vlla cognitione
duxerunt. etc. Moses etiam in lege tales blasphemos precipit lapidari. Sic
etiam ibi, indicta causa and in audita damnandi sunt, etc.

Nam tales generales articuli, recepti in tota Ecclesia satis auditi, satis
sunt approbati. satis fir^ati per scripturam, per miracula, per sanguinem
martyrum, per scripta and confessionem totius Eccles^ae. Nec vl^o modo ferendus
est vllus sapien^ulus, qui illos reuocare velit in dubium etc. and page 489. St
T. Munceri audaciae, and Carolostadij conatibus cito esset itum obuiam, tunc
cum in alienis Ecclesi^s and domibus, clanculum, and sine vocatione spargebant
sua dogmata, minus publicarum calamitatum vidissemus. Now apply these, to his
own course, and his own doctrine: and he must neads perish by his own
breath; and by his own verdit against his antagonists, he does dravv an
enditement against him self, against Muncer, against the Princes, and against
all those that taik arms for religion against there soouerain Lords.

TITVLVS SECVNDVS OF CALVINISM.
I Will hear leave Germany, and launch of Calvin, and tho vvarres in France.
out into an Ocean of as great miseries in France: and examine there, whether
Caluinism does prepare and dispose the hearts of that peopl to mere obedienc,
humility, and patienc, then Lutheranisme ded. The first author and fownder of
this sect was vld. Swinglius, (whose Followers Luther Called Sacramentaries,
the french named them Huguenots:) but now they have there title and denomination
from Calvin, (who as a Transcendent, haith overshadowed and obscured the glory
and name of Swinglius; and is solie reverenced, as the Patriarch of Geneua, and
the Architect, that framed all there state and discipline: and ordered all the
motions of that Sphere, with much art and policy. For as Lutger was harsh,
stearne, and violent, neither using modesty nor goot manners: so Calvin was
more cautelous, of a more subtle spirit, and appeared at first to the world, in
humility, and covered with the foxes skin. Luther was the original cawse; but
Calvin glories that he gave the perfection of all. So both of them wear
glorious, both bred in the school of law and contention: both special friends to
pleasure and the flesh, and neither of them commended much for piety or
devotion.

For the description of the life and conversation of Calvin; of his nature,
behavior, delicacie of diet, and physical epicurisme: I referr you to one,
that sat long by him to dravv his picture, Viuis coloribus, Doctor Hierome
Bols^k one that was used to feale his pulse, and know his humors.) A man not
hired, nor corrupted to do that (as some withowt producing any proof have
affirmed, and ^o withowt credit may as well be rejected.) Specially
considering, that Frances Baldwin concurreth with him, both in the
portraicture and coolors: who was a famous lawyer, one that lived with Calvin,
and knew what blood was noorished in every vain of his body. The like was
done by Florimond de Remond, a gentlman of quality, Claudius de Saints, and
diverse others who have left us the lively image of Calvin, and of fine master
Theodore Beza, who succeaded him in his chair and jurisdiction, like a
virtuous man: a pastor usurping an other man's parish, and the husband of an
other man's wife: ever further in love then charity, and of better disposition
to show wit, then piety.

And as I will not medl with there virtues and lives: so will I leave to the
more learned there schoolpoynts and doctrine, intending only to deliver there
seditious paradoxes, and demonstrate to the world, how much both there r^fyned
discipline and doctrine does derogate from Royalty, and the soouerain
authority of kings and princes: and how much it is more fau^rable to
democracie and popularitie, as more consonant to the advancement of there
confisiorie and eldorship (vvherby they have wrought much confusion, sedition
and mischeafe.)

I will beginn with Calvin, who goes slilie to work, and by certan degrees;
and not so bluntly, and rudely as Luther.

1. First he labors to commend Aristocratia, and abase Monarchies: (only and
secretly to prefer the reputation of his Consistory and Sanhedrim) l. 4.
Cap. 20. v. 10. of his instit. non id quidem per se sed hominum vit^o And what
is his reason? quia raris^me contingit reges sibt moderari: deinde tanto
a^umine and prudentia instructos esse, vt vnusquisque videat quantum satis est.
So he maiks yt, dainty, to find a wise and temperate king, and therefore he
concludes, facit ergo hominum def^ctus, vt ^u^ius ^it ac magis tollerabile,
plures tenere guberna^ula Sc. the defects of Princes is the reason, that I hold
it it more safe, and more tolerable, for many jointly, th^n for one
absolutely to govern and command. Atque vt libenter fatear, nul^um esse
gubernationis genus is^o faelicius. For when many govern, one supplies the
defects of an other, both in counsel and justice. Thus with a politic reason,
he Does insinuate him self into the hearts of the people, to plain his way to
the discipline he propounded. You may err in thinking this a trifle, and a
scoolpoint: for he applied it to a further end. After the Geueuians had eiected
there Bushop, who had the supremacy in that state, as his predecessors had long
enioyde it, sinc Frederic the first: then as Bodin notes, there Monarchy was
chainged into a popular state yet governed Aristocratice:) and therefore Calvin
confirms the peopl in that opinion, and gives reasons to aprooue that act,
which was the first fruits of the gospel in that city.

2. Having given this blow to a monarchy, (he forgets he was born at Noyon,
and thinks him self safe at Geneua) to prevent that you might not object, that
Princes have always grave and wise counselors to advise and inspyre them; and
if they be weak them selfs, to supply there defects He gives this resolution,
cap. 11. v. 26. upon Daniel. Kings maick choice of such men for there
counselors, as can best fit there humors, and accommodate them sells to serve
the appetites of there king, scilicet, in Creweltie, and fallacians. So he maiks
them rather worse then better, by having counselors, and stayneth the honor
and reputation of a counselor with a bleamish and scandal intolerable, as if
kings wear neither better nor wiser by there counsel tables.

3. But yet he goes on a degree further, for before he gave the precedenc, by
way of comparison, to Aristocratia, but now he both discrediteth and disgraceth
Monarchies and Monarchs. cap. 2. v. 39. upon Daniel. They are (says he) out of
there wits, quite void of sense and understanding, who desire to live in
soouerain Monarchies. For ir can not be, but that order and policy shall
decay, whear one man holds, so large an extent of Dominion.

4. And to maik this bad proposition seame good, cap 5. v. 25. Kings (says he)
forget they are men, that is of the same mould, that others arr. They are called
kings and Dukes Dei gratia. To what end serve these words? to shovv by there
title, that they acknowledge no superior. And yet will they tread upon God
with there feate, under that cloak. So it is but an abuse and disguisement,
when they vaunt that they reign Dei gratia. Is not this excellent doctrine to
be preached in a Monarchy? and a fine Deskant, upon Deigratia? Yet he goes an
further. c. 5. v. 21. Kings maik there boast that they reign Deigratia, yet they
despise the Majesty of God. Voila, quelle est la rage and forcenerie de tous
Rois. Hear is no exception but a general accusation: and to maik that good, he
adds this strenth to it, It is common and ordinaire to all kings, to exclude
God from the government of the world.

Consider well that Calvin writ this, not as a Politician but as a Divine, and
in his prime and master peace, his institutions: he delivers these daingerous
positions in his sermon, to the people, and in his readings upon Daniel, not in
private discourses: and as matters of discipline and doctrine to be generally
beleaued: and so making a course against Nabugad nezzar, he run; the wild goose
chase against all kings, and that rather out of plea^, then out of his text.
For to what end and pupose tend these speeches so scandalous, and derogatoire
to princes? certanlie, to disgrace scepters and sooueraines, both for folly
and impiety.

And because you shall see how well Calvin and Luther do symbolise in this
point, that they speak one language, and both wear like coolors, and the same
fashion. I will deliver unto you how Luthers opinion of these points, agrees
with Caluins, These knaves, of the nobility, tyrants, tom. 7. fol. 441.
Nebulones isti ex nobilitate, tyranni, etc. qui inducunt animum, ideo Deum
nobis euangelium dedisse, eosque ex carcere ponti^icio expediuisse, vt possent
ipsi auaritiae suae litare. And in epistolis fol. 350. Principem esse, and non
ex aliqua part latronem esse, aut non, aut vix possibile est, a Prince can not
be, but a robber, and oppressor, and tom. 3. fol. 325. Non est Principis esse
Christianum, paucos esse Christianos oportet. And tom. 6. fol. 143. in psalm
101. Mirum non est seculares Reges, Dei hosts esse, eiusque verbum hostiliter
persequi. Hoc ^psis a natura est insitum haec eorum proprietas. Nota.
what an Antipathia there is betvvean Royalty, and religion, by Luthers rules:
and so betwean Lutheranisme and loyalty, by as good consequenc, (which is the
mayn quaestion.) But procead. tom. 3. latin. fol 459 in psalm. 45. Aulae
principum, vere possunt dici, seeds and thronus diaboli, vbi tot sunt diaboli,
quot fere aulici. For such as the king is, such is the court like to be: and if
the courts be the thrones, kings must be the Deuels. Tom. 2. fol 81. De
seculari magistratu. Principes flagitiosissiminebulones. The reason he gives,
is this. Sunt enim Dei lictore^, and carnifices, quibus ira diuina ad puniendos
improbos, and ad conseruandam externam pacem vtisolet, and fol. 190. Nullum
neque tus, neque fidem, neque veritatem apud principes seculares reperiri
licet. And then if kings and princes have neither honesty, truth nor Justice,
Quid ego principes doceam. and huiusmodi porcis scribam why should I write,
and instruct such porck tom 3 fol. 149.

Who can not discern how these two holy men iumped in unity, as led with
the same spirit; (ay ming bot-at one end, which is to noorish a deadly feud in
all men's mynds, against kings and crowns, that will not subscribe, to there
superintendencie, and Caluins Institutions. And that you might more evidently
discern that, read c. 6. v. 25. upon Daniel. Says he Darias by his exampl
will condemn all those* who at this day profess them selfs, either Catholic
kings, or Christian kings, or defendors of the faith: and yet not only, they
do deface and bury altrevv piety and religion, but they corrup and deprave
the whole worship of God. Hear is in dead work, for the Covvper; not by a
Marprelat, but by a Mar prince. The most Christian king must be again new
Catechized and learn a new Christian Credo Hear is a new portraicture of a
reformed Catholic, drawn for the instruction of the most Catholic king; and a
new private spirit, to direct the Catholic.

The defendor of the faith, bycaus he erreth in his faith; not having a saving
and iustifi^ng faith; must have a new faith created, and inspiret into him, by
this great Prophet And so by this new model, all the old religion in the
church, and all the laws in the state concerning it, must be abolished. Thus
presumed Calvin, to reform kings and government, and to build a new ark, to
save and preserve the world, from an inundation of impiety, ignoranc, and
irreligion; of whom I may trevvlie say, plus quam regnare videtur, cui ita
liceat censuram agere regnantium. But of this, I shall more pertinentlie speak
in the appendix. In the interim. Can a man sovv more seditious seads, if he
would seak to Cantonize a kingdom, into several circles, as they have done
there french church? Yet shall you hear him preach, more like a Svvisser; and
Lutheranize, with the proper spirit of Luther. cap. 6. v. 3. 4 he touches
kings to the quick; and describes, what kind of beasts they are, at this time.
Les Rois sont presque tous hebetez, and brutaux: aussi semblablement, sont-ils
comme les cheuaux, and les asnes de bestes brutes. And he gives this reason;
because they honor and prefer most, there Bavvdes, and there vices. What a
seditious declamation is this, against the title, and majesty of Gods
anointed? Mark the age, and time, when Calvin writ this book: and note in that
age what renoumed kings, France had: Jews 12. Frances the 1. and Henry the 2.
what majesty wisdom and magnificenc wear in the emperor Maximilian and
Charles? what state in Henry 8. of England, what hope in Edward, what virtue
in Marie for Scotland, James the 5. reigned, and two such Mary's, as at worthy
to be Canonized. And for Castill and Portugal, there kings never floorished
more, for government, greatness, encreas of state, discoueries of a new world,
peac, and plenty. Then what was his meaning, to affirm that almost all kings
wear so stupid, and brutish? Surely to bread and noorish, a contempt of hings;
and to induce the people, that live in free states, to despise and hate them;
and conninglie to seduce them that live in kingdoms, to be sorry for there yoke
and servitude: to shake of there fetters, and purchase there liberty (Specially
for religion). for at that he aimed most (the propagation of his doctrine): and
he knevv, well, that in popular estates he might prevail stronglier, and
with bette hope of success, for all his religion is popularitie, and
pleasing,) and as Swinglius fovvnd he could not induce Fra^ces the first, to
applaude him: So by the exampl of Henry the second, Calvin ded perceive that
kings, and Deigratia, vvear blocks in his way. And therefore to remove them,
that they might not empeach the course and current of his preachings, and
proceading C. 6. v. 22. he speaks in a tune full of sharpes, and menaces.
Abdicant se potestate, terreni principes, dum insurgunt contra Deum: imo
indigni sunt, qui cons^antur^^ hominum numero. Potius ergo conspuere oportet,
in illorum capita, quam il^is parere, vbi sic proteruiunt vt vel^nt sp^liare
Deum ^uo ^^re. What a learned homely is this, to teach subjects obedienc?
Join all these good instructions together, and so shall you best interpret
and explain one by an other. D. Bilson in his book of Christian subjection,
takes pains to expovvnd and wrest Caluins words; and to save his credit,
sets the berst coolors on them he could. I. Calvin (says he) in this place,
Speaks not a word of depriving princes, or resisting them with arms: but
only shovveth, that Daniel ded rightly defend him self, for not obeying the
kings wicked edict, joined with the dishonor of god Secondly by Abdicant se,
he means not they loos there crowns, but that they loose there power, to
command in these things: but in lavvfull things, they retain there power. 3. For
the phrase conspuere, it seams something hard; yet the comparison so standing
as he maiks it (whether it wear better, to contemn there impious edicts, or to
obey them:) Calvin urges it in vehement words. And this is far from
Rebellion. An other excuses it, that it was spoken comparatiue, not
rebelliouslie: that is if the king should contradict Gods law. A poor shift:
but he sets not down, who should be judge of that, betwean God and the king.
And so it is nihil ad rem. I answer to the first, it is idle and impertinent:
what if he use not these words of deprivation and resistanc? (for then had he
erred too palpablie:) ar therefore the other words he uses, excusable? For
Daniels right full defenc, it is not pertinent to the quaestion, D. Allen maid.
Besides what, was Daniels defenc, what arms took he? All with out contemps of
the king: humility prayer, and patienc. Not after the Geneua fashion so
bravely, as to spitt in Nabugodonosors face; nor alleging that he was not
worthy to live among men.

And for the second, by (abdicantse) what means he, that kings do loose? not
there Crowns, but only power to command. let us speak plain English, withowt
halting. You confess, the king loses his authority and soouerain power, to
command (and you add obscurlie in these things.) You mean, in matters of
religion, for so it is to be understood, tho you cast a cloak over the words,
and cover the matter. Then I, desire to know, what is a kings crown withowt
power to command? He that teaches, they loose there royal power, does he not
mean, they forfeit it? and if they do forfeit it, who is tho challeng and taik
the forfeiture, of a crown? but by such lectures, does not Calvin stir up and
arm against the king his traiterous subjects, if they revolt from there
obedienc, for religion? Is not that, the grownd of all the combustion, and
civil wars in France? Yea, but in other things lavvful, (you say) kings
retain there power. First these ar master Bilsons words, not Caluins: for they
contradict Calvin, whose proposition is indefinite, abdicant se potestate, they
loose and forfeit all there authority and power: absolutely, not after a sort:
and in all things, not in some particular: and for altogether not for a time
(for when kings ar dispossessed they seldom recover there hold again.)
Besides, what court, or what magistrates ar fit to hear and determine whear in
kings may loose there power, and whearin not? and to decide and judge the
difference, betwean these unlawful matters you speak of and the lawful: tho
Caluins words import no restriction, at all The which does playnlie appear by
his harsh phrase (as you term it) of spitting in there faces: that is, as you
interpret, to defye them to there faces, to contemn them, and there acts. But
this you say is far from rebellion: true, and yet nothing to the purpose. For
rebellion is but one species of Treason, and therefore tho he teach not
rebellion, he may teach treason. And so you help him litl. Labor to extenuate
the words as much, as you can: and yet, will they be reallie heinous and
seditious. For he that, hould^th a king is not vvorthie to be or live in
hominu^ numero, does he not as it vvear eiect and excommunicate him, from all
government, and confyne and censure him to live with beasts as Nabugodonosor
ded. If you teach, that insurgunt contra Deum, do you not maik him hateful
for his impiety?

But to conclude, this you grand in effect to be his meaning. That if the king
threaten Daniel, except he worship the Idolle: or if the king of France seake
to compel his subjects, to obey his law, and communicate, at the alter of
the church: then abdicat se potestate; the king ought to loose obedienc:
subjects are not bovvnd to obey him, (but rather to spit in his face, which is
a contempt in the highest degree, (and that was the cavvse, why Doctor Allen
ded object that against Calvin, as seditious doctrine.

Besides, he maid his own quarrel, Gods quarrel: the defenc of Caluinism, as
the defenc of religion: and so embroyled the king and the kingdom, in
perpetual quarrel, for his doctrine.

But D. Bilson, ded know, or might have known: that seditious doctrines,
wear not so dainty at Geneua. For in hatred of the three Q. Mary's, of England
and Scotland, he set abroach and defended that poison and factious doctrine of
Gunocratia: and by his inspiration, knox and Goodman, ded publish there books,
against there lawful princes.

Besides, look upon the story of Scotland, printed by Wautroller. p. 213. and
you shall find, that knox for an Apology of his practices, alleged Caluins
authority, That it is lavvful for subjects, to reform religion when princes
vvil not.

But Caluins opinion of that point, may be more manifestly proved, by the
practice of his darling master Beza: who sowndlie ded understand his doctrine
and ded bravely second him in all his platts. In the preface to the new
testament: dedicated to Queen Elizabeth. 1564. he used these words. Quo die,
scilicet (19 december.) ante biennium, Galiica nobilitas, (illustrimo Principe
Condaeo Duce,) tuis, and illustrissimorum quorundam Germantae principum,
subsidijs freta: non procul vrbe Druidum fortissime praeliata: prima
restunendae in Gallijs Christianae religionis fundamenta, sanguine suo,
faeliciter consecrarunt. So then hear is both resisting with arms: and
defijng there king, in the face of his army: and this I hope master Bilson,
will confess to be rebellion. And this act, which others would shadow, Beza
justifies so boldly: that in the same place, (commending the good services at
Meaux and Orleans, and that famous battle of Dreux, vvhearin he was a
principal, not an accessorie, he adds, Id quod eo liberius testor, quod istis
tum Concilijs, tum etiam plerisque rebus, quando it a Deo visum est* interfui.
To that place, (objected to the Caluinists, as an argument to convinc them of
seditious, both doctrine and practices) master Bilson shovveth much care, and
study, to answer.

1. That batle, (says he which Beza speaks of ar Dreux, was neither
against the laws, nor the king.

2. They took not arms to deprive the king, or annoye the realm, but to save
them self, from the oppression of one, that abused the kings yowth.

3. The Duke of Guise, hating the nobles of France (himself being a strainger,)
and to tread down the professors of religion, that he might strenthen him self,
to taik the crown, if ought should fall to the king (being under years) or to
his line: armed him self to the feald, etc.

4. The nobles of France, perceauing his malice, and his injustice, with
private violenc to murder so many innocents: gathered forces together to keape
there own lives, from the fury of the blood sucker. And in that case, if they
repel force, what have you to say against that?

6. For the kings consent, he was young and in the Guises hands; therefore his
consent, was nothing vvorth (that a subject should do execution by the sword,
upon his peopl, withowt order of Justice.) The king had neither age to discern
it, nor fredome to deny it, nor law to decree it.

5. We know not the laws of that land, nor the circumstanc of these warts?

7. Lastly. Beza, says he, allows, and exhorts obedienc to magistrates.
Libro confess. fidei. cap. 5.. 45. in these words. Quod autem attinet ad
priuatos homines, tenere illos oportet, plurimum mter se differ, iniuriam
infer, and pati iniuriam. Iniuriam pati nostrum est, sic precipiente Deo, cum
nobis illam viarcere non licet, ex nostrae vocationis prascripto, etc. neque
aliud vllum remedium proponitur priuatis hominibus tyranno subicclis, prater
vitae emendationem, preces and lachrimas.

At larg, I seth down his Apology for Beza, and the reasons: both by canse D.
Bilson, was at that time, a man selected and chosen to be the champion of that
great cawse; and his book was published with so great applause, as if he had
batred down the seminaries of Room and Douay.

Touching the first point, he is confident, that the battle of Dreux, was
neither against the law, nor the king: and yet in the 5. he corrects and
contradicts him self, confessing that he knows not the laws of the land, nor
the circumstanc of the war. So you see this great Doctor had a conscienc: to
affirm the certantie of a matter, whareof he had not scienc. And so I might
leave him bett, with his own weapon. But was that battle neither against law,
nor prince? assuredly against both, as you shall find by the laws of Charles
the VIII. 1487. and of Frances the first 1532. and of Frances the 2. at
Fountainbleau 1560. the which laws, I shall have occasion more fitly to
plead, in the case of Rochel and Montauban, in this discourse.

But how does D. Bilson, prove that the battle of Dreux was not against the
king? Because, the 1. Duke of Guise, ded Duke of Guise led the Areargard; and
tho it was his fortune to stand master of the feald, and winn the glory of
the day: yet had he not any charge at that batl, but of his own companies.
And so he fails in Not. See M. Ma^uisser in his commentaries, and, M. Lanovv,
in his discourses.
the verrie growndwork of his answer.

And whear he says, that the protestant Princes took arms, only to save
them selfs from there oppression by Mr. de Guise? it is a blind reason, for a
clear cavvse. For if that only had bean there reason: when they see the
Constable, marching in the vauntgard (whom none of them could accuse to have
abused the kings yovvth, or sought there oppression): why ded they not then,
lay down there arms, and depart the feald? and if it had bean only, to
defend them selfs; why ded they not stay at Orleans, or sum other nests of
rebellion, till they had bean assulted; rather then to affront and assail the
kings army? Why ded they set upon the Constable, the kings Vicegerent, and
the the honor of the Admirals house, (and the Admirals kinsman and great friend,
when he was prisoner at Melun for his religion, by commandment of Henry II.)
If there end had bean only to save them selfs, from the Duke of Guise; why ded
they fight with the Constable? No, this is, bus a mask; for Beza him selfs,
playnlie confesses, that the feald was fought, for this end, with there blood
to restore religion.

And where as he inveigheth so hotelie, against the Duke of Guise, that he was a
strainger in France: it seames he knew not, that the Duke was descended of the
line and brainch of Charlemaigne, (who was no strainger in France?) or that he
him self was a pear of France: that he was coosen German to the Prince of
Co^die; or that his moother was Anthonette de Bourbon: and that his
predecessors, had long enjoyed office and honor, in the court of France.
Neither peradventure had he hard, of the great services done by him, at Rome,
at Mets, at Verdun, at Theonuille, and Callice (when all France was in
Mourning and distress, after the Admiral had lost S. Quintins. (But that
dream, that the Duke of Guise aspyred to the Crown, (if the king and his
issew fail:) is to be pitied rather then answered: a fable (taken out of the
legend of Lorrain,) and the other libells of that time. Weigh and examine it,
and see the leuitie of folly. The king was young: his brothers younger: there
moother living; the king of Nauar, there trusty and noble fre^d (and a brazen
gate, betwea^ Guise and the crown:) and the nobility of France, as he says,
maid an association against the house of Guise. Then was it not likely?

Now it being apparentlie falls, that the kings was in the hands, and power of
the Guises, I com to the proposition, that the king had neither age to discern
it, nor fredome to deny it, nor laws to decree it: it rests to examine that
proposition, that the kings consent, authorizing that army at Dreux was
nothing worth, because he was not of age, nor at liberty.

What if the king had not age, to discern it? was it therefore withowt warrant or
law? A king haith two bodies: his body Politic, as it never dies: so is it
never defective of authority and direction. The acts of the body politic, be
not abated by the natural bodies access: the body politic is not disabled
to rule and govern by the nonage of the natural, see 26. lib. assis. placit.
24. whear by justice Thorps judgment, the gift of a king is not defeated by his
nonage, nor shall not embleamish the body. In the book of ass. see the case,
tit. droyt. plac 24. anno 6. E. 3. f. 91. for a writ of right brought by E.
III. of a manor, as heir to R. I. The exception of nonage against the king
was not admitted. For if the body natural die; yet the body politic (which
magnisieth the natural body,) is not said to die. So 4. Eliz. for leases of
the Duchy maid by E. 6. all the Judges resolved, they vvear good, tho the king
was in his minority. For the body politic extolleth the natural, and
alters the quality of it. And so though the kings body natural in his
minority can not discern and judge: yet that disableth not a king, that the
acts of his minority, ordered by his counsel, and by the Regent, should be of
no validity. Nay, your own Hottoman, in his Francogallia, will teach you an
other lesson, (tho he was Bezaes trusty Achates.) Resolume; would any
counselor like it well, if a Catholic in England should affirm, (as he might
more trewlie) that the chainge and alteration of religion by king Edward VI.
was not warrantable, having not age, to discern it; nor freedom to deny it,
(being in the hands of the protector and Northumberland: nor laws to decree
it, (till by his vncls authority and greatness, new laws wear enacted for it.)
If you approve not this: why do you disprooue the same in k. Charles IX. of
France? was the age of the one, a bar in law, and not the others? or was the
one, an absolute king, and not the other? or was k. Edward's consent,
sufficient to authorize his vncls doeings in spiritual matters: and was k.
Charles his consent nothing worth, to authorize the Constable and his army, to
pursew, his rebels?

Now concerning the last point, touching Beza his opinion: I must turn that
Canon against him self; for if Beza said trewlie, iniuriam pati nostrum est:
nobis vim viarcere, non licet: if it be certan, nullum remedium proponitur
priuatis hominibus, tyranno subjects, praeter vitae ^mendationem, etc. then
surely, master Bilson is betrayed by him, he seaks to defend: and Beza
betrayed the Admiral and Prince of Condie, to draw them into the playnes of
Dreux against the king, to fight for there religion: when vim viarcere non licet.

I will not stand to refell that opinion and error of D. Bilson, that the
Prince of Condie ded not owe simple subjection, to the king of France, but
respective homage, and so was not mearly a subject: because it shovveth a
palpabl ignoranc of the laws and customs of France: and besides that could
not excuse the Admiral, who at all could not plead any such protection, or
alledg any such prerogative. For if H. 2. might committ him, to prison
lavvfully: Charles the 9. as lawfully might cut of his head. But forasmuch as
Bezaes sentenc, is coninglie used, and cast as a mist to bly^d the eyes of the
reader: I will disperse the mist, and let you see what kind a man he was in
his proper humor, and in puris naturalibus.

Read his positions, and Catechism of sedition, (the practice of his piety)
the book called, Vindicie contra tyrannos; whear he acts the part of Iunius
Brutus, a noble Roman, (but the suppressor and enemy of kings.) First (page
15.) he propownds this question: if subjects be bownd to obey there kings, when
they command against Gods law? and then page 22. he resolves, we must obey
kings for Gods cawse, when they obey God. And page 24. as the wassel loses
his fief, (his lordship) if he committ fellonie: so the king loses his right,
and his realm also. And above all other, this is notable page 65. a conspiracy
is good or ill as the end is, at which it aymeth. which is a most wicked
Maxim, fit to mantain Rauillac, or Poltrot, or to be a buckler for the
conspirators of Amboys. Yet this page 66. goes a degree further. The
Magistrates, and one part of the realm, may resist the king being an Idolater:
as Lobna revolted from Ioram, for forsaking God. Does not this strongly
patronise the battle of Dreux? does it not teach subjects, to rebel, and to
plead, sic dicit Dominus, for there defense? but note well how fynelie, he
fortifieth this axiom. page 132. The government of the kingdom, is not given
to the king alone: but also to the officers of the Realm. And again, page 103.
France, Spayn, and England, ar customarily consecrated, and as it wear put in
possession of there charge, by the states, pears, and Lords, (which present the
people.) And p. 199. there is a stipulation in kingdoms haereditarie. As in
France, when the king is Crowned. The Bushops of Beauuois and Laon, ask the
people, if they desire and command, this man, shall be king. And what then?
surely it is no argument that the people, choose him. It is an acceptance, no
election: and a declaration, only of there submission, obedienc and fidelity,
as you may evidently perceive, by Frances Rosselet anno 1610. the ceremonies,
at the coronation. When was there ever an assembly of the states, to elect, or
consecrate a king of France? the kings, never count the time of there reign,
from the day of there consecration, but of there entrance: and Charles the. 7.
(Gaguin and Giles can witness,) was nether crowned nor sacred in eight years,
after he begonn his reign. And for the Pears? what think you, that they are as
Ephori. No they are pares inter se, not companions to the king. They are not
states, as in Holland, to rule and direct all affairs: for in France and
England all authority depe^ds upon the kings; and if they wear his consorts,
they wear not his inferiors. What is the state, but the authority of the
Prince? who only, by his letters patents creates the pears, disposes all
Offices, gives all honors, receaueth all homages, (as the sole fountain, from
whenc springs nobility and authority:) and he that either would restrain
that sooveraintie, or communicate it with others; makes no differenc of the
Crown of a kinst, and the la Beretta of the Duke of Venice. Many such like
rules, and positions, haith he published fit introduction, for Anarchie, and
mutinies: most of them false, and all wicked: vayles only to cover the face
and name of treason, that it might not appear, in his proper and ugly shape.

I might hear travel and wearye you, with as Good stuff out of the book de
iure Magistratus, (a bird of the same nest, for if it wear not Bezas, as many
think, It was Ottomans his Camerado.) But I will leave them both, for they
touch the string of sooveraintie with too rough a hand: nay rather they strain
to breack it, when they teach so gross treasons, that the states ar above the
king; that the body is above the head (a monstrous doctrine: as if any man
could (with judgment) maik a quaestion, whether the people should be directed
and commanded by the master or the man; by the subject, or the soouerain: by
the Princ of Condie and the Admiral, or by king Charles. and king Philip had
reason to cut of the head of the justice of Arago^: and to teach the people,
what was the true meaning, of nos qui podemos tanto, come vos, etc. All which
paradoxes, it wear easy to refell: but that I have undertaken only, to
discover, not to combat and encounter them: and because they are learnedlie and
religiously confuted all ready, by Barkla^e, Bauricau, and Blackwood.

Only by the way, I must inform you; that they deal politically and
conninglie, and profess not openly and bluntly, to have any liking, to
chainge the state, and depose, or ouerrule kings. But artificially they manage
all. First to bread a dislike of Monarchs; then to show the inconvenienc, to
depend upon the edicts of one man: then may they much the better, magnify the
authority of magistrates, by whom they might reform idolatry; and why the
Creatures of a king suppress the creator of there power. And yet, be sure, the
Consistories and elders muh rule all: and be judges, both of the clergy,
laws counsel, and king. They be the Rabbis, that out of there Sanhedrim,
must govern both church, and kingdom, by the Oracles of Geneua.

I may not forget, how vureuerentlie Eusebius Philadelphus, (Sc. Mr. T. Beza)
used king Charles in his book of Reueille matmattin: (whear usually he calls
the king Tyrant: and maiks his Anagramme Chasscur des^oyal. Read his rymes, and
scandalous reproaches against the Q. moother-Peruse the 40. Articles recorded in
that book, for the better advancing of seditious government. As art. 25. that
all cheafs and Generals, must observe there, ecclesiastical discipline,
ordained by the Synodes. And art. 40. they are bownd never to disarme, so long
as religion is pursewed, (persecuted by the king, he means.) So much patienc,
have these Saints: that seaking to reform all others, can not reform there own
affections But if you peruse the 14. and 15. art. you shall discern the
bravery of there irregular passions, intending thereby only to overthrow the
king, and the family of Valoys.

These wear the holy articles of Bearn 1574. coined with his stamp, and
communicated at Millun to all there Moschees, that they might he more stro^glie
maik war (as they Said) against there enemies, till it pleased God to turn the
heart of the French tyrant. Thus, ad gustum populi, principatus exigitur. At the
same time, was framed, and dispersed abroad, the life of Katharine de Medicis,
Francogallia, the Toxsan of Massacreurs, and the Legent of Lorraine. (For that
honor the house of Guise haith long had: that no man professed him self, an
enemy to the church: but he was likewise, at deadly seud with them.)

Hear I might taik up; and stay you no longer, with the description of there
virtues and loyalty: but that I desire to present unto you, what opinion the
grave and learned men of the church of England; and others also of gread
judgment, have dad had of these Evangelists of Geneua.

1. Doctor Sutclif, in his answer to a libel supplicatorie p. 194. confesses
that the protestants of the french church, taught for 30. years violent
reformation of religion, by the nobility, people, and private persons.

2. And in an other place, Beza (says he) in his book de iure Magistratus,
does arm the subjects against the Prince and he says, that book overthrows
in effect, all the authority of Christian kings, and Magistrates; and for the
book of Vindinciae contra tyrannos, which many affirm to be Bezas, or
Ottomans: It geues power (says he) to subjects, not only to resist but to
kill the Prince, if he impugn gods religion.

3. The same is also averred, by the late Archbush. D. Bancroft, (in his book
of the Suruay of discipline:) a man, who exactlie had learned, examined, and
observed there courses, and positions, and the great dainger growing to the
state, by the ministers either Scotising, or Geneuating, (for so he terms
them.) And the book of daingerous positions, page 192. does demonstrate also
the same.

To these I may add the judgment, of that famous Lawyer, Frances Baldwin, (who
had familiarlie conuersed, with Calvin at Geneua:) in his book, called
Responsio altera, ad Iohannem Calumum, Paris. 1562. page 74. Mirabar, quorsum
euaderet inflammatus tuus quidam apostolus, (Sc. m. Theodore) qui cum hic
concionaretur suis auditoribus, commendabat vehementer, extraordinarium illud
exemplum Leuitarum, sirictis gladijs per casira discurrentium: and obuios
quosque idololatras, trucidantium. Sed nunc audio, te vix contentum esse
^alibus Leu^is* And, page 128. I euiora (says he) sunt illa, cum statuis and
sepulchris, and ossibus principum ac martyrum, barbarum bellum indictum
videmus: cum civitates occupari, fana spoliari audimus, etc. But what nead I
labor to prove that Beza, and his followers, have caused all these vproars,
and commotions in France: when he him serf Epistola 40. Christophero Thretio,
confesses, that they must fight it out. Ego quidem pacem nullam, nisi
debellatis hostibus, ausim sperare. If you ask, who wear these enemies? he
answers, Cacolycorum castra tra^s Ligerim sunt. Thereby he means, the Catholics
and the kings army. And a litl before, ab eo tempore. nostri (copiss
foelicis^ime instauratis) Tolo^anum agrum infestarum; Inde ad Rhodanum vsque
progres^i, occupatis aliquot passim oppidis and arcibus, in quibus praesidium
reliquerunt. So they spoiled the contrie, disturbed the peace, surprised the
kings towns, fortified, and oppugned the kings forces: and yet these men, Beza
allows, and encoorageth. Thereby you see, how apt this holy man was, to
ruffle in the world. But this seames to be morbus in natus in the
Sacramentaries; and that malus coruus malum ouum: for Swinglius (the grand
father of them all tom. 1. art. 42. Reges (says he) quando perfide, and extra
regulam Christi egerint, possunt cum Deo deponi. In defenc of this Principle,
D. Bilson, auswereth; first more wisely and with discreation, I vndertaiknot
(says he) to defend each several man's opinion (though Svvinglius was not
every man; being the fovvnder and principal author of that sect.) Secondly
says he, they may be deposed, when they aduanc vngodlienes, as Saul was.
Tirdlie, Swinglius shows the cawse, why magistrates may be displaced: but he
geues no private man leave to draw the sword, or offer violenc, to any princ,
(though a tyrant.) And fourthlie (says he) Swinglius speaks of princes
elected, not successiue and absolute: and yet he speaks of them also in that
article, but allovves no force to be used against them. Is not hear two
contradictories, in one sentenc? Transeat cum reliquis erroribus. But answer
this, if they may be deposed as Savvl was; who is to depose them hear is no
Samuel, nor any prophet. May the people? no says he (blushing as asha med of
the grossnes) no private man: is it then a secret reserved to the Eldors? no
neither. Svvinglius himself, deals plainlier, and art. 42. and 43. he
expresses his own meaning. Cum suffragijs, and consensu totius aut maiori
partis, multitudinis, tyrannus tollitur fit Deo auspice. Hear is no exception,
elective and successiue, ar both concluded: and the people, have the sword put
into there hands. And to maik, it more olaynne; see his epistl Conrado Sonnio
l. 4. page 868. Permittendum est Caesari, officium debitum (but conditionally)
si modo fidem nobis permittat illibatam. Si nos illud negligentes patimur,
negatae religionis rei erimus. So this, factious minister taiks upon him to
determine, whether and upon what terms Caesar shall hold his place, or be
deposed. Gently, they will obey Caesar, if Caesar will be advised and directed
by them: other wise what is there course, they will taik with him? l. 4. Epist.
fol. 196. ad Vlmenses. Monet eos, vt coram auditoribus suis, sensim incipiant
detrahere personam imperio Romano. Quomodo, stultum sit, agnoscere hoc imperium
in Germania, quod non agnoscitur Romae, vnde nomen habet? Was not this Caluins
course, for Monarchies? the verrie same. But hear him further. Nimis amantes
estis rei Romanae; quid Germaniae cum Roma? sed prudenter and paulatim agenda
sunt huiusmodi, atque cum paucis, quibus credere possis, quod ardua sunt. Note,
how this Swiz labors to undermine the empire, and blow it up with his breath:
and what traiterous and seditious counsel, he geues for there liberty. Sensim
and paulatim, not openly and grosslie, nor all at once: and coram adiutoribus;
it is doctrine for a pulpit, a sermon to the people (who ar likest to applawd
it.) And how? incipiant detrahere personam imperio Romano, what have they to
do with Room, or Room with them? This man speaks naturally in his own
language, and by him the princes of Europe may see, what they are to expect of
these reformers, when they are armed with power.

Now, as I have declared, the principles, and Aphorisms of the great
Triumuirat of the french Church, Svvinglius, Calvin, and Beza; the tribunes of
the people, and the boute-feux, and ringleaders of rebellion, (whom our
learned Doctor of Oxf. would gladly have defended.) So it shall appear ex
effectis, that Geneua is the school of rebellion, and the seminary of all the
civil wars in France. Neither vvil I blott there names with any false
aspersions: for as there practice is the best Commentary of there positions, and
vvritings: so it is the best trial of there loyalty: and can give in best
euidenc, whether they be (as they would seame to be) good Patriots, and true
subjects.

First therefore, call to mind, both there beginning; there proceading; and there
continuanc, to this time. And in all these, three things ar specially to be
observed, 1. there many conspiracies, 2. there many and great batles against
the king and his officers, 3. and the horrible owtrages, and attempts, both
incomperable for cruelty, and incredibl for disloyalty.

I will begin with Amboys, (whear they The Conspiracy of Amboys.
begann to act the first Scene of there Tragedies. And thereof I will deliver, a
true and breafe Narration.

At the assembly of Nantes 1560. Certan of the Caluinists conspired to Seize
the kings person, and surprise the court: and to apprehend and endite the two
principal of the Guises, for seaking to invade and posses the crown, to ruin
the princes of the blood, and to suppress and banish religion. Which was whith
great deliberation concluded in January, to be executed at Bloys, the 10. of
March after. The cheafe of this conspiracy, was Godfrey de Barry called de
Renaudie, (who maid the Prince of Condy partaker of his counsel, and
acquainted with there platt; which he disliked not, if it might be performed by
form of law.) This was straingelie discovered, first by the Cardinal of
Lorrains secretary; and after by the advertisement of Cardinal Grauuellan.

And thereupon by good advise, the king soodainlie removed to Amboyse, and so
disapointed the conspirators, both of the time and place. And by that means,
the forces levied and appointed for that service, vvandred up and down, withowt
head and direction: and so the Duke of Nemours, with the trowpes he had,
apprehended many of them, and among the rest, the Baron of Castelnau: and
Monsieur de Pardillan, slew Renaudie, the general: and diverse others wear
executed. And the Duke of Guise, prouidentlie took order for the safety of the
king and the court: and so assured him self of the person of the Prince of
Conde, that he had See the commentaries of M Mic. Castelnau.
not power, to attempt any thing to there prejudice: and yet afterward, he was
committed and condemned to loose his head: but enlarged by Charles the ninth,
and for politic reasons, acquitted and declared Innocent. And this was the
first act, pretended by the Caluinists, to be done, for religion, and bonum
publicum.

The like was after put in practice, against 1. The conspiracy of Meaux.
Charles the IX. at Meaulx, 1567. the which the king happily escaped, by the
aid and noble service, of the Duke of Nemours and the Swissers. There purpose
was, to have possessed them selfs of the kings person, and of the Duke of
Aniou, and to have slain the Queen moother, (but by recovering Paris, they
wear all saved:) and the Cardinal of Lorrain, (whom they principally desired
to entrap) was forced to fly speadilie, and secretly, to Reames, for his
safeguard, (whear not long after he Dyed.)

I omit the practices, at S. Germain in 2. S. Germain.
Lay, against both the king, and Queen moother: which was so manifestly
discovered, that Mole and Coconas lost there heads for it. And the error in the
ill managing of Comment M. Castelnau.
that matter, (so many heads and hands being in it) bred the occasion of great
trovvbles.

Further more, to inform you of there 3. Battles.
open and actual rebellion, whearin they sought by the sword in there hands, to
compel the king, to Pacification. Remember first that furious and memorable
battle, upon the playnes of Dreux; the batle of S. Denis; the batle of Iarnac;
the batle of Coutras: the batle of Moncontour: and the beseaging of Roane,
(whear the king of Nauar lost his life. At S. Denis the Constable was slain:
and at Iarnac the Prince of Conde: and at Coutras the noble Duke of Ioyeuse,
ended his Days. The fealdes ar yet stained: France was let blood too
prodigally, and straingers wear brought in as surgeons, to launch the wounds
of it (which have left behing them greater cawse of lamentation, then
remembrance.)

And for that of Moncontour, whear the Admiral stood alone, as the sole
Champion of the Reformed churches the Missa-Pulta ded testify, what there
principal quarrel was; which by Bezaes devise was advanced, as a Basilisk, to
beat down the Royal standard of France, and the Labarum and cross of
Constantine.

Touching the Owtrages, and assassinates committed by these holy fathers, and
there disciples (who ar said, to be so innocent, for blood and murder.) Poltrot
shall have the first place in the Callender, (for killing the Duke of Guise the
kings Lieutenant General, in so horrible manner.) who confessed before the
Queen Moother, that Beza had Catechized, and encooraged him, to that heroic all
action.

2. Remember also how the protestants, in Valentia, used Seigneur de la
Motte-Gondrin (the kings Lieutenant in Daulphine,) who promised them not to
bring in the Gendarmerie to force them: if they would live peacablie with the
Catholics. But they assembled there forces, surprised and hanged him up in
cold blood, both in contempt of the king, and skorn of his office. (A villainy
not tolerable in any commonwealth, specially, when such tolleration and
conniuenc, was offered, and with so much favor.

3. But greater and more inexcusable, was the enterprise of Simon May: who was
induced by the same spirit, and out of the same school, to kill the Queen
moother, and Henry the third. But his purpose was discovered, and he was
taken, and executed. And this fact, can not be excused nor shifted of by any
coolors. For he confessed it, and accused, Seigneur de la Tour, and Monsieur
d'Auantigny (two gentlmen of good parentage, and byrds of one feather,) to
have bean his counselors, and abbettors. Who both wear apprehended: and yet
afterward released by his Majesty. (not willing to search too deape, into that
wound; either for the men, or the matter.)

4. Yet this ded not satisfy them; they seized and took possession of the
kings rents, and reuennues: they coined money: they surprised the cheaf cities
of the realm, Orleans, Troyes, Poictiers. Tours etc. and put in garrison, and
governors, of there own choosing, and for there own ends: and delivered one of
the keys of France, into the custody, and government of forreiners. all which
being done, with out the kings commission: proved plainly, that they usurped
upon the crown, the cheafe prerogatives of sooueraintie.

5. Lastly and most tirannicallie: Nicolas Froumenteau (a minister of the new
edition) confesses (l. des finances de france:) that in Daulphine only, the
army of the Huguenots, killed 265. preasts 112. monks and friars, and burnt
900. towns, and villages. And yet, both the Caluinists, and others, tell such
a pittiefull tale of the massacre at Vassy, by the Duke of Guise: as if no
creweltie had ever bean comparable to that: which how small a matter, how far
from the liking and consent of the Duke it was; when you hear it declared by
Monsieur de Chasteau neuf in his commentaries, you will say, Parturiunt montes.
It was a toye, and trifle in respect, of these crewelties, or of that at
Montbrison, that of Mornas in Daulphine, and many other places. I will not
tire you, with stories and discourse of the calamities of the church in France:
whear those that justly deserved, and unjustly complained against persecution;
ded persequute there neighbors most unjustly and tyrannically. Let the Monsieur
Arnold, le Reueille Matt. in Francoys.
world judge it by this: In these civil wars, 20. thousand churches, wear
destroyed by the Protestants: and yet these mem vvear born (they say) to edify
the church, Is it not likely? Mahomet could do no more, but plant his
doctrine, and establish his Alchoran by his sword as they do. Now let them
that are most partial, consider, (for tho I commend no fact of creweltie I may
excuse it.) the Admiral being the principal moouer and instrument of all these
perpetual motions: who can justly blame king Charles, by a mean extra
ordinary, to cut of such an extra ordinary member: rather then so pestilent
agangrene, should corrupt the whole body, and endainger the head? he, who now
in france, as the petty king of a new common wealth, ruled the peopl
(revolted from there soouerain:) maintained war against the crown, solicited
and called in the aid of straingers (upon false and disauovved pretenses:) he
who levied contributions, exacted tributs, coined money, seized the kings
reuennues, invaded his towns, vvaued all laws, what title or what
punishment do you think his offense deserves? for he that usurps the
regalities, either seaketh to vvear the Crown, or command it. And bycavvs he
was proclaimed traitor, 1569 I may call his offense, treason.

But per adventure, you may dream, that this age is a refynor of all former
errors and transgressions: and that now there is more civil and charitable
proceading by the Huguenots. There for I will represent breaflie unto you, the
true state and condition, of the reformed churches, in France, at this time
1621.

I pass over, the infinite trowbles, labor, and charges, that king Jews was
forced to bear and endure, all that summer and winter: I omit the garboyles at
Toures: and the practice of the Rochellers, to put in 6000. men into Saumur;
thereby to cut out sufficient work for the army therabowt, and so hinder there
march to Montauban. I will not delate, nor discourse upon the revolt and
disloyal practices at Gergeau (who stood out, against the Count S. Paul,
governor of the province of Orleans: as Sancerre ded, against the Prince of
Conde.)

I will not exaggerate, the treacheries and conspiracies of Vatteuile, in
Normandy (plainly proved, by his papers and instructions intercepted:)
whearupon the Duke of Longueuille, was constrained to disarme them of Deape,
Roan and Caen, to prevent the dainger, if they should ioyn with Vatteuil. But
I will beginn with S. John d'Angely; which held ovvt, and refused submission
long, (the king, being there in person:) and though Monsieur de Soubize was
sommoned to render the town, or stand to the peril and attaint of treason,
yet they ded hold out and defend it, so long as there remained any hope.

How was his Majesty defied and despised, at Montauban wheare he continued at
the seage a long time, with noble, and most expert soldiers, not with out the
death and loss, of many gallants, and men of good desert and service
(specially the two brothers, the Duke de Mayn, and Marquis Villars, who wear
generally lamented.) Yet the Consuls would not yeald, the commons vvear
obstinate: and so the king by good advise raised the seage. And after his
departure, the Insolent Burgers, led (as in a triumph) all the Clergy of the
town, with skorn full indignities. And the Huguenots in Montpellier and
Languedock, deprived Monsieur Chastillon from all gouernemens, by sentenc of
the consistory, and razed 36 churches.

Now as these reformers vsurp upon the Royalties of the king: so ar they as
bold with the inheritanc of private Lords, when it may serve there turns. They
would not suffer, the Vicount Lestrainge, to enjoy his lordship of Priuas,
because he was a Catholic: and they put him out of his own castle of Lake
(whereof the Marshall Memorancie put him in possession,) and gave it to Buson
(one of there fraternity) as belonging to him: tho it was none of the towns
of Assuranc, comprised in the list at Brewet 1598. Neither would these good
men, permit the kings Justices (being delegated thither, to compound the
controversies) either to hear mass, or have any use of there religion.

What society, what commonwealth can stand and continue, if this Anarchie
stand and bear such swaye? If by pretenc of religion, they may disseise the
right owner: and hold what they can compass, for the use and assuranc of there
confaederates?

But why do they riot, and rage thus? what cawse have they, to run such
desperate and disobedient courses? the king is graciously content, they should
quietly and safely use and exercise there own religion: yet this contents,
them not; they will not demean them selfs, quietly nor converse peaceable with
the Catholics: nor obey the kings laws, in temporal affairs. you can
neither dowbt, nor be ignorant of this.

For ded not the king assure them, at S. John d'Angely, that he would protect
all of the reformed religion, that would obey him, and observe his edicts? ded
he not both promise and perform the like to St Malloret, deputy of the
assembly of base Guien? ded he not the like, to the Duke of Tremouille (son
in law, to Monsieur de Bouillon) who came to that seage, tendered his service,
and protested his obedienc to his majesty? ded not the king committ the
government of that famous Saumur, to the Count de Sault, granchild of the Duc
Desdiguieres: tho he knevv him to be of the reformed religion? Ded he not long
before 1615. answer the petitions of the Huguenots, that he meant not by his
oath at consecration (which was for repressing haeresies) to comprehend
therein, his subjects of the reformed religion, who would live under his laws,
obedienc, and order?

And how graciously the king haith dealt with Rochel, and how vvilling rather
to regaine and reduce, then to destroy it: appeared well, by his employing of
Monsieur Desdiguieres, to persuade them to obedienc and conformity: who
accordingly ded solicit them by letters: and proposed diverse arti^les, which
he thought reasonable, but the deputies Ch^las, and Fauas refused them. What
could a king do more, then seak to vvinn his subjects? who not with
standing, published a long and frivolous declaration, taxim him for unjust
persecution, by the counsel and enducement of the enemies of the state, and
there religion.

To disprooue and discover the vanity thereof; I will deliver the cawses of
the kings proceadings, against these mal contents: and what reason he had, by
arms to mantain his royal authority, which they unjustly by arms, sought to
usurp. There for he was constrained at Nyort, to proclayme Rochel and there
adhaerents, rebels against him, and guilty of treason.

1. For first it appeared by the Edict of Nants art. 77. that king Henry the
fou^ht, discharged the protestants, from holding any assemblies, general or
prouincial: and likewise from all unions and leagues: and from houlding any
counsels, or by them decreing and establishing any acts. Also art. 82. he
ordered, that they should forbear, from all practices and intelligenc, with in
or withowt the realm. And art. 32. that they should not hold any Synods,
provincial, withowt a licenc obtained by the king. All which they promised
the king to observe: and let France judge, whether they hane broken there promise
or no.

2. Besides they intrude upon the state, and both taik and fortify places of
assurance, vvithovvt the kings warrant, and against the order set down, August
1612. whearas it is evident, it depends upon the kings favor and goodness, to
grant and assign the places of surety, and not for them selfs, to choose and
vsurp them.

3. Add to that, there presumption and disobedienc, to introduce the reformed
churches, of Bearn, and adioyn them to France, by an act of union both
spiritual and temporal, in the assembly at Rochel 1617. and they maid an
apology thereof, promising to assist Bearn, in case of oppression. and bownd
them selfs by oath, 1. to observe and execut all that should be determined in
that assembly: 2. and to employe, there lives and goods in maintenanc thereof:
3. and not to reueal the propositions, aduises, and resolution of the
assiftants to any person what soever, (not excepting the king.) And all this
was done contemptuously, knowing that the king had sent to all the provinces,
and ded expresslie for bed that union; and knovving that the king had set down
order in his council to the contrary, Besides how ded they use ^egnard, whon
the king sent commissioner for the church goods in Bearn? what disorder they
committed at Pau, against him, it is skarse credible.

4. I vvil pass over the assembly they maid at Loudun, with obstinate
disobedienc: I will only note and show you, how they presume to encroach, upon
the kings graces and favors to them, withowt, order or dispensation. The king
permitted them, to assemble at Grenoble: and by there own authority, they
assembled at Nismes. The king suffered the^ to assemble at Chastelleraut, or
Saumur, only to choose there two deputies, (who wear to remain at court, and
there to receive and exhibit, all there complaints and greuances.) But they
co^trarilie maid an act of ^nion: and for there assemblies: and took the same
oath, which the leaguers before had maid: but with this differenc, that they
protested there service to the king, so long as he remained Catholic: but the
Huguenots, contrarily, (le souuerain empire de Dieu demeurant tousiours ^n son
entier.) So there service was reserved to God; but none to the king, was
expressed. And they shovved there mynds most playnlie when they sent to the
camp at Sansay, to ioyn with them that ded oppose, the kings marriage. But this
was not all.

5. They established in each prouinc of France a Council, to hear of the
affairs, orders, and government of the contrie: and importunatelie urged, to
have counselors in the parliement, at Paris.

6. I will add yet one act, more odious, and of more presumption, and treason,
then all the rest: which was maid at the assembly of Rochel, 1621. whear ovvt
of there own authority, they divided the provinces of France, into vij.
Synodes, which they called circles, and added Bearn for the viij. And therein,
wear orders set down for governing the army: and a general, and officiers for
each circle, (as if they meant, to cantonize France.) And they decreed, art.
11. that no treaty, nor truce should be maid withowt there assembly: art. 35.
that the general assembly in respect of there great charge, should arrest the
kings rents, and moonie dew for tails, aids, gabells, etc. and appoint
officers for collecting the same. art. 36. that they should seize, and let to
farm, all goods Ecclesiastical and profits of churches, and reuennues of
personages. And art. 41. they took the like order for all the profits of the
Admiraltie (which articles vvear signed, by the President Combart.) And all
this, is pretended to be justice, and not disobedienc; and as foul as the
fault is: it is covered with the fair shadovv, of Gloria Patri, and with the
name of religion. And surely, it was vviselie, sayt of Tullie, Totius in
iustitia nulla Capitalior, quam little, qui cum maxim fallunt, id tamen agunt,
vt viri boni videantur.

I will not declare the opinion of the Ciuilians, what a sect is, and which are
justly called conuenticles, and congregations, against the prince, and the
ancient laws in force: and how saction and Conspiracy ar defined, (which ar
practiced and used for the propagation thereof:) and whether they be within
the compass of treason or no? I refer you to Farmacius part 4. to Decius l. 7
c. 7. and c. 20. to Bossius, and to Gigas, who can with better authority
resolve you. I will only alledg the municipal laws of France, (which
heartofore have bean the bridle of Justice, to curb and break such unruly
colts.)

And first this decree was maid by king jews 11. 1477. All treaties, against
the kings person, or his estate, and the realm: wear decreed to be treason.

To the same effect, a law was enacted by Charles the VIII. 1487. By Frances
the I. 1532. By Frances the II. at Fountainbleau 1560. And by Henry the II.
1556. all men wear prohibited to bear arms, or to entertain any particular
intelligences, or to hold any counsels, or assemblies for conferenc, but in
town houses, or publik places. By Henry III. at Bloys 1579. an inhibition was
maid, to assemble any trovvpes under pretenc of particular quarrels, or to
enter into any association: and it was enacted that to hold intelligenc; or
maik leagues offensive; or to have participation within, or vvithovvt France:
or to leure men of war withovvt the kings licenc, should be judged and deamed
as High treason, and the offendores to be holden as disturbers of the state.
All which laws ar set down in the Code of Henry the III. printed at Paris
1597.

And all lawyers, assirme the same by the common laws of the land, Frances
Rogueau, des droicts royaux: Bodin de repuclica: legrand Coustumier: and other.
And, good reason. For as withowt order, there can be no peace: so withovvt
Justice, no society: and Caluinists differ (in that point) nothing from
Anabaptists, if they will not subject them selfs, to the obedienc of laws,
and magistrates: (who as king Iosaphat said 2. Paralipum. 19. non hominis, sed
Dei exercent iudicium.) And surely, I may bodlie affirm, that Caluimsm haith
cast the state of France, into a desperate disease, and such as requires an
Aesculapius: if neither the majesty, nor the forces of a king (the eldest son
of the church:) nor the wisdoms of his Counsel and Parliements: nor the
authority of the, estates so often assembled: nor the obedienc dew to Justice;
nor the peace and safety of the kingdom, can move these out laws of Rochel
and Montauban, and the rest, to yeald up to the king them selfs and there arms;
and seak for that royal grace and pacification; which all his other
devvtiefull subjects of there own tribe, do merciefullie enjoy.

THE 3. TIT. OF THE REFORMED CHVRCHES IN SCOTLAND.
BUT perauentur, if this fiery zeal, of The cavvs of the trovvbles in
Scotland.
these Rabbines of Geneua, wear transferred into Scotland, (a coulder Climate:)
it would be quiklie cooled, and qualified, and procead with a better temper.
No surely* for it haith bean tried by exampl, of an infamous Emperick: who,
both inflamed, and corrupted the whole body of that kingdom, with his
irregular zeal and such aboundanc of ill humors; as thereby grew a pleurisy of
trowbles in that state, which could not be cured withowt effusion of much blood.

The authors and actors of the alterations and tumults in Scotland, vvear as
violent as whirlewynds; which blow down all that stood in there way, even the
crown it self, and royalty. John knox, Goodman Gilby, and Primo there doctrine.
Buchanan, (wear the principal instruments, and the legati a Latere, from
master Calvin.) who vvhear bravely seconded, by mais. David Fergusson (a
learned shoemaker, and minister of Dundee) by M. Couerdale, Willox, Rous,
Harriot, and Mongommerie: Victrix legio, and Nouatores strenui.

All of them Ministers, and such saltpeter men, as vvear fit for fire
works, and to prepare matter for powder, to blow up the state of the
clergy of any nation.

And by these rare men, was the Church of Scotland repaired, and reformed:
according to the scantling of Geneua, and the Platform of the Elders.

Knox, far unlike to Nehemias, both for course, and quality: yet he acted his
part, how properly, and piouslie, Langey his contrieman can tell you, who
ded write of his virtues.

For Buchanan, he was ever a rude and slovenly Swiz, of a presumptious
audacitie, and factious nature. he was one of them that in Edinborough, in the
time of king James the fifth, ded solemnlie in Lent ear the Paschal lamb: and
being convicted for that Iudaisme: which the king him self examined: his
partners vvear condemned and burnt for that haeresie; and he escaped and fled
over into other contries, (as a man reserved to be a plague to his own.)

But if you would discern and try there spirits, there peceablenes, there
patienc, and there sanctity read there Theoremes, and by the maxims of there
doctrine, you vvil find them extraordinary Doctors, and skarselie matchable.

Knox libro, ad nobilitat. and populum Scot. beginus thus to instruct them.
Neque promissum, neque iuramentum obligare potest populum: vt obediat, and
auxilietur tyrannis contra Deum.

And in his History of Scotland, page 372. Princes may be Deposed by the
people, if they be tyrants against God, and his truth: and there subjects ar
free from there Oaths and obedienc.

And that you may not think, that only, knox ded hold this opinion. his
fellovv Good man also, in his book of obedienc, sings the same note out of
Exodus 17. Toti populo (says he) hoc onus incumbit, vt animauertat in idolatram
quemcunque nemo excipitur, sieve Rex, sieve Regina, sieve Imperator. This is his
Homely, whereby he warranteth the people to punish any Idolater, be he king or
Queen. And how, and by what order, is that to be done? This is Gods
commandment, to the people, vt in simili defectione, rectores suos, quia Deo
ipsos abducunt, a^fu^cas abripiant and suspendan. If the governors fall from
God, or with draw the people from the true worship of God: they may worthily
draw there kings and rulers to Tiburn, and hang them up.

Buchanan in his book de iure regni Scotiae, is not behind them in such grave
and wholesome counsels. For he says. page 61. The people is above the king, and
of greater authority: they have right, to bestovv the crown at there pleasur:
they may arraign there princes, and depose them: to them it appertains to maik
laws, and tho princes to execute them. These be the Proverbs, of that Solomon
of Scotland, as provvd with the concept of his own judgment in these
mysteries, as with his poetry and ballets. This was a man vvelchosen to
instruct a prince: but better to infect his auditors.

Yet is there one advise of knox, which is to be recorded with admiration. fol
372. It vvear good, that rewards vvear publicly appointed by the peopl for
such as kill tyrants, as well as for those that kill vvolfs. Now they all
accoumpt those kings tyrants, who ar professors of the Catholic religion: and
so they know, what to trust to, if the Knoxians can prevail.

But if you will yet, have a litl patienc, you shall hear a most prophan
dialogue of Buchanans, (whearin he neither shovveth divinity, nor humanity.)
They hold says he) kings must be obeyed good or bad. It is blasphemy so to
say. But God places often euel kings, to punish the people: yea, and so does he
often, private men to kill them. But 1. Timoth. we ar commanded to pray for
princes: yea, so we ar also to pray for theau^s. But Paul commands obedienc to
kings: yea, Paul ded write so in the infancy of the church, but if he lived
now, he would say otherwise. As if this time, ded afford a more ripe and
solid judgment, then S. Paul could apprehend.

It is most true, that great high-Soaring poetical wits, have ordinarily,
some taint and touch of frenzy: for other wise he would never have written
thus madlie, vsteron proteron, setting the Cart before the horse, the people
before the king, confusion to overrule Order, and Anarchie before a Monarchy.
Thus the people is armed to kill tyrants, by there doctrine; but by what law?
for if they do it not by justice, and order; it is an act of confusion, and
impiety. Yea, but the zeal of Gods truth, and the light of the gospel, be the
sword of Gedeon, and the arms of Judith; but who must draw and direct that
svvord? the people, and even against the king him self? what is Anarchie,
disloyalty, and sedition; if this be order, and government?

To procead. what nead I trovvble you further: see the book of daingerous
positions who gives this sentenc of them: this new divinity, (says he) is
not holden by knox and Buchanan alone: but generally for ought I can perceive,
by most of the Cheaf Consistorians beyond the seas. That is by Calvin and Beza,
and all there brood: (who have bean heartofore about 1570. so much reverenced
and esteamed in England: that both the schools, and the pulpits, ded magnify
them, as Oracles of the Church: for whose releaf and perseruation, public
collections, and prayers vvear maid in the kindome.

And because you shall not err, and conjecture, that these books and opinions
wear never approved at Geneua: remember the precedent discourse of the
reformed churches in France: and call to mind that master Whitingham, (in his
preface to the book of obedienc,) testifies that the same was allowed, and
commended by the cheafe deuines of that city (1. Geneua.) And Calvin him
self, epist. 305. to knox. Does applawd and encourage him to procead. And
Bucchanans works, ded pass as current in Scotland, and cum priuilegio; till
(long after the impression of them) the king ded prohibit them to be printed,
or published.

So as you may see it was not one Goodman, nor one knox; that taught and
defended these impious paradoxes, but the whole congregation of Puritans: and
not in one contrie, but universally: and not lately or newly, but
originallie, and as there peculiar and proper discipline. Nay, there holy Geneua
bibles prove it: to be so: whear in there notes upon the 2. Chron. c. 15.. 16.
they allow, the Deposing of Queen Macha, by her son king Asa, for idolatry:
and yet reprehend him, for want of zeal, that he put her not to Death by fire.
The like axioms, are not allowed at Doway: nor the like notes, arr fownd in the
Reames testament.

But all this, though it be baed enough: yet there practice and the execution of
there decrees is worse. The Bushop of Ross, Leslaeus in the. 10. book of his
story. Eo (in quit) knoxij prorupit audacia, vt public pro concione nobiles
perstrinxerit, quod Iesabelem ex medio non sustulerunt. Yet these wear but
words, now blows follow.

He and thirty of his compaine begone there reformation of religion, by
surprising the castl of S. Andrews, withowt warrant or commission:) and
murdering the Cardinal Betun, 1546.

The Queen regent summoned him to appear, and answer for these owtrages; he
refused it. she proclaimed him traitor: he contemned it. then she sought to
apprehend, and restrain him: but he solicited the burgesses of S. Iohnston,
and Dundee, to suppress the frieries, to pull down images, and to overthrow
the Abbeis of Skone, and S. Andrevvs, which they effected. And yet they left
not so for they

But stay a little: I will relate unto you a 2. A parlieme^t. 1560.
story, of the greatest and most disloyal Barbarism, that ever was committed
by Christians in any nation.

In the year 1560. (the Queen being in France;) by the instigation of knox,
they enacted this as, a perpetual and fundamental law of the state, to abolish
the Catholic religion: and they decreed, that whosoever defended the popes
authority in Scotland should be banished: and further they repealed all former
acts, of the ancient kings maid to the contrary.

But by whom, was this law maid? the words of the act show. The three estates
under standing, that the jurisdiction of the pope, hes bean contumelious to
God, etc.

Quo vvaranto, was this parliement, summoned and ratified? for hear is showed
no commission, from the Queen, expressing any authority given to them for
that end: nor her consent is produced to confirm such an act. So hear is a
parliement of the three estates, withowt a king: and disanulling the precedent
acts of all former kings. a thing incredible, in a kingdom: there soouerain
living, and obeyed as king. and to maik that seame good by order of law, which
of it self was most disorderly and defective: they procured an other
parlieme^t 1567. Earl Murrie being rege^t, and the king skarse out of his
cradle) to confirm the validity of that parliement 1560. and therein cap. 9.
was an oath drawn to be given to all succeading kings, to mantain that
religion then received: and to establish the confession of that church. and for
the defects of this second parliement; I forbear to vrg them, they are evident.

Had not the Queen then reason, to send the french forces into Scotland: to
bridle such usurpers, and so seditious practices of her subjects? But yet a
greater mischeaf follows.

By the Instigation of these Caluinists, and by the ambition of some noble men.
3. The Queen's deprivation.
They deprived the Queen from her government; and dishonored her with the most
capital and criminal accusations, that slander and malice could devise: and
cast her into prison not vvhithovvt, dainger of her life. All which was
furthered by Beza, (the Tibullus of Geneua) who Epistola 78. ad Bucchanan.
provoked them to it, calling her Medea, and Athalia: and nullum illius
sceleribus idoneum nomen inuenio. And how un merciefullie he pleaded against
her, (after she was prisoner in England,) for the hate he head bear to the
house of Lorraine: it appearith by his book of Reueille-matin.

And tho I am apter to bury old quarrels, them to renew there memory: yet to
Justify Innocence, and to discover perfectly the practices of Puritanisme,
and to detect the iugling and crafty conveyanc of these conspirators: I hold
it necessary, to declare exactlie what inducements vvear pretended, for so
heinous an offense.

They alleged, that it was done for the zeal to justice, for the honor of the
realm, for the satisfaction of foreign nations (who much detested so crijng
sins as Murder, and adultery:) and there for they wear forced, to keap her in
prison, till she could clear her self, for procuring the death of her husband;
and purg her self, of that intention to marry Bothwel.

Touching the Murder. It was unlike to 4. For the murde of her ^usband,
be true: for her sex was not fit for such a butcherie: and a royal nature,
could not harbor such a dishonorable treachery, (though she had just cawse of
offense against E. Murton, being fled into England for that offense; vvithowt
the Queen's konwledg, and allowanc, her said husband revoked him. But they
object, that Dowgleish (E. Botwels main) was executed for it. true. But what
then? It was he that brought a box of letters of the Queen's to Bothwell, which
he received (to carry to his master) of St James Balfour at Edinborow: and by
the intercepting of these, all there packing was revealed. Lies have ever one
leg short, to maik them halt.

1. First was it like, that either the Queen or the Earl would repose such
confidenc in Sr James, and so great secrets? knowing him to be at the devotion
of the contrary faction?

2. Or was it like, that she would send them at all, having given commandment
in the letters, to burn them: which she might have done at home, withowt
sending them to him?

3. Besides the Queen denied the letters to be hers, (tho her hand was
counterfeited) as some times before it had bean.

4. Further more there was neither superscription, endorsement, seal, nor date
of them: so as they wear liker to be copies, or proiects, or fictions of her
ennemies.

5. Add also, that he (who delivered them, could never be fovvnd ovvt, to
discover the pack: and Dovvgleish who was accused to carry them) protested at
his death; that he never knew of any such letters: and there for to stopp his
mouth, he was executed by the Lords of that faction, out of the way.

6. Lastly, if the Queen had sent them, yet was there contained in these
fictions, no express proof of any unlawful act, or attempt, or practice, to
charge her with: And if there had bean pregnant proofs, that she had endeauored
to have her husband murdered; and to marry Bothwel, (which is the worst of the
case:) do you taik that to be a sufficient and lavvfull cavvse for subjects
to taik arms against her, and depose her? Holy king David was in the like
case, and yet for his trespasses against Vrias, and Bersaba, he ded not forfeit
his crown, nor endure so hard a censure, as Queen Marie ded. S. John Baptist
reproved Herod for his adultery: but ded neither counsel nor exhort the
peopl to deprive him, tho he was an I dumean, and an usurper. neither was
Edward the IV. threatened deposing, for keaping an other man's wife: nor Henry
the eight, for cutting of the heads of so many his own wives, and committing
as great sins spectante populo: for mihi vindicia, is Gods prerogative;
subjects are not competent judges of there soouerains.

And surehe these boute-feux, while they presume to punish there kings for sin:
precipitate them selfs, into haeresie, (even that which Wiclef, and Muncer have
bean, by general counsels condemned for.) Such is the fury of vndiscreat
zeal, like a sword in a madd man's hand. But to return to the matter, what
probabilities, what vehement presumptions, ded they produce against her? 1. she
mourned fayntlie for his death, (which was a sign she was weary of his life.)
and 2. again, she acquitted Bothwel for his death, and ded not punish him. What
a Nugipoliloquides, was Bucchanan? must princes be deposed upon probabilities?
or vvear these signs, any evidenc matterial? for her mourning, and the
funerals; the body was embalmed: he had the honor to be enterred, besides king
James her father: the Lord Traquare, Justice Clark, and others attended the
corpse to the grave: most of the Counsel being protestants, would not admit the
Catholic ceremonies: neither is it the custom in Scotland, to reseru the
corpse 40. days: and lastly, it was not decent for her to be there and mourn
personally, as a subject, but as a soouerain and yet his wife: and that she
performed so long, till both her counsel and phisicions dislwaded her, (as Sir
Henry kiligrew might witness, who was sent from England, to condole, and
confort her. What could be required more of a wife?

Now touching Earl Bothwel; the Iugling Touching E. Bothvvell.
of Murrie and his faction, is worthy to be revealed; was not Bothwel acquitted
for this crime by his pears? even by Murton,

And touching the Murder, the Lord Harris, accused Murrey of it: and the reason
was, because at Cragmillar castle, he, Murton, and Bothwel, consulted,
conspired, and determined the kings death: and there wear indenturs maid, and
subscibed for the effecting of it. And that you may not stagger and dowbt of
this. Powrrie, Paris, and Hay wear all executed for the murder; and at there
death, they ded call God to witness, that these two (Murrey and Murtan) wear
the principal contriuers of that assassinate. And John Hepburn, Bothwels
servant, ded the like at his execution, for the same fact, protesting that he
had sean there articles and writings.

And yet is it maid more manifest by this, and there crime and practice more
odious: for to blind the world, first they took arms, as they said, to
apprehend Bothwel; and after they sent out ships to pursew him at sea Both,
wear fallacians: for they never meant it. for if they would have apprehended
him: why ded they dismiss him? and why ded they send the Lord Graing, to
advise and will Botwell to depart, and promised that none should follow, and
pursew him? and so in dead no man was haistie to do it, (tho he stayed two
months till Murries return:) for they knew, that by taking him, they should be
bewrayed them selfs; and therefore they meant to betray and ouerreach him; and
offer him up, as a sacrifice to the malice of the world, for there own
purgation.

So then these two Catelines cawsed the king to be slain, and used Bothwels
assistanc and help in it: and then accused bothwel, and the Queen, as the
conspirers and contriuers of it. (tho till her emprisonment, she ded never
know, who wear the accessaries, or who wear the Principals.) Now to diue to
the bottom and deapth of the cawse.

The E. Murrie never loved trewlie the Lord Darlie: he was once in arms and in
the feald to have killed him; and thereupon fled into England (whereby appeared his
good disposition.) Also he persuaded the Lord Darlie, to have a hand, in
killing Dauie the Queen's secretary: at which time, they set a pistol to the
Queen's belly, being then great with child, to terrify her (whearby she might
have bean in dainger to miscarrie.) After ward the lord Darlie, then king)
seeing his own dainger, craved, and obtained the Queen's gracious pardon: and yet
fearing least Murrey might misinform the Q. against him, resolved to kill
Murrey, and discovered his intention to the Q. about it, who would not suffer
nor endure to hear it.

This coming to Murries knowledge; as he had before practiced to estraing the
Queen from her husband; and offered to procure and sew ovvt her divorce from him
(which she utterly condemned:) so now he resolved to have him maid away,
(and yet conninglie before the murder) he went from the court, and after into
France, that he might be thought innocent, in the matter. And trewlie all these
things appeared, plainly to the Queen's commissioners, who hard the cavvse at
york: as it seamed by the notes of Sir Raphe Sadlers (touching that busienes:
which I have sean:) but it was maid afterward as clear as the son, by the
execution of the E. of Murton.

Now upon these false and treacherous fowndations, they grownded there disloyal
conspiracy and seditions, at Ca^barie hill; there slanderous libells: there
imprisoning her at Lough leuin: and the act of parliement for her deposition,
as appears by the words of the statute 1567. (because if she lived still
Queen, she might taik reueng of her wrongs:) and lastly the resignation of
her crown, (which they stowtlie affirmed at york, to have bean voluntary,
and of her own seaking.) But whether it was voluntarily resigned, and by her
own election: there course of proceading will maik it manifest. For first
(when they had conspired, that she should be forced to resign, or to loose her
life) they drew a form of resignation, fit for there purpose. Then Athol,
Liddington, and the rest, sent Sr Robert Meluin, to signify her dainger: and
to persuade her to yeald, to there motions for the resignation. and subtillie,
they alleged (as out of there dewtie, and welwishing) that it could not
prejudice her being extorted.

Also Sir Nicholas Throgmotton, arrived at the same time in Scotland, (but upon
other pretenses:) and was a fit man to further the contriuing of that
busienes, (and what wynd soever ded blow him thither: he ded his work, like a
conning artificer, and deserved well to have bean created lord Hurly.)

Afther these preparations, came the lord Lindsey with commission from the
counsel, (whose hand had bean washed before in David's blood:) and with stearn
and grim looks, tendered the writings unto her: with fearful threatening, if
she ded refuse them* and thereupon she subscribed them being a prisoner; and to
save her life, lost her crown.

Call you this a free resignation? The act of parliement in dead calls it so
(1567) and she gave power to the l. Lindsey and Ruthen, (as her dearest friends,
and so in dead they wear) in her name to renoune the government, and to
appoint, Murrey the Regent, (which he had long, and earnestly gaped for.) and
in Cap. 12. they decreed she should remain prisoner till her trial: and Cap.
19. her enditement was drawn most scandalouslie. The cavvses alleged for her
resignation wear these. First she was vvearied: then, she was notable in body
and spirit to endure the pains: and that she might in her life time, see her
son settled in the government, (then which, nothing could be more joyous to
her.) and it is true, I think she was vvearie of such tyrannous disloyalty:
but in the flovvre of her age, there was no likelihood either of her
disabilitie to govern; or of her weakness, and such infirmities, as that she
could not endure the pains. but for her son, in his cradle; that was the way
to be ridd of them both. But Domini est salus, euell^^ de laqueo p^des suorum.

And to conclude after the Queen straingelie escaped, at Hammilton (the house of
a noble family, and well affected:) she revoked all, and protested, and
confessed, the force and violenc offered to her: so as there was neither formal,
nor orderly proc^^ding in procuring it. besides the noble earls of Hontlie,
and Arguyle: the lo. Harris, and others never consented to it. and in that
parliement, there was not above 4. Earls, 6. lords, one Bushop, and 3. Abbots.

Could not religion be planted in Scotland, withowt such treasonabl shifts? ded
you ever read of such impostors, or men of so large conscience, to maik show of
reforming religion, and to abuse the world with the name of piety? The
Apostles obeyed Nero, (a tyrant and a monster:) and suffered death, rather then
they would give exampl of disobedienc. Te ancient fathers, obeyed Dio^letian,
and Julian (tho an apostata.) Elias reproved Achab; but ded not solicit the
people to commotion. D. Bilson, alleges many reasons, to disprooue such
conspiracies, (as directly contrary to gods words, upon any surmises what so
ever, all which you shall see hear after.) and surely not withowt sound reason.

For war maid by a subject against his king, is unjust though the cawse be
just: and why? the iustnes of the cawse can not give lawful power. A just
cawse; a good intention: power and jurisdiction, must concur, to maik such
public actions warrantable. so if a king him self taik arms, for an unjust
cawse: though his intention be good, the war is bad. Yet are not subjects
warranted properly to taik upon them, the cognizance and judgment thereof:
they must leave that to the high tribunal of heaven, and to the kings
conscience. But these commotions in Scotland, wear popular tumults, and
conspiracies against there soouerain: and had no good cawse, nor good inte^tion:
and no authority at all. Now because I am urged to discover the true and
principal motives, that induced these men, to cast them selfs into such a
Goulf: as they must either neads perish: or runn the whole state upon a rock,
and wrack it. I will tell you, out of Aesopes fables, a tale, to divert, and
refresh you.

In Africa there wear two great forests, near adjoining. in the one a Lion
governed the beasts, in the other a Lyones. The Lion (being rich, and full of
pray and booties:) feared least the Lyones should seak a foreign mate, and
grow of greater strenth, and invade his forest: and therefore called a council
of his beasts, to advise, how he might rest quiet and assured. The bull
(presuming of his strenth, and used to gore, all the foreign vvolfs that came in
his walk) together with the bore, and the bear, contemned these vain
fears. An old Ape, that lived in the forest, and was used to counterfeit,
persuaded the Lion to feign kyndnes, For great hearts, vvear soonest vvonn with
fair semblance. Reignard (the fox) disliked not that: but knovving that the
Lyones, had many hongrie and ravenous wofs, and wily foxes about her: advised
the Lion, to send the goat, (a grave bearded personage,) to visit the Lyones,
and renew friendship: and under that coolor, to Deal both with sum of the
wolfs and foxes: and bread in them a jealousy of the lyones, and fear of her
creweltie: and therefore to persuade them, to stand upon there guard, and maik them
selfs a free state, and so live at liberty and under no command.

The Goat performed the service wisely. Now among the beasts under the lyones,
there was a Mongrel in greatest favor: he hearing the motion consulted with his
brethren, and undertook the busienes; but said he, we have among us crevvel
beasts, what if they shall dislike this, and seak to deuowr us? fear not that,
said the Goat, we will send vow mastifs to guard and defend you. Yea, but said
the Mongrel, what shall we be the better, or the fuller fedd by this: oh said
the Goat, all the pray is his, who is master of the feald: get you the Lamb,
and leave them by the ears for the purtenance. Thearupon, the Mongrel, with
the wolfs and foxes that wear his friends: conspired, entraped the Lyones: and
drew her to fall into a deape pit, out of which she never recovered.

Raignard hearing of this, sent unto the Mongrell, to get also into his
custody, the Lyones whelp: and so he should be sure, presently to rule and
have all; for I have fownd, said he, by experienc, that a present morsel is
ever svveatest: and possession is the cheaf point in law. And afterward
either the whelp may die; or it shall live at your pleasure and dispose. This
is the fable: the moral I leave, til I can have time to expownd it and moother
Hubbars, tale together. For Hear I would gladly end, this description of the
Puritan church of Scotland, the beginning, and the progress thereof: but that I
perceive, you desire to know also the true cawse of this fiery distemper, and
the incredible contempt of all authority, (which is an accident inseparable to
them;) vvhenc it springs, and why it is more peculiar and proper to a
Caluinist, then to any other sect. I will show you breaflie my conceit.
Calvin, when he was (after his expulsion) invited home again from Strasburg,
wheare he lived with Bucer, and sucked long of his milk: by the persuasion of
his friends, he was content to return to Geneua; upon condition that he might
establish his new discipline, (the Idea wheareof he had apprehended in
Germany.)

So by general consent, he returned: and shortly after erected his
consistory: which is the Quintessenc of Puritanism, the Oligarchie of Elders,
and the Inquisition of Geneua. A strain of policy, far above Luthers gross
reach. For so he ded foresee, he might become the Dictator of the church at
home, and abroad: at Geneua specially, to censure all offenders, bridle all
oppositions, and perpetually invest the eldors (by that authority) in the
soouerantie and government, bot he of the town and church (which of an
Episcopal Hierarchy, they maid now a perfect oligarchie.) And that it might be
received abroad with more reuerenc, and be obeyed more religiously, and be
plausiblie entertained in the world (tho it wear the Idol of his own
fantasy.) They set it down as a mark of the true Church of Christ, and
joined it, in aequal rank: with the preaching of the word, and administration
of the sacraments; necessarily, fundamentallie, and inseparably.

So then this great Sultan of the Lake, sending his Mammalucks, into every
province of France, planted the first reformed churches there, after this
modele of Geneua. Thereby the synodes, and assemblies of France, impatronized
them selfs upon the principal towns in the kingdom: negotiated with the
nobility and commons; and had mutual intelligenc to hither. And making ever
(politick^ie) the people partakers of there eldership, and share authority and
command with them: they wear sure always of perpetual and strong support,
and by all probability they hoped, at last to pull down the huge pillars, of
the Catholic Church, and to convert all into Caluinism, and set up there
throne, there consistories, and Sanhedrin. This was that Medium, whearby in
France, in Scotland, in the Palatinate, the puritans maid them selfs supreme
heads, judges, directors, and commandors of all: and whearby princes, and
nobles ar maid there wards. Hearupon proceaded such violent courses, such
intolerable irregularities: such indiscreat zeal, as I have allreadie
declared. Ded they not at Rochel refuse to speak with Monsieur de Bi^on the
kings ^^baslador directed unto them? ded they not so tire Monsieur Lanoue with
there inciuilitie, that he was content to forsake them? And in the articles of
Bearn, artic. 25. A^ cheafs, and generalis, ar entoyned to obseru there
Ecclesiastical discipline. ordained by there Synodes.

And see what course they took lately in the assembly at Loudun: remember
how they of Rochel divided France, into Circles and provinces, appointing
generals, creating officers, making counselors, (as if they had bean the 12.
pears of France:) and shooting out the bolts of there exco^mmunications, even
against there greatest friends, (if they offend them:) vvherby Monsieur
Chastillon, had cawse to discern both there insolency, and there indiscreation,
of late, used against him.

Such is the violenc and fury of Caluinism: which, some call the discipline
of Gracchus: some, call, the policy of the church; some more properly, the
school of faction: but zeal and religion, no man calls it, but them selfs.
And hear it comes fitly to my mind, that in the conferenc at Hampton court; a
Bushop recited to his majesty, master Butlers definition of a Puritan, scil.
a Puritan is a Protestant, ovvt of his vvitts. (Which, was not so merielie; as
trevvlie and substantiallie spoken.) for if you would dravv his pettigree,
and declare his original, and of what family he descended, he is (a
Protestant:) there is his generation. If, because he comes of a younger and later
house, you will assign him his differenc, and distinguish him from the rest of
his sect: (out of his wits) is his coonisanc, and badg. Now, why this
differenc is assigned as proper to a Puritan, I will show you the reason.

We find by experienc, that caeremonies and solemnity, have ever in the Church
stirred up and bred a reuerenc and devotion, in the hearts of the unlearned: and
do eleuate the sowles of the godly, from mudd and earth, in the time of
prayer. And so also that order, and gravity of Bushops and Prelates vvear ever
wont to find respect and estimation, with the people. Now ask a Puritan, his
opinion of, Surples, corner-cap, and the habit of a minister (which distinguish
them from the laytie:) he calls them the rags of Antichrist, the badges of
superstition.

For the Communion book; he calls it, the Ports and breuiarie of Satan: and
that such set prayers, extinguish true zeal. The Ecclesiastical courts, he
calls the Synagogue of the Deuel, and the excrements of a corrupted
discipline. And what opinion of Bushops, haith he? surely, the same that
Luther had. for william Ames, says, Hunc Episcoporum ordinem, e medio
tollendum, vel denuo Papam reuocandum ab orco. And the like opinion the English
at Amstardam hold, in there book called confessio fidei anno 1607.

Read the censure they give of the Clergy and ministers of England; whom
they disgrace to be a multitud, of forlorn Atheists, soldiers of Antichrist,
and a bastardly, ministry, page 16. 11. and 14. and the like is avouched in
the book of daingerous positions, c. 12. From this fountain sprung, the libels
of Vdal, Penrie, Martin Junior, any work for cooper, supplication to the
President of wales, and many more: offensive to the Queen, and trowble some to
the state. The spring head of all this was Calvin; who Epist. 305. acknowledged
magis sibi placere, reformationem Scoticam quam Anglicanam. and why? Epist. 126
ad Cranmerum. Corruptelis Papatus, audio relictam esse congeriem, quae non
obscuret modo sed prope modum obruat purum and genuinum Dei culium. Thereupon in
Queen Mary's time, the English church at Geneua was Antagonist to the English
church at Frankfort (by whose means and endeavors, the authority of Bushops,
was then defended) which they knew to be the only way to suppress,
Puritanism. so you see the Puritans ar men that stand upon there pantaples; and
points of honor, for there discipline: and will not learn of there prelates, nor
be subject to there canons and iniunction: vvhearby a man may conjecture they are
not verrie well in there wit. But what meant master Butler, and what solid
reason had he for his definition? Surely he had hard of the garboyles of
France: of there horrible desseins in Bohemia: and of there hurly Burlies in
Scotland: he had read Basilicon Doron, (written by a pen, sensibl of there
discease and disorder:) he had read the book of Philip Nicholaus, de regno
Christi, superintendent and cheaf of the Lutherans at Wirtenberg, full of
fearful predictions of the power, attempts, and plats, to aduanc the reign of
the consistorians.

He had bean advertised of the sentenc of John Schuts, (a learned Lutheran, who
described them to be men, that in brachio seculari confidunt, and plerumque
sunt homines seditiosi, causamque suam ormata manu iueri volunt. Libro 50.
causarum. He had hard, the kings opinion of them, in monitoria prefatione ad
Imperatorem, thus. Ego a puritanis, non solum a natiuitate, continue vexatus
fui, verum etiam in ipso matris vtero, propemodum extinctus, antequam in lucem
editus sum. And do you think he ded not understand, how the ministers, wear in
feald at Starling, under Gibson, called the king Hieroboam, and persequutor,
and threatened his extirpation: nor how scandalouslie Lawson opposed and
affronted the king: nor, how Pont and Baquanquel, by open proclamation, and in
the presenc of a public notarie, wear so hardy as to censure him, and to
withdraw the hearts and love of the people from him.

Yet this is not all, that may be auerred to disanul these seditions and
popular consistories: they are condemned by there half brethren (the Swinglians,
which is a thing much to be noted. Hear the voice of Gualtherus, minister of
Zurich, Tigurinus, how bitter a sentenc he pronounces against them, in
Comment. in 1. Corinthians. cap. 5. says he, Galli habent sua seniorum
consistoria, penes quos, est omnis potestas, and iurisdictio Ecclesiastica: and
in quibus omnium bellorum contra regem, and consilia acta, and subsidia
collecta sunt. The french ministers have there consistories of Eldors in whom
rests the supremacy in all cavvses Ecclesiastical: and by these both all
counsels and resolutions ar taken, and all impositions appointed, to mantain
the wars against the king. And what estimation, Musculus holds them vvorthie
of; appears locis commun. cap. 10. tit. de officijs ministrorum. So you see,
neither of them bow the knees, to this Baal, nor magnify Caluins Idol.

But if you would look thorough (with a pearcing eye, the absurdities of the
Disciplinarians; read Schulting his Hierarchica Anacrisis, lib. 15. cap. 19.
20. and 22. Whearby you may perceive how all kings ar maid subject to there
excommunications, (the trevvlie Brutum fulmen) of these Eldors, and what
confusion it breadeth in the civil state, (which learned Hooker, wisely
noted:) and gow both nobility and commons must assamble at the summons of the
pastor (as the head of the parish, the President of the Counsel:) and then,
what conclusions they determine and decree, arr rules, and of sufficient
authority, to bynd the Parish to obedienc.

So every parson, is a demi-Pope in his parish: the elders ar suprem
magistrates: and Calvin, really Papa and cheaf pastor: though ovvt of his
humble pride, he will not vouchsafe to be, nor be called Doctor.

Besides master Butler, knevv: that vvheare Philautia and Phantasia arr
conjoined, and reign as matches predominant. in the breyneand body: there must
neads be a heart svvelled and blovvn up with singularity, and with a
conceit, that they only know the truth, and the true worship of God; and
that only they stand in grace, as men predestined to glorieand bless.

Upon this dream, they contemn all others for there defects and imperfections:
and being transported with strong passions, and inflamed with the feruor of a
provvd spirit (more then of charity, and sober zeal:) they ronn into
desperate actions, as furies that regard neither Majesty, justice, or
government. And in dead there be some diseases that ronn in a blood, and arr
almost hereditarie to some of there family (as frenzy often does:) which
leaves alvvaies a taynt and a spice, of the staggars in there vital spirits,
as if they had bean bitten with a mad dog.

And therefore master Butler knovving the sumptomata of there disease: might with
skill, and iudiciouslie set it down as an Aphorism, That a Puritan, was a
Protestant ovvt of his vvitts. And so I leave him, till it please God to cure
or convert him, specially in Scotland.

TITVLVS QVARTVS, TOUCHING HOLLAND, AND THE UNITED PROVINCES.
WE ar now to arrive, by course, at Holland, and Zelland, that horrible The 4.
proof of disloyalty. By exampl of Holland.
Akeldama, and feald of blood; and the theater of tragical and lamentable
stories. Whear I will rather declare, then delate, with what fury the Lutheran
faction begonn, and with what violenc the Caluinists proceaded; and with what
calamity they both continued, (for as you have hard there axioms and positions
before at large: so the practices and tyranny of there followers, ar hear best,
to be discovered.)

And above all the actions of there conspiracy, the Union of Vtreght, was the
most capital and infamours. A devise, (according to the rules of Iunius
Brutus:) an imitation of Swiz, and the Cantons: and a strong argument, to
convince them of rebellion, (though they ever marched under the name, of
Religion, and bellum sacrum.)

This Union was maid by the states 1578. The form^ of the union of vtreght.
who seeing the fortunate proceadings of the Duke of Parma, and the course of
the Malcontents; entered into a perpetual league, comprised in 20. articles,
for there mutual support and succor.

First they of Holland, Zelland, Frize, and Gelders, ded ioyn, Contra omnem
vim, quae sub praetextu nominis Regij, aut religionis inferetur.

After that, the contriuer and ringleader of all, the Prince of Orange, and
they of Anvvarp and Gand, came with into the league, and subscribed it, the 14.
Februarij 1579. the which was after ward again confirmed at Haghe, 20. Iulij
1581. and the scope of all this was, to abandon and expel there leage lord, the
King of Spain; and to depose him from his own dominion and inhaeritanc.

Therefore upon that, they established an edict, que le Roy d'Espaigne est
descheu, de la Seigneurie du Pays-bas. And to maik it more authentical, they
devised a form of Abiuration, from the king, and a particular reuocation and
dispensation of there former promise and oath of obedience, in these words. I.
W. N. Svvearanevv, and bynd my self, to the provinces united, to be loyal and
faithful to them, and to aid them against the King of Spain, comme un bon
vassal du Pays.

And when they had taken that oath, they broke all the kings seals; pulled
down his arms; seized and entered upon his lands; rents, customs, and all
other haereditaments, and took the same into there own hands. And as absolute
lords, they coined moonie in there own names, placed and displaced officers of
the state, banished all the kings counselors, published edicts, possessed the
church livings, suppressed Catholic religion, beseaged Amsterdam, and used all
the marks and notes of sooueranitie, in there own names.

Whearupon Raald, a counselor for frizeland, hearing this new oathe, which was
generally tendered to all men: upon the horror and greaf thereof, he dyed
soodainelie, (as of an Apoplexy.)

The reasons, they gave, why the king of Spain, had forfeited his title and
right, wear these: For 1. suppressing there religion, 2. for oppressing them
with tyranny, 3. for abrogating there privileges, and for holding them in
bondage and servitude: for such a magistrate, they are not bownd to obey, they
said, but to eiect him as a Tyrant.

An example and president of daingerous consequenc, and which deaplie
concerns all princes to look well to. For if subjects may depose there prince:
and maik them selfs judges, when he shall forfeit his crown and dignity
(which praerogatiue the Rochellors, may challenge as lawfully, as the
Hollanders:) qui stat, videat ne cadat, kings had nead to maik there seat sure,
and sit fast, for these men maik it, but a slipperie hold. And in dead ambition
and treason, can never find a fitter cloak for there wearing, then that which
is maid of the Holland fashion, by religion.

Now, that you may the better judge of The general quarrel.
the particular quarrel of the Hollanders: I will set down the true grownds for
the defenc of the general, and why they took arms at first. The original and
principal cawse, of this long and crewel war, was the spring of the new sects,
in the low contries: and under the shadow of religion, all the factions in the
state and all discontentements wear masked, singular commodum, and priuatum
odium. And as the peoples natural inclination to novelty, ded set it much
forward; so there wanted not a concurrenc of forreiners, who served (as bellows
to blow the coals, both out of France and England.)

Charles the fifth, out of his wise prouidenc, remembering what a peace of work
Luther had cut out for him in Germany; and with what dainger, charge and
difficulty he overcame it: Intended for the quietness of this contrie, and for
his own honor and interest, to prevent the propagation of the Martinists, and
other new sectaries, lately sprung up in these contries. And he could devise
no better remedy, then to establish the Inquisition there. (which he ded anno
1550.) Wheareof Marie Queen of Hongrie then regent, to her great honor,
procured both a mitigation, and an explanation. But he resigning all the
government to his son: retired him self from the world, (whearin he had bean
long tired,) and in a most memorable manner, consecrated the last act of his
life to God and devotion.

Afterward king Philip likewise finding, The Inquisition. 1.
how largely the brainches of Anabaptism, Libertines, the family of Love, and
others, ded spread abroad, and grow up with Lutheranisme, in Flanders: and
what dainger might ensevv upon it, to the state, if no good order vvear taken
to prevent a further ancrease of mischeafe: he follovved his fathers counsel,
and at large renewed, the commission, instruction, and articles for the said
Inquisition, anno 1555. which was a thing most fearful and discontenting to
the inhabitants of the Netherlands: who alleged that in regard thereof, all
straingers would depart the contrie, and by consequence all traffic would
decay, (which is the gold mine, and maintenanc of these provinces.) But in
dead, they knew best there own disease, and what affliction and scourge they
should be subject to: being for the most part inclined to innovation. and this
they apprehended, as the first cavvse of there commotions.

2. Besides an other prudent and politic act, added more fevvel to the fire,
and an increase of coffeehouse: which was the erection of the new
bushopricks.

3. Thirdly the authority and power of the Bushop of Arras, was much
disdained: and his Cardinals hat maid him more odious, as a man too
supereminent in a state so popular: and the greater his obligation was to the
Pope for his honor, the more was the malice of the nobility, and the hate of
the peopl increased against him.

4. Furthermore, the better to cloak and cover there intentions, with the veil
of bonum publicum, they urged to enjoy there ancient liberties and freedom:
and that no strainger might bear office and rule among them, and that the
Spaniards might be discharged from all residenc in these lands.

5. Lastly and specially, they desired toleration, and liberty of conscienc.
So as in effect, the names of religion, and the Commonvvelth, vvear maid the
standard bearers of all these commotions. Now concerning, these greauances:
the first is a name of more terror, then in dead it is. Not so fearful to good
men, but a rack to offenders; devised upon necessity against the Moors in
Spain: and continued, upon experienc, of the use and benefit of it: and tho I
can commend no sign of crevveltie, yet can I not condemn this: bycaus, it
adds nothing to the punishment of heresy, (more then the law before
inflicted:) but exacted only, a more strict and seuear execution, and course
of examination, by the inquisitors: it shovveth a more care of the governor;
when he fyndeth abuses and dainger in an offender. And also. bycawse it was the
sole Antidot, whearby only Spain, is and haith bean, so well and so long
preserved, from the infection of sects, and the contagion and tumults, which
innovation usually ingendreth (whearwith all the kingdoms in Europe, have
bean embroyled.) And the Spaniards them selfs, never complained of it; not felt
it ever as a yoke or burden upon them (who are not verrie apt, to bear
burdens.) Neither is it, in se, a more bloody law, or a more fearful
execution of justice, then the consistory of Geneua, and the seuear
commissions and proceading of some other contries, (as shall hear after
appear, by the comparison.) Besides, as is was a curse, zealouslie at first
propunded: the execution was likewise as wisely afterward suspended. So as the
jealousy and fear of an act, more then the action, drew all this blood.

And for the second, it was a politic and prudent invention. a suaffle, to
bridl sectaries; and a sicle, to cut down the vveads growing up in the church.
For setting in each prouinc, grave and learned men, to stand as watchment and
sentinells, to foresee, ne quid in commodi respublica and Ecclesia patiantur:
they might better, and more prouidentlie, with there authority either prevent,
or cut of the heads of that Hydra, which ded then spring up with much terror.
Neither was the matter and motion new, for Philip the wise Duke of Burgondie,
had long before desired, byt could never effect it: knovving it to be a thing
neadfull, because at that time, almost all the 17. lands (except Arras) wear
under the diocese of Bushops, who wera straingers, and the subject of foreign
princes, (which was a thing not convenient for the state.)

And what good this chaing haith wrought, experienc perfectly and daily
shows. for now every diocese is more carefully visited: and the Bushops,
being of the same nation and language: as they have a more natural compasion;
so likewise have they more knowledge and care to instruct there contriement,
and to vvead out the disorders and abuses growing up among them; then any
strainger, would or could have. And that was the cavvse, why it was alovved
and ratified by the bull of PIUS IV. anno 1559.

Now touching Monsieur d'Arras: albeyt his wisdom and experienc in affairs
both of the church, and the state, was sufficiently known to the kings: yet
because the Prince of Oreng, and the Counts of Horn, and Egmont, ded jointly
write to the king against him: his Majesty (tho to the great hinderance of his
service,) was content to remove him, for there satisfaction and contentment:
and when he was called away, neither was the contrie quieter, nor they
ceased from practicing.

As for there liberties and franchises, ded not the king at the Joyful entry,
confirm them all? then how, and when ded he after violate them? was it for
preferring the Spaniards? there wear few of them left in ahe Netherlands, and
fewer cum imperio. Was it, for the offices of state? the king distributed all
the gouernements among them selfs, (natives of that contrie:) so great trust
and confidence, he reposed in them. He maid the Count Egmond Governor of
Flanders and Artois: the Prince of Oreng, Governor of Holland, Zelland,
Vtreght, and Burgondie: to the Count Arenbergh, he gave the government of
westfrizeland, and over Isel: to Count Barlaymont, Namur: to Count Mansfeld,
Luxemburg, and Chinay: to the Marquis of Berghen Lile and Douay. So as the
nobility, could not justly taik offense, nor have expected more honor and
command, then was favorably, given them. And for the further assuranc of his
good affection to them, he left his sister, the Duchess of Parma, Governor
general: a woeman, of a peacable spirit, and who was like to bear the bridle
with a mild and gentle hand, and to be advised by there counsels.

So then, what was the original of these commotions; All was actuallie quiet;
the fire lay covered, and as dead under the Ashes: till the time that the
Baron of Brederode, delivered in his supplication to the Duchess, with demands
neither reasonable for them to ask, nor safe for her to grant. The furtherers
of chaing of religion.


1. In the mean time the Martinis increased ane grevv strong in the contrie:
first by there matches with Germa^s and Lutherans. The Earl of Culenbergh
married one: Horn matched with the sister of Count Harman: the Prince of
Oreng, by his moother was allied to Count Solmes; and his wife was sister,
to Morris Duke of Saxony: and the Grave of Scherenberg married his sister.

2. Then, Count Ludowick, the Princes brother, a soldier, a man of a great
spirit, and a Lutheran was a powrfull instrument, both to maik a party, and
to back it.

3. Besides Flaccius Illiricus (whom they sent for from Germany) and other
ministers dispersed in all corners, ded incense the people much. But after the
quick silver of Caluinisme was brought in, the fire ever after was unquenchable.

Then ded the flame burst ovvt. The people, as in spite of all laws, begonn
to mutine, broke down the kings arms, and grevv so vvild, as in a rage, they
pulled down image, sacked the churches, spoiled the monasteries, and contemned
all magistrates, that soughr to appease the trovvbles. So as the Duches of
Parma, fearing there fury, and distrusting there violence: determined to retire,
if she had not bean disvvaded and stayed by some of the nobles.

4. And yet had she daily more and greater cavvse of dislike, and distrust: by
the private conuenticles, preachings, and insolency of the people (openly now
Lutheranising:) and specially by the many secret meatings and assemblies of
the nobility, vvhearof she complained much.) For she ded well consider, that
as the people could work no noble effects vvithovvt a head: so the nobles
vvanted forces and power to compass there desseins, withowt the assistanc of the
people (who by there inducements, appeared now in there own likeness, and
attempted that alteration, they most desired.)

Heareof the Prince was the cheafe capten, tho he played least in sight, and
would never shovv ovvt-vvardlie to favor any chainge of religion: for all that
he ded practice, he pretended to do for the commonwelth and the general good.

He was assisted by the Marquis of Barghen, Montignie, and Florenc Montmorancie
Count Horn, who was now grown a perfect malcontent, not so much for religion:
as for his own particular respects and occasions; his debt; the rejecting of
his suit for the gournment of Zutphen; and above all, the execution of his
brother Montigny in Spayn.

By means of these noble and populer persons, diverse assemblies wear procured
(as the nurces, that fostered the conspiracies.) First at Breda, whether among
others Egmond was invited, (who had the greatest power and swaye with all
military men in that cont^ie:) and shortly after, as the fruict and effect of
that Assembly, Brederode delivered his petition to the Duches for the
religions Vried. Afterward they had meatings, at S. Trudon, at Hoocstrat and at
Osterweal. Whearby that noble Count Egmond was undone. For at his arrainment,
he was charged with this article; that he was privy to the confaederation and
agreement, at these assemblies. And passage: and that he ded neither dislike,
nor dissvvade the proceading of the confaederates.

And of the same articles was Count Horn endited, adding this further, as a
particular charg, to him, that he threatened to levy 50. thousand Men, by
violenc to reskew his brother, and reduce him home.

And upon the proof of these accusations, they wear both condemned: as by all
law, by reason of state, for exampls sake, for the Regents safety, and the
honor See Sir Roger Williams story.
of justice it was necessary. Albeyt it is certan, that Count Egmond was
conninglie circumvented by the Prince, and drawn to his own confusion by plats
and policy: for which at his death he was repentant, (being a man of a
plain, magnanimous, and noble disposition.)

What Prince could endure such indignities, The cause of reaucing the Spaniards.
and not seak both to prevent the like offenses, and to taik reueng of the
offenders? was it not high time to arm, when the people contemned religion and
government; and the nobler, wear there patterns: when the cities wear in
vproare, and the whole frame of the Commonwelth was shaken? had not the king
reason, to send Alua with his forces, as well to repress these present
conspiracies; as by the sword to subdew such rebellious spirits, which could
not be reduced by lenity to obedienc. You may see, it was high time, to
encounter Oreng, who had almost undermined the government: as he had
discooraged the governor.

And touching the companies conducted hither out of Spayn (against which the
Prince had taught the contrie to repyne:) was it lawful for the Prince to
bring in the Reistres, and for his brother Count Lodowick, to bring in the
frenchmen to invade Heynault: and was it not tolerable for the king, to send
his army, to defend his own inheritance? was it lavvfull to surprise Mounts
by force, and was it not more lawful to expel them by force? and seeing it
could not be done withowt force, surely if the Duke of Alua had not bean so
near, to encounter and bear dowen there malice, the king by all probability
had lost his footing in the Netherlands.

And let no man dream, that if the Duke had not comed at all, the fire had
bean more easily quenched, and the people less provoked to fury. For these
confaederations of so great persons, ded portend the generation of some great
monster; and the manner of the birth, and first appearanc of the Geuses, by the
encooragement of the governors of the state, ded prognosticate a crewel storm,
to all men of understanding: neither wear they like men, by any bitt in a
woemans hand, to be brideled: so as of necessity, the king was, to send Alua.

And the rather, bycaus he could not hut know, that M. Chastillon, the Admiral
John Pettit.
of France, ded send to baron Brederode, persuading and incensing him, not to
accord with the Duchess of Parma, (for so they would be deceived:) and offering
him in case of necessity, to assist him, with 4000. gentlmen. And Count
Ludowick, after his defeat at Mounts, ded lie at Rochel among the Caluinists:
and the Prince went to France of purpose to prepare for a future invasion. And
the same Admiral shortly after solicited with great earnestnes Charles the
9. to divert all his wars into Flanders, and taik upon him the protection of
that contrie. And Aldegond, in Germany as carefully ded solicit a party, to
combyne with them. so then they labored upon all sides* to offend the king:
and if he seak to defend him self, must he be taxed for tyranny and creweltie?
surely that state must neads be out of order: that presumes to censure a
king, for seaking by his ministers to punish disorders, and reduce all into
order.

The Duke of Alua, could becawse of none of these disorders precedent, (the
lenity and mildnes, of the merciefull Regent, maid them insolent: and yet the
verrie name of the Duke before he gave any offense, maid them seak to
forreyners to oppress him.

And after his arriual hear, who can blame him, if he maid war with rigor;
perceauing the general impression of malice, in the peopls hearts against him?
specially being advertised, that the protestants had combined in the passion
vveak to kill him, at the monastery of the grean vallie, in the forest of
Sauue near Brussels; (whether he used to go many times for his devotion.) It
was well known, that Monsieur Rifot, Carli and Villars with 700. horse, and
500. foot, conspired when the Duke, and the nobles, and his followers vvear at
M^sse in the church; to beset the place, and with fire and devises, to burn
both men, church, and Monastery, good and bad, friends and enemies: (the
which, the two Guidons confessed.) and the like execution, was intended at
Brussels against the Spaniards, as Pettit, Mendoza, and Michael of Isselt
testify.

Neither ded they cease there malice, and mischeafe when he was recalled: for
that noble and wise Duke of Arschot, advertised Don John, that Oreng endeauored
to seize his person, to disposses the king of the sooueraintie: and to
establish liberty in the low contries. I ask not who set Ratclif, and Gray on
work to kill him, at Namur, for latet anguis in herba. And ded not the
Caluinists, as fynelie contriue at Antwarp, to have blown up with gunpovvder,
the famous Duke of Parma: as he was to pass in the high streat, with the state
of the whole contrie attending him. So as it appears, as coye as they maik
it, they are not so free, and clear: but that protestants may be charged, with
treasons assassinats, and powder plats: nay more; to be the first inuentors of
it, as long ago in Scotland appeared, and the king haith good cawse to remember.

Now for the authors and actors of this The authors of thy. union.
union: the States, and the Prince wear the Contriuers of it. And touching
the Prince, he was a man politic, popular, ane a great hovvskeaper: (both
which qualities stood him in good stead.) The house of Nassau, in Germany,
was ^ncient, and honorable: but was advanced in this contrie most by
marriages; this william, (because his father turned Lutheran) Charles the
fifth ovvt of his princ^lie affection, took him from his father, and commended
him to the care and education of the Queen of Hongarie, his sister. And
afterward admitted him into his own chamber for many years. Then maid him
general of his horse: and after raised him to the honor of his Liuetennant
general. And to maik his obligation the greater to him, he maid choice to send
by him, as a man of most trust, the Imperial crown to his brother king
Ferdinando: and ded like Vise commend him highly to king Philip (tho diverse
forewarned him, to taik head, that he ded not noorish a snake in his bosom.)

Add to these favors, the Emperors furtheranc of his match, with the Count of
Burens daughter and heir (whearby he was highly advanced:) and specially,
above all other things, he procured Renatus of Challon, Prince of Oreng, to
maik this william his heir, (when the President Schorus was wholly against
him.) And forget not the honor, king Philip ded him, to committ so many, and
so great gouernements, to his charge, and sidelitie. was it possible, that any
thing could corrupt this man, and divert him from thank fullnes, and
allegiance? Ded they after give him cawse of alienation and hatred, or he took
a cawse? When the king was to depart into Spain. The Prince (after the Death
of his first wife) aspired to marry the Daughter of Christierna Duches of
Lorrain, (coosen germain to the King.) And therefore he labored to have her maid
governor of these provinces: and so he should in effect by that allianc, swaye
the whole government, (for which he had gaped long: and was a competitor for
it, with the Count of Egmond.) But the king, preferring the Duchess of Parma,
the Prince lost both his hope and his wife: and therrupon grevv his hatred
both to Alua, and Granuellan, by whose means he imagined that Parma, was
preferred: and the other rejected.

So ambition was the true internal motive, of all this rancour: but religion
was maid the owtward cawse, and the mantel to hyde it. Ambition is a passion,
that can not rest and sleap, withovvt dreaming of a reueng: and therefore he
first married in the house of Saxony (the sanctuary of Lutheranisme;) he
incited Brederode: he set a pike and quarrel betwean Egmond and Granuellan (who
had stood his best friend before, in many matters of importance:) he studied
and practiced to hinder the coming in of Alua, (purposing a certan reueng, for
a supposal of that he ded not certanlie know.) He never after shovved him self
well affected to the kings affairs nor content with any favors. afterward,
he invaded Frize, directed Lumay to posses Bril, and what he could in Holland:
he gave order to his brother Seherenbergh to maik him self master of Zuthphen:
and placed Saras governor of Flushing, that the world might see the error of
Alua, in neglesting so long, a place of that importance.) So as I may well
seye, he was the great vvheale, vvhearupon all the state was moved and
turned.

I will conclude, that after he sought to be reconciled with the king. (by
intercession of the emperor, and the Duke of Bauier,) and could not compass it,
modo and forma, as he desired: he grevv desperate, in all his attempts having
ill succes; and fovvnd no harbor so safe for him as Holland, the best nurce to
mantaine his decayed estate; a receptacle of all religions; and a fortification
strong enough by nature and art, wheare he might safelier write Apologies then
fight; encoorage faction, and plant a new religion, (wheareof it seameth he
was not at first fully resolved:) for tho when he was at court, he went to
Mass: yet from his childhood he was thought to have had some seads of
Lutheranism, (which was ever after his being in France, transplanted into
Caluinisme, if to any certan sect.)

And these, and all his courses, being well discerned at last, by the states of
Artois and Heynauld (anno 1579.) when they wear reconciled to the king: with
the assent of the most honorabls Duke of Arschot, (who never much affected the
Prince,) articulo 5. they ded bynd them selfs, to prosequute war against Oreng
(as a general enemy of peace) and to find at there own charge, eightene
thousand men for that purpose, and will any man imagine: that so noble, so
religious, so valiant men, (pears to the Prince for nobility, and wisdom,)
either could err in there judgments of him they knew so well, and (who had acted
his part, so long upon the stage, in the face of them all:) or would have maid
such an offer, if they had esteamed him a Good patriot or his cause, and
proceading just and warrantable?

Now touching the people of Holland, I acknowledge they are a people verrie
industrious? and skilfu^l to maik use of there labors; and as a learned censor
of them well noted, nec totam libertatem, nec totam seruitutem patiuntur.
Friends to chainge, seldom content with the present state: in prosperity a
litl insolent; most addicted to traffic and there profit; and iealious of
any, that would empeach there gayn or liberty. And the Prince being well
acquainted with there nature: to bread and fead there jealousy more, discovered
to them, the secret counsel and combination of king Henry the 2. of France,
and the Duke of Alba, to suppress the protestants, and to erect the, 17.
Provinces into a kingdom. (the which he said that king discovered unto him.)
But surely, non placet commentum: (it is not like the Duke of Alua would
discover his masters greatest secrets, to an enemy so lately reconciled.)
and his fiction of other fables; maiks it more probable, that to have bean a
fable also. For he gave out, that the Emperor and the king affected a monarchy
over all Europe: which if it wear but a conjecture, (was devised by him self,
and not upon certan intelligenc understood:) and upon knouledg) from them selfs
it could not be; for the Emperors overtoyled age, his end, his course and the
harbor of a religious hows he be took him self, into; convinc the contrary.
Yet these inventions and forgeries, served him to good purpose, both to
terrify the Hollanders (that they might still rely upon him:) and to procure,
the distrust and malice of foreign nations to the house of Austria. And with
such baits, ded he long both entrap and feald, that contrie people.

Now you have hard the whole charge, and all the trespasses objected to the
king, (both general, and particular: now, and ab Origin;) and the actors,
that followed the busienes, and what exceptions may be taken justly, against
there estimation, integrity, and testimony, (specially in there own cawse.) It
remains therefore now, to examine first, whether the king stood guilty of these
crimes, of Injustice and Tirannie. For if he be innocent, then is there
usurpation The king of Spayn, his desire of peace. His court not tirannous.
unlawful; and if he wear guilty: an other quaestion is, whether his error,
geues them title, and his offenses free them from subjection.

I will maik it manifest to the world, that the king ever desired peace; and
with great care sought to avoid, the desolation of his people, and contries.

1. And to maik this evident. It may please you to call to mind, the course
taken, by that excellent, and most loyal Prince the Duke of Arschot, and by
the states general at the Pacification of Gand, 1574. whearin it was thought
requisite, to decree an Amnestia, and oblivion of all things past, on both
sides: and to taik order, for discharging the Spaniards, and sending them home.
And notwithstanding that in this pacification, all things wear referred ad
arbitrium ordinum: (using, nor mentioning any reservation to the king: yet Don
John ded ratify it, and procured the kings consent, and confirmation of all,
as appears by the perpetual edict. And altough this pacification was agreed
upon, by all the rest of the states general (out of a zealous affection, to
general unity:) yet would not the Prince of Oreng, nor Holland and Zelland
subscribe and accept it. And they dissuaded the states general to accept Don
John for governor, till the Spaniards should be dismissed at a time limited:
and yet would not they dismiss the foreign forces they had in Holland; but
being at liberty them selfs, would tie Don John to perform his promises. but
why ded the Prince and Holland, refuse to subscribe? was it for religion? no
for in these articles, Holland and Zelland wear as well provided for, as they
could desire. for therein was this article, vt sola in ijs prouincijs, Romana
religio toleretur and exerceatur, excepta Hollandia and Zellandia. tho these
provinces, never esteamed nor respected, that peace, nor that provision for
there indemnitie. and for the Princes person and safety, his own guiltienes,
and his precedent offenses, wear buried in this Amnestia (the states prevailed
more for him then the Emperor could.) What then caused the differenc? malice
and Ambition, blinded and transported him. for all men may see, the king
desired peace, and the Prince altogether was inclined to war (tho thearin he
was no excellent Hannibal.)

2. And that appeared more playnlie 1575. by the colloquie of Breda, whear the
king offered reasonnable conditions: and the Emperor sent the Count
Swartzenburgh, to induce them to concord and unity. And yet would the Prince
listen to nothing, and the treaty was fruitles. the cawse is worthy to be
known. At that time, they of 10. Pettit.
Holland deliberatelie determined to submit them selfs to some other Prince,
and offered them selfs secretly to obey the Queen of England hy Aldegond and
Douza. The project vvhearof, and the reasons I have sean.

3. Yet ded the king, show, still how great his patienc, and mercy was: and
how far from the baseness of tyra^nie; that knowing all this, and much more:
yet would he not proclayme Oreng a traitor, till 1580. when his malice
appeared to be irreconciliable, and his courses desperate: and after they had
finished the fabric of that union of Vtreght; about fiftean years after the
beginning of these trovvbles.

4. The fouth argument, to prove the kings inclination to peace, and his
detestation of tyranny, taiks away all quaestion from men indifferent.

When the Emperor solicited the treaty 1. The persons.
of Coolen 1579. and maid choice of most honorable persons for that purpose,
the two Princes electors, the Bushop of Wirtzburgh; the Count Svvartzenburgh,
and Doctor Lawenman. the king of Spain was as forvvard, and sent thither, the
Duke de Terra noua. and the Duke of Arschot (ever ready to aduanc peace, and
the commun wealth) with diverse others, wear commissioners from the states, with
commission signed by the Archduke Matthias. So as the persons, on all sides,
vvear like to deal with integrity and iugment.

Note also, upon what motives, was the The moiues.
Emperor content to employe these commisioners. The states by there letters to
the emperor dated S. Iun. 1578. ded promise, and assure him, that they wear,
ar, and so would continue constant, vt in Belgio colatur religio Catholica, and
regi sua constet authoritas. And before that, at worms in the general diet
holden 1577. the agents of the states submitted and referred there cavvse to the
Emperor, as likewise the king of Spayn ded. And therefore, both parts, being so
conformable, and concurring in eodem tertio. a general peace might well be
expected with good probability.

Now observe how this was performed. according to agreement, the Emperors
commissioners came to Coolen in the beginning of April. but Dauus pertur^at
omnia, the states sent not there is till the 4. Maij, and then with a commission
insufficient, and restrained the time of there treaty to six vveaks, and no
longer. So it seamed, the states could not agree a long time of there
instructions, to there agents. and there for the Imperials took it as an error,
that when they them selfs could not in many months agree of that; they would
notvvith standing limit there deputies to so short a time, for the handling of a
busienes so weighty and intricate, as this was: and whearim so many several
men, had several ends. Besides in the articles, which the deputies exhibited,
they propounded extrema, non media, contrary to promise. furthermore, by the
articles and media of peace, proposed by the Duke de Terra noua, all severity
was lenified and mitigated, for the case of religion. as the Emperors
commissioners ded testify by these words. Vt nemo just conqueri posset, regem
pretextu religionis, vel seuire in corporae subditorum, vel bona eorum
confiscare, vel conscient it is vim infer. So as the Imperials finding the
dallijng and de lays of the states, such, as in 16. weaks, they could get no
answer; and that by there letters they renewed all old greafs and quarrels: they
broke up the treaty, and departed

Hearupon Bolduc, and Valencen received and incertained the articles. Over
Isel, and Turnay, refused them not. Artois and Heynault guided with the bonus
genius of the Church; and Em. Lalain, that valiant and religious Marquis of
Renty, together with Monsieur de Capre, Heze, Baize and the rest: condemning
the course of the Prince of Oreng, offrerd there obedienc to the king, and maid
peace with the Duke of Parma. In this interim, what ded they of Holland? they
wear now further of, the case was altered. They published discourses against
the treaty; they studied how to defend there usurpation, and how to perfect the
Frame of there union; and how to increase discord and division among the rest.
(vvhear there ministers and agents, failed not to serve there tvrn.) But they
wear principally busied, abovvt a new project. For by the mediation of the
Prince of Oreng, and the counsel and assistanc of England, and for there better
ability and more strenth, they capitulated with Monsieur the Duke of Alleneon
1578. whom they created Duke of Brabant, and Prince absolut of the Nether
lands.

2. Secondly, touching the kings tyranny. Touching the kings oppression of
them.
first exaction, and impositions: then disanulling there privileges: also the
too severe government, of his ministers, (whearby he broke his oath solemnlie
svvorn at the ioyefull entry) wear the cawses of making this union. The end
was, to preserve them selfs, and there contries from utter ruin and
destruction.

Hear is there Claim, and the foundation of there Union, and of there Dominion,
and sooueraintie. And first touching the exactions and tyranny, and severity
of Gouernous, which the deputies of the states ded aggrauate so much at Colen.
Surely, so long after the Duke of Alua his time; and under the temperate
government of the Duke of Parma: and after so often and many offers, and
signification of the kings gracious disposition to ease there burdens: it was
rather to be judged as a Cauil to shift of peace, then a desire to beridd of
war.

For first touching these greauous exactions, they complain so of, v^delicet,
of the Tenth penny, imposed by the Duke of Alua.

It is necessaries to Draw the Curtens, whearwith they shadovv and obscure the
truth. Necessity and not his own will,

Some of the counsel in Englant, in the Queen's name, seized in Hampshyre
600000. Ducats, (sent from Spain to pay the Army, vvithovvt any charg at
all to the contrie:) tho she had given a passeport, for the safe conduct of it,
as is reported. Upon what pretenses, or how justly, I will not argue, (having
bean before debated at larg, in a treaty.) But these politic men who
conselled her, to extend her authority, for staying the moonie: as they well
knew it was none of hers: so wear they also sure, it would drive the Duke of
Alua into such strayts, that he would be compelled to commit error, and
increase the hatred of his government, and arm the peopls fury to sedition.
(which was the thing they most aimed at.) Besides the king of Spayn having
sent the Duke de Alua (who partly by misfortun, partly by his stearnnes,
partly by some errors, and by foreign princes disfauor, was grown odious) he
brought with him, 200000. Ducats: which the Zella^ders, intercepted upon the
seas; and as his stewards, took it as pure Alms into there charge, to disburse
it withowt accoumpt. So having lost his moonie, and ships: lost also his heart
to stay near them; and therefore returned back to Spain, fully resolved, never
to have further dealing, with such sharking Cormomorants of that Nest and
crew. And so was Alua further both plunged, and perplexed. But hearby it
appears, that it was neither the kings pleasure nor purpose, (who furnished
him, so largely and liberally as was intended) but the necessity of his
present wants, which compelled Alua to that demand, and exaction. And so it
was rather an occasion of scandal and offense reflected upon the king, then
deserved by either: and a quarrel rather maid, and contrived, then given.

And these popular orators that plead so earnestly for the ease of the
commons: and seam so careful to procure the exoneration of the impositions,
and taxes laid upon the people: why do they not now inueigh as much, against
these new magnificos of Holland? who ar so fart from laying down and
diminishing these subsidies and excis^s, that they have raised and augmented
them in duch so^t: as at this day, no common wealth in Christendom groneth
under the like burden.

And it can not yet be forgotten, that the gend to there of the people, (as they
called him.) the Prince of Oreng, ded propovvnd and labor to wrest and wring
from them of Holland, the Sixth penny, toward his M. Issolt.
change and maintenanc, anno 1584. this was a note above Ela, a strain far
higher, then the Duke Aluaes; and yet tho the people denied it, and murmured
much: yet still was he in Holland paeter patriae, so smoothly he could manage
his busienes.

Barneuelt in his Apology, confessed: that he fovvnd 1586. the order of the
government ovvt of all Frame, many preachers protestants would not
acknowledge the states (for after the french fashion, they had no command, nor
discipline:) the commons quite opposite: the towns and magistrates wished for
peace; the expenses of the state, exceaded all incoms and reuennues by twenty
six millions: and that (which I maik this note for) west frizeland in the
beginning ded contribute skarse, Decies octies centena millia florenorum; and
now they are charged, to pay quadragies centena milua librarum, and duos
milliones. I use his own words because I will not be challenged for mistaking
him. Who is therefore now the tyrant and the exactor? tho the peopl have chainged
there Lord, they are not eased of there oppression: and wheare before they
complained they had one, now ar they subject to the command of many tyrants,
who fleace them, nay vnskin them. Alua bett them, with whips; but the states,
with scorpions. Examine there excises, and impositions, how they are increased,
upon meat, drink, fuel, men, servants, wages: besides lones and beneuolences.
Henry Cuickius charge them, to exact the fourth part of there reuennues, that are Hollanders and live out of the contrie: Si in prouincijs nostris, venia
eorum degunt: semissem iubent soluere: si secus bonis exuunt.

And to answer that inuectiue, against the Duke of Alua his Creweltie (which
was so much objected at Coolen, and since haith bean aggrauated by D. Baudius,
in his orations:) call to mind what occasions wear given him: by the opposition
of the Nassouians: by the war at Mounts: by the practice to empeach his
entranc to Brabant: and by contriuing his death. Yet these wear venial sins.
But, when he fownd the nobility, so far engaged in the conspiracy with the
Geuses; that the kings authority was despised, the religion established was
profaned and derided; that the towns in Holland, and Zelland revolted; H^^le^,
Alcmar, and the rest excluding the kings authority and power: what stranger
and man impartial, would not think; when the blood of the body was so
corrupted, that it is not fit both to use cauterism, and violent purgations to
cleanse it. for violenc is never necessary, but when lenitiues, will not remedy
and work a cure. And when Alua was revoked: remember how litl, the peacapl
nature of the Commendador prevailed with so rough and harsh natures, who was
forced to cry out, Dios libera nos de estos estados. And hear I pray you read
the opinion of Sir Roger Williams, a soldier of good note, who had served an
both sides, and knew the natures of the peopl. in his story, of these wars,
he condemned the reuocation of Alua as an error: because nothing but rigor,
could reduce these violent spirits into order: neither can any man maik them
obedient, but he that can pull them upon there knees; and carries the sword
drawn, in his hand, allwaies ready upon such inflammations, to open a vain,
and let them blood: though I conffess a gentle heart will much ever relent with
compassion, when it sees blood shed.

Concerning the breach of the kings For the kings oath
oath, (which they object having svvorn to observe there privileges: if they
will decide the matter by course of justice, it must first be maid plain, and
appear; that the king haith broken his promise, and not performed his oath:
and in what case. and in there own causes, it is not agreeable to common reason,
that the Playntifs should be both accusers and judges.

Again, if he had broken his promise: many things may happen after his oath,
to excuse him from perjury. or tyranny. for by law, every absolute pact, and
promise does implie tacitam conditionem, to procead, rebus sic stantibus, as
they wear at the oath taken. But what if such difficulties follow, that he can
not keap his promise? What if that which was then promised for the good of that
province? can not be observed withowt the great damage of that province, and of
all Europe? As the cawse, so the case must be altered.

But procead further, if the king had broken his oath: yet wear not the states
enabled and authorized thereby, to choose a new prince in his stead; much less,
to inuest them selfs. for in the articles of the Joy full entry, this is a
clawse, vt si in omnibus, aut in vno quo^iam articulo, pacta ista Dux
Brabantiae violassct: denegare ei, tantisper subdus possunt, consueta seruitia:
dum id reuocetur, vel corrigatur, in quo controuersum. For otherwise, withowt
that dum, ill disposed subjects, should continually have the advantage to pick
quarrels against a good Prince.

And the world can witness, how often the king haith offered to the Emperor, to
foreign princes, and to the states general either to revoke, or amend, what
could be proved to be amiss.

Besides the states and courts of Brabant, ar more properly to decide that
quaestion, then Holland, (who can claim those privileges, but by
participation.) Add also, that the states of Brabant, Flanders, Artois,
Heynault, and the rest have conformed them selfs, like dewtiefull, virtuous,
and noble persons, to obedienc of the king: and to all Laws, and government.
(And if Holland could learn by there examples, so to do, the quaestion wear
then ended.)

Furthermore, the like oath all kings taik at there coronation; and it is the
greatest honor to them religiously to perform it: but if they break it, what
then? shall he be deposed? that is a doctrine only sit for the schools of
Conspiracy. Besides there is a great differenc, betvvean a covenant, and a
condition, in the common law: and yet neither of them tie a Prince, so as the
breach implies a forfeiture, (as hear after appears.)

But to conclud, who ded first, create and grant these privileges? ded not the
Prince, ex gratia spectali, and mero motu, to gratify good subjects? how
unthankful subjects then ar they, who will seak to deprive there soouerain Lord;
if he be forced to break a clawse, or an article, or a covenant, upon urgent
cawse? What would they have objected, to Philip Duke of Burgondie, and of the
Netherlands, who resumed into his H. Berland.
own hands, and by his own authority, all the Privileges, and immunities of
Gandt? and detayned them all his life time; teaching them to acknowledge, by
whose grace they held them. And what remedy? when his son Charles, came to
Gand; the people in a rage compelled him to restore them. But, to there cost,
for they wear forced to seak his pardon, and to cast them selfs, and there
charters, at his feate, and stand to his mercy.

And the like he ded at Machlen, (which he determined to have razed, and
destroyed:) yet he restored them to there liberties, upon great suite, and upon
such conditions, as he thought good.

Neither of these great cities, objected to the Dukes, there breach of oath, at
there entry, or that they had forfeited there estates: they wanted the cloak of
Holland, and such a conductor as Oreng. Yet it is worthy also, to be
considered, why the Prince urges so much the kings keaping of his oath: and
yet he maiks no religion to perform his own. For when he was to taik upon him,
the government of Brabant, he took his oath to mantain the Catholic Michael
Barus do union stat.
religion in Brabant. And haith he performed it? when he retired into Holland,
he professed and protested publicly, he would chainge and alter nothing: nor
disposses the Clergy of there livings: and the like he ded at Amsterdam, and
bownd him self with a solemn oath: and yet he performed none of these. So to
serve his own turn, he takes hold of the kings oathe; and for his own oath,
religion and bonum publicum, give him a dispensation which Calvin ded confirm
unto him. Libro 4. c. 13.. 21. Aman (says he) illuminated wi^h the truth,
simul vinculis omnibus obediendi legibus and Ecclesiae solutus est: he that
once haith perfect knowledge of the gospel, is absolved from oath, and all such
suares. Is not this a holy gospel, and a blessed lesson. But yet, I see no
particularitie alleged, whereby it may appear, that the king ded break his
oath: was it for exactions? it is answered. was it. for bringing in the
Spaniards? it was time, and necessity, that maid the king, to his great
trowble, to his greater charge, to his greatest greafe: to taik arms, to
defend the Clergy, to defend the religion of his ancestors (according to the
laws and lawble customs of these provinces:) and to force them to acknowledge
that he was there Prince.

Was it for religion? In dead it is true, there is a clawse in the union, that
they are thereby to defend them selfs, contra omnem vim, quae sub pretextu
religionis aut nominis Regij inferetur. At first, the Prince, Horn, and
Montigny, offered to Ioyn with the people, against the Inqusition: they
assisted comforted, and encooraged Brederode: they desired and urged the
Religions Vried, and published books to defend it: maid liberal promises to be
content with the use of there own religion, and not to prejudice nor offend the
Catholic.

And with much art, they hid and dissembled there intentions, the better to draw
on the Catholics to ioyn with them, for the general good of the state. For by
that devise, they wonn many prelates and men well affected in religion, to
cooperate with them, for the furteranc and defense of the Archduke Matthias,
with there bodies and goods: and still under the fair names of liberties and
religion.

Now that religions Vried being granted, it was a supersedeas to the
inquisition, and a prohibition of all violenc, and severity. and what could
they desire more? Besides Holland and Zelland, ever since the pacification of
Gand, have bean offenders more then defendors: and have enjoyed there Religion,
liberties, and denique quid non? so as they had no just cawse, to maik this
union and conspiracy, (specially when all other provinces submitted them
selfs to the king.) But faction and haeresie is ever humble, till they can get
the svvord of power and authority in there hands. For now, they of Holland,
ar in Gloria Patri, and sing an other tune: they have expelled all the
Clergy, seized there lands and livings: emprisonned, those that vvil not be
conformable, to there Synodes holden at Dort 1574. and at Midlborough. 1581.
they have used much crevveltie both in drowning and executing men for
religion: but no toleration they will permit; nor more favor, then to the
Puritans, Anabaptists, an semi-Arrians, emoug them.

And for the matter: of Religion, at the making of that union; they maid them
selfs cheaf governors of religion and the church, by these words. Quant au
poinct de religion, ceux de Hollande and Zellande s'y comporteront comme bon
leur semblera: and les autres, selon le placcard de l' Archiduc Matthias.

So then, by this, belike the States of Holland and Zelland ar advanced to be
head of the church in those provinces: for all must be touching Ecclesiastical
matters, comme bon leur semblera. They are now, the Regula Lesbia, to square
judge, direct, govern, and order all: and what religion they will allow, that
must pass for current: and in that manner, and for so long time, as they please.

Now this authority being in the states general; then that church must be
governed by many, not by one: one spiritual body by many temporal heads,
and most of them artificers, (merchants of Amsterdam, brewers of Delft,
Staplers of Dort, seamen of Horn, etc.) An anarchie, vvithovvt learning: and
(which is pity) a forenoon head, better then an afternoon: too many for
unity, too ignorant for verity, and skarselie able too determine with
judgment, whether the Gomarists or the Armenians, should be Doctors of the
Chair. And that appeared well, by there edict published at Haghe 1614. that no
man should preach, Deum aliquos in exitium creasse; which sentenc was afterward
retracted, bycaus the heads of the church had erred therein, (for they admit
not the ministers, as in France, to sharewith them any part of there
jurisdiction.)

Now to draw, to an end: if the king had taken arms to introduce any new
religion (like a Mush-rump grown up in a night) and to compel the consciences
of his subjects to obey that: I must neads say, he had much encroached upon
the liberties of the contries, and had incurred justly there malice.

And I can not but say also, that the Hollanders, taking arms against there
soouerain, for defenc of such a religion, and innovation: can neither, by law,
reason, not religion, be excused and defended. Now if the Hollanders be so
precise in upholding there religion: if the Elders of Geneua will permit no
toleration: if the french church insult and oppress the poor humble Catholics,
that live emoug them: if Romulus by his law enacted, Deosperigrinos ne colunto:
if Numa would not hear Lib. 4. de repub.
of any novelty: if Socrates ded wisely advise, that people should reseru
and refer all mutations and matters of religion to Apollo: if nature and all
nations concur in this: had not the king of Spayn reason, to endeavor to
prevent, that confusion of opinions, and that multitud of sects, which had so
daingerouslie infected the west part of the world?

And if they of Holland, think it necessary for the peace of there state: is
not the case a like for him? if for there conscienc sake, they will bar ovvt
the Catholic and ancient religion: should he be bard for his conscienc sake,
to taik the same course against the Caluinists? how do there beginning, and
there proceadings differ? and how do there profession and performanc agree? for
at first they maid that a cavvse of there rebellion that the king would force
there consciences: and yet they will not now permit the same freedom, to
those that live under their command.

But now to come to the Main point. they Challeng by the union, to be
absolute Lords of these provinces: and have renounced all title, and obedienc
to the king of Sayn, as Earl of Holland and Zelland. I ask, quo titulo ingressi
sunt? they Post tractatum pacis Coloniae, qua Hispani potius ad opprimendam,
quam subleuandam Belgium vsi sunt: Hispani, Mercurius Gallob. libro 32.
tanta tyrannide, in prouincias, vrbes, ac ciues omnes Belgij, procul^atis
omnibus priuilegijs grassabantur: vt ad conseruandam, quod ei imminebat, ab
extremo exitio patriam: pleraeque Belgicae prouinciae, quae in union
perstiterant, regem eiurarunt: and certam quandam, ac liberam reipublicae
formam constituerunt. It a pro liberis, a multis regibus accepti. per 32.
annos. Hear is the fowndation of there free state: and the reason is tyranny:
and the time is said to be after the treaty of Coolen, (tho in dead this
union, was maid before.) Besides in the same place: they use an other argument:
that the king of Spayn in quas ipsi nihil iuris praetendant; cum omnibus,
generalibus, and particularibus renunciationibus. At the making of that union,
they alleged, that the king privileges, and the kings own renunciation of his
title: arr the pillars of this union. It remains therefore, after having maid a
breach with this long battrie, to give the assault upon there title: and
discover how seditious the positions and principles of that religion ar, which
imprinted in them such disloyalty to vsurp that title.

If it could be proved by them, (which is necessary first to be:) that the
king ded oppress the contrie by tyranny, and abrorating there privileges: then
is it yet a question of importance, whether thereby he haith lost his authority
over his subjects? and if he had lost it, by what law have they fownd it? by
what civil order or president, ded they abjure there obedience? Surely it was,
certam quandam ac liberam reipublicae formam constituere. That was there end,
and there presumption: but it was neither order nor cawse. Neither is the kings
tyranny, a sufficient vvarrant for there tyranny and usurpation. for a
soouerain can not loose his soouerainetie: it does all ways carry with it a
nonobstante, to difpenc with errors and irregularities.

And for there privileges, which the king never intended to maik void, (and so
they build upon a false grovvnd, which will fail them:) if it had bean so
great an offense, for the king to abrogate theirs; is it not a greater offense
for subjects, to vsurp his? and so to maik them self parties and judges, and by
there own authority to punish there prince. Which is an insolency and
indignity incredible to all posterity; and such as neither the Svvizzes, nor
the Amphictiones (the confederate cantons of Grecia:) ded ever match, nor come
near. for so they maik, regna, occupantium ius, qui potest capere, capiat. A
pretenc opposite to all laws: a portall to let in confusion. but if the king
ded loose and forfeit all his authority and jurisdiction: yet I see not, why
or how, they could also challeng his lands, and private inheritance: for that
must neads descend by law. Besides if the king could for feit his sooueraintie,
how can he forfeit it to his subjects? but say they, wear now no subjects; we
have waued and renounced the same. and is that enough? It is true; a subject,
may maik him self ciuis alienae reipulicae: but if he stay in his own contrie,
he can not of a subject maik him self no subject; (for tho he do rebel as the
Hollanders ded, yet he is a subject:) but it is admirable, how of a subject he
should become a sooueraine: that is scientia scientiarum, a supernatural skill
above my capacity,

Yet if the kings should for feit his earldome of Holland; it is not to them,
but to the cheaf Lord of the fee, that is to the Emperor (for it can escheat to
no other, either by the Imperial or municipal laws.) If you ask me the reason:
I say it is manifest, that Holland was erected into an Earldome, by the
Emperor Carlous Caluus qui cum audiuit, Hollandiam terram Imperatoriam, a
Danis spoliari, rogatu Iohannis Papae, principatum eius contulit Theodorico.
Berland Meyer.
Anno 863.

So if it be not in the king of Spayn, (to whom it is lineallie descended from
Theodoric:) then may the Emperor give a new inuestitur thereof, as a fief
Imperial, to whom he pleases, as he ded to Theodoric. (for it is a
fantastical imagination, that it is fallen by lapse to them of Holland.) the
Emperor takes no notice of there Stateships, (being a private order for there
better government.) But if it be fallen in laps, it is rather fallen to Oreng
and the nobility, (who can Better govern) then to tradesmen, and mariners. And
yet vndowbtedlie to none of them, except they plead, that as conquerors they
wonn yt by the sword, and so they will hold it: which is a Tenure, neither
known to Litlton, nor sum Rural, not Ius feudale: a tenure fitter for
forosciuti, or the Hoords of Tartarians, then a commonwelth of Christians.

A certan Hollander, in his third defenc, of the united provinces, calls the
king of Spayn, Raptorem, and haereticum notorium, rudely and vnciuillie; and
thereupon infers, An non potius regem Hispaniae, quia haereticus notorius
est, ex suo regno omnibus omnium Euangelicorum viribus, expellere oporteret?
either this man was much distempered, or his religion infected him, and maid
him a Catelin, and so seditions.

These Ar fearful paradoxes, and such as all princes have interest in; and
had nead to have there swords drawn to confute: if for pretenc of religion, for
errors in government, for restraining there privileges, for punishing sedition
and ryots: subjects may thus sit in judgment upon there princes, and taike arms
and expel them out of there territories. Thus ded ket, and Jack Straw in
England, rise for bonum publicum: the Bowres in Germany, and Ziska in Bohemia
maid there insurrections for religion: and so every Gracchus, may taik upon him
the reformation of the church and the state.

Now if they object, there case is ill fitted with a comparison, because many
princes in 32. years have acknowledged and used them as a free State. If they
hold only by prescription: I may justly say, that time will not serve there
turn: except they can therewith plead a title, and bona fides: for time may
co^firm a title, but creates none. and the opinion of foreign princes, maiks
not there bad claim better, but gives only, a reputation to the usurper: and
in so bad a quarrel, bravely defended, not the cawse, but the success: not
there right but there prosperity haith done them honor. Besides it is nor true,
that they have bean so reputed of Princes. to negotiate with princes under that
title, and that so princes confirm there title, be different things.

I grand that they offered to Queen Elizabeth the sooueraintie of these
provinces, and labored that she would entertain them: but the counsel
(specially the L. Treasorer,) ded not vvelcome the offer. both in regard of
there title, for nemo potest plus euris transfer in alium, quam ipse habet:
they could not geuer her that, which was not there own: and in respect of the
safety and honor of the Queen, who could not hold and mantain such a tile,
withowt the censure of the world; and withowt giving foreign princes, and her
own people a president against her self.

Although for her own private ends, afterward she was content to protect them:
and he who furthered most that protection, was as glad so clenlie to be rid of
the son: as the Marquis of Winchester was, to be delivered of the father.

And therefore, the Queen's commissioners at Burborough, (as I have hard) affirmed
trewlie, Auersata est Regina delatam sibi saepius illarum regionum summam
potestatem. Neither was Sir Noel Caron, in Queen Elizabeth's time, esteamed as
an Ambassador, but as an agent.

But to ioyn issew with them: if they can maik good there hold and Claim; it By
law.
must be either, by the Gospel, and patronage of religion: or it must be by
law, (for if by neither of these, they lean upon a rotten stake.) first, the
law is directly against them. For at the Joyful entry, they wear subjects
absolutely, and the king was soouerain, and to Oreng he committed the
liuetennancie of these contries, Ouem lupo. Oreng, and the people. withdraw
there obedienc (upon surmises,) defended there towns against the king, deprived
him of his inheritanc, and maid them selfs sooueraines. Whether wear these men
guilty by law, of Treason or no? this is the case, trevvlie. Dambouderius
your contrieman, in prax. criminal. cap. 132. haith drawn your process. says
he. Seditiosi sunt, 1. qui moluintur conspirationem, 2. aduersus rectores and
admmistratores regionum, 3. il^^citas congregationes populi cogunt, ^iues
commotionibus turbant, etc. This compared with there dealing against Alua, Don
John, and the Duke of Parma: with there many meatings, at Breda and Osterweal;
with there incensing and encooraging the Geuses: with there defenc of Harland,
and Alcmar: is as good as a comment, to explayne the law. But cap. 82. Vi b^^^a
sint insta, requiritur 1. iusta causa 2. recta intentio, 3. personarum
idoneitas, 4. and authoritas principum, sine qua est laesa Maiestas. Now if the
states mark that sine qua; they may hold down there heads, and blush. for, in
all there wars, they neither had good coolor, nor just cawse. they wear
secured for there religion, by the pacification of Gandt, by the perpetual
edict, by the articles of the treaty at Coolen, and by enjoying all withovvt
disturbanc: and yet would they not ioyn with the states general, and accept
the same.

Also there was not recta intentio, for it was to noorish discord. they
pretended ever religion, and the peoples safety; but the Prince persuaded them
to arms and the union, not for the love of them, but for his own preservation.
Ambition and despair wear his motives and counselors: and reueng, and
dispossessing the king wear his ends. And he was the more disloyal, seeing he
being a person of honor betrayed the trust of so great a charg reposed in him.
And touching that sine qua; it was a war (on there parts) maid against the
king, and not by his authority: and not only his sword was shaken against
the king, but his penn and Apology, (which was a great error because they wear
not aequallie matched, and of one degree.) He had in the low contries, neither
office, nor command, but under the wings of the Aegle, or authority of the
Lion. And he held all his Belgic lands in fee of the Duke of Burgondie, (as of
his Leage Lord: and ded homage, and fealty for the same, and he knew also that
a soouerain, geues law to his subjects, as well as offices, and haith power of
life and death: and as a learned man noted, Eo^in.
the law signifies the power and command of him, that haith, the sooueraintie.

Besides, Claudius le Brun, in his book of process civil and criminal: adds
this. Whosoever surpriseth, towns Castles, and forts, vvithovvt order of his
soouerain (as the Prince ded cawse Count Lumay do in Holla^d; and Vorst, and
Barland ded Flushyng.) VVhearby the peace of the contrie is broken: or who
attempteth against the life of the soouerains liuetennant, it is treason. And
these, all Europe do hold, as judgments, decrees of reason, and principles of
state which are not to be called in quaestion. and if the states in Holland do
not observe, hold, and practice the same: they can never expect, either peace,
order, or obedienc in there contrie.

So as it is manifest, that the Hollanders, in the beginning ar to be charged
with sedition, and in the progress with rebellion and treason. And then being
traitors by law; they have admirable luck, and art to maik them selfs also
Lords by law. and it will be a good encooragement, to there soldiers; if men
may winn dignities by offenses, to share the novvnes of Holland among them, or
to induce them to a bellum pyraticum, or sociale: and cantonize that prouinc by
there own example.

They have yet one evasion, (which is rather of consequenc, then of substanc to
prove there title:) a plaster they think to salve all sores: that the Archduke
haith renounced his right: and the king ar knowledgeth them to be now, liberas
prouincias, and in quas ipse nihiliuris pretendat. though it is no aenigma, no
ridl, nor such an argument as will pose a lawyer to answer it. yet because, I
will not do hurt, whear I would do good, I leave it to the consideration of
that honorable, and learned Chancellor Peckins: who can best in a fit time,
satisfy the world, that it is but a sharcrow, and thunder withowt a bolt.

So then by law, you have hard in what state they stand, for procuring the
effusion of so much blood, and breaking the peace By divinity.
of Christendom: so now I desire all both Gomarists, and Armenians, to hear
the opinion of Doctor Bilson, a great Pillar of the church of England, and who
was chosen to write of this argument, by the greatest Statesman of that time:
and he writ cum priuilegie, and the general allowanc of the church of England.

Says he shall a king be deposed, if he break In his book of Christian
subjection.
his promise and oath, at his coronation? in any of the covenants, and points
he promises? He answers, in the margent, the breach of covenants, is no
deprivation. And he geues this reason. The people may not break with there
Princes, tho there Princes break with God. And afterward. Subjects can not
depose there Princes, to whom they must be subject for conscienc sake. This is
a sermon quite contarie to the Aphorisms of Holland, and the divinity of
Rochel: and yet it stands upon invincible reason: for as you may not by Gods
law, depose your prince, so you ar for bidden to taik arms against him. And
why? D. Bilson, vvil satisfy you. For (says he) he that may fight may bill:
and war against the Prince, and murdering the Prince, ar of consequenc
incuitabl. Afterward he adds this, (to stopp the mouth, of such a
Polipragmus, as called the king, raptorem, and haereticum, and a suo
repellendum.) The Apostles obeyed the tyrants, that commanded all things
against religion. And in those things, which vvear cammanded against God, they
ded submit them selfs with meakenes, to endure the Magistrates pleasure, but
not to Not.
obey his will. Lastly and most to the purpose, he concludes; if the laws
of the land appoint the nobles, as next to the king, to assist him in doing
right, and with hold him from doing vvrong: then ar they licensed by man's
laws, to interpose them selfs: but in no case to deprive the Prince, vvhear
the scepter is inherited. Now it is certan, that the laws of the Netherlands
give no such authority to the nobles: and if they ded, yet in no case to to
deprive there Prince, or to abjure there obedienc: and maik that as a bridge to
pass over to the sooueraintie. And because some of good accounpt and judgment,
have bean led into that error, that the Dukes of Burgondie, hold not full
power, and sooraintie in the Netherlands: I will send them to school, to all
lawyers, records, stories, and (that which is most infallible) to the practice
and common laws of that contrie; to Bodin; and to that ancient and honorable
Counselor, the Lord Chancellor Egerton, in his oration for the post nati, page
71. The Dukes of Burgondie (says he) vvear absolute Princes, and had soouerain
power in there contries. and king Henry the S. ^ad as absolute sooueraintie,
when his style was Lord of Ireland, as when he vas king. for the difference
of styles marks not the differenc of soouerantie.

So then to conclude, if this war, begonn for religion, was against all the
rules of religion: I may dewlie infer, that as there usurpation is withowt
warrant either of law or the gospel, they continue to hold it withowt
conscienc. and have no other title but force, and the canon. And all foreign
soldiers that do assist them (knowing the injustice of the case, and that the
war is so unlawful) incurr the penalty of mortal sin, and dainger of
damnation: and may as justly be reproved, as king Iosaphat for helping and
assisting Achab. Look to the end, for it is certanly fearful to all those who
know that, (...).

I write not thus much, as an enemy to the contrie, (I hold a peareles
county, for the goodly towns, wealth, traffic, strenth, and fertility, in
so small a circuit:) nor for any personal quarrels: nor for any corruption,
or assentation (in regard of the match with Spain:) but, only the truth of
the story; the dainger of there president, and the cawse of religion have
induced me. for tho I remembered, the dislike had of there manner of government,
there dealing with the Queen's officers, and of old how vnkyndlie my lo.
Willoughbie had bean hearto fore used by them, as his Apology can witness: and
of late what complaynts our merchant adventurors (in there books) had maid for
there ill usage at Mosko, and the east Indies by them: what contempt they
showed, when the devvtie of Size Herrings was demanded in his Majesty's right,
for fishing on the coast of Scotland, (in presuming to imprison the demander.)
and many such like matters. yet why should these move me when the state was
not moved (And when I say the state, I mean not the people, but the king,
(to whom Holland is and was most bovvnd, for 2. high and bynding fauores,
wihch require a reciprocal obligation and thankfullnes on there part: and such
as ought to bread in them good blood and ambites and respectfull toungs. first
in restoring unto them the keys that ded open and lock there provinc; (not for
any remuneration. but restitution of a part of his dew.) As also for the free
permission of there fishings upon the Englih coast: whearin they have yearlie
employed, above 30. thousand persons, set to work by it, and above 4000.
Busses, Doggerbotes, galliots, and pinks, to there admirable benefit. which is
only a permission of grace, and no priuiledg, by law, (for Grotius may
withowt contradiction prove mare liberum, as the kings high way is for every
man's walk. But he can not prove, that fishings upon an other Princes coast be
permitted to the^.) this is a digression (to a good end.) And therefore I will
return to the matter.

THE V. TITLE. OF THE TROWBLES IN BOHEMIA AND THE PALATINATE.
BOhemia Only now rests, as a stage The trovvbles and sedition in
to present the last Scene of all foreign tragedies, and tumults for religion.
and I Bohemia for religion.
will taik the Palatinate in my way. An unfortunate province of late, (which
in a hundred years, haith chainged religion, five times: and never leatned in
all that time, the rules of obedienc.) Wheareof I nead not marvel, when I think
of Parreus, Cracerus, and the schools of the new discipline.

Parreus in his Comment. upon the 13. Romans. teaches, that subditi possunt
suos Reges deponere, quando degenerant in tyrannos, aut suos subditos cogunt ad
Idololatriam: Scil. Subjects may deprive there Princes, when they degenerate
from a royal government and become tyrants; of if they compel there subjects,
to Idolatrize. (And his meaning is: if they establish the Mass, and the
sacrifice of the Church, or any other religion, then Caluinism:) then eiect,
excommunicate, and cast them out of all authority. so terrible a sentenc he
gives, both against the Emperor, France, Italy and Spayn. But stay, this is
but his first peale, which he ded ring as the Toxsan, the Alarm bell to
Bohemia: but he adds, an other article, as a just cawse of deprivation,
Quando pretextu religionis, quaerunt propria commoda, when under pretenc of
religion, they seak to maik there own profit.

Which had bean a lectur not verrie plausible to king Henry the 8. nor in
Cromwell, or the protectors ears. and surely, if a man should ask whether
Murrie and Murton in Scotland, whether Oreng and Horn in the Netherlands;
whether the Admiral and the Princ of Conde in France; whether the Protector
and the Duke of Northumberland in England, had any politic respects, any
odd ends of ambition and avarice; other then religion: you will find them
guilty, and subject to this censure. An other cawse he assigns for
deposition of Princes, quando grauant conscientias subditorum.

And after ward, in an other place, to show his constancy in that opinion, and
to expownd his own meaning, says he subditi, aduersus superiorem magistratum,
se and veram religionem, possunt etiam armis iure defendere: si aliter in
conscientijs incolumes esse nequeunt, with which I think there is no Counselor,
or wise man, but would be justly angry, if it should be thus translated.
the Catholic subjects in England, Scotland, Denmark, or the Palatinate, may
with arms, by law defend them selfs against there superiors for defenc of there
religion, if they can not other wise quietly enjoy the freedom of there
conscienc.

For it is not enough and a sufficient reply, to say there religion is
irreligious; because that is the question.

And in his commentaries in Iudices. Magistratus minor potest occidere maiorem,
(and expresses his meaning in that Case) quod tyranni domestici, magis sunt
reprimends. As if a man should say baylifs, sherifs and Constables, (for
religion) may kill kings and counselors; because tyrants with in our doors,
ar most to be feared and cut of, (upon the former conditions before alleged.)

But was Parreus the only protector of these paradoxes, and the only Doctor
that poisoned the Palatinate with this infectious doctrine? no in dead.
Gracerus his pewfellow taught, that coercenda gladio est Antichristi malitia.
and in cap. 13. of the Apocal. Benedictus Aretius, labors to stir up the
people, to hate the name and authority both of the empire and Emperor, with
this lecture. Draconem (ait) dedisse imperio potestatem suam. the deuel
errected, and authorized the Empire. why? In Imperio habitare plenitudinem
diabolismi. for in the Empire, dwells the fullnes of the Deuels Impiety. But
these opinions I nead not to condemn, and aggrauate the dainger thereof; if it
be true, that I have hard? that in Powles Churchyard, the fire confuted them,
and that worthily.

And yet be not so gross, as to imagine that only Parreus, Gracer, and Aretius
taught this doctrine: for it is the practice of there church. Do not look so
stearnlie, upon me for saying so: because I will justify it with evident
proof. There own neighbors, and there elder brothers; they have used with this
uncivil and turbulent inhumanitie. ask Giesekenius (a man of learning, and
accoumpt among the Lutherans.) how they behaved them selfs at Emden (a Lutheran
state.) he shows first there act, 1. Emdenses illustrem Dominum suum mota
seditione, fere tota ditione pepulissent. The subjects of Emden had almost
driven there Lord out of his dominions. 2. Then there force and viole^c,
Pactietiam sunt, ne illustrissimus Comes, habeat potestate^, vllius religionis
nisi Caluinisticae exercitium, subditis suis, concedere Emdae. They articled
with him, that his excellecie should not have power to grant to his subjects at
Emden, the exercise of any religion but Caluinisme. 3. Lastly there grace They
hate and persequute the Lutherans.
and kyndnes to there soouerain. Et tamen liceat ei in aula habere
concionatorem, qui sit Augustanae cenfessionis. They will notwith-standing
tolerate, that he shall be suffered, to have a preacherin his court of the
confession of Auspurgh. A great favor. subjects will tolerate there Princes
religion; and frame it for them selfs after there own cut: they will direct
there governor, and he must obey.

Some curious man, will suppose this was a tumult; and that the church of the
Palatinate, ded not warrant any such proceading against Lutherans there
brethren. then mark, and consider this. Anno 1602. there wear 20. points,
established in the church of the Palatinate. And the first articl was totus
Lutheranismus, and omnes libri eorume ^edio tollentur. They decreed, that all
Lutheranism, and there books and writings should be prohibited, and abolished.
and in the same Synod diverse opinions of the Lutherans, ar recited and
condemned, as you may see by Schulting, in Hierarchica Anacrisi. libro 15. page
98. whearof certanlie there is great reason: for there is an impossibility, that
Lutherans and the ministers of the Palatinate should quietly live the other, in
one Ecclesiastical government; they are incompatible, in respect of there
discipline, there consistories, there elders (to say nothing of there doctrine.)

For these ar the bar that hold out all civil society, and concurrenc
betvvean them: these ar the cawse, why they eiected the Lutherans ovvt of the
Palatinate; ovvt of Brandenburgh; and out of Emden. these ar the cawse, why the
Lutherans wisely provide that they shall have no footing in Saxony, Hamburgh,
and the Hans towns. And these vvear the cavvs, why that great Synod of
Torgaw, (convented by the means and procurement of the protestant Princes, ded
testify, that Caluiniani, Christianas Ecclefias omnes, academias, regna,
turbauerunt ac vastauerunt. And yet neither ar Caluinists, comprehended under
the peace and protection of the Empire: and the religions vried is no way
permitted to them. As appears by the edict of Charles the 5. de compositione
pacis cum protestantibus anno 1532. not in his sentenc de confessione Sueuica
1530. nor in the interim 1548. nor in the constitution, de pace publica. And
touching the acts maid by the Emperor Ferdinand, at Passau 1552. the verrie
words exclude them from all benefit of the pacification, as a thing not
intended unto them, viz. Intereatemporis, nec nos, Electores, Principes, etc.
quempiam ex Augustanae confessionis statibus, propter religionem vicogere,
bello etc. volumus: sedsuae religioni fideique, quiet stare, cadereque
sinentes. And he declares and explaneth him self, 1555. at Auspurgh. Propter
Augustanae religionem confessionis, nullam violentiam Ecclesiastici inferant,
sed liberum eius exercitium permittant, vsque ad controuersae religionis
compositionem. I may hear fitly alledg, the conclusion and agreement of the
states of the confession of Auspurg, the three Electors, and the rest of the
Princes, and Cities. Postquam Deo it a permittente, praeter nostram
Christianam religionem and confessionem, haereses sacramentariorum
Anabaptistarum, Osiandrinorum, etc. irrepserunt: (quae omnes a pace religionis
exclusae sunt,) volumus vt contra illas, in communi mandata edantur, vt
eiusinodi haereses eradicentur, and this was enacted 1557. so it is most
plain, that Caluinism is there judged an heresy (by the protestant Princes
them selfs, and banished the Empire.) and anno 1566. Caesar, and the Princes in
the Diet, decreto publico, scripserunt ad Fredericum Palatinum, vt errorem
Caluini deserat: nec in templis and scholis doceri permitteret. and this decree
was intimated to Frederic the Elector, in the presenc of the Bushopd of Ments,
Trier, and Coolen: and of Augustus Duke of Saxony, and the Ambassadors of
Ioachim of Brandenburgh. but the execution was differed till his death (perhaps
to save his honor.) yet his son Jews obeyed it.

And the same year, in there reply to the Emperor; the same Princes, ordered,
permittere se nolle, vt vlla secta, cuiuscunque nominis, in Ecclesiis illorum,
ipsorum voluntate locum inueniat, quodque eodem modo, and non minus de
Svvingliana and Caluiniana opinione sentiant. and long before 1555. in recessu
Imperij, the same was decreed. So you may well infer, that Caluinism before was
not tolerable in Germany: and much less now when the Bohemians, have maid it
intolerable. And worthily, they are quite exempted from the protection and
benefit of the laws, liberties, and peace of the empire; who ar so factious
and busy in the Empire, both to extirpate the Lutherans, and to suppress the
Catholics, (by popular fury and such seditious Aphorisms as Parraeus and the
puritans of the Palatinate hold.)

These wear the fyrebrands of Bohemia, that have seduced the people; set
Princes at Variance; and the kingdom in Combustion.

Shall I nead to report the case aright? no for the original, of this war in
Bohemia, and the progress; the stories of Mercury Francois, Mercurius
Gallobelgicus, and diverse others relate, so as I forbear to touch it, (and my
heart greaueth and groneth, for the fatal misfortune of some, that had interest
in it.) The long, many and secret plats and practices wear discovered after
the batle of Prage, by intercepting the papers rolls and records thereof. First
by secreta principis Anhaltini, Cancellaria, printed 1621. which certanlie was
no invention and fiction, (as the Satirical Catholicon in France against the
leaguers was:) but a serious admonition, dull, plain, and withowt affectation:
and as a treatise rather to deliver the truth, then to show art. And thereof
Lundorpius (an historiographer of Frankfort, by his book called acta publica)
is a good confirmation, who sets, down the letters and records, of the whole
proceading for a time. and Cogmandolo, in an other litl treatise, called
secreta secretorum; is a fortification of the truth and credit of that
Chancerie, and takes away all jealousy and suspicion of devise. Upon this
rock then, will I build my relation.

This great union, ded beginn 1608. and The beginning of the union.
the Cheafs thereof wear, the Count Palate. Christian Prince of Anhalt, and the
Marquis of Onoltzbach. Count Mansfeld, was a principal agent, (who 1618. sent
2000. men to aid the Bohemians, against the Emperor, in contempt of his
proclamations and letters.)

Afterward they admitted Ioachim Marquis There assistants.
of Brandenburgh, (as Vicarius and Liuetennant of the general:) and they drew
in, the Marquis of Baden, the Duke of Wittenburgh, the Landgraue of Hess, Duc
Du-Ponts: Strasburh, Norimbergh, and other cities. all which ded contribute so
largely to these vvarres, (that the Emperor never had the like contribution
granted against the Turck.) the particular taxes, yealded by each of them,
Cogmandolo sets down, (which a mounted from 1608. to 1619. for so
secretly and so long was it concealed, to the some of 4176917. flor.) This
concurrenc of so great princes, showed a mighty force: which was much
increased, by the negotiation of Mansfeld, and Nomarus in Italy (scil. Baltas.
Newwen cheafe secretary of Onoltzbach:) and of Volrad Plessen with the
Hollanders, Bohemians, the Duke of Bullion, Bethlem Gabor, and the rebels of
Hongrie. (for they conceived no hope that the king of England, would enter into
there confederation: for such weighty, and solid reason, as he alleged.)
besides, they hoped of the Grisons assistanc: they gave out, that the
Hanstownes ded favor the union: and they ded earnestly solicit the
Venetians, to enter into the league (who ever wear desirous to keap in aequall
ballanc the princes of Europe, as favorers of Ostracismus, and iealious of the
too potent supereminencie, of any particular prince.

Hear I am to open an other gate, and to The pretenses and reasons for the
union.
show you the scope and end of this union: and whether they stood upon the
terms of a pure defense, or to offend also: whether only to resist, or to
offer violenc also and hostility: and whether for religion only, or for
matters of state and religion (for it can not seam probable, that d'Anhalt
would again taik arms for conscienc, having bean for it in France, so well
beaten both out of his honor and fortune: and specially Mansfeald, who
desperately and like a Cheualier errant, braueth the world with his running
camp.)

The end, they showed openly to aim most at, was the defenc of there
privileges, and the protection of there religion. but this was not the full
drift, for they meant to offend the Catholics. and that does well appear
page 121. of the Cancellaria: whear Achatius a Donau writes to Anhalt 15. pied
a pied, to extirpate the Antichristian Papaltie,

And tho the union yt self (fownded upon 21. articles,) was said to be
undertaken, as a bukler against the plats and proiects of the Catholics; yet
articulo 8. they confess, that there intention was, to expel papisme; to
preseru them selfs from the yoke and servitude of Spain: and to prevent all
foreign government. And Bethlem Gabor in his letter to the Turk says
plainly, that he must now labor, vt rasa pontificiorum cohorse medio tollatur.
So then, this is assured, that if they can prevail; all Catholics know there
doom, there suppression, and oppression.

But this is not all; though it be ever one. for page 43. Ecclesiasticorum
inuasio, is set Augusta Treuirorum, (Trier.) for so they should be commanders
of a Prince Electors contrie, and triumph over the clergy.

Neither yet was this all: for ambition, vt aduersae part is Prouinciae
inuadantur, to invade there contries, that should taik arms against them.

But there noblest project, was: to inuest them selfs in Bohemia and Hungaria.
Two crowns wear goodly booties, and temptations fit for high spirits. and
why ded they first, and so earnestly, affect Bohemia? The reason is given page
25. for thereby, in Collegio electorum, compos erit votorum duorum, he should
have two voices; and he was sure of the consent and concurrenc of Brandenburghs
suffrage.

And there for the Count Palatin in his letter, to the Elector of Saxony,
says. The cawse why he ded taik upon him the Administration of Bohemia, was
this that, 1o thereby this kindome might not be longer restrained and detayned
from the use and exercise of there religion; and 2o that they might enjoy there
privileges, and not be maid hereditarie: or fall into the hands of Spain, to
the prejudice of the Electors. and 3o that hearafter the election of king of
the Romans might be in the power and Choice of the Protestant Princes, by the
plurality of voices. (So he thought, they should not be forced to hold the
stirrup; while the Popes wear mounted, and Papists ded govern all in the
Empire.) And peradventure for that end purposed, if they could: to hinder that
Ferdina^d, might not be chosen king of the Romans. For so Anhalt ded write to
Donau, in May 1619. that it wear better, the Turk or the Deuel should be chosen
and preferred to vvear that crown, then Ferdinand. and B. Gabor by his letters
certified the Turk, that the Pal. and Brandenburgh vvear resolved no longer to
endure Ferdinand: and that all these Provinces, who wear in the league,
Sultano, and tot^ationi Mahumeticae cord and animaomnia officia f^delissime
prastabunt: and that Ferdinand shortly should be expelled Germany to seak his
succor in Spain. Is not this a holy league? Be not the ends charitable, and
the media most Christian?

But the truth is, Ambition was Hongrie: Bahemia, Alsatia, and a part of
Austria: and to enlarg his dominion, by the Bushoprick of Spyrts, and a part of
Mentz. Bethlem Gabor, should be assisted to keap Hongrie, the which (he having
no issew) might also happily fall to the lot of the Palatine (Too manic
crowns so purchased, to expect any in heaven.)

Onoltzbach gaped for two fatt benefices, the Bushopricks of Wirtzburgh, and
Bambergh, (his next neighbers) and therefore it was agreed that there should be
the Rendeuous of the army.

The Marquis of Baden, thirsted after Brissack; and to be enabled, to continue
his unjust possession of the upper Marchionate; and to out face the Count
Eberstein (who had endured much wroug at his hands.) Wirtzburg was a mote in
the eye of Brandenburgh, it lay near and fit for him: and therefore his dessein
was to have a share in it.

Anhalt, hoped to supply his wants, by a part of the spoil, both of Ments,
and Bambergh; and by some lands and lord ships, which wear like to escheat in
Bohemia.

And if the Venetians would ioyn in this Association, they might with so good
assistance easily maik them selfs Lords of Istria, and friuli. and by this
means, Oceanum, cum Adriatico, said they, posse coniungi. A great conquest
surely: and it showed a deuowring stomach, that could swallow so great
morsells, and sowell digest and dispose them, before they had them.

It rests now to demurr upon these points; and to examine, what Apology, and
what arguments can they alledg strong enough, to defend a project, and a
conspiracy, so pernicious to the whole state of Christendom, and so directly
against the law of nations, and the peace of the Empire.

All the pulpits in England, and the churches ^ Reason.
(called reformed) ded generally and lowdelie sownd an Alarm, against treason
and rebellion of the league and leaguers of France: and yet that ded not extend
it self, beyond the Alps or the Maze, as this does.

And yt was at first undertaken quietly, withowt any sedition or
insurrections in the state. And was for defenc only of there ancient
religion, (withowt any temporal respects:) and confirmed with the kings oath
and allowance: and afterward it was continned in reueng of Murder, and actions
of tyranny.

Now consider what was there scope? Monsieur de Villeroy, in the relation of his
services maiks it evident. they ded not seak the extirpation of the king of
Nauarr, but his reformation: and if they might be assured of his religion, he
should be assured of there obedienc.

But this union runs a wilder race. It is not only a new religion, but the
lands of the old religion they gape after: and the affection they have to the
latter, maiks them more greadie, to suppress the former. And yet all must be
said to be door for religion, though it be done most irreligiouslie, having
neither, the order, nor the media, nor the end religious. how could it then
succead add prosper well, that begonn so ill and how could it beginn worse,
them to march under too such standards, as ambition and avarice.

And therefore most wise he, ded that excellent 2. Ratio.
Duke of Saxony, as a friend of peace, adui^e the Count Palatin to renounce
Bohemia, and seak for pardon: because this war ded open the gates of the
Empire, to let in the Turk, which of it self was a sufficient cawse to condemn
there union. for if there quarrel had bean good; yet the effects yt ded work,
wear bad.

Moreover, plessen confesses in his letters 3. Ratio.
to Anhalt, that which is most true, the actions of Holland, and Bohemia, eodem
fundamento niti: so Holland is the pattern. Bohemia the imitation: suits of one
cut: lessons of one school. And seeing that of Hollond is sufficiently
disprooued, all ready, I nead not use any new argument to refell this, but
referr you to the precedent discourse. for they took arms against a king
lawfully elected, solemnly crowned, and by consent of the states established
in possession, what could be more orderly* and so hortlie after, to depose
him; and upon so weak surmises, to show so much leuitie: neads better arguments
then yet y could ever hear.

And it was maid the more odious, by nominating the Duke of Saxony, as a
competitor and a stale; to maik him suspected to the Emperor, as reum affectati
imperij: knowing that he had refused there offer, when they employed Count Slick
to persuade, that he would imbark him selfs, in the busienes, and accept the
crown of Bohemia, which in dead they never intended to a Lutheran prince.

An other reason, does much exaggerate 4. Reason.
the offense. By there president, Austria was corrupted (see how strongly
examples work with a multitud. The people, (says the Register of the
Chancerie) by the correspondenc of the Turk and Gabor, took coorage; and told
Ferdinand, that if he would not grant them toleration of religion, and freedom
of conscienc: they would join with the Bohemians and Hungarians, and renounc
there obedienc to him. And they vvear masters of there words: for in August
1620. the lower Austria, abandoned there Lord (the ancient inheritor of that
noble patrimony,) quitted there obedienc, and accepted a new protector in his
stead. I am sure the subjects of England would condemn the Catholics, (and so
they might justly) if they should stand upon the like terms, and there
ancient tisle; and in defenc of that, seak to expel there soouerain, and invest
a strainger in the government, to serve there turn. And surely there cases, ar
matches: if the one might by law, the other may: and if you, condemn the one,
you must vnpartiallie condemn the other.

But nothing maiks this action more offensive, 5. Reason.
more scandalous, and more infamous, then that Anhalt and Onoltzback, (in sc^s
electoribus,) ded confederate them selfs with straingers: and dispose of the
succession of the Empire, vvithovvt the warrant of the Empire. and this fawlt
is dovvbled, by combining with Bethlem Gabor; Christians, with the Turks
vassal, a reprobate, a monster.

This is that B. Gabor, who to hold him self in the Turks grace, delivered
unto him, the town and fort of Lipp, and the towns of Solimos Tornadg, Margat,
and Arad (well fortified) in Hungaria.

This is he, who treated with the Hungars, 1607. to deliver up Vaccia (a town
Episcopal) into the Turks hands; to the great prejudice of religion, and
oppression of Christians. This is he, that swore alleagianc to Gabriel
Batthori his soouerain Lord, and Princ of Transil^ania, and afterward
trayterouslie murdered him and usurped his state. This is he who maid a league
with the Emperor Matthias 1615. not to attempt any thing against the
liberties and peace of Hongrie: and afterward practiced with the rebels of
that state, invaded the kingdom, took upon him the crown 1620. led Andrew
Dockzy the kings Liuetennant (catched in his nett by frawd) prisonner into
Transiluania, and banished all the state Ecclesiastical (that he might fead
his soldiers with the spoils of the church.)

And this is he, who having entered Poson, profaned the Cathedral church of S.
Martin, placed there his new Chaplains, and afterward with his own hand
certified the Turk; that at last he had undertaken that worthy exployt, to the
which the Turk had often incooraged him: and that most of the nobles of
Hongarie, wear his, and had submitted them selfs to him: and that now he was
determined for the clergy, seeing they gloried to shave there crowns, he would
glory to cut of there heads. whearupon in Iun afther: the Turk maid peace
with Tartaria, and promised to assist Gabor, at his nead with 40. thousand
Tartars.

What tare virtues can be expected, from such a man, whose anatomy if it vvear
to be maid, would shovv such a leaprousie such a corruption of blood, and so
loath some a body; as Europe haith not often known. I nead no other reason
against this league, but to subscribe his name, (as a principal in the
contract) whom the world must neads judge unlike to be a fit instrument to
aduanc the Cross of Christ, and to reform religion.

Yet this was the man upon whose head the union ded agree to set the crown
of Hongarie; and to carry the practice with more secrecy, they intertaind
his nearest kinsman at Heydelbergh; under the govvn of a scholar, to hyde all
there intelligences, and conduct there busienes.

Now, do I vvish, that a partial reader, 6. Reason.
would look upon Germany, and see the picture of Troy on fire; see the image
and horror of war: and how well it would please them to see the face of
London, and Midlsex so disfigured with wounds and desolation. And that puritan,
who now is most forvvard to blovv the coals of discord and sedition, and
inflame a state with fury and quicksiluer: may quake and trembl when he
shall consider in what devastation, all that contrie of the Empyrelyeth
mourning and groaning.

The Provinces abovvt the Rhine ar waisted, disturbed, and empouerished by the
soldiers on both sides (specially worms) tillage^s suspended, traffic is
decayed, trades ar ceased, taxes ar imposed, new fortifications charge the
contrie, men are not masters of there own goods, and above 100. thousand men ar
acco^ppted to be slain* these ar the fruits of civil wars; which are bitter
and lovre to them that taist them, (as I pray g^d England may never.)

And there are the fruit of Caluinisme: which (though it was directly
prohibited by the law, and tolerated only by the mercy of the state;)
seaketh now, to suppress both the Emperor and the states, withowt any
toleration of there religions, an uncharitable requital: ans vvithovvt the feal
of any religion. for your iustifi^ng sole faith can never justly (vvithovvt
yt bring charity in her bosom:) and the true marks of Charity being patienc,
humility, and zeal conjoined strongly in a link: your litl patienc, and
humility, convinc your zeal to be counterfeit, and your faith to be fruitles.
for charity would not direct you, to invade the Duke of Bauier his
territories, if he refused to stand Neuther: charity ded not counsel Anhalt,
in his letters to Donau 1619. to have an auaricious eye, to surprise a city,
which would be vvorth unto them 32. millions. Charity does not use to direct
Christians to solicit the Turks assistance (as page 80. Cancellariae:) nor to
set down such plots, as they intended p. 42. and 32. and 66.

Now touching the laws of the Empire, 7 Reasons.
I referr you to that I have delivered before, against the commotions of the
Lutherans: which there is justly condemned Only I will add this, touching
Bohemia, Carolus 4. in act. de confirmatione regis Bohemo^um, sets down
this clause, as an essential part, of that kings authority and approbation.
Volentes, vt quicunque in regem Bohemorum electus fuerit, ad nos and
successores nostros, Romanorum reges and Imperatores accedat, sua a nobis
debito modo and solito, regalia accepturus, non obstantibus iuribus, and
legibus municipalibus quibuscunque, etc. And in the Aurea bulla. cap. 4. Curia
Nurenberg. act 7. Iubemus and volumus, vt omnes Principes, Electores, etc. and
art. 8. Si quis autem Princeps Elector, aliusue feudum a sacro tenens impeno,
supra and infra scriptas Imperiales constitutiones adimplerenoluerit, aut eis
contrare presumpserit: ex tunc caeteri Coelectores, a suo ipsum deinceps
excluda^t consortio, ipseque voce Electoris, dignitate careat, and iure. Whereby
it is maid manifest, what the law requires to be done? and what order and
manner it prescribes for the doing thereof: and what paenaltie and forfeitur
is set done against offenders and transgressors of that law. And good
reason. for take away or neglect Justice; pretend what you will, your great
glorious attempts, your invasions, your intrusions, be but magna latrocinia,
and violent oppressions. as appeared well, by the supplication of Leopold king
of the Romans, to his father Otho I. who because he had broken the peace of the
Empire, and called forreiners (and yet not Turks) to his assistanc. says he,
membrum Imperij appellari non debeo, quigentes ext^rnas and barbaras in mediam
Germaniam immisi sorrowing for his fault, and acknowledging his error.

But these Minyeons of Geneua, bring 8. Reason.
Religion to plead for the defenc of there union: and that they endeauored
only to punish Ochosias, for consulting with the Idol of Accharon, and to
root ovvt superstition. Hear in dead is the voice of Jacob, but the roughnes of
Esau: words of piety, but action of Babel. can you shovv as good a vvarrant
as Elias ded? ded God call you, ded God authority you, to deprive your
Princes? per me Reges regnant, was Gods proposition: and S. Peter 1. Epist. c.
2. v. 13. be subject to every humane creature for God, whether to a king as
excelling, or to rulers. His counsel and yours vary much for he willed them
to fear God, and honor the king: but you direct your auditors to degrade and
depose the king. S. Paul Romans 13. v. 1. Let every sowl be subject to higher
powers, for there is no power but of God: and he who resists that power,
resists Gods ordinanc, and purchases damnation. and v. 5 not of necessity,
but for conscienc sake. But this matter, neads no disputation: grace and piety
can best decyde it.

TITVLVS SEXTVS.
AT last by a long travel, we are returned Touching, Q. Marie, and the
practices against her.
home to England, vvheare no such paradoxes, ar now holden by the Clergy,
and prelates. and it is no marvel. for now, they have the wynd with them, and
live in a calm: so as there patienc and obedienc (of late days) never came to
probation: and no trial could be maid of there spirits, having no crosses, nor
other combat, then with sin and Martin Marprelate: and in so great peace and
prosperity, he wear not compos mentis; that would not preach against
disloyalty, and tumults.

But if you look back to the times past, and call to mind, what spirit reigned
in them, during any storm, or tempests: you will find them much differing
from them selfs, and that they wear not allwaies so peacable and regular, (as
now they are,) since they appeared first in the world, as Antagonists to the
church of Room, and with that singularity, and title of Reformers.

For if master Fox ded trewlie register his martyrs, and if the Wiclefists and
Waldenses wear rightly inserted in Catalogo testium veritatis; then may you
find cawse enough to dovvbt of there humors, and quiet disposition. and if you
ask my reason. Bycaus they ded hold (as the knoxians yet do in Scotland.) That
the people might correct Princes, if they offend: contrary to all the
Theoremes of Catholics schools. And therefore Philip Melancton, in his comment
upon Aristotels politics, says, Miras tragedias, excitauit Wiclefus, qui
contendit eos, qui non habent Spiritum sanctum, amittere dominium.

And in his book, de iure magistratus, Insanijt VViclefus, qui sensit impios,
nullum dominium habere. As if Princes, should forfeit there crowns; if they
lost grace, and Gods favor.

And Osiander witnesses the same, Centuria 9. And yet master Fox, calls
him, stellam matutinam in me lio nebulae, and lunam plenam in die us illis. A
morning starr, in the midst of a fogg, and yet the full moon, of that time.

How plausible he was, in those days, no man will maik a Quere, that can
Remember, how Sir John Oldcastel (Lord Cobham) and Sir Roger Acton, (wiclefs
disciples) levied 25. thousand men, intending to destroy the monasteries of
westminster, Powles, and saint Albons, and all the howses of friars in London;
whearof that active king Henry the fifth, being advertised in good time, (by
the confession of some of there partakers:) with great diligence he prevented
them at S. Gyles fealds (appointed to be there Rendeuous:) and incountring those
straglers, who wear there attending the generals coming: apprehended,
condemned, and executed 37. of the principalls, for exampl and terror to the
rest. And he aftherward hunted ovvt and fownd Oldcastel, and Acton, and put
them to death, being attainted of Treason, and Haeresie, as by the records
appears.

All which master Fox labors to extenuate and falsify, and disprooueth
them as calumniations and slanders. but with no success; as you may learn by
John Stow page 550. and by Doctor Hapsfealds Ecclesiastical story, lately
published by a worthy man of our nation.

For it is evident that 1. Henry 5. the Wiclefists set schedulles, on powles
Church door, publishing that there was a hundred thousand men, ready to rise
against such as wear ennemies to there sect. And in a synod holden at London,
for diverse points of doctrine touching the Sacraments, Oldcastle was committed
to the tower, (from whence he broke out.) and afterward one Bennet was
executed, partly for harboring Oldcastle, partly for seditious libells
against the king: whearupon, (as also for some practices at kenelworth against
the king) Oldcastl was endited in the Parliement, before the Duke of Bedford,
(as an enemy to the stathe.) he answered them with contempt, accompting it as
a trifle to be judged by them, (belike because they wear sinners: and because
(he said) he had no judge among them, so long as king Richard lived.

And at his death, he spoke like a man frantic to Sir Thomas Erpingham; that
if he saw him rise the third day, he would procure quietness, and favor to
those of his sect.

And surely if you look into VViclefs own life time; you shall find it no
marvel, if his doctrine ded so far seduce Oldcast: having procured thereby, so
great patrons and friends in the court, at his first rising: and such applause
in the university of Oxford (the place best able to judge of his learning, and
illumination.)

John of Gand, Duke of Lancaster, ded much favor: and patronize, this martyr
Wiclef: in so much, that he being summoned, to appear before the Bushop of
London: the Duke ded him so much grease, to go with him thither for his better
protection, assisted with Sir Henry Petcie (the Marshall of England.) to
discountenanc the Bushop, to encoorage Wiclef, and to animate and increase his
fectaries and folloaeers in there course.

And it was worthy the noting, that Religion was even then used, as a fair
vestement, to cover many foul practices. for the Duke and Wiclef had several
ends. the Duke graced him, because he was so generally plausible: the better
to overthrow both the liberties of the Church, and the Charters of London: bot
which lay as blocks in his way, to hinder the course of his aspiring desseins.

And this appeared playnelie, by Ihon Lattimor (an Irish friar) who accused the
Duke of many practices, specially of his intention to vsurp the crown. (which
maid him so popular.) But Latimor being committed by the Dukes means to the
custody of Sir John Holland, in the night before he should come to his
answer: the poor man, was strangled by Holland and Grean.

But to come nearer, to the present age. In Queen Mary's time, examine how
obedient these Reformers wear, to that magnanimous Queen, and the Crown. and it
is worthy to be noted: that in five years, (the too short time of her
reign:) she had defacto, more open and violent opposition and rebellion by her
own sudiects; then Queen Elizabeth had in 45. years. (for the treasons of
Preasts, and religious men; wear but skar crows in dead; fictions, maid
faults by law: devised by policy, and maid offenses, rather then being so of
them selfs. (How plain was her government, and how far from triks? a litl
seuear (to which ^he was often forced:* for though she was a great Iusticer; yet
withal how merciefull she was, appeared manifestly by her gracious compassion
to the Duchess of Sommerset, to Sir John Cheak, to Sir Edward Mountagevv (the
cheaf Justice,) to Sir Roger Cholmlie, to the Marquis of Northampton, Sir
Henry Dudlie, Sir Henry gates, the Lord Robert Dudlie, (who stood attainted)
and to the Duke of Suffolk: whom all she knew, and had before fownd to be
enemies of her religion, and no friends to her title, and yet she released them
all ovvt of the tower, whear they wear prisonners.)

Notwithstanding all this: the Protestants wear never quiet, nor suffered her to
be quiet. Some ded libell against the regiment of voemen: some picked quarrels
to her marriage: some published discourses and invectiues against her religion:
and some conspired her deprivation, to advance her successor (by whose
advancement every Caluinist expected a golden fleace.)

The grovvnd of all these seditious actions, was the religion they professed
(then nor fully six years old) a religion of more liberty, more pleasing to
the gallants of a court; and void of these austerities and mortifications,
which the ancient Catholics observed with reverence.

But among many others, that book of obedienc, prepared most the vulgar, to
insurrections and mutinies. for page 94. he affirms, that Queen Marie
deserved to be put to Death, as a tyrant and monster. Ded ever any Catholich
write so? or ded the pen of any seminary man blot the paper with so barbarous
a sentenc? Yet knox libro, appellat. ad nobilitatem and popul. Scot. joins
hands with a Goodman, and backeth his opinion. Illud (inquit) audacler
affirmauerim, debuisse nobiles, rectores, iudices, populumque Angl^anum non
modo refistere and repuguare Mariae illi Iesabeli, quam vocant reginam suam,
verum etiam de ea and Sacerdotibus eius supplicium sumere. and these, yet vvear
not all. Procead Sir Thomas Wyatt, is worthielie chronicled for his: rebellion:
who marched as a Cyrus, over Shooters hill with his army: threatening both
court and city, Prince and people. Yet this holy Goodman, cap. 14 in his
Obedienc, commends him, and says, he ded but his dewtie: and that it was the
dewtie of all that professed the gospel, to have risen with him. and page 43.
He affirms, that it is lawful to resist the superior powers, and urges all
states to taik arms against her.

But whear ded Goodman and kno^ suck this sweat doctrine? at Geneua, (the
school of Monarchomachia whear Buchanan, ded learn the same, and all for one
end. and master VVhitingham in his preface to that book; confesses that it
was approved to be a good and godly treatise, by the principal of that
city, that is Calvin and Beza. And albeyt in Qurne Elizabeth's time, Goodman
is said to have recalled that opinion: yet it was never publicly recalled by
him, and disalowed: and besides it shows in Queen Mary's time, under the
cross and affliction of what spirit, he end his faction wear of.

If you dowbt, upon what pretenc wyat ded rise, (because some maik quaestion
thereof:) surely it was partly for religion, partly for bonum publicum, to
hinder the Queen's marriage: (for both jointly concurred, as Stow and
Hollinshead agree.) He that shall presume to defend, that it was not for
religion; Queen Marie in her oration at the Guildhall in London, does refell
him: for she declared, that she had sent diverse of her counsel to wyat, to
demand the pretenses of his insurrection: and she said it appeared to her
counsel, that it was a Spanish Cloak to Cover religion.

It is true, that wyat urged, to have the Towr delivered to him: and to have
power to nominate and choose new counselors: and that he would not trust, but
be trusted.

Wear these in different demands af a subject? Or regalities fit to be offered
to his mercy? was this to preseru the Queen? Surely Violenc, and the Svvord,
be unfit keapers of a Prince person.

And touching Religion, Fox him self says. that for religion they co^spired
among them selfs, and maid wyatt there Cheafe: the reason was, that by foreign
marriage, the Queen would bring a servitude upon the realm, and establish
popish religion there in.

Vovv upon these premises, mark what ensevved. William Thomas, conspired to
kill the Queen: and at his execution, he gloried, that he dyed for the good of
his contrie.

Doctor Pendlton preaching at Povvles Cross, one discharged a peace against
him. and at the same place, an other day: one threw a Dagger at master Bourn
(being in the pulpit:) wheare the lord Maier could skarselie appease the
tumult: so as the lords of the counsel, the next sunday after, together with
the Guard, went thither to prevent, or to punish such disorders (if any
should there happen again.)

And at westminster, upon an Easter day, a desperare fellovv, wounded a
preasts as he was saying Mass, in saint Margerets Church.

So great was the distemperature of these inflamed puritans; who complain so
much against the persecution of that time, and yet they provoked it: and having
no power to command, yet had they no humility to obey: and when they might
have lived quiet them selfs, yet would not suffer others to live quiet, in
whose authority it lay to disquiet them.

But I will mount to offenses a degree higher. William Fetherston (a counterfeit
king Edward) was brought upon the stage, as a Parkin Warbeck, to disturb both
the Queen and the state.

What strains of invention and policy; wear these against a Prince, for her
religion? but hear they stay not. for One Clebar (sometimes a Paedante)
remaining at yakeslie in Northfolk, was put to death, for a conspiracy
against the Queen. Vdal, Stanton, Peckam, and Daniel, wear committed both for
conspiracy, and haeresie, and for attempting to robb her threasure, and the
Exchecquor, (for which they had there dew punishment,) To let pass the treason
of Dudlie and Ashton (who wear set on, and stirred up by the French:) Sir
Peter and Gawin Carse, (great protestants) together with Sir Thomas Dennie,
took arms in Deuonshyre, to hinder and empeach the king of Spain his arriual
in England: possessed them selfs or Excetor Castl: and afterward perceauing
there own weakness, and less assistance then they expected; they fled into
France, (which was then the harbor for the malco^tents of his nation.)

Thomas Stafford, (coming well instructed from Geneua) maid proclamations
publicly in several places, that Queen Marie, was not lawful Queen, and
unworthy to be Queen. and so abuse the people, he gave out boldly and
falselie, that twelf of the strongest houlds in England, and best fortified,
wear committed to the custody and command of the Spaniards, (to maik them the
more odious; whom they hated only for there religion and power, and no other
particular quarrel.) and therefore, he Bradford, Procter, and Streatchlie, took
Skarborow castle (a fort then of some strenth, in yorkskyre, to hold against
the Spaniards: and in recompenc, of so great a service, they worthily lost
there heads.

Henry Duke of Suffolk, (to whom Queen Marie had once before given his life,
being father to Lady Jane, a privy counselor to the treasons of
Northumberland, and her prisoner in the tower:) he flijng into Leicestershyre
with the Lord Gray; in his journey he likewise maid proclamations against the
Queen's marriage with Spayn (for that was then the greatest object of the
Protestants malice:) and finding his disabilitie, to levy a commanding army,
he fled, and lurked in corners; till the Earl of Huntingron, discovered his
hole, apprehended and brought him up to the tower (his old lodging,) whear he
maid an unfortunate end.

I might urge the practices of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton (a man of great wit
and policy,) who was endited of high treason, and arraigned at Westminster,
with Arnold, Warner, and Others. And though the case was plain, the Jury
acquitted him, but to there constand trowble.

Albeyt he had cawse to thank God, that it was not in a time, when the
Advocates vvear so skillful to triumph at the bar upon calamities, and
vvilling rather that the prisonner should loose his head, then they would
loose there Oration, and the glory of the day. Thus was Queen Marie tossed in
a sea of trovvbles, tantae molis erat, Romanam Condere gentem.

But some have objected, that no Ministers, had a hand in these tumults: nor
vvear the trompettors of sedition, at that time. yes surely both there heads
and there hands ded cooperate. Do you taik Goodman and Gilbie to have bean no
ministers? Ievvel preached at Gloucester, against the Quens proceadings: D.
Sands vvalked with the ragged staff, and being vicechanlor of Cambredg,
assisted the proclaymers of lady Jane. Hooper, Rogers, and Crowlie vvear
enrolled as friends of these actions: and diverse others who in Queen Mary's
time, after vvyats fall, ded forsake the realm.

And what think you of the two Apostles of that time, Cranmor and Ridlie? wear
not they instruments of the Queen's trovvbles? A great Doctor, with great
subtilitie labors to excuse Cranmor and Ridlie, that they committed no
trespass against Q. Marie, nor in her time. Sir though the time, does not
excuse there offense (if it had bean fully committed in kings Edwards days)
being actions of injustice, and against the rules of common reason and
conscienc.

Yet y may say, uon been diuisa sunt haec temporibus. D. for it is evident,
that Ridlies sermon was after king Edwards death, and so could have no shelter
under his authority; because all men of vnder-standing know that the reign of
a Prince commenceth not at the time of his coronation, but actuallie upon the
death of his predecessor. Now it is certan, that the Sunday after king Edward
dyed, D. Ridlie (being Bushop of London,) sailing with the vvynd in his sermon
at Powles cross, (like an Other infamous Shavve) magnifiet and defended the
title of the lady lane, to the crown of this realm; persuaded the people to
accept and obey her, as Queen: and so impugned the invincible right of both
king Henry's Daughters, against his own conscienc and knowledge, and directly
against king Henties will. and there: for he was justly convicted and
attainted of treason.

As for Cranmor, he was a counselor and oracle in the busienes: and therefore
was arraigned and condemned, with the Lady Jane, and Guildeford Dudlie, as a
contriuer and principal assistant, of that treasonnable practice, to disherit
both the Queen's: and to graft the princely roses upon a crabtree stock. (as
appears by the records in the kings bench.) and I may trevvlie affirm of that
Proteus, that in all his actions, he showed him self ever seruilie pliable to
any humor of the kings.

First a principal instrument of the divorce, (whearby the court gates vvear
set open, to welcome Ann Boodein.) then afterward, to serve the kings appetite,
he and Cromwell wear the cheafactors, employed for her condemnation and death.
(as appears, by the statut, 28. H. 8. c. 7. whear Cranmors sentenc is
recorded iudiciallie as of his own knowledge convincing her of that foul fact.)

So as Queen Elizabeth's friends had no cawse to favor him, either for dew
respect of her, or of her father: or for kyndnes to her moother. and all
impartial men will condemn him of inexcusable iniquity, that being a
counselor of strate, primate and Metropolitan, and pretending to be a reformer
of religion; he would betray his master (whose creature he was) would
frustrate and void his will, (wheareof he was cheaf executor:) would subscribe
to extinguish and root out his issevv, his two daughters, two Queen's, to set
up Lady Jane in there places.

And all this baselie, and against his own conscienc: and all to pleas a
subject, all for fear of affliction, against which he was never well armed
(as appeared by his so many chainges, relapses, and periuries: offenses, which
I leave to God, as faults of frayltie and batges of humain weakness.) But to
come to the matter. All these aforesaid being overt acts, and treasons in se,
and simpliciter, and by the common laws of the realm, and by the statut of
25. Edw. 3. I think I may, well conclude that Caluinism, and the new
religion, ar most daingerous to princes: and have bean the greatest cavvse, of
all the wars, seditions, and depopulation in Europeever since Luther (a man
of unhappy me, morie.)

And yet I can not but commend that religion, M^tonimia.
because it is semper eadem, you may allwaies know it, by the coonisance, by
the operation, and fruits of it.

It is the same that induced them of Geneua, to expel there Bushop and Lord:
the same that moved them of Sweueland, to deprive there lawful king: the same
that procured Holland, to depose there soouerain: the same that solicited
subjects to deposeth' Emperor, king of Bohemie. the same that emprisoned, the
virtuous martyr, and Queen of Scotland, and cast her into that calamity,
which haunted her even tho death: the same that authorized Rochel, and
Montauban, to stand at defianc against there king the same that begot so many
monstrous conspiracies against Queen Marie of England, (as you have hard.) So
as, in 60. years, mo Princes have bean deposed by the Protestants for there
religion: then had bean by the Popes excommunication, or the attempt and means
of Catholics in 600. And yet foall this, I perceive all these action, have
some Champions: at least, some men of note, seak to excuse them. as, when we
object Svvedia; master T. M. defends it, and geues reason, that it was the
demand of the whole state, for defenc of there privileges and liberties, and
fruition of religion.

A writ is brought de eiectione firmae, against Sigismond king of Svvecia, by
his own subjects; the king is eiected thereupon: and T. M. allovves it, because
it was the demand of the whole state, etc. Consider better, first do you
talk of a whole state, and maik the king no part of it? the head no part of
the body? can there be a monarchy vvithovvt a king? you harp to near knoxes
tune, and a Scots gig.

The whole state, id est, the people, (either solicited or disposed to aduanc
Duke Charles, vvithovvt the kings consent to vvear his crown) ded elect
Charles there king, and deprived Sigismond.

This was you say for defenc of there privileges and religion. So then you
think for the se two cawses, they might justly depose there king: and so the
kings maistlie knovveth, what assurance he may have of you, and what a sure
stake you ar for kings to lean on. can you defend this fact? it is the same,
that Holland and Bohemia committed? then against whom is rebellion, against
the people or the king? The law is plain, no war can be maid, withowt the
authority of the prince, sine qua est laesa maiestas: and that is a
fundamental law in every monarchy; (which you turn to a Democratie by
leaving the bridle in the Peopls hand.) If you will vouch safe to hear S.
Augustine, he says l. 22. cap. 75. contra Faustum, ordo naturalis, mortalium
paci accommodatus hoc poscit, vt suscipiendi belli authoritas atque consilium,
penes Principem sit. and he geues a reason, for non est potestas nisi a Deo vel
iubente vel sinente. and because you think they ought by force of arms to
resist there king, for religion: c. 76. he answers your objection, by exa^pl
of the Apostles, Isti sunt resistendo interfecti sunt, vt potiorem esse
docerent victoriam, pro fide veritatis occidi. Martyrdoome.


Iam sure you like not this, Occidi, for few perfect Caluinists, prove perfect
martyrs.

Valentius, degreed to banish Eusebius from Samosata; the people resisted, but
Eusebius appeaseth the sedition, dissuaded the people, and obeyed the decree.
Theodoret l. 4. cap. 14. Valentinian, sent Calligonus his chamberlain, to
threaten S. Ambrose, and terrify him, from his opinions, by the name of death
and torments. he ded answer in an other tune, Deus permittat tibi, vt impleas
quod minaris. Ego patiar, quod est Episcopi: tu facies, quod Spadonis.

Christ him self, resisted not: but commanded Peter tu put up his sword: it
was no proper vveapon to defend his quarrel. Daniel and the Children of
Israel, Captives in Babylon: when the king commanded them to Idololatrize; they
resisted not, they reviled not, they ded not offer to spit in his face, (as
Calvin bravely defended they might.) but refusing his command, they laid them
selfs at his feate, to endure his pleasure.

But to touch you a litl, nearer. I nead alledg no other authors then your
own, either to condemn wyat, or the subjects of Swetheland.

Doctor Bilson holds it, as an articl of

Besides, master Beza, some times (when Nullum remedium proponitur hominibus
tyranno subiectis, preter preces and lachrimas. Parson whytes own argument
against the fathers of the Catholic religion; (that dij maiorum gentium:

And if Princes should for feit there authority, when they err in faith. Then
who should taik the forfeiture thereof? and who should be judge whether he
haith forfeited yt? I know you are not so gross,

Xiphilin, in the life of M. Antonius, says, Solus Deus, iudex Principum.
Belloy, in his Apology Cathol. part. 2. Orationibus pugnandum, arms against
Princes have no warrant. Quis est iudex, si^^ ex transgreditur conditiones
regni? Solus Deus.. 21. and how far we ought to obey princes, and Quatenus:
see saint Augustine sermon. de verbis Domini in Matthew. And common reason will and
may teach every is anima corporis, spiritus vitalis, caput membrorum, vinculum
per quod cohaeret respublica: sine quo nihil respublica ipsa futura, nisi onus
and praeda, si men's illa Imperij detrahatur. This was Senecas opinion, and a
sownd proposition. for if the soul offend the body, the body can not punish
it vvithovvt participating of the punishment: neither is it a proper faculty
of the body, to judge. but of the soul, and understanding. Examine, what the
law means, by body politic; and you shall better discern,

It is a dignity Royal annexed to the natural body, whearby he is maid Lord
Paramount, and is not surnamed as others ar, but styled by the name of the
body politic declaring his function, as Iacobus Rex. and to show the nature,
quality majesty and prerogative of that body, 1. It can not hold lands in
ioyntennancie, (nor endure a partner:) 2. it can not be seized to uses, (and so
limited:) 3. it is not bovvnd to give liuerie and season of lands, (nor tied to
the circumstances of a natural body:) 4. it can not do homage having no
superior: 5. and that body is so precious, as the imagination only to
compass his death is treason, (tho there be no attempt.) 6. and that body
vested in a blood, ought to descend: and tho the natural body be attainted of
fellonie or treason before, yet by access of this body politic, he may taik
his inheritanc, for that dignity purges the blood, as it ded H. 7. and H. 4.
(for this body was founded vvithovvt letters pattents, by the Common laws,
and for the defenc of the people.)

And if criminal cawses can not disable the descent, it can less when it is
descended. for the crown of England is independent (for his iura regalia)
holden of no Lord, but the lord of heaven: so it can not escheat to any being
holden of none.

What then? from this fowntain is all authority, and honor derived. Judges at
created, and have there commission to judge from the king, for criminal and civil
cawses: the Constable and marshals court for arms and honor: the Chancerie for
equity: the Checkor, for reuennues of the crown. So to conclude, the king
giving, and appointing all judges, who in his realm is to judge him? or to
censure his counsels of state, and politic temporal actions? and if be he
judge, they are vvithowt judgment, that attribute it to the states; but they err
most that arm the people withdraw that authority. For tho I know what a
parliement means; and what power it vvoorthilie carries: yet as it is ever
summoned by the king; so there acts must be judged, allowed, and confirmed by
the king, before they be laws.

In the senate rests consilium: but in the king is the power, and Majesty of
the realm, and he is judge to allow, or disallow what he likes. and by the
conjunction of these, Foskevv said trewlie, no state is berter tempered, nor
more temperatelie governed: nor by more excellent municipall laws, then
England is.

So to conclude, what reason can be pretended for wyats insurrection against
his soouerain the body politic. was it for matching with Spain? that was no
stra^g motion, for her father had once before de^seigned to match her in that
family. besides the conditions vvear honorable: and profitable to the crown
(if God should bless them with issevv:) the person most noble; and the reasons
allowed by all the counsel.

But the Queen ded not observe the laws of the realm, she abrogated the
statuts of 1. E. 6. (which all the kingdom approved:) and the word of God by
Moses commands, that Princes should observe the laws. and those Princes
dishonor them selfs, who do not acknowledge that of Theodosius, tantum tibi
licet, quantum per leges licet.

Well, aliud ex alio malum. As Moses prescribed what a Prince should do, so
Samuel, what he may do: Moses told him his dewtie, Samuel his power: and it
is true, and a Christian profession of kings, legibus se subiectos esse
profiteri. But you must consider, the law haith two properties, the one to
show what a man should do: the other to punish them, that do it not. To the
first the king is subject; but touching the second, for criminal cavvses; I
know no court, above the kings bench, nor no judge above the king.

Moreover if Queen Marie should be tied to her brothers laws: why was not
Queen Elizabeth to hers? why was not king Edward to his fathers laws? but
that religion of Queen Marie was corrupt, vnpure and superstitious. So still
hear is philautia and presumption, you will censure your judge; and you (a lay
man) will judge, of his religion. that is the Quaestion yet, and not decided by
any orderly Councels, or Synodes on yovvr part. and S. Austen, libro vbi
supra, Si vir nistus sub rege sacrilego militet, just posset illo iubente
bellare: 1. ciuicae pacis ordinem seruans: 2. cui quod iubetur, vel non esse
contra Dei praeceptum certum est, vel vtrum sit, certum non est. Tho the king
be sacrilegious, yet he is to be obeyed; and how 1. ciuicae pacis ordmem
seruans, (that is the course; and that is the end, for indiuidua bona sunt pax
and libertas; which is to be noted for them that plead so strongly for there
liberties:) secundo, if the kings commandments be not directly against Gods
words, if vel non esse certum est; vel vtrum sit, certum non est. Now tho all
Catholics, knevv the certum est, in there conscienc: yet the protestants, for
the vtrum sit, vvear vncertan, because both the law of the realm, the general
counsels, the whole state of the Church Militant, was against them; and they
had only the testimony of private spirits, to oppose against public
authority. But, what if Queen Marie had erred in some superstitions; what if
the present king ded err in his government, in his courses, in his judgment,
or in matching his son, withowt the consent of the realm: should either of
them, be censured or excommunicated by the ministers: or deprived, or committed
and emprisoned by a wyatt.

Solomon, ded fall into greauous sins, ad profundum Idololatriae lapsus atque
demersus (says S. Austen:) and ded directly against Goods commandment, (to
keap and marry straing voemen of the gentiles) non ingrediemini ad illas:
besides, he worshipped Moloch, and Astarthes (the gods of the Sydomans.) yet
neither Preasts, nor people ded rise against him, or depose him: they left it
to the proper judge of hings, who in his wrath ded appoint and raise up
Hieroboam to ruin his son: and if wyat could have showd such an immediate
warrant, he had bean excusable.

Julian proved in Apostata: yet tho the Doctors of the primative Church, as G.
Nazianzen and others, sharply reproved, and detested his impiety: yet they
never persuaded nor taught the people to deprive him.

He that proclaimed the prerogative of kings, vos estis d^: he taught the
world, that as Gods have summum imperium; so the people ar to obey, and therefore
called subditi, for there subjection. and you never hard of any but Giants,
that wear feigned to fight with the Gods; and they perished, for all there
greatness: for that hand must neads wither, which touches Gods anointed: for
he that taiks arms against him, does provoke the king to the feald: and when
the flame rages, who can tell whear the sparks will light. Some limitations
there ar: and those neadfull. For I ascribe not: an infinite, unlimited
divinity to kings, nor a power to tyrannize, and live as atheists: he that gave
the that glory, vos estis dij: ded likewise give them, this caveat that for
iniquity and impiety, transferam regna de gente in gentem. He is the Judge of
Princes, and his audit is dreadful; and to that we must leave them.

FINIS.
THE SECOND PART.
HIERVSALEM, THAT OBEDIENCE, AND ORDER, BE THE EIRENARCHAE OF CATHOLIQVES.
HAVING allreadie trewlie, King Henry tho eight.
and lively Drawn and presented unto you the Image of the Churches called
Reformed, with a face so full of frowns and stearnnes, that by the
Phisiognomie you may judge it, unquiet and turbulent: It remains in like sort
to paynt out unto you, the portraicture, of a Roman Catholic, by the
infallible characters of devotion, order, obedienc, and the humility of the
professors thereof.

What they wear in this land, in the time of king Lucius, and the Britons, I
shall not nead to expresle: but refer you, to the ecclesiastical stories of
that time: which even Fox and the Centuries do honor: laboring rather, to
commend them, as members of there own Church, then to acknowledge them ours.

For the time of the Saxons, I will maik no relation of there virtues, and how
amiablie the Church and common welthe ded sping up together. And though the
prelates wear highly reuere^ced, and ded bear great swaye in the state, yet
how dewtiefullie they obeyed there princes: Venerable Beda, and the stories of
that time. M. Lamberts Archaionomia, the old Saxon Laws, and the monuments yet
upon record, can witness and testify.

From king Edward the Confessor, Down to king Henry the VIII. there is no man
so blind, that will affirm there was any other religion, professed and
privileged in England, but that which was planted hear by Gregorius Magnus;
who as D. whitacher notes l. 5. contrae Duraeum, page 394. ded us a great
benefit, and which we ar ever most grate fully to remember.

In all which time, though the Clergy maid Canons, by there own authority,
for there ovn particular government: yet the kings of this realm, ded ever fynt
them obedient, and ready, hymblie and dewtifullie to obey them, and to afford
there best assistance, to support the estate Royal (even often when they wear
much trodden upon, and heavily burdened.) and albeyt sometimes, they wear
forced to whote contentions, for external matters of jurisdiction, and there
immunities, (as the commons and Barons wear:) yet they never passed the rules
of order and obedienc, nor stirred up sedition, or commotions. And who soever
shall object, and call in quaestion, the opposition of some prelates under
Henry the II. King John, and Henry the III. shall neither do great honor to
the kings, nor dishonor to the Churchmen for there zealous defenc of there
immunities: and perhaps he may revive such matters, as wear more convenient, to
be buried in the records.

But the first king, thar ever gave effectually cawse in this kingdom, to
try in the face of the world, the admirable patienc, Order, and loyalty of
the Catholics, was King Henry the VIII. (flagelium Dei, to the Church of
England, and yet of there own religion.) First, by aceusing the Clergy, to be
fallen into the danger of a praemunire, for mantaining Caridnal VVolsies
legantine power: Secondly by the statut of Supremacy: Thirdly by the
Suppression of Abbeis. Which vvear the three first breaches; whereby he threw
Down, the foundation, strenth, and glory of the Church of England. The first
leuelled the way, for the second: and the second enabled him with power and
authority, to compass the third. The first was a burden, the second a bridle,
and the third a terror.

By the first he fownd there weakness: by the second, they perceived his
greatness: and by the third, he maid them despair, of any recovery or
reparation of there estate. by the first only the Clergy smarted: the second
lay heavy both upon the spiritual, and temporal: by the third, the whole
realm was again in a sort conquered.

And all this was done, to be revenged against the Pope, (touching his
marriage) to abandon his jurisdiction, and to advance his own greatenes, and
royal power: that so no man might afterward control his action, or restrain
his appetites (which lawleslie rainged, in him and proved verrie inordinate.)
And there for he bard out of the realm, all foreign power: and at home, he
subdewed them, and maid them of no power.

Such is the imperious nature of domination in irregular mynds, which having
once broken out of his circle, can not endure limitation and bownds, but must
and will rainge at liberty, in the wide and wild feald of his humors; and not
being able to give law to his appetites: will maik laws as champions to
authorize them, and reason (as a parasite) to glorify them

Now to examine all these three. The first 1. The premunite.
was a quarrel, he ded pick only against Cardinal VVoltie; and yet afterward
set upon the tentors, and extended against the whole clergy. Which being
summoned into the kings bench, the kings learned counsel, urged and
exaggerated the matter, so vehamentlie: that in the Convocation house, they
concluded to submit them selfs, to his pleasure. and to obtain there pardon, and
recover his favor, they wear content to offer and present unto him a hundret
thousand pownds: whereupon there Pardon was signed by the king, and confirmed by
parliement. and by a devise there, they wear also Drawn, to acknowledge him
supreme head.

This was a course, at that time thought neither agreeable to Justice, nor
honor: for Cardinal Wolsie, had the kings licens under his hand, and the great
seal of England, sor his warrant to use the legantine power, and afterward by
reason thereof, the king him self employed him to exercise the same, and sit
with Campegius, and examine the matter. And if the divorce had bean allowed:
there should never have bean quaestion maid, of the legantine power.

Touching the Supremacy, All the hings 2. The supremacy.
subjects ever acknowledged, that the crown of England, quoad temporalia, is
independent of any other power, but that great and Transcendent Majesty,
who proclaimed to the world, Per me reges regnant; that kings knovving, who
will taik there audit, may be more careful to rule with Justice and keape
there accoumpts straight; and subjects, knovving there tie, and who laid upon
there necks this suaue iugum, and withowt encroachment, may obey with more
loyalty and affection.

The Question, which king Harrie maid (first of all kings, in his parliement,)
concerns his power and jurisdiction quoad spiritualia.) And whether that new
and high praerogatiue, vvear ever properly and essentiallie invested in the
crown of his realm heartofore: or whether it wear the creation of a new
right by parliement, iure Coronae or the establishment of an old.

And hearupon grows an other quaestion (now both in England, and other
kingdoms so much debated,) whether the Controversy for Supremacy in
spiritualibus, be a quaestion only proper to Religion, and so subject to the
sentenc and censure of the Church only (as among the Romans it was to the
Collegium Augurum, and Pontifex Max.) or proper to Policy and the state
only, and so subject, to the judgment of law: or Mixed, and a participle,
vvhear of either of them may hold plea.

Of both these, I shall have fitter both Occasion for the matter; and
Opportunity for the time, to declare my poor opinion, in my discourses upon
the Ecclesiastical History.

And for the suppression of the Abbeys; 3. The Supression of Abbeys.
the Clergy (by that fact, and the supremacy,) stood as in captivity, and
at the kings pleasure and mercy: there possessions wear seized, there goods
forfeited, there Churches profaned and sacked. And the augmentation court was
erected, upon the spoils of the Church, and the sale of there mooueables,
vestiments, challices, bells, and all. for when the king fownd, that the
Clergy (thorough the humility of there zeal) yealded so much unto him: he
never thought, he had power sufficient, till he had more then enoughe. and upon
that advantage, his conscienc being enlarged; broke out of those ancient bownds
which the laws of the Church had prescribed to him.

Therefore anno 27. he appointed Cromwell and Doctor Leigh, to visit the Abbeys;
and by virtue of the kings commission (which had then a chemical power to maik
sacrilege, virtue) they took out of the Monasteries there cheafest Jewels,
plate, and Relics, to the kings use. and dismissed all such religious
persons, under the age of 24. years, as desired to walk at liberty in the
wide world, and were weary of Cloisters and spiritual exercises.

Anno 28. to loose no time: all small religious howses of or under 200. pownds
per annum, with all there lands and haeteditaments (of which there wear 376.)
wear given to the king by parliement: and these vvear able to dispend above
3200. povvnds per annum, of old rents of Assise. and the mooueables of these
howses (being sovvld at vndervalevv) amounted to above, 100. thousand pownds.

The religious, and there dependants, vvear all voyded, and left unprovided of
habitation: so as more, then ten thousand persons, wear turned out of there own
doors, to seak there fortunes. Which moved the common people to much
compassion: to see them forced to live by alms, who by there bountiefull
hospitality, had releaued so many.

Anno 30. Battle Abbie in Sussex: Martin, in Surrie: Stratford in Essex: Jews
in Sussex, wear suppressed, and converted to the kings benefitt and use, (for
all things wear done politiquelie, and by degrees.) At last, anno 32. and 33.
generally all other monasteries, of what value soever: and all the lands of S.
John's of Jerusalem, wear given to the king, and the corporation of the knights
was dissolved, and to satisfy them with some contentment, they had pensions
distributed among them, of 2870. pownds, during there lives.

So hear was left in England and Ireland, no care of the general good of the
Church to mantain any succors, assistanc, or fortification of Europe against
the Turk; nor no nurceries of devotion, and prayer, again sin, and the deuel.
And to conclude, all Chantries, Colleges, and Hospitalls for the releafe of
the poor: vvear offered and bestowed upon the king, and left to his order and
disposing, anno 37.

The value of all the Church lands in England, at that time, amounted to above
320180. pownds, 10. per annum. wheareof the king took into his own possession,
and appropriated to the crown, 161100. per annu^. The which was so great a
booty, that an offer was maid once in the parliement, as House reports, in
preface to H. 8. to create and mantain with those reuennues, forty Earls, 60.
Barons, 3000. knights, and 40. thousand soldiers: and also, that so the Commons
should never after be charged, with any more subsidies or impositions.

The like motion and project was commended The Cavvses of the Supression.
and offered, at the lay man's parliement, in the time of king Henry the fourth,
by some that loved Wiclef better then the Church, and wear better friends to
there lands, then to there Religion. but Thomas Arondel Archbushops of
Cantorburie, ded stowtlie and virtuously resist there motion; and prevailed
with the king, to prevent there platts, and the malice of avarice.

The Lutherans in England, ded revive, and set on foot again the same motion,
by there book called the supplication of Beggars: which was opposed by the
supplication of Sovvles, endited by the virtuous and learned penn of Sir Thomas
Moor. yet at last, they fownd a patron, an unworthy Thomas of Cantorburie, to
give way to there de^uises, and to fead the kings humor. and so, he who should
have bean the cheafe protector and intercessor for the Clergy, proved the
Cheafe Cateline that betrayed the Church, and conspired there oppression.

Add to this, the kings own inclination to vayn-glorie, which begot his
avarice: whose prodigal expenses, could not be mantained vvithovvt such
extraordinary support.

And think you, that the Lords and courtiers disliked the proposition? no, they
knew what a rich pray it would prove, (whearof each man hoped and thirsted,
to have a share, and specially master Cromwell, who knew no better ladder to
climb to greatness and wealth, then by an innovation so full of spoil (whearby
one might easily rise, by the fall of so many:) who being a man of experienc,
and bred up in a forge, knew the better which way to hammer and frame his
busienes, in some good form, that the king might vndertaike the action, and
stand stowtlie to a matter of his domination and profitt, (knovving well that
his conscience was all ready buried in Ann Boolens tomb.)

And tho maik: he way playner, and remove all blocks: the three principal
Abbots, Glastenburie, Reading, and Bury, three Barons of the parliement, stowt
and religious men, and likest to cross and empeach these practices: wear
executed for denijng the supremacy, both to discoorage the Bushops from
mediating for them: and to terrify the rest of the religious, that they might
not withstand the king, who was now armed with suffieient power to bring them
upon there knees (all foreign intercession being cut of.)

But quo iure, quo titulo, was this suppression The titl of the religious
houses.
compassed? The Abbeys hold these lands in frank Almoine, and in see: they
vvear possessed of them by the donations, of Saxon, English, and Norman kings
and subjects: continued legallie by prescription, established by law, and
confirmed by the Charters of kings: and so they held there inheritanc, and
immunities, by the same, laws, the temporal Lords hold there Baronnies, and
the king his reuennues. What nead I remember the Charters of the realm: the
magna charta 9. H. 3. or the confirmation thereof 28. Ed. 1. vvhear it is
granted, that the Church of England shall be free, and have her liberties
inviolable. and cap. 2. judgment against them shall be held for naught. and 4.
Bushops wear authorized to excommunicate those, that shall seak to undo there
charters. And 3. E. 1. the Bushops ded accurse those, that attempted to spoil
the Church, or by force and craft to diminish there liberties or the charter of
the realm; and all those that either should maik statutes, or observe them
being maid, against the said liberties. for (which is to be noted) by one and
the same Charter, both the Church, and all the subjects hold there liberties: so
as king H. 8. might as well break the one, as undo the other: and if the
parliement could give power to abrogate the one, that is a president to
dispense with the other.

But in Peterbo^ow Ledgerbook, you shall find king John's grants, more at large
and fullier then any printed book sets down. What nead I remember,
sententia lata super confirmatione cartarum, by E. 1. or 42. Ed. 3. cap. 8. if
any statut be maid contrary to magna charta, it shall be void.

Or the confirmation of all these, 1. 6. 7. 8. of R. 2. and 4. H. 4.? Which all
wear intended, to prevent tyranny, to secure the Church then being, visiblie
known, and generally reverenced (for to no other Church they wear granted:
nor no other can enjoy the^, if the king so please.)

But to return, to the suppression. The The surrendors.
king, to maik his title, either to be, or to appear stronger, (to which he had
no title of him self, but by parliement; and how far that power is extended
to give away the lands of a third parson, not being hard, nor convicted
orderly for some offenses, is an other quaestion) he procured an act, 31. H.
8. vvhearby it is expressed, that sinc the former act of 27. H. 8. the
religious howses, voluntarily, and of there own good wills, and withowt
constraint, by course of law, and vvritings of record, under there Couentseals:
have given and confirmed to the king, there lands, howses, and right: have
forsaken, and left them all to the king. And to this statut they are said to
consent, as to an act at there own suite. Whearupon you shall find, among the
records of the augmentation court, a great Chest full of particular surrendors,
by the Abbots, and Couents under there hands and seals: the which if you ded
see, you will admire the art of the lo. Cromwell, and the obedienc and
simplitie of these poor oppressed men.

And is not this a likely tale? that out of there bowntie, voluntarily, they
would renounce there livings, and turn beggars? in dead to so gracious a Prince
it was no marvel. I ded once my self upon Salesburie plain, deliver my purse,
when I could not keape it: and commanded there humanity, tho I could not prai^e
there honesty.

Now if you please to examine and consider Examples of sacriledg.
vnpartiallie: you will find, that this great Conquest, this augmentation of
reuennue and Threasor: both by law and religion, was a Robbery and pillage of
the Church, and a sacrilege inexcusable. and it was not for nothing that
Luther said, inducunt animum ideo Deum dedisse nobis Euangelium, eosque ex
carcere Pontificio expediuisse; vt possint ipsi auaritiae suae litare. (The
which might fitliest be applied to king H. and from the which, many and
fearful examples might have dissvvaded him, and discooraged his agents and
instruments; if God had not hardened there hearts, and sealed up there eyes: and so
as few of them prospered, to see tertium haeredem, beatum.)

Marcus Crassus robbed the temple of Jerusalem: and note his end and
disiaster. Joseph lib. 18. c. 8. Herod opened king David's sepulcher, and took
the spoil thereof: and what misery afterward ded he fall into? Josephus lib.
16. c. 11.

Vrraca, went to robb the chapel of S. Isodore in Spain; to defraye the
expenc and charge of his vvarres; and his guts burst out of his belly in the
Church porche. Histoire general of Spayn, part. 4.

Leo the 4. Emperor, took a most precious crown out of the Church of S. Sophia
in Constantinople, which was dedicated to it: and he dyed of a carbuncle.
Sigonius l. 1. de regno Ital. Gondericus king of the Vandals, when he took
Siuil, took also the spoils of the Churches, and seized upon the riches
thereof: and to requite him, the Deuel Seized and posseded him. Tarap^a in
Honorio. What nead I seak more examples of terror, king Hentie is dead? they
come to late; but not to admonish others. What punishment, had Julian the
Apostata, among his other sins, for his Church-robbing at Antioche?
Tripartite lib. 6. cap. ^1 what misetie fell upon Heliodorus for the like? 2.
Macchab. c. 3. To conclude, read the history of Nicephorus Phocas (a parallel
to Match. H. 8.) He resumed all Donations granted to Monasteries and Churches;
and see what afflictions and furies haunted him ever after. and therefore his
successor Basilius, abrogated that law of Phocas for the suppressing of
Monasteries, as the root of all the calamities, that happened in that time.

He is desperate, that is not moved to fear (by such examples of terror) to
tempt God, with the like attemps. I will not apply these to k. H. 8. tho I
might trewlie affirm, that wrestling (as it wear) with God and his Church:
not unlike Herod, he lived iealious of his wives, and not confident of his
friends: his lusts wear maid his torments; and after his divorce from his first
and lawful wife, as in reueng of his lasciuiousnes (the original of all
Englands calamity:) no wife could please him long: few of them could get a
protection for there heads: and none of them lived secure and ioyefull.

And which is most to be noted, as if God would show his indignation, and with
his hand write upon the wall, Mane, Thekel, Phares, as his judgment against
him: all his hopeful and glorious stemm and brainches wear quickly cut of,
withowtanie issevv, and that pittiefullie, and lamentably: and the crown and
scepter was translated, to an other name and nation, quite contrary to his
intention, and the proiects both of his will and statute.

And for his actions, God suffered him as a bling man to err in his ends, and
wander in his course: all this great purchase was neither employed to the
honor of the realm, nor to ease the subjects, nor to increase learning, nor to
mantaine soldiers and men decayed, nor to releaue the poor: all was vvaisted
in tiltings, triumphs, enriching and pleasing his mistrises, and the
sollicitors of his lusts: Boolein, and prodigality consumed all; and to maik
an end, he can bragg of no other monument he haith left to record his memory,
but the same which he left, who boasted of burning Dianas temple.

And touching his agents Wolsie, and Cromwell, the master, and the servant:
the instruments, and moouers of this great vvheale: when they had acted there
parts; they vvhear both by him self cast of the stage with contempt and
disgrace, and not vvithovvt a brand left upon there names and families.

What course would the Lutherans in Cermanie, the Consistoriand of France, or
the Puritans of Scotland, have taken: if they had bean plunged into such
miseries? remember there actions, and there violenc: and judge of the tree by the
fruit; and then c^mparatiuelie look upon the Image of the true Catholic
Church, and mark the differenc of there visages, and virtues.

Though these Abbeys, vvear almost the third part of the realm: men of
understanding and power: the renennues great: there tennants, many and rich:
greatly favored of the people for there hospitality and howsekeaping; and
highly esteamed both of the nobility and gentry. And though also the knights
of S John's of Jerusalem, wear in the same predicament, and by there
fraternities might have procured great trowbles and tumults, and the rather by
the Popes assistanc, and the Emperor: yet to show to the world, what they wear
in there own likeness and proper coolors, and to testify the patienc of true
Israelites, the obedienc of true subjects, and the real imitation of there
master, (who was apter to shedd his own blood, then to revenge his wrongs:)
they resolved to endure Gods punishment, and the kings injustice and rigor, and
armed them selfs into the feald with tears and prayers, and took up no other
weapons, nor maid no insurrections: not counterfeiting, as Beza in words
preached patienc, but in actions showed, fury, violence, and reueng. I will
add this, and so end. that by there suppression, to many wear enriched and the
gentry was increased; yet the rents of lands wear enhauced, enclosures set a
foot, depopulation generally maid, the price of all things raised and the
Yeomanrie decayed infinitely which heartofore was the honor, and strenth of
the kingdom: and so consequently it was the true reason, why all things
have continued so dear in this land, (vvhearin master Stubs ded err nota litl.)

TITVLVS SECVNDVS.
HItherto Schism reigned; but the second plague, was the ruin and wrach K.
Evv. 6.
of the Church for the authority and name of king Edward was used, to break
down, and forciblie subvert the whole Church of England. but see how crafty a
statesman the Deuel is: though the way to Anarchie and confusion was laid leuel
by king Henry, (who was only fit for such a work, in regard of his
greatenes, and crewell imperiousnes:) yet he let religion stand a while
longer, knowing well that all could not be effected at once; but as he seduceth
Sowles, so states by degrees: and being also confident, that the forts of
piety and religion being razed, and the Church being brought under a lay
supreme head; he might by a second hand easily overthrow religion it self.

King Henry at his Death, appointed by his will sixtean Executors, who during
the minority of his son, should be his aydors and counselors, for the
better governing the realm. Among whom One, and who maid him self the
Principal, was the lord Edward Seamor Earl of Hartford (who took upon him,
being the kings uncle, to be protector:) and that was as good as a dispensation
(as he took it) for his executor ship, and lifted him too many degrees higher
then his fellows, which king Henry never intended, that he might overrule
the rest, by his title, and supereminencie. One of the first things of
importance, he contrived and compassed, was innovation, and the establishing
of a new religion: not so much for devotion, as bycaus he knew that nothing
could quench his thirst so well as a chainge, and bring the game he hunted
after into the toils. and hearof Cranmor, was a principal worker, (tho he was
but a few months before, of king Henry's religion, and a patron of the six
articles.) The better, both to persuade the people, and give harting and
strenth to there sect: Peter Martyr, and Bucer vvear sent for ovvt of Germany,
(upon whose fame, and learning, as upon two great Arches, they might build and
raise there Church (tho) both wear Apostates.

By Cranmor, Ridlie, Lattimor, and these two Rabbis, was the new Liturgy
framed, and the old banished; these wear the authors of the first Alteration of
religion, (which so many hundred years, had bean hear professed and
continued with all dew reverence.) So povvrefull was the Protector, (by using
the king name, a child then but of 9. years old) but he was well seconded, by
the Duke of Northumberland, the Admiral, and the Marquis of Nortampton (all
affected, or seaming affected, to the chaing of religion:) who overruled all,
that maid any show of opposition, or dislike of there proceadings. Which was
verrie strainge considering, there wear so many wise and eminent men, who had
aequal authority with them both, as Counselors and executors: and vvear most
different in religion from them, as the lord Privy seal, the lord Saint John
of Basing, Bushop Tonstal, Sir Antonie Brown, and (thewise sectetarie,) Sir W.
Paget: and specially that noble Chancelour, (the lord Writheoslie, a man of
experienc, knowledge, and prudenc, and a director and pattern to his posterity,
to be preferred before any new guides.) but to content and please him, he was
created Earl of Sowth-Hampton; yet neither wonn so, nor contented, nor safe.

All things afterward grew to confusion, there remained no face, and skarse the
name of Catholic Church in England. and tho there wear great multitudes of men
well affected to the old religion, and discontented, that the Church was
driven into the wilderness, and forced to lurk in corners: yet ded they show
loyalty, humility, and peace, and ded not taik arms and disobey that shadow
of the king.

But what moved the realm, how wear men enchanted to embrace this religion,
and applawd the authors of it? Novelty ever pleases dainty stomachs, and
avarice is no small temptation. at Syracusa, Dyonisius the tyrant coming into
the temple of Apollo, (full of sumptuous and goodly ornaments:) and seeing
Aesculapius appareled with clothe of hold, and full of Jewels, having a long
white silver beard: and Apollo (the father,) carved, with a floorishing
yowthful gould beard, and a plain cote of silver* he gave order, to shave both
Apollo and Aesculapius. for it was indecorum, that the son should have a
graye, and his father a read beard; and also indecent, that a Physician should
wear so rich a cote: so he ded not like that Apollo, should be drawn so
gawdilie, and like a Barbarossa: and a grauer gown (he said) would become a God
better, (for gould and Jewels wear fitter for Princes then gods, fitter for
pomp then perfection.

The Duke of Sommerset ded rightly imitate Dionisius. for seeing the Church
rich, remembering the exampl of his old master, and hauinng taisted at
Aumesburie how sweat a Morsel a Priorie is: he thought it not decorum, to
see the Clergy so rich, there wealth was not suitable to there calling: there
lands vvear given to noorish devotion, not to choke it: to stir men up to
prayer, not to ease and luxury; and therefore he would shave and share with them.

Two Bushops houses he took in the Strand, which served him well to build
Sommerset house for Queen Ann.

He procured an act, whearby all Colleges, Chantries, free Chapels, Hospitals
and fraternities, wear suppressed, and given to the king. and how greadilie he
intruded into the Bushop of bathe and wells his houses and manors: that
Church can never forget. (and yet Bushop Bourn by his industry recovered some
again; but nothing to the Spoils. a poor releaf, rather to fead then to fatt a
Bushop.)

Yet was he not satisfied. for shortly af there, contrary to all law, against
king Henry's will, and against his own covenants (when he was maid protector)
he committed to the tovvr, the Lord Chancellor: he deposed Busbop Tonstal both
from the Counsel, and his bushoprick (as too stately a Seigniorie for a man of
religion, and too dainty a bitt to be swallowed by the Church:) therefore he
dissolved yt and brought it within the survey of the excheckor, and he never
prospered after. It was directly against the law. 1. Edw. 3. cap. 2. that the
lands of Bushops should be seized into the kings hands: and that his father by
the advice of euel counselors commanded them to be seized withowt cawse, but
hearafter it should not be so.

Yet hear he set not down his staff. he committed Gardener the Bushop of
Winchester: and after deprived him. He dissolved Stoke College: fleaced all
Cathedral Churches, and committed infinite sacrilege (whereto the Nonage of
the king gave opportunity.) Neither ded he hunt after his pray, only among
the Church living: for if you look in the Parliamant rolls, of that time,
you shall find that (with a wolfs stomach) he ded seak to deuowre, that most
ancient and honorable Earldome of Oxford.

In all this glory; he was cut of for his sins; and arraigned and executed
for acting so grosslie, the part of a Protector. And though he was badd enoug,
an other succeaded much worse.

For now begone the tree of Dudlie, to spread out his brainches with glory
(who could not be, except he vvear great:) now was the time for his common
wealth to floorish. and because he would not seam to do any thing, but by
Justice: he begonn 1549. to vvrastl with Sommerset, till he gave him a fall.

First he proclaimed him to be a man, that subverted all laws; and that he
broke the orders of H. 8. appointed for his sonns good: that he keapt a
Cabbienet counsel, and litl esteamed the advice of his fellows: that he took
upon him to be protector, expresslie upon conditions, to do nothing in the
kings affairs withovvt consent of the executors.

And upon these and such like accusations, God stirred one of these reformers,
to vvrack an other. Now as that shovved his justice: so to seame religious, he
cavvsed the book of common prayer, 1552. to be first published; for that
religion he knew would best serve his turn, (who was all ready now far
engaged in the plat to aduanc his own house, by the ruin of his masters.)
and by that coolor, he discerned that he might best vvinn the Duke of suff. to
him.

And bycaus he supposed, the Lord Threasorer, was not unlike to cross him: he
took order at the counsel table (vvhear he used to leave his spectacles, if he
vvear soodainlie called for up to the king) to maik the same before his return,
be so svveatlie anointed and perfumed, that thereby he lost his nose, and skaped
nearlie with his life, (and yet he lived to requite him.) and for his better
strenth while king Edward was sick, as if all had bean fixed in a sphere to
move with him, he cavvsed at Durham house his son to be married to lady
Jane: the Earl of Pembrocks son to the lady Katharin: and the Earl of
Huntingtons son, to his own daughter. and all upon one day, all to serve for
one end: and to maik it impossible for any to bayt the bear, hearafter. Then
was king Edward maid away, by his means: and that potticarie who poysond him,
for the horror of the offense, and disquietnes of his conscienc, drowned him
self. and the landres that washed his shirt, lost the skinn of her fingers.
there be some yet living in the court that have sean weaping eyes for it.

Yet was all so over shadowed with the name of religion; that not many could
discern the impiety. if you would see the oration, he maid to the Lords (when
he was to depart from the towr to go, toward Cambredg, and proplayme his
daugther in law Queen:) you shall see how Raignard had gotten on a minister
cloak, and maid that is cawse, which he was furthest from.

Now consider three things 1. for the men: vvear not they both, fit instruments
to increase piety and virtue, and to reform a Church? vvear not rhey like
men, to have bean chosen by the spirit of God, for so godly ends? and like to
be laborers in the harvest of Christ? wear there piety, zeal, and charity
such, as became them well, and vvear suitable to reformers, to Josias, and
Ezechias? No, nisi hominus edificauerit ciuitatem; they labor in vain: he will
give them a fall, whear they purposed to taike there rising. 2. For there ends,
both of them concurred in chainging religion; both of them lost there heads; one
of them was a butcher to an other: and both vnded there own famililies, and
hazarded there friends. but for Dudlie as he ded ruin the king, so he
endaingered the whole realm: and yet his end was a demonstration to the world,
that all his aim was ambition, and not religion (for either he dyed a
Catholic, or certanly an Atheist.)

And as his ambition, so Sommersets avarice, was not withowt his plagues. for
his weakness was over maistered by a wife: his eldest son, was disinherited:
he executed his own brother: he lived to see the loss of bullen, the crown and
the realm engaged in debts and wants; confusion and commotions within the
realm, (by there ill government,) and contempt withovvt. 3. Now consider te
patienc of the Preasts and Prelates, under these Cormorants: they suffered all
withowt resisting, or rebelling: and never provoked the nobility to taik
arms, having bean bredd in the school of virtue, to bear there crosses with
patienc; and to affect rather the glory of a Martyr, then the svvord and
fortune of a conqueror. And so I leave them, till hearafter.

TITVLVS TERTIVS.
THe last and greatest tempest, which shaked the verrie fovvndations of the
The Q. Elizabeth.
Church of England, and threatened the utter ruin and subversion thereof, was
raised by Queen Elizabeth: who revived the Protectors new religion, and
reestablished it.

The which was effected, quickly and quietly, sine sanguine and sudore, and
as M. Camden notes well, Christiano orb mir ante. And surely, it was a
strainge alteration. because the Queen (during her sisters life) daily hard
Mass, and ad Romanae religionis Camden. annals.
normam, saepius confiteretur. Which is consonant to the report of Sir Frances
Englefeald: that the lady Elizabeth (being examined at Hatfeald, by Q. Mary's
commissioners,) said to one of them, it is not possible that the Queen will be
persuaded, Iam a Catholic? and thereupon she ded swear and protest, that she
was a Catholic.

And it aggreeth well with the Duke of Feria his letter to king Philip (yet
extant to be seane;) vvhearin he certified the king, that Q. Elizabeth ded
profess and assure him, that she beleaued the real presenc, and that she was
not like to maik any great alteration for the principal points of religion.

I nead not relate, the like speeches used by her to Monsieur Lansack; seeing
many honorable persons have affirmed the same: and seeing her external
profession in public, and her private chapel ded testify, that either she
was then sincearlie in dead, or would be taken then to be a Catholic. And that
was the cawse, which maid the world marvel more, at her great and soodain
chainge of religion.

And the rather, because at her coronation, she was orderly consecrated, and
anointed at a Mass, by the Bushop of Carlisle: and she took the oath then, to
mantain the Church, and uphold the liberties thereof, as her predecessors had
done.

Which, vvithovvt aequiuocation, must neads be intended of that Church then
being in esse, and whearin she was consecrated, and took that oathe: and not of
the Idea of a new Church (a castle in the Air, to be hearafter erected and
fownded, by lier authority and the Parliement.)

But how ever she was before persuaded; she was now altered, and became too
soodainlie Retrograde: and so, as in the opinion of many prudent and great
persons, it a bated much the glory of her wisdom and heroical spirit: and
gave the world occasion to suspect that all her former actions wear counterfeit
and camposed for her security to temporize: and to misdowbt, that she was not
innocent and clear, of these great not capital crimes laid to her charge (for
which, she had stood in no small dainger.)

Ant to speak frelie and trewlie my opinion, she was a Prince of great Majesty
and magnificens, but fitter for government, then devotion: and of more
policy then religion: and not as her sister was, the same in a storm and a
calm; a Queen and a subject, nor semper eadem.

But how, and by what means, ded she How religion was chainged.
contriue and work, this admirable mutation of state: I will breaflie declare:
for tho it be not proper to my quaestion, it is not impertinent, and may be of
some use.

1. First the long sickness of Q. Marie gave her great advantage, and time both
to deliberate, and draw her plattformes, prepare her instruments in readienes;
maik choice of her means, and resolve of the fittest counselors to advance her
ends.

2. Secondly she laid her honor to pawn, and maid protestation in open
parliament, that she would never trovvble the Roman Catholics, for any
differenc in religion: which ded give the Clergy great hope, of some more
indifferency, and tolerable favors. (the which is related by Hows in prefat.
of Q. Elizabeth.) for knowing well, that a king can not create a new religion
as D. Bilson said trewlie, (meaning that it must be the act and work of a
parliement:) therefore to winn the Bushops, either to silenc or patienc, she
wisely used that peace of art. The which thing was well noted by Monsieur de
Mauuissier (who was long french Ambassador in England, and a curious searcher
and obseruer of matters of that nature:) says he (lib. 2. page 61. in Les
memoires de Monsieur Mich Castelnau.) Queen Elizabeth purposing to chainge
religion, that she might the better vvinn the Bushops, she promised to follow
there aduises in all things, and thereby prevailed not a little. And though many
fine sleights wear used, frowns and favors, promises and threats: yet
notwithstanding by that parliement, both the statuts for the supremacy, and
the abrogation of the old religion, wear enacted.

3. Add also, that when the act was maid for supremacy, (which must ever be,
as the first great vvheale of motion:) because, by king Henry's law, Bushops
and Barons stood in dainger (for Sir Thomas Moor, and Bushop Fisher had given
them warning to look to there heads.) therefore now, in this new edition of the
supremacy, first the words of supreme head vvear chainged into supreme
governor; (which qualification of the words being aequiualent, was used but
as a mask and shadovve, to bleare the eyes of the people.) and secondly the
Barons and Lords vvear exempted from the rigor of the Oath, to vvinn them the
rather to consent, to the act; and so to leave the Bushops in the briars, to
bear the brunt of the storm ensewing.

4. I know you will admire, and you may, how this chainge could be wrought
in the upper house, by most voices; considering, so many Bushops, and so many
Lords well affected to religion, had there suffrages there. Remember first,
that king Henry pulling down the Abbeys, weakened the strenth of the
Clergy; taking away by that means, twenty five voices of Abbots, who satt
there as Barons of Parliement. and besides, Sinon (who managed that busienes)
showed all his conning therein, and as a master of his art. For the noble Earl
of Aro^del, (abused and fed with a vain hope) by the aid of the Duke Northfolk
engrossed into his hands the proxies, and voices of so many Lords, to be
disposed at his pleasure, and to serve and further the Queen's desire and ends,
that the Catholics wear overswayed and born down, by the plurality of six
voices only. And how God rewarded these two great Princes, (the instruments
of that service:) the world may judge, by there afflictions as spirits that
haunted them. (tho to expiat that fault, the religious and noble, Earl Philip,
suffered the martyrdom of a languishing sowl.) A strainge, and memorable mattet
it was, to have a new religion introduced, and no Bushop nor religion man, to
consecrate and advance it with one voice. for the vehement oration of Abbot
Fecknam aginst it, is fresh yet in memory: and how all the Bushops, obstinate
refragati sunt, Camden does witness. and that noble Lord Montagew (sensible of
the scandal thereof) opposed it vvithall his force, (who together with D.
Thurlebie Bushop of Elie, had so lately bean employed, at Room about it,) and
urged that the world would disgrace fully censure such a soodain chainge and
innovation; proposing also the daingers which wear like to ensew, and so ded
by excommunication.

But for there better assurance, to prevail in the vpperhowse, and more
strongly to overrule the Bushops, and the Abbots: the Queen created diverse
new lords, William lord Parr, Marquis of Northampton (a good speaker, and a
wise man:) the Earl of Hartford, the Vicount Bindon, the lord Saint John of
Bletso, and the lord Hunsdon, (all Protestants and men fit to build a new
Church.)

And to be better armed: the Catholic party was weakened, by discharging from
the counsel table, many of the old counselors, the lord Chancellor, the lord
Privy seal, Secretary Boxall, and Sir Frances Englefeald. and in there
rooms, wear placed Sir Nicholas Bacon, the Marquis of Northampton, the Earl of
Bedford, Sr A. Cave, Sir Frances Knolls, Rogers, Parrie, and secretary Cicil,
(all fit men, to bear parts in that Pageant.) And further she deposed many
of the old Judges: and maid also new Justices of peace: and gave order to use
all vvarienes, in the election of knights and burgesses: that they might
likewise maik there party good in the lovver house (which you would wnder to
hear, how politically it was performed.)

Furthermore, to taik all scrupule out of the heads, and hearts of the people,
and that they might conceive, that the service and religion still continued,
the same the old was (but transtated into English only for there better
edification, and under standing:) they directed, that the alteration should be
framed as near to the old, as they might well do.

And so it was in dead, verrie politiclie handled. For they both admitted and
continued the title and jurisdiction of Bushops, (with some litl grace, and
authority:) and they permitted the use of surplises, caeremonies, anthems,
Organs, and many prayers in the form of the old. Whearby the Queen, was the
better able to excuse her fact, to foreign princes, for this great chainge, as
she ded use the same for her reason to Secretary d' Assonuile, who was sent by
king Philip to congratulate her advancement.

7. And touching the communion book, it was composed by certan commissioners
appointed for that purpose, Parker, Grindal, Horn, VVhytehead, May, Bill, and
Sir Thomas Smith: and it was, maid according to the liturgy of the straingers
of Frankfort (1544.) all of them of Bucers stamp, and not much varijng from
that in king Edward's time. The which Parr, Russel, Gray of Pytgo, and Cicil
approved: but all those of Geneua utterly disliked, (not knowing the Queen's
reasons, nor regarding them.)

8. Lastly, the isntrumental cawses, and cheafe artificers for building this
new work, wear choice men all both for experience and policy. Sir William
Cicill, (maid second Secretary in king Eduuards days, in an age whearin a man
might learn more conning, them virtue.) a wise man for practice, and one that
knevv well, how much this alteration would serve his turn, and raise his
fortune. and at that time he was hongrie, having only the personage of
VVimblton, and certan lands about Stamford, (as appeared by his letter, to the
lord Marquis 1560. when Sir Robert Cicil was borne? desiring the lord.
Threasorers furtherano, that the Queen would grant him some means and
maintenanc, for these two C. C.) solike to be famous in England herafter.

Sir Nicholas Bacon, was an others; his brother in law, a man of Deap
judgment, of more knowledge in the laws, and a more plausible Orator.

I may not forget the Lord Robert (who solelie to posses the Queen's favor, by a
trick discarded Sir William Pickering, then a favorite and a courtly
gentlman.) neither can I omit Seigneur Nicholas Throgmorton, S. Tho. Smith,
and many others: who wear now in hope to find that, which they had long gaped
for; such offices and preferments, as they wear like to loose, who held them in
Queen Mary's time.

Better Enginers, and fitter men, could, neither have bean wished nor fuwnd,
then all these wear to undermine and cast down, the Clergy, and the old
Church government. who possessing wholy the ear and grace of the Queen,
satt with command at the stearne, and as pylots of great estimation, guided
the course both of the Church and commonwelth at there pleasure, (though many
men wondered how master secretary could so soon, forget his beads, and his
breuiarie whearwith he counterfeited a Catholic, and vvonn Cardinal Pool to
stand firmly his friend.) Notwithstanding all this choice of men, and
preparation of means: there courses and cownsells, gave occasion of more
trowbles, continual fears, and greater hazards and daingers to the Queen the
realm, in all her time: then ever any architects of innovation committed.

And no marvel, for ludit in humanis diuina potentia, God does skorn and
frustrate the policies and shifts of men, that have nothing else to trust to
but shifts: and he will ever teach the wisest, to see there follies; and (a
litl to humble them,) those that are most provident shall by there errors learn,
that plus est in art, quam in artifice.

For now the Queen, (by this act of Innovation, left destitute of all her
allies and confaederates) was driven to stand upon her own guard, and lie open
to all storms: having France an enemy, and Spain (a friend skarse contented.)
and so was driven even at first, to run upon a rock, (forced to assist the
rebels in Scotland against there Soouerain) and to send them aid to expel the
french, employed there for there Queen's service.

It may de, you think this a trifle: mark the rest. To succor the Admiral, and
rebels in France: she Invaded Normandy, and took possession of Nevvhauen and
Deape, delivered to her by the Vidame of Chartres. was this a glory? the
disgrace in loosing and ill defending Newhauen, was a greater bleamish to them:
then it was honor to have them yealded and offered to the Queen's disposing. and
specially, seeing they might thereby either have brought Callice home again; or
have locked up the gates of Roan and Paris.

And they ded neither; but bring home the great plague, (as a scourge to the
realm for that offense.) furthermore, for the security of the realm, and to
divert all wars from home, they wear driven, (not withowt touch of the Queen's
honor) to kindl the fire, in all other adjacent nations; and then to publish a
declaration and reason of there actions (as if the world could not read the true
cavvses of actions, vvithovvt the spectacles of those ancient Senators.)
Whearupon they ded aid the Princes of Orange against king Philip, (under
pretenc of amity and league with the house of Burgondie, and the kings of
England.) which was a litl to gross for so excellent vvitts; considering that
the amity was contracted with no subjects nor states, but betwean the kings
of E. and the Dukes of Burgondie wheareof the states had the benefit, and wear
partakers but not authors: comprehended in the treaties, but not treators.
fair coolors, for foul errors.

And why? for so she gave a president against her self, that foreign Princes
might be warranted by her example to invade her own kingdoms, to releaue her
subjects if they should rise for religion, and to learn the way to Ireland and
requite her.

And, the show of Religion, served them fitly for there purpose. But surely,
I have hard verrie wise men much condemn the course.

Bor though England ded assist there neighbors on all sides, upon the reason of
state which Polibius prescribed, Vicininimium crescentis potentia, mature
quacunque ex causa deprimenda, (which is an axiom, that is often inconvenient,
and ofter injurious, and sometimes pernicious:) Yet the counsel of Thucidides,
was more proper and safer, Nullus princeps a suis subditis just puniendis
arcendus est: and qui id facit, parem in se legem statuit, ne suos and ipse
puniat delinquentes.

And hear I must commend him to have said this vviselie, who says all things
wittielie, The vvisidome of the latter times in princes fayres, is rather in
fine deliueries and shifting of damgers, when they are near: then solid and
grovvnded courses to keap them aloaf.

The grownd of all these trowbles, was the pretenc of Sinon, Viz. Actum esse
de ea, si pontificiam authoritatem, in quacumque re agnosceret, (as Camden
says:) the Queen vvear undone if she acknowledged the Popes authority. Mark
his reason, duos namque pontifices matrem illegitime nuptam pronunciasse. and
by that argument, he suggested, that it was best to alter religion, inuest her
self in the sooueraintie, and banish the Popes bulls (from grasing in this
kingdom) and all obedienc to that sea.

This was a course neither at home, nor abroad, to keap daingers aloof. and
vndowbtedlie, if Henry the 2. or Frances the 2. of France had lived: that
error was like to have wrapped the realm, into inevitable perils: and might
by all probability have served as a bridge, to have let the Queen of Scots
pass over into England under her own title, and the banner of the Church.
soliciting for her better warrant the renewing of the bulls of Clement the 7.
and Paulus 4. against her moothers marriage, and her own illegitimation. and
the rather this might have bean done, by the error of them, that left open the
port of advantage: having not repealed in England the act of her
illigitimation, as Queen Mary's counsel wisely had done before.

But now at lenth, to return to the matters proper and pertinent, to the
quaestion, Iam to handle.

The Queen before her coronation, put all the bushops to silence, and commanded
they should not preach. and after the parliement, all those that refused the
oath (being called before the Queen's commissioners,) wear deprived from all
honors livings, or employme^t, either in the church or commonwealth: and wear
also committed to prison, and so both lost there liberties and living together*
Dignities they could not loose, (as appeared by B. Bonners case, whom they
could not degrade from the Dignity of a Bushop, though he ded loose London.)
There vvear in all 14. Bushops, (most virtuous and learned prelates) of
England, and 10. of Ireland deposed. 12. Deanes, 15. masters of Colleges, 6.
Abbots, 12. Archdeacons, 160. preasts, together with master Shellie, Prior of
S. John's of Jerusalem.

Now touching, there Demeanor, and the course of there proceading before there
Deprivation. These Bishops sitting in Parliement at Queen Mary's Death,
acknowledged by diverse proclamations, Queen Elizabeth's title, and right to the
Crown. And the Archbushop of york, D. Heath, then Chancellor of England,
calling together the nobility and commons assembled, in both howses: by a
grave oration exhorted them, to accept and obey Queen Elizabeth: and by the
best course he could, endeavored to dispose and setl the hearts of subjects to
love and serve her.

And all the Bushops jointly, ded there homage and fealty to her Majesty in
dewtifull manner. And although they vvear not ignoranc of her determination to
alter the course of religion: yet ded they never practice, neither Scotising
nor Geneuating: nor never incensed the people and Catholics against her: nor
attempted any violent resistance: nor sought the support of foreign Princes,
(whom they knew at that time, ready upon so fair pretense to have aided
them.) but they ded so respect fully, tender both the Queen's safety, and the
peace of the realm, (more then there own lives, liberties, or livings:) that
though diverse among them, maid a quaestion if it wear not most convenient for
the good of the Church, to procead to excommunication against her (to which
her case lay verrie open, and subject:) yet the most voices dissuaded that
course, least if they should use the sentenc and censures of the church against
her, the people might be induced to taik arms for the protection of religion.
and therefore they ded advise rather to referr it to the popes determination and
pleasure, then to talk upon them to do yt them selfs, (though they thought
they might lavvfullie do yt, as the case then ded stand.) There was also, an
other secret friend, that ded much fortify the state of the Queen. King Philip
knowing all the platts of France, and there secret intentions, and vvat motions
they maid at Room, and upon what terms they ded stand, to offend England:
albeyt he had buried all offenses at the treaty of Cambray, yet loath to see
France grow so great as to have footing in England, and as loath that Religion
should loose her howld and honor there: though he ded wish the end, he ded not
like the means: and therefore he employed his ministers in England to do good
offices betwean the Queen and the Clergy.

But Alas, what became of all these grave prelates? Trewlie nothwithstanding
all there public disgraces, and private sufferings: they ded rather choose a
Durate, then an Armate; and ever professed and well performed, Preces and
Lachrimae, arm a nostra.

Observe how long, and how heavily there burden lay upon them. D. Scott Bushop
of Chester dyed at Loouain in exile. Goldvvel of Asaph, at Room. Pate of
worcester, subscribed at the counsel of Trent, for the Clergy of England,
and never returned. D. Oglethorp of Carlisle, dyed soodainlie and shortly after
his deprivation; and so ded learned and famous Tonstal, die a personner at
Lambeth. Bourn of wells, was prisonner to Carry deane of the Chapel: Thirlebie
of Elie first was committed to the tower, and afterward he and secretary
Boxal vvear sent to Lambeth (vvhear they ended there days.) Abbot Fecnam,
Bushop Watson, Bushop Bonner dyed prisoners: and Prior shel lie in exile.

This was the Catastrophe of the worthy Prelates of England, a tragedy of the
Downfall of the whole Clergy. a thing incredible to posterity, and never
hard of in former ages: that the third and most reverend state of the realm,
the Cedars of Libanus, (who ever sinc king Etheldred, floorished as the Oaches
of a realm) should be all at once cut down, cast into disgrace, and prisons,
or exile, and live withowt releaf or comfort as men forlorn and abiects: yet
neither taynted for vice: nor convinced for trespass: nor accused for any
treason, but that which they would never subscribe to aknowledg treason, the
refusing the oath of supremacy (a poynd of religion to them, and which
touched there sovvles to the quick.) And wear they deprived for that? then
surely had the ministers of Geneua great luck to escape the high Commission,
for you shall hear there opinions: and see the differenc of there spirits.

1. Gilbee in admonitione ad Anglos, calls king Henry the 8. libidinosum
monstrum, and monstrosum aprum, qui Christi locum inuasit, and Ecclesiae
Anglicanae caput dicivoluit, cum tamen omnis religionis expers esset. This
monstruons bore, must neads be called Head of the Church, under pain of
Treason, displacing Christ our only head, who alone onght to have the title.
why ded he call him bore? Partly for his qualities, partly for Ann Boolens
sake, who was that Helena, cuius causa peribat Ilium, (as both Melancthon in
his Chron. and G. Bellay in his Comment. declare.)

2. And that you may know, what an haeresie and flattery of kings the
school of Geneua, censureth the Oath of supremacy to be: I pray you hear the
Oracle. in cap. 1. Osee and in cap. 9. Amos; Et hodie (in quit) quam multi sunt
in papatu, qui regibus accumulant, quicquid possunt iuris and potestatis (of
this point I dare avowe Geneua is not guilty:) ita vt ne qua fiat disputatio,
sed potestas haec sit penes regem vnum, vt statuat pro suo arbitrio, quicquid
voluerit, and sine controuersia hoc firmum maneat. Qui initio tantopere
extulerunt Henricum regem Angliae, certe fuerunt inconsiderati homines,
dederunt illi summam rerum omnium potestatem, and hoc me semper grauiter vulner
auit: erant enim blasphemi, cum vocaru^t illum summum caput Ecclesiae sub
Christo. Ded Sir Thomas Moor, or Bushop Fisher say more? nay, not so much,
against the matter: nor in so rude and violent manner. such was the violenc of
king He^rie that he pressed them to speact, and if they ded speak they wear in
dainger of law? if they ded not speak, in danger of his wrath. o miserable
time, vbi tacere non licet, quid cuiquam licet?

3. To this opinion Luther subscribeth; and (which is rare) they both C. and L.
accord against the supremacy of Princes, in cawses Ecclesiastical. for tom. 2.
fol. 259. says Luther, quid ad not mandatum Principis Electoris Saxoniae?
Princeps, secularis est mogistratus quem gladium, non munus predicandi, curae
habere debet. as if a secular magistrate, had nothing to do, with Clergy
busienes.

And tom. 1. Latin, he expownds him self fol. 540. Non est regnum aut
principum, etiam veram doctrinam confirmare, sed ei subijci* and seruire. Which
is quite contrary to the acts of parliement, either of H. 8. of E. 6. or Queen
Elizabeth.

4. It may be you will Imagine that though Luther was so singular, yet the
Lutherans arr not: but you ar deceived, and that you shall find, by there
greatest and most learned Champion.

M. Chemnicius, epist. ad elector. Brandenburg, first he shouweth, that it is
not convenient, vt punitionis officium contra Caluinistas, interea temporis
penitus quiescat, (which is to be noted, as a thing, he much regarded.) and
shortly after, of the religion, and the Queen of England, he gives this
sentence; that 1. no good thing is further to be expected of her: 2. that she
used the Protestants of Germany hardly: 3. that she noorisheth a new sect
risen in her realm of Puritans: 4. and lastly, he maiks it a ^east that she
being a woeman, haith taken upon her, to be maker of Ecclesiastical Laws,
and quod femineo and a seculis inaudito fastu, se Papissam, and caput Ecclesiae
fecit, these ar his words, and surely none of our Bushops deprived, could say
more, tho more manerlie. for the statut, consisting of two brainches, the one
they defend stowtlie, that the king ought not to have the supremacy: in the
other they disagree among them selfs.

5. Cartwright, haith written many chapters in his last book against this
supremacy: who yet was never conuented in the starchamber, nor arraigned for
yt: neither was forced to recant his writings. The Puritans ar as earnest, as
the Catholics, that it ought not to rest in the king, but differenc is in
whom the power should rest: whether by a monarchy, in the Pope; or in an
oligarchie of the elders. The English Puritans of Amsterdam in there Confessio
fidei, 1607. page 50. art. 2. ded resolve that vnicuique Ecclesiae particulari,
est par as plenum ius ac potestas exercendi, fruendi, and exequendi,
institutaomnia, quaecunque Christus Ecclesiae suae dedit obseruandae in
perpetuum. So then every parish-preast, is a Pope in his parish, and haith par
and plenum ius: and whether this advancement of the Consistories be not more
prejudicial to princes, then the Conclaue: more subject to mutinies, more open
to confusion and anarchie, I referr my self to learned Hooker.

6. I will conclude with D. whiracre, and that with some admiration (he Does
so boldly affirm a matter, so notoriousle untrue page 4. against M. W.
Raignolds in his preface.) The title says he of supreme head of the Church,
haith bean misliked, by diverse godly learned men and of right it belongs to
the son of god: and therefore never ded our Church, give that title in such
words, unto the Prince; neither ded the prince ever challeng it. I understand
not what this means: for if he mean plainly and withowt aequiuocating,
then certanlie, he abuses his reader with a fable. if I object the statut of
26. H. 8. c. 1. or 35. H. 8. c. 3. I know he will say, it was not our Church
that gave that title. But Sir, that will not serve you, for 1. E. 6. cap. 12.
if any person, after the 5. of March next, shall affirm, that the king his
heyrs or successors, kings of this realm, is not or ought not to be supreme
head, in earth of the Church of England and Ireland, immediately under God: it
shall be treason, for the third affirmation. so hear is the act of your own
Church; for which Gardener was sent to the towr: and these godly men sc.
Gilbie, Calvin, Knox, Luther who so much misliked it in king Henry: had not
cawse to like it better 1. Eliz. when it was chainged into supreme governor,
for the one had as much power as the other.

And surely D. Whit. rather shifteth of the objection, then answers it. for
these godly he means, wear Calvin, Gilbie, the Lutherans, and his ancient
friend master Cartwight (who all condemned the use of that title of supreme
head.) and think you that he ded him self like it? I imagine, that he would not
othervvis have maid so she an evasion. for his commendation of the men that
denied it: his own reason, derived from there words, (that it belonged only
and properly, to the son of God:) his fable, that never ded the Prince
Challeng that title,) show fully the Doctors mind, that he would not subscribe
voluntarily to that opinion and taik the oath, and desired to euade.

But what ever his opinion was of the matter; he commended those that most
impugned it. Now to return to the Bushops, seeing the supremacy and the oath,
was the main and the mean, objected to deprive them (which was as much
impugned by there own half brethren, Lutherans and Caluinists, as by the
Bushops) seeing Cartwright, pvas tolerated, licensed to preach, not restrained
nor punished for his opinions: and seeing so many, and so eminent men,
concurred with the Bushops in that opinion? (as I have shovved:) there was and
is some reason, to have expected, if not a more merciefull sentenc, yet a more
favorable execution of the sentenc and seeing they fovvnd so litl favor and
releaf: it does witness to all posterity, there exceading patienc, to taik up
there cross and follovv there master.

For not vvithstanding all this adversity, disgrace, wants, and loss of
liberty, the magistrates never had cavvse to complain of any inuectiues or
libells. No Reueilematin, no homelies of sedition wear dispersed: no Wyatt, no
Oldcastel appeared in the feald: the soldiers and knights of the Rhodes vvear
not detected of any conspiracy: the Realm was not disquieted nor embroyled.

A miraculous patienc, by a supernatural grace: they ded rather choose to
suffer them selfs, then the realm should. which was a great happienes to
England, and the like not hard of, (upon so great a mutation of state:) and
which was neither to be ascribed to the policy and prouidenc, of the
Chancellor or Secretary; nor any fear of punishment, which might be
inflicted upon the Bushops (for they could fall no lower, being all ready cast
down to the grownd: and they, that could hope for nothing, nead not fear any
thing:) but reallie and trewlie, it was to be imputed to the nature, patienc,
humility, and obedienc, innated in religious and virtuous men who ar trewlie
Catholic.

These virtues, and this there patience, shows well the nature of the English
patients that suffer, and bear there crosses, either within, or vvithowt the
realm. withowt the realm, wear and arr the Seminaries of Preasts, religious
men, and students. within the realm, ar the Recusants, who daily, taist of
affliction, and have not a light or small burden to bear. who all suffer for
there conscienc; and secundum magis, vel minus, participate of the miseries,
incident hear to Catholics.

Touching the Seminaries: when the old Clergy, and preasts wear some
Languishing The Seminaries.
in prison, some in exile, many dead, and all in disfauor: the Secretary and
some politcik protestants, both hoped and promised that preasts and preasthood,
would be shortilie worn ovvt, and extinguished (and in dead, abovvt the year
1576. there wear not above 30. of the old preasts, remaining in the realm.)
whearupon D. Allen, (a man born to do God service) and others of the Clergy:
out of there providence, and Charity, begonn the Seminaries at Douay. 1569. and
why? To prevent the decay of religious professors; to setl a continuanc and
increase of preasts (for the better propagation of religion:) to preserve a
visible and Catholic Church in England: and for the instruction and trayning
up of young scholars, in a settled course of study, conference, and exercise:
and so to bread in that nurcerie young plants, continually fit to be drawn
out, for employments in England: to vvinn sowles, to instruct them in cases of
conscienc, and so spread abroad there knowledge and virtues into all ports of
the land.

And that Seminary was not erected against law; for the statute was maid
long after, when they had taken deap root: and then was it too late, either to
transplant them home, or by threats and terror to prohibit there proceadings.

But these ar said to be, schools and harbors to noorish such men, as ar 1.
base and fugitives: 2. such as corrupt the land with false doctrine: 3. and
such as ar ministers of practices, to disturb the kingdom, to stir up
rebellion; and to with draw the subjects from there obedienc. And there for the
proclamation 1580. and other statutes wear justly maid against them.

But how do they answer it? In dead it is true, that great Pronotharie and
clark of the execution of Justice, objected so For there baseness at Douay and S.
Omers.
much against them. but for there baseness; I have observed well, and am assured,
that at Douay, there be gentleman both in the College and monastery, of as good
families, as well bred, and as learned scholars, as I have known in the
universities of England (whearin I was no strainger.) I will not compare them,
(for so I might maik them odious:) nor yet will I detract from the milk of my
own nurces; but I may trewlie ovowe, that they are so orderly governed, as
maikes there demeanor civil, and supra aetatem religious and deuowt. and how can
it be otherwise? for they spend there time most in study, in exercises of
learning, and in matters of devotion. Neither ar they in such dainger of
Debauchment, or the infections of disorder; for they be strictly keapt to there
task, and rather vvonn then forced to yt: and tho they be brideled with a hard
bitt, it is carried with a gentl hand. and greater care is had, because many
of them ar of eminent families, and noble parentage: who though they can not
dravv there pettigrees from Lewlin Prince of Wales, as the Pronotarie does: yet
can they show a descent both ancient, and honorable, neither yeomen of the
wardrobe, nor yeomen of the guard.

And touching there being fugitives; they answer well for them selfs, that they
deserve not properly such a title. for they live not there as out laws, but
for conscienc sake and to avoid the rigor of the new laws, opposite to the
doctrine of the Church.

Secondly, they live not there, for faction 2. Fugitives.
or vndewtiefull affection, to his majesty; but compelled by extreme
necessity: the Catholics having in England no Churches, no Catholic service,
no dew administration of the sacraments nor use of the sacrafice of the alter.
and so they say, they should live in England, as bodies withowt sowles, or
sowles withowt food; and so either be starued for want thereof, or become
Apostates from there religion, or live as Atheists, withowt religion. Thirdly
if you put upon them, the disgrace full name of fugitives, only because they
do not accommodate them selfs to your Canons, and the injunctions of the
present time, and therefore depart out of the realm. To let pass, Bartie,
Knolls, Hales and others, you must not forget, that your great Doctors, Jewel,
Horn, Cox, Pilkinton, Poynet, and many others, ded taik the like course in
Queen Mary's time. And if these men wear not fugitives, and deserved in your
judgment no disgrace, for remaining at Frankfort, Strasburgh, and specially
Geneua (noted for the Seminary of all Conspiracies in France:) how comes it to
pass, that those at Douay and S. Omers (being in the same case) ar so
hatefullie censured to be fugitives? And if they wear fugitives,) as the law
also then ded judge them,) you ded so welcome them home, with the titles of
Lords, and Bushops: that I perceive, to be a fugitive of your making, is but a
verbal objection, and not a real scandal.

Besides, they answer trewlie, and reasonably. As they can not remain in
England, withowt dainger and offense of law: so when they come over hither,
they committ treason: and if they return, a promoter or a purseuant will
shovv them the way to Nevvgate, (except they renounc, there religion, which
you esteame peradventure but a Peccadilio.) and that is evident, by the statut
25. Elizab. c. 2. (whereby young men that return not from the Seminaries, and
abjure not there religion, ar maid guilty of treason.) and they, who send them
releaf and exhibition, fall into the dainger of a Praemunire. what remedy can
you teach us, against this Dilemma? If they might find grace, and have the
happienes to be freed from the dainger of these Laws, and (which they humbly
crave) toleration of there consciences and religion: neither Doway, nor S.
Omers, could hold them: they would quickly show there dewtiefull affection to
there Prince, there natural love to there contrie; and for there parents and
kindred, (from whom they are separated to there great discomfort) they should
playnlie find, that kyndenes would not creape, when it may safely go. 3. They
corrupt no^ the Land.


Now touching the next point, (whear with they are charged,) for corrupting the
land with false doctrine. First, in this accusation, as you presuppose
Caluinism and your religion to be an infallible verity; so the preasts and
religious hear, ar as confident, that it is impiety. On both sides, there ar
learned, and virtuous men: and one will not veil bonnet to the other. how then
should the quarrel be decided? or shall it remain perpetual, and a skourge to
the world? The Bushops in the first parliement of the Queen, ded urge and offer
to defend the principles of there religion by disputation: which the
protestants would not accept, Camden.
nisi Baconus in theologicis parum versatus, tanquam iudex praesideret. and he
being a professor of the common laws, why he should be chosen moderator of
such a Divinity disputation; Cambredg can neither give reason, nor president;
nay rather if you ask there opinion, they will answer, Spectatum admisi, etc.
for it is a tidiculous Solaecism. Since, Father Parsons, and diverse others have
maid the same challeng, desirous to bring I ruthe to the Trial and touchstone,
in solemn and public manner. And let no man object, the colloquies at Poissy,
Ratisbon, Worms, Altenburg, Murbrun, etc. which wear fruitles, because
formeles: they ded not produce the effects expected, because they erred in there
course of proceading; and I confess I under stand not, the mystery why the
protestants in England now draw bach, seeing Ievvel in the beginning was so
forward, and maid so liberal offerts: which if any would now defend, it would
quickly appear, which religion wear counterfeit, and which current: whether
doctrine wear solid, and whether not. specially having a moderator, who
could discover evasions, guide the disputers; and iudiciouslie determine, to
whom the prize should be given.

And if perhaps some would except, and alledg the conferenc betwean M. Heart and
D. Reignolds: betwean Good and Campion, which wear honored and diuulged as
triumphs: and that these ought to stand as sufficient proofs, co convinc the
Catholics, if the truth so well sifted by disputation, may satisfy them, and
prevail. I answer, it is iniquissima conditio, for a man armed, to set upon a
prisoner, to insult upon a man weakened with fetters; and destitute of books;
withowt preparation and warning: and (which is worst) in the face of a rack
and torments, whear Campion had bean posed with crewel quaestions before: and
in a place of no indifferency, whear they may set down what they list, and
frame a combat at there pleasure, as Roynolds ded.

And whear as perhaps for politic cavvses, the king and the Lords may dislike
any public disputation, upon the grownds of religion: yet this may well be
granted, (and the french kings president, may induce it.)

The preasts and fathers, offer to prove that Jewel (the mainster Carpenter of
that Apology of the Church of England:) that Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, and
the later Doctors (Colonells of the new plantation,) have overcrowed and born
down the Catholics (for opinion of truth, sincerity, and learning) only by
false quotations, corruptions, falsifications, misrecitalls: and that both of
scriptures and fathers, both of the text and the gloss. And this they humbly
pray and hope, that his Majesty in his own time would be pleased to grant;
because these be heinous offenses; and the temple of verity can not be builded
upon error and false grownds: and because illusions and forgeries, be
stratagemata satanae: that at least he would permit the trial of that just
accusation; and so afthervvard esteam of there integrity, as they shall acquit
them selfs.

Concerning the third point, that the 3. Preasts ar no practisers.
Seminaries bread such preasts, as ar ministers of practices, and stir the
people to rebellion: as they are charged both by the book of execution of
justice, and by the proclamation 1580. whearin particularly they are accused to
have bean privy and accessarie, to the counsels and proiects of the king of
Spain, the Pope, and others, who intended and combined at that time, to invade
England, to depose the Queen, and subdevv the realm.

I must freely answer, that jealousy is trewlie described to be full of eyes,
and yet all pur-blind: fearful of her own shadow, ever in motu
trepidationis, and contrary to the motions, of other stars.

And tho they vvear great statesmen, ye with all there Optics they could not
foresee the great daingers like to fall upon them, till they wear at there
doors. And having by error drawn and provoked them; yet took they the course,
rather to continue the flame, then quench the fire: to encreas the malice then
prevent the mischeaf.

For first if any such confaederation had bean, (which never yet could be
discovered, nor was recorded in any history was it probable, that so great
and so wise Princes, would acquaint the poor speculatiue preasts at Reams or
Douay, or the fathers of the society, with there plats and intentions? is it
credible that they would manage matters of state so vveakelie? yea, but these
Princes purposed by the means of the preasts and religious, to prepare a
party assistant in England; how? by reconciling the people to the Pope, that
they might join, with him and the king of Spaynes army. One error begets an
other: for preast do not reconcile men to the Pope, but to God and his Church.

1. And yet surely it was a miracle, that among so many preasts, and in so
long time, and when Spies and intelligencers wear employed and rewarded;
neither any such preast could be nominated, (who was then or after, so
corrupted or induced by these great Princes:) nor any was afterward
apprehended or discovered, for any such trespass. and which is most to be
marked, not any subject was called in quaestion, or accused for entertaining
any preasts to that end. then how fantastical was this fear? what an
imagination of Chimeraes and terrors? most injurious, to touch the reputation
of all the English preasts in general, and by statuts and proclamations, to
call there names and there lives in quaestion: and to have no su sufficient
vvitnesses to accuse them. no euidenc against them, nothing but presumptions
and probabilities to attaint them of treason. the life and honor of subjects,
wear wont to be esteamed more precious: and the function of preasts, more
reverenced.

2. I may also add this: that when the king of Spaynes armado, was under sail
toward England, not a preast nor Seminary man was fownd in it. And though in
the proclamation, they wear traduced to be men suborned for preparation and
making the way leuel for there better landing: yet how well they prepared it,
appears by this, that neither preast nor Catholic, vvear apprehended and
attainted for any such offense, as is before said.

3. Besides how litl affianc the king of Spayn had in the English preasts and
Catholics of that time, was demonstrated by this; that all the religious
English at Valladolid and Burgos 1589. wear fettered and committed close
prisoners, when the army of England assaulted Lisbone, and invaded Portingal.

Furthermore in all the actual treasons and conspiracies, supposed to be maid
against Q. Elizabeth: there was never preast, or monk, or friar touched or
taynted for any of them. For certanlie the holy altars of God will not suffer
nor endure so ungodly machinations: and cloisters, bread better humors,
eleuate there sowles from the world. they think not of Princes but in there
prayers; and venite ad iudiciu^ sownding ever in there ears, requires a
continual preparate in there hearts (which is an antidote against treason.) And
that I think the cawse, why in the 45. years of the Queen's reign as I have
hard, there vvear only 2. secular preasts convinced and attainted for actual
Treason, Ballard (for knowing and concealing the attempts of A. Babington:) and
ovvld parson Plometree (for saying Mass at the rising in the North, for I
never hard of any other treason he committed.) yet it is straing to see, what
a malicious extension of offenses they make, what inuectiues vvear published
against them and there vocation: what sermons, proclamations, laws wear maid in
thunder and ^e^^or against these poor soldiers of the Church militant under
the banner of Christ? and what crosses and sufferings have they not endured?
the only College of Rheams and Douay besides all other religious orders, can
best testify the rigor, who smarted most by it; sending into the Harvest of
the Lord above 100 laborers, who all suffered for res mere spirituales, for
being preasts, and doing the office, and for no other treasons, (as hearafter
shall be explained.)

5. But, fully to clear and purge them, from all just scandal and
calumniation, I will confirm and justify there innocentie, and there loyal
hearts to Queen Elizabeth, obsignatis tabulis.

Anno 27. Elizab it was maid fellonie to receive and harbor a preast, and
treason to be a preast. and the act ded look back verrie crevvellie to 1.
Elizab. that who vvear maid preasts since, should be branded with that mark.

The which laws vvear maid, in regard of Parries treason, of Frances
Throgmorton, of Babington and his accomplices, and of Fa. Campion, and the peasts
with him arraigned: upon the conceit and opinion had, of there practices and
combinations, for restoring religion, and for deliueranc of the Queen of
Scotts: all which vvear then fresh in memory.

Whearupon the preasts then being in England, framed a supplication by common
consent, and delivered the same to the Queen at Gren which by the hands of
master Shellie (for the which secretary Walsingham committed him to the
marshalsie, vvhear he dyed: because the counsel vvear not maid first
acquainted with yt.) In that petition, first they renounced and condemned
Parrie his practices; then they declared there opinion in these words.

1. We for our parts utterly deny, that either the Pope or the Cardinals,
have power or authority, to command or licens any man to consent to mortal
sin, or to committ or intend any fact, contra ius diuinum.

2. Who soever he be spiritual or temporal, that delivers or mantaineth so
apparent sacriledg; we renounc him and his opinion as deuelish.

3. For our true purgation we protest before God, that all preasts who ever
conversed with us, have acknowledged your Majesty there lavvfull Queen, tam de
iure, quam defacto, and pray for you, and exhort your subjects to obey you.

4. They preciselie admonish us, that it is haeresie for any subject, to lift
up his hand against Gods anointed.

And so by this supplication, they answered all the six articles, which wear
usually tendered and objected to all preasts. Then how do these men deserve,
to be charged for defending propositions of treason? or corrupting the
subjects, or attempting against the sacred person of Gods anointed? ded those
there opinions, give any cawse to maik such seuear laws against them? or to
continue them? But I will maik there loyalty yet appear more plainly. after
the Gunpowder Treason, (the name and memory wheareof, does yet greaue the
hearts of all good Catholics.) first the Archpreast, ded utterly condemn it,
by writing, as a most detestable and irreligious devise.

And the preast them self, as well for there own purgation, and to clear there
vocation and society from an imputation so odious; as also to testify and
approve there obedienc, and loyalty: they exhibited three petitions. One to his
Majesty: an other to the Parliament (by the hand of Seigneur Frances Hastings,
and Sir Richard Kinghtlie:) and an other to the Earl of Salisburie
(protestations of there innocentie, and testimonies of there fidelity and
dewtiefullnes.) What could they do more, or what could be desired more of
them? therefore his Majesty, in his proclamation 7. Nou. graciously declared
his good opinion and assurance of the Catholics in these words. VVear, said
he, by good experienc, so well persuaded of the loyalty of diverse subjects,
of the Roman religion, that they do, as much abhor this detestable
conspiracy, as we our selfs. and good reason, for thereby all should have
perished togeter, of both religions.

Which induced father Garnet, (who was there confessor) to protest his dislike
allwaies of it, and to repent his fault sorrowfully, (which was only in
concealing it; and which he conceived, that he ought not to reueal; knovving
it only by there confessions.) and which also moved Sir Euerard Digbie, to
lament his ill fortune, that he should leave behind him the memory of such a
loath some stayne: tho he was not maid privy to there drift and purpose.

What nead I say more? how far Preasts and Catholics ever detested sedition
and treason, appears by the treatise of that learned Bushop, D.
Christopherson against rebellion. and would you know how much those of
Rheames condemned treason and disobedienc: Read page 301. there notes upon the
testament lately printed: Subjects vvear bovvnd in temporal things, to obey
the heathen being lavvfull kings, and to be subject to them even for conscienc,
to keap there temporal laws, to pay them tribut, to pray for them, and to do
all other nature all devvties. And yet Doctor Kellison goes further, for in his
learned Survey, he gives a good reason for it. Bycaus (says he) faith is not
necessarily required to jurisdiction, neither is authority lost by loss of
faith. which opinion Waldensis ded long since defend with great judgment
against that monstrous opinion of Wiclef. Nay further, they teach obedienc for
conscienc sake, not for only fear of punishment, and penalties of the law
(for laws ar never so well observed, as when they are enacted in the conscienc
of the people:) he that obeys for policy only, may disobey for policy,
which varieth upon occasions, and so does his obedienc with it.

7. But if you desire yet to be better assured and satisfied: I will show you
the opinion of the Bushops, and prelates of Queen Mary's time. The new devised
six articles (composed by D. Hammon) vvear proposed to all preasts, as the
touchstone to try there loyalty. 1. whether the bull of Pius V. wear a sentenc
to be obeyed? 2. whether Q. Eliz. wear a lawful. Queen, not withstanding the
bull. 3. whether the Po^e had power to give authority, to her subjects, to
rebel and depose her, etc. Upon these quaestions, Bushop Watson, Abbot
Fecknam, D. John Harpesfeald, D. Nicholas Harpesfeald and others, wear
curiously examined. Some of them answered they never see the bull: but all of
them professed there obedienc notwithstanding the bull, et vt verae reginae
obediendum. And fully Nichol. Harpesfeld resolved them, ego regalem eius
authoritatem in omnibus rebus causisque ciuilibus and temporalibus agnosco. the
which Goldastus (tom. 3. de Monarchia S. Imperi^ Rom.) does report.

8. But to conclude, with a demonstratiue argument: against which I know no
just exception or opposition you would know, how Princes can be assured of
Catholics, and how far they may repose confidenc in them! and whether there
religion tyeth so there consciences to dew obedienc, that merciefull and good
Princes may rest secured, they will neither revolt from there allegianc, nor
attempt against there persons, nor move the people to seditious practices. S.
Thomas lib. de regimine princip. cap. 6. negat posse tirannum a quoquam priuata
authoritate interfici. (quite contrary, to the rules of Parreus and knox.) and
so does D. Gerson, Decret. 2. part. cause. 23. q. 8. de Episcop. it does decree,
de Episcopis vero, vel quibus licet Clericis: quod nec sua authoritate, nec
authoritate Romani pontificis, arma accipere valiant, facile probatur.

And yet because there may be Cauils and objections drawn upon some words of
the Canons, to maike dowbt of the truth and certantie of this opinion: the
Canon laws of England do explain it fully. qui pacem and tranquillitatem
Domini regis and regni perturbant.

And to void all quaestions, the general Council of Constance, sess. 15.
concluded, that is an error in faith, to hold that subjects may kill there
Princ being a tyrant. the words ar these. Nuper accepit sancta Synodus quod
nonnullae assertiones erroneae dogmatizataesunt, reipublicae statum euertere
cupientes, etc. scil. vt quilibet tyrannus, potest and debet licite and
meritorie occidi, per quemcunque vasallum suum and subiectum, etiam per
clanculares insidi^s, non obstante quocunque iuramento, nec expectata sententia
and mandato indicis, etc. And thereupon, the council decreed, eam esse doctrinam
erroneam in fide and moribus: and then condemns it, and enacteth, Quicunque
pertinaciter doctrinam hanc perniciosissimam asserentes; sunt haeretici; and
tanquam tales iuxta Canonum sanctiones sunt puniendi. The which act, after the
parricide of Henry the III. the parliement of Paris published, both to condemn
such infernal practices, and to shovv how sacred the Church holds the
persons of Princes. So now you have sean (as in a glass) the face, and
integrity of the Catholics, and how they are tied, to obedienc of magistrates:
you see the dogmaticall principles of there religion, touching there loyalty.
if you will judge of them, by there doctrine, you see the basis upon which
they build: if by there proceadings, there petitions, there protestations, and
public profession acquit them: if by there course of life, there frequent
confessions, and continual prayers, show there innocentie. and to speak
confidentlie all Princes, ar more secure, and have a more and better tie and
obligation of Catholics; then of any Caluinists or Lutherans what soever. And
if he who writ that Pamphlet of Romish doctrine, in case of Conspiracy and
rebellion, and marked upon every leaf, Romish positions and practices of
rebellion: will read this plain rec^mination, and relation (maid to recompenc
his travel:) he shall find, how false and scandalous these Chimaeraes, and
fictions wear: and how injurious to all preasts and religious, to call there
names and reputation thereby in quaestion, vbi de capite fiunt comitia.

But Coolors will best appear, when they are compared therefore examine if any
sectaries overmatch this fidelity? and give so good assuranc to Princes, to
lean and rely upon there loyalty. Philip Mela^cthon, in his epitome of Moral
philosophy, says, Violare leges ciuiles, seu edicta magistratuum ciuilium est
peccatum mortale* (thus far he agrees with the Church, which taught him
that lesson:) and therefore he adds, sciamus conscientiam fieri ream, si non
obt^mperemus, and consider a quantum est hoc vinculum obedientiae, and publicae
tranquillitatis? in dead there can be required, no greater or stronger a tie,
and so simply ar all Catholics tied. but having maid up this hedge, to keap
out disorder: he leaves a gap open, to bread new trovvbles, and break all
bonds. for says he, debet autem haec sententia de magistratuum edictis
prudenter intelligi, scilicet de ijs edictis quae non iubent facere, contra
mandatum Dei. For then all is, naught, as before he showed ex libro consil.
Euangel. that inferior magistrates may alter religion, and ouerthrouu
Idolatry. and so hear is neither left any tie; nor yet any instruction, how
to be able to judge whether and when the Prince does idolatrize or do
contramandatum Dei. But if the justices of peace, and Constables be persuaded,
in there conscienc, that the Prince erreth in his then at they authorized by
Melancthon, both to judge and give law to the Prince and not to obey him.

2. Luther, prescribes that men should obey municipal laws, (as I have cited,
tom. 3. Witteb before in the first title:) but if you object to him, ne
excitetur tumulius contra Episcopos: then he falls into Melancthons gap, an
ideo negligetur verbum Dei, and peribit populus?

3. And this, his backed with a general consent of the more precise
protestants, that subjects may by arms mantain there religion. what to resist
and defend only: yea and to offend also, as appears by Danaeus l. 6. polit.
c. 3. and by P. Martyr in cap. 11. Iudic. and in locis com. and Althusius
polit. c. 35. page 37. makes three just cawses of war, 1. iustitiae denegatio,
2. purae religioni^ defensio. 3. repetitio rerum ablatarum.

4. It may be thought I choose out, the worst of there opinions, and misreport
them: therefore I will clear my self, sufficiently. Doctor Swinglius, teaches,
dum flagitiosi loco non mouentur, totus populus a Deo punitur. So he warrants
them to depose Princes.

The famous minister Sureau (called Rosieres, who was after emprisoned at
Paris) writ a book to prove, that it was lawful, to kill Charles the 9. and
the Queen moother, if they would not obey the gospel, (id est Caluinisme) so
witnesses Belforest l. 6. c. 103.

In the confession of the french Church art. 39. they say, affirmamus parendum
esse legibus, soluendatributa, subiectionis iugum tolerandum, etiamsi infideles
fuerint magistratus. but what fellows? that which corrupts all, dummodo, Dei
summum imperium integrum maneat. Now, because in this dummodo, may lurk an
aequiuocation: it is explained in the Synod of Bearn, 1572. Dei imperium
dicitur manner illibatum, cum rea exterminata Catholica religione, solam veram
and puram extollit. God is trewlie worshipped, obeyed, and served, when the
Catholic religion is banished, and only the truth is professed (which is in
effect all one, as tho say when Caluinism is established:) for they concluded
all men enemies that are not of that profession, as Poplonnier restifieth l. 34.

This is the doctrine of there Synodes: and in there public Apologies the same
lesson is read. in Com^^ent. de statu relig. part. 2. l. 12 c. 1* the war,
which subjects maike against there Prince, is defended. and fol. 349. if the
kaing mantain his own religion against them, what then? Rex a populo potest
exauthorari, per ordinum in regem authoritatem and again, nec omnes regni
parts in solidum committuntur regi, sed tantum superior regni dignitas: cuius
tamen suo modo and certis conditionibus, inferiores magistratus, sunt
participes, maxim officiarij coronae. all states and members of the realm, are not committed to the king, but the cheaf and prime dignity of state: wheareof,
in some measure, and condition, inferior magistrates do participate,
specially the officer of the crown. but this is a gross paradox, not worth the
skanning. yet that which follows is not better. In populi iuramento, tacita
aut expressa est conditio semper, se obtemperaturum regibus, quamdiu iusto
imperio rem gererent. They have one evasion or an other, shifts to cussen the
law. object, that subjects ar bownd die there oath, to obey there Prince: he
answers it with a quamdiu. So long as the king serves God, we will serve him,
then that must be a clawse in the oath of allegianc, if a Caluinist taik it.
and I will satisfy you, why I say so. The Prince of Condie, 1577. gave this as
a rule: Promissum In his protestation contra convent ^lesensem.
illud Euangelicorum, de armis contra regem non ferendis, and de abiurata
religione, factum est, contra Deum, and bonos mores, etc. and tale promisium
seruare non tenentur. the Gospellers of France, are not tied to perform there
oath and promise (scilicet not to bear arms against there king, or to abjure
religion:) for it was, both against God, and good manners. Poplonnier l. 41.

And this he learned of Calvin, l. 4. c. 13. 21. Institut. Quibuscunque huius
Euangelij lux affu^get, etc. ab omnibus laqueis and iuramentis absoluitur. That
man who is so happy, as to see the son shine of the Geneus gospel (huius
Euangelij*) he is absolved and discharged from the dainger of all oaths, and
snares to enthrall the conscience. A marvelous priuiledg; and such a priuiledg
the Prince of Oreng had, as appears by his aduises to Monsieur, in his
letters intercepted and published, as Surius declares anno 1581. And do you
imagine, that these beams of the son, ded never shine in England? master
Dudlie Fenner, who iumpeth right with the Apostles of Geneua, lib. 5. cap. 13.
of an euel Prince, he gives this fearful sentence. Hunc tollant vel pacifice,
vel cum bello: vel regnt Ephort, vel omnium ordinum connentus.

So, tollant, is decreed, the king must be pull down: but by whom? by Regni
Ephort. who ar they; because it concerns the crown, ask the kings atturnie,
or the Clark of the Crown, whether they acknowledge any such officer: and I am
persuaded, they will read him a lecture, against scientia inflat, which will
teach him discreation. but, go on.

When master William Raynolds, objected the tumults, and sedition of the
gospellars in France D. Whitacre, in his preface, answers him thus. As though
it vvear sufficient for there condemnation, that they resisted: so then, he
thinks that not sufficient, or because he speaks not categorice, taik it
only as the doubt of a Doctor.) And ded not admit what violenc was offered
to Gods truth, or them selfs: contrary to oath, promise, edicts, or law:
(vvhearby they vvear warranted to do what they ded.) Then the Huguenots of
France, in D. Whitacres opinion, vvear warranted, to resist the king, to
assault his towns, to fight with his officers, and to do all acts of
rebellion. examine the vvarrant; the law was against them, the edicts of the
king wear against them (for the admiral was proclaimed traitor) and the court
parliement ded verify the edicts. But he adds, they wear cleared from the
crime of rebellion, by just defenc of there doing, and by edict, of Princes.
hear be two bucklers, there Apologies ar the first: the kings proclamation the
second. Do not you imagine that he is much driven to his shifts, that fights
with so weak weapons. if an apology vvear sufficient to clear a man who would
be condemned? Scotland had a Bucchanan; France an Hottoman; Holland, Oreng,
(who generally, sought to excuse him self, and the contrie, and lay all the
burden on the kings back.) yet an apology, served not. And for edicts, they
wear proclamations of the kings mercy, edicts of pacification: not to vvarrant
that which the Huguenots ded, but to pardon them. and so that Doctor so
esteamed for his divinity; erreth much in matters of humanity and defenc of
his brethren. and specially if he lead them to Melancthons gapp, to resist, to
oppugn princes, or to defend there opinions with the sword (which S. Peter ded
not teach, 1. Epist. c. 2. v. 19. c. 4. v. 15. 16. c. 5. v. 9.)

But hear, I must maik a stand: for seeing An objection that preasts. and
Jesuits teach murdering of Princes.
I have so much touched, and so personalie, the opinions of the Lutheran,
french, and puritan Churches: I see a tempest of toungs rising against me, to
pay home and requite my objections (for it will not be easy to answer them.)
And first I will encounter, the Picture-maker, Ormer.

Who accuses D. Allen, for teaching 1. D. Allen.
men to murder princes; and that in his Apology of the Seminaries, he cites.
25. of Numeri, that subjects may taik there soouerains and hang them up. (a
thing so impious, that it never came into a religious heart.) For they are much
deceived that think it a property of Catholics; (as this man and P. white
do,) but that it is not proprium quarto modo, omni, soli, and semper, it is
all ready plainly and demonstratiuelie proved. but I will show, master
Orm. the picture of a minister of Geneua of the first edition, that whotelie
defends the same, you accuse D. Allen for.

Goodman l. de obedientia, says he, factum illud, quod memoratur, Number. 25.
perpetuum est exemplum in omnem aeternitatem, and certa denunciatio populi, vt
in simili defectione a cultu Dei, rectores suos qui a Deo ipso abducunt, ad
furcas abripient and suspendant. Et quanquam posset videri haec magna confusio,
vt populus sibi tantum assumat: tamen cum magistratus officio suo fungi
desinit, populus it a considerandus est, ac si careret omni magistratu, and tum
Deus ipse gl^dium in populi manus tradit: and Deus ipse, eff^c^tur imme^iate
eorum caput.

As now, you imputed to D. Allen, the citing of that text in Number. to be a
position and principl of Papists, to depose and murder Princes: I shovv a
Caluinist, that affirms the same, and overmatcheth him. Iam sumus ergo pares.
but yet is there odds: for D. Allens words, and scope differ from Goodmans.

Goodman warrants the peopl to execut there Princ; geues them reasons, shows
the way, and to confirm them maiks it Gods act. D. Allen, complaining against
the rigor and severity of the laws of E. shows, they are not to obey and
perform them, but stirrs not up the peopl to rebel: he shows what resistanc
may be warranted, but incites not to resist. I will cite his own words. cap.
5. ^ro Catholica religione certaere, praeclarum: sed modo* and tempore. Vt
conscientiae lex sacra, supremi pastoris sententia dirigant. So then he recites
Deuter. 13. and Number. 25. and infers. Illud autem in omnibus ijs exemplis
notandum, populum, non sua voluntate and impetu ad has Caedes, sed a prophetis
and Sacerdotibus commonefacti: id quod omni posteritati sequutur examplo est,
ne alias priuato odio, superbia, etc. in errores ruamus, and imbrobitatem
nostram religionis velo, tegamus. So hear is more discreation, and more dewtie,
then ad furcas abripere: more order and government, then suspendere, (as in
fury:) more religion, then to teach that God ded authorize the peopl to so
desperate actions. Doctor Sutclif, in his book called Turcopapismus 2. F.
Parsons.
objected, this against Fa. Parsons. Lopez a personio Iesuita, and Hispanis
quibusdam, ad reginam interficiendam magna pecunia conductus, nisi vigilantia
Essexij scelus deprehensum. I will tell the Doctor, such an other tale, to maik
him amends. Peter Pannie a Cooper, was reported to have bean hired by Mauaraeus
rector of Douay, prouincial of the Jesuits, to kill Count Morris: and upon
examination of the matter it was found a fable, as this is, which the Doctor
delivers so confidentlie. for in that action of Lopez, there was no man
accused, but Portingals and Spanyeards: and in the examinations which I have
sean and read (whearin all the circumstances ar declared) all the aydors,
moouers, and actors ar nominated: there is not one word of Fa. Parson. And
when master Egerton, ded in the Guildhall, most largely and eloquently vrg
all he could, against Lopez; not a word was spoken of F. Parsons (which he
would not have omitted, if there had bean cawse.) and all men knevv, that knew
him, that he was not a like man, to venture his reputation, in a foreign
bottom, subject to so many leaks, and so much dainger as that was. and therefore
this was a scandalous fiction.

But the Threason of Parrie, is low dlie 3. Parrie.
sownded in all men's ears, as a reproach and stayne of Catholic religion:
because the Pope by his letters, had provoked him to kill the Queen. hear is
some probability. yet this is no stayne at all; for Parrie confesses, that
master Wats a seminary preast, (with whom he had conference) disliked both
his motion, and attempt: and told him, that it was an unlawful practice. and
that diverse other preasts ded the like.

Besides at Lions, when he came to Fa. Creighton (a Jesuit) after his
confession, he opened to him his intentions, (belike persuading him self, that
the good father would byte, at such a bate. But Fa. Creighton vertuoushe
resolved him, quod omnino non liceret, it was against Gods law: and by diverse
reasons dissuaded him. and thus much he him self confessed to the Queen:
Hollinshead in his chron. wituesseth it; and few men that are of experienc about
London but know and acknowledge it. So there is a discharg both, to the fathers,
and preasts, for Parries treason. Now touching the Popes letter; you must
understand, that this counterfeit, had bean long used in Italy, as a spy. and
fynding upon his return, so litl encooragement at Lions, by the fathers: he
traveled to Paris. whear he sought to insinuate him felf into D. Allen and Fa.
Parsons, (who wear there with the Lord Paget:) But not fynding such
entertainment at there hands, as he expected; he was brought by means to the
Nuncio, to whom he delivers a letter, written by him self in Italian and
directed to the Pope. 1. Whearin first he confessed the wrongs, he had done to
Catholics. 2. That he was going into England, to maik some satisfaction by his
services; and 3. desiring his bsnediction and approbation (vvithovvt specifi^ng
any particularitie, he meant to perform there.) which letter is yet extant,
at Room, upon record. and to this letter, Card. Como answered: and upon this is
all the triumph.

The letter of C. Como. is common: examine it, and see if either there be any
particular services intimated, or any seditious directions given from the
Pope, more then an encooragement in genere, to an offer in genere. What then
can you reasonably infer upon this to disgrace Catholics: you may infer,
that the Popeshowed a fatherly affection to England, that would vouchsafe to
write to Parrie, (promising to do some good service.) but by that letter, you
can not infer that he exhorted, or encooraged Parry to any treasonabl act;
specially considering, that such actions be notoriously condemned by the sea
Apostolic, Councels, fathers, and schoolmen.

But it was Parries devise, to procure that letter to serve his turn in
England, and to use the Popes name, both to abuse the Catholics, and deceive
the Queen. when he departed secretly from Paris, vvithovvt an Adieu to F.
Parsons, (with whom he was not well pleased, for being ill regarded) he
writ to the Lord Burly, for a passport, that he might come over, and impart
to the Queen great matters. he was admitted; the Queen hard him: and he
informed, that the Jesuits moved him to kill her. yet in the Parliement
house, he defended boldly Catholics, and religion, (for which the house,
committed him to the tower: not knovving that the Queen was prive to his
purposes, and that her intention was thereby to give him reputation, and credit
with the Preasts and fathers. for now he had continual accesss to the Queen,
he hoped to be master of S. Katharins) was in great favor with the lo.
Threasorer; and was employed to discover the plats and intentions of
forreiners: and at home to betray the Catholics: and particulerly the Lord
Lattimor, (whom the Threasorer, studied to have caught in Parries nett.) But
he that was true to no man, proved false to him self, and was taken in his
own snare: (having met with wits overreaching his:) and perished so
worthily, as I may trevvlie conclude, quis paena eius mouebitur, qui id
commiserit, pro quo, nemo misereri, misericors potest?

Yet this was, generally judged the more 4. Fa. VValpool, and Squire.
probable, that the Pope and the papists ded employe Parrie: because Fa.
Richard Walpool, was accused to have encooraged Squire, to the like attempt.
and surely upon examination, it will have the like success. This Squire, and
one Rolls 1596. wear taken prisoners (in a pinnace of Sir Franc. Drakes, by Don
Pedro Tellio) and brought to Siuil; whear Fa. Parsons procured for them, both
liberty and apparel, (though they professed them selfs to be protestants:)
and so they wear sent away, when they came to S. Lucars, by indiscreation, they
fell into the inquisition, (an argument sufficient to witness there religion,)
and so they wear brought back to Siuil: whear Fa. Walpool ded them much favor,
set them at liberty, engaged his credit for there forth coming, and placed
Rolls in the Jesuits Coll. and Squire in a monastery. 1597. til they both
secretly fled away, and left father VValpool in the briars, to answer for
them.

And afterward, they sent letters, to excuse there soodain departure to Fa.
Walpol, (which letter he ded show for his discharg. Now then weigh well, all
circumstances: and examine the enditement. Squire is accused that Fa. Walpool,
provoked, and instructed him to poison the Queen: and preached to him at his
departur, to persuade and confirm him. Is not this probable? 1. they fled
secretly away, withowt his knowledge, (and that was generally known to be
true) Squire was a man, who ever professed him self a protestant, and so dyed.
3. a man, that at his arrainment and death, denied it. (And tho being upon the
rack 5. times, the torture compelled him, to accuse him self; yet an argument
from the rack, is not a sufficient euidenc, being after denied.) 4. a man, that
had wife and children in England: and not like withowt some great and present
temptation, to be drawn into suca a plat: and Fa. VValpool, was as unlike and
unfit, either to promise or perform any recompenc of value. 5. then what
should be the motive? his religion, would not persuade him; for he regarded no
merit. Rewards hear wear none, and vvithovvt some end, he would not cast
away him self. 6. Besides Fa. VValpool as he was not like, to trust a
protestant, with a matter of that weight, and secrecy: so neither was he of
that credit, nor authority, that he durst do it withowt the licenc of his
superiors (Fa. Parsons. and Fa. Creswel, being his ancients. 6. Besides examine,
how it was proved. by his own confession? it was extorted, and by the same
breath denied. by Stallenge his testimony? he had it but by hearsay. a vveak
proof. and how was this to be performed? by poison delivered to him in Spain.
a straing secret, which his fellow Rolls never knevv of who returned with
him. and how was it to be done? the sadl upon the horse back was to be poisond.

Hear was art. how could the Queen be poisoned with it so, and he escape that is
said to hauesqueased it upon the sadl? or if it wear squeazed (as they termed
it) how could part be reserved, to poison the Earl of Essex? and specially
how could it be done, that the grooms of the stable, and the querries (who
ordinarily attend the horse for the Queen) could not discern it? but to
conclude, was ever any man hard of that took hurt by that poison? or was sick
of it? no, no, then surely seeing he denied it, seeing there was no probability,
and specially seeing there was no witnesses to prove it, I can not esteame it,
as a stayn, to be justly imputed to the Jesuits.

But all these, and such like devises, passed as current, in England (upon a
false supposition) that Mariana a Jesuit, and the fathers ded mantain that
ungodly position, of murdering and deposing Princes for religion.

1. Touching Mariana: it was a personal 5. The Jesuits.
fault, Marianas proper opinion; yet was he not resolut in that opinion, but
handled it problematice; he inclines to the worst part, but absolutely
affirms it not. his words ar, falli possum vt humanus, siquis meliora attulerit
gratias agam.

2. Secondly his quaestion was not, for killing of kings, but for killing
tyrants (which is to be noted as a great differenc.)

3. Again, his whole order disauows his position, and categorice determine the
contrary. Card. Tolet in his summa. l. 5. cap. 6. decrees that it is not
lavvfull, to attempt against the life of a Prince, tho he abuse his power: and
that it is haeresie to mantain the contrary. So also holds. Greg. de
Valentia part. 2. q. 64. and of the same opinion is Card. Bellarmin. cap. 13.
of his Apology. and Salmeron, tom. expovvnding the 13. C. Romans (vvheare he
refers the fact of Aod, against king Aeglon, to Gods express commandment.)
I may alledg, the authority of learned Lessius, de iustitia and iure, l. 2. c.
9. dub. 4. Serrarius in c. 13. Iud. Azor in his Institut. Becanus in his
answer to the 9. Aphorism. Gretser in his Vespertilio, Haeretico politicus,
who confuteth Marianaes grounds. and so does L. Richeome in his Apology.

4. What nead I say more? yet to put all ovvt of dowbt, this opinion of
Martiana, was condemned both by a prouincial congregation of the same society
holden at Paris. 1606. and the condemnation was ratified, by Claudius
Aquauiua, general of the order.

5. And because, no man shall dovvbt whether it be a droctrin so general
received in the Church: anno 1413. by the declaration of the Doctors of
Sorbonna the same is averred; as also renewed, 1606 that it is an unlawful
and ungodly position.

6. And lastly, the doctrine of Mariana, was justly condemned by the court
Parliament of Paris, the seame year.

And that you may not stumble at Simancas words: you must know he was a lawyer
no divine: and if you read Heisius ad Aphorismos, you shall perceive that both
he and Becanus, are not guilty of this error. see page 85. and 91. And all this
stands and concordeth, with the agreement of Gods ancient Church. for Ireneus
l. 5. c. 14. sets it down among heresies, to think that kings ar given to
men casuallie; and not by prouidenc, and appointement of God: quia omnis
petestas a Deo. And S. Ambrose contra Auxentium. ait, lachrymae meae, arma mea,
aliter nec debeo, nec possum resistere. Nauar, Cunerus, and all that I have
sean (and I have curiously searched for it) agree in one sentenc. and the
reason I am so curious in this; was not only to satisfy my own conscience;
but diverse good and virtuous protestants in England my friends, who wear much
offended that a Thesis so scandolous, should be protected by the learned
fathers, of the society, as was given out.

There remains yet certan stains in the 6. C. Main.
Cote of Preasts, and fathers, which are honestly to be taken out. I have hard
it much urged, that the greatest argument for the rigor against preasts; was
necessity to free the state from dainger, because they vvear the likest men,
to bread it. and that was specially discerned as they said by the coming in
of C. Main, (who corrupted master Tregion, and diverse others, and with drew
them from there obedienc.)

Because it is a matter (which concerns all preasts:) it is necessary to
examine it with deliberation. Cuthbert Mayn was indicted at Launston 1577. that
he had, and obtained from Room, a bull, and instrument for absolution, and
that master Tregion, knowing him to have obtained the same 20. April, after
ded aid and mantaine him, and was reconciled These wear the accusations, and
judge of them.

1. First for his reconciling, Mayn answered, that they wear deceived, preasts
ded use to reconcile men only to God: neither by reconciliation, was ever
any man withdrawn from his remporal obedienc, by any consequenc, but rather
had a greater obligation.

2. And touching his being at Room, and procuring this bull of the Pope: he
said he was never at Room* nor sought to obtain from thenc, any Bull at all
for absoluing any man.

3. Moreover, that it was copy of a bull printed which he bought at Douay,
only to pe^ule and see the manner of it.

4. But that, which is most to be noted, is: that it was printed at Douay; and
by the enditement, he was accused that 1. October. 1597. he ded obtain from Room
the before said instrument. for the law intended, that the trespassor should
obtain immediately from, the Pope, not a copy, but the instrument it self. and
that it should contain some matter prejudicial to the Queen's person, or the
quiet and good of the state, or to seduce and corrupt the subjects (for it is
not to be imagined, that the parliement would maik that treason, by which no
hurt nor dainger can ensew to the state.)

5. But what bull was this? that makes the matter clear. it was a bull,
concerning the Jubilee, which by the Pope is granted of course, and not at the
suit of any private person, and for all contries not for any one, and once in
25. years. and that bull ded continue in force, butone year: which year was
ended 1575. (and so the date of the instrument was expyred, before he bought
it: much more, 1. October. 1597. when he was endited. so you see par^u^ iunt
montes Yet because he had the bull, tefused to come to the Church, and obey the
Queen's proceadings, judge Manhood told the jury, whear manifest proofs can not
be had, persumptions must be allowed; and thereupon the jury fovvnd him
guilty. (though the enditement contained altogether matter insufficient, and
impossible, and neither answearable, to the words, nor senc of the statut.)

For in this bull, there wear neither words nor matter, to withdraw or seduce
any subject from dew obedienc: neither was there any thing prejudicial to the
Q. to be executed. Notwithstanding master Tregion lay long in prison, among
fellons, in a dongeon noysom for smells, toads, etc. fed with bread and water:
and was afterward condemned in the praemunire, and his lands seized by writ from
the excheckor: and the date of the writ vhas before the judgment given, (as if
they knew it should be so.) he was prisoner 16. years; an ancient gentlmen,
and honorably allied: and his lands 1000. pownds of old rent.) and tho it was
entayled: yet the knight marshall fownd means to avoid it who had begged his
lands of the Queen. And all this was, but for religion: and upon false
accusation of one Twigs a parish Clack, who affirmed that he had speech with
Mayn at Christenmas 1575. and at that time was Mayn at Douay. But to go forward
ex pede Herculem by this judge of the rest. (which is so much objected.)

Touching the rising in the North, and 7. The Bull of Pius V.
the attempts of Babington and his accomplices: they wear mixed actions, not for
religion only, or state only, but for both: and not procured by the suite
and solicitation of religious men, but out of there ownzeal, and compassion of
the Queen of Scotland, whom the Earls accoumpted, nearest allied to the
crown.) And such actions, are not comprehended within the compass of the
Question I am to clear and discuss.

1. But concerning the bull of PIUS V. Preasts vvear not to ask the reason of
the Popes doeings. yet you may find some of the reasons specified in the
bull.) diverse have ascribed it, partly to the soodain revolt of England from
the Church; partly to the prouocations maid by the ministers there, (who in
every pulpit vvhotelie and slanderouslie proclaimed the Pope Antichrist, and
the man of perdition:) and some have attributed it, to minsinformation of the
Queen's case, and the Catholics. But I am sure, many grave men vvear sorry,
that it was either procured, or defended.

2. And C. Allen witnesses, multos illud factum agree tulisse, (as before,
you see, Bushop Watson, and the rest ded) and he wished, that it had bean Dei
iudicio reseruatum.

3. And Fa. Parsons, and Campion, solicited the mitigation thereof, (as
appeared at his arrainment) that it might not bynd the consciences of subjects,
to disobey the Queen. Whearupon Gregory the 13. declared (withowt any
limitation or restraint) that subjects ought to perform all duties to Queen
Elizabeth, notvvithstanding the censure.

4. Lastly, you may probably conjecture, that the Popes are not lightly
induced to use so extreme courses: seeing they neither sought, by such censures,
to disturb the peace of k. Ed. 6. of the kings of Scotland, Denmark, Sweden;
the Duke of Saxony, or Marquis of Brandenburg.

Neither does it at all, touch the Catholics, nor the present state (for actio
moritur cum persona:) which is the thing most concerning us.

The greatest blott is: that there vvear 8. The preasts.
more treasons by the preasts committed in Q. Eliz. time, then ever wear in
any age, by protestants. and that is no quaestion disputable, bycaus it is
manifest verum; near 200. preasts and religious have bean executed for that
offense. In dead Norton, D. Hammo^, and Topclif affirm that it is true: but
bycaus Catholics denieit, let us examine, whether it be a true Thesis, no
preasts wear executed for religion but for Treason.

1. And to, determine that the better: enquire what be the acts for which they are condemned, to be a preast, to come over into England, to refuse the vath, to
say mass. 10 absolve and ^econcile, to preach, and minister Sacraments, and to
bebred up in the Seminaries Ar these matters of State, and not of conscience?
temporal and not spiritual? crimes of treason, and not religion. There must
then be a new lexicon de verborum significationibus: for else in foreign
contries, they will exclayme, because it touches them all (by participation)
both in conscienc and c^edit, who ar preasts, and find there function and
profession so tainted.

2. Th^n consider and defyne what is treason. The best definition thereof is
the statut 25. Ed 3. (which was maid according to the common laws of England.)
how know you that? master Ploydons opinion directs me.

In that act, the Question was, what was treason by the common law: now says
he. it is a principle in the exposition of a statut, that if the preambl
shows any dowbt to be before, either in common law, or some statut, and
afterward does enact, that thus it shall be: in that case it must be taken,
that the law doubted of, was so before For ab expositors of dowbts, they
would not ordain it otherwise, then the law was.

Now it appears, by that statute, scilicet, by the common laws of England,
and by I. Stanford, in the pleas of the crown. 1. that Treason must ever be an
action, not an opinion, nor a profession (for a man can not properly be called
Traitor, till he committ an act, that geues him iusthe that denomination.) For
Oldcastel was condemned a Traitor for his act in one court: an heretic for
his opinion, in an other court; and so wear Cranmor and Ridlie for there
actions. 2. yt must be the act of a subject, against his soouerain. Now what
hurt, had ever king H. 7. or his progenitors, by any subject, who was a
preast, said mass etc. or can you show, that any real treason by preasts was
committed* or intended against the late Queen? ded they ever procure sedition,
or stir rebellion actuallie? 3. and that was neadful to be proved; for
Treason must be for offenses in the highest degree: because the punishment
extends it self, to all his posterity (that offends so,) to the ruin of his
family, and to terrify others.

3. So then by the common laws, it is not treason. But D. H. elench was,
quatenus he is a preast, he is not a traitor: but quatenus, he does the office
of a preast, in England. Subtilissima subtilitas: and yet bycaus false, it
preuails not. For the function it self is maid treason: and therefore the act
looks back to 1. Eliz. (to maik all preasts traitors, that had there orders
sinc that time.)

4. Besides by the prouiso of the act 25. and 27. Eliz. if any preasts
(committed) shall submitt them selfs to the Queen's laws, and taik the oath;
they shall be freed from the penalty of this act: and so they shall not be
judged traitors, if they renounc there religion. as Bell, Io. Nicholls and
others ded. whereby it is plain they are not traitors simpliciter but secundum
quid: not for fact but opinion, and to be enlarged upon condition. and seeing it
is in there power to maik them self in instanti no traitors; It appears, there
offense is not properly treason: for if it vvear so by 25. E. 3. there
acknowledgment only and conformity, and repentanc, neither could not would
have discharged them from the Justice of the law.

5. Exampls will maik the case playner. Wilm Anderson, a Seminary Preast was
executed, (45. Eliz.) for being in England contrary to the statut. so was M.
Barckvvorth. anno 1600. that was there treason.

Tho. Pormort. 35. Eliz. was attainded, for being a preast residing in England,
and reconciling: and Barvvis was executed for being reconciled. that was there
treason: both spiritual matters. you may as well call Mithridate, poison;
black, white: virtue vice, as to call religion treason. but the law haith so
called it. A new name alters not the operation of an old virtue: the cavvs of
the death, maiks the martyrdom, not the name. And surely this act of general
diffidenc, increased more discontent.

But what ded force the state to use such violent and extraordinary remedies
what ded bread such intricate trovvbles? the extraordinary chaing of religion
ded cast them into this laborinth, bred these discontents, procured all these
enemies; and forced the counselors, so to punish preasts. 2. (as Camden
notes) the opinion of the Queen's illegitimation, abroad. 3. the iealouslie
had, of the Queen of Scots; (whom they dowbted most for her religion, allianc
in France, favor of the Pope, and her proximitie and near kynred to the crown:
4. the bull of PIUS V.

And 5. the dowbt of the house of Guise, in the behalf of there neace. and 6.
lastly the offense of the k. of Spayn, for ayding Oreng, and intercepting his
moonie. these wear the cawses, that induced the State, to prepare, arm, and
use means to prevent all malice and mischeafe. And knowing, how strong a wall
England haith for her protection: and yet with in them selfs, what a party,
religion had both in E. and Ireland: and no men wear so like, as preasts, to
stir up all the humors in the body of the realms: therefore to keap then out,
to expel them, and to curb them if they came in tey wear driven to use this
policy, to maik yt treason, to be a preast, or to mantain a preast. And as
this was maid law, by that glorious Prince (who neaded such a devise:) so it
may be abrogated, by him that neadeth it not.

It remains, that I shovv you, what Recusants.
men these Recusants arr, who suffer in England, and how they have bean put
to the trial of there virtue.

The Recusants ar such, as by the new laws, ar men marked out, that refuse
for there conscience, to frequent the ordinary prayers, sermons, and communion,
appointed by the Church of England. this is all there offense; and the sole true
cawse, they the law does take notice of them, and that fault, because it
shows only that they are not conformable to the Queen's injunctions, and the
Canons of that Church: and does not conuinc them of any disloyal affection to
the Queen, and the state: there for they are subject to a pecuniarie mulct,
which the Scots men name verrie properly and significantlie (Saul moonie.)

They have always bean, and yet arr, persons of good quality, many of
noble parentage; most of under standing: fevv of the meaner sort: and all, men
of virtue and piety, who have learned, what accoumpt is to be maid of
conscience. And of this sort of subjects, diverse have bean ever since the first
alteration. It was an information of more malice, then truth (by that
profownd Casuist and Reporter of the laws:) that from 1o Elizab. No person
ded refuse to come to the Church (to public and usual prayers) till the bull
of Pius 5. was published.

As if that bull had bean the sole mean, to induce recusants, to disobey the
Queen's laws; and so to maik disloyalty and disobedience, the Original of
recusancie. I know, he could not be ignorant, that all puritans, refused to
come to Church, or to communicate: and wear best content to walk in the Church,
till sermon begonn; so much they ded dislike the liturgy of England.) Besides
he forgot, how many Bushops, and preasts, wear then known and professed
recusants: and how many noble men, and gentlmen of accoumpt, ded forbear to
show them selfs members of that Church. I marvel how he could conceive, that
only Levites and Prelates, wear left to pray and serve God; for a people, who
showed no religion nor constancy, to wards Gods worship in tenn years? No Sr
England had many worthy men at that time, who never bowed there knee, to
Nabugodonosors statua; as Lanhearn, Grafton, Dinglie, Ashbie, and many other
places can witness. and the author of the execution of Justice, gives better
testimony thereof; and uses it as an argument of the Queen's rare clemency,
and her confidence of there loyalty. further more, if you look curiously and
iudiciouslie into it, that bull ded not concern there going to the Church and
serving God: but touching the Queen's being lawful Queen, and serving her,
(after the excommunications.)

Now How these noble gentlmen, and others succeading, wear used and oppressed:
to what reproaches they wear subject, by the basest skoome of men: it is a
lamentable story, and would move a heart of flint.

It was not affliction enough, to authorize purseuants to search there howses:
and Promoters to inform against them: but they must also have a Felton, surue
yor of there lands, and estates: What losses ded they sustain, by the leases of
the third part of there lands? what loss of goods, by rapine? what spoil of
woods? what bribes wear they forced to give, gratiam emendicando? I nead not
repeat them: I have sean some part of the proceading.

For there committing to W^sbich, Banhurie, Elie, the Fleat, York, or Ludlovv:
though they ded suffer there restraint patiently: yet I must neads pity them,
because there they lost there liberty, hazarded health, wear forced to neglect
there state: vvear detained from there wives and children: and maid subject to
the contempt of the world.

And touching there being Disarmed: yt was more disgrace then loss: it proved
they wear distrusted, which was a course rather to provoke, then reclayme them.
But for there twenty povvnds a month, paid into the excheckor: that ded lie
heavy, and maid the meaner sort groan (though I know by the lo B. the rigor
and extremity, was a litl qualified.) Compare these with the Puritans
recusants (who will bear no such burdens:) you shall find in the Catholics,
more virtue, and less insolency: more humility and less dainger to the state.
Compare them, with the recusants of France: and you will think our ge^tlmen
preasts, and there ministers Capitains: our Catholics unwilling to offend,
theyrs unwilling to obey: they defend there faith with there swords, and resist
the magistrate; ours endure, and s^io, cui credidi, is there comfort; and
because they have no Bezaes, no Knoxes, no Synodes, no boutefeus, they can not
shovv you a Mountauban, or a Mountpellier, nor any other place of assuranc and
retrayt, but the Fleat, or the Gatehows.

And yet neither in these plotts and treasons, supposed to have bean against
her person in Queen Elizabeth's time; nor in that inuinc^bl armado 1588. nor in
that invisible army (the skarcrowe of London) 1599. nor in the wars of
Ireland (whearin the Queen, required aid of her subjects:) no men, ded shovv
them selfs more forward, to do her majesty service: nor performed more
readily and frankly what was imposed upon them: nor behaved them selfs, with
more devvtie, and less dainger. The reason is plain; they that refuse to go to
Protestant Churches, in respect of there conscienc: will far more refuse for
conscience sake, to committ treason (a sin of so high degree:) and surely
they that regard so litl there own bodies, for safety and salvation of there
sowles; will never attempt or consent to any desperate act, against the kings
person, or the state of there contrie: and by such greauous and crijng sins,
hazard the destruction of both body and soul.

Now if you will compare the greauances The Inquisition.
of Recusants, Preasts and Catholics in England, with the Inquisition of
Flanders (one of the long cawses of that war.) you shall find hear, more
burdens, and theirs not heavier. It is a rule taught commonly, but learned of
fevv, quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris. The protestants of E.
condemned the name of Inquisition in Flanders, because there brethren groned
under that burden: and yet a more greauous load being imposed upon there
contriemen, friends, and kinsmen at home, they taik no remorse, no compassion.
there for I will set before you a glass, which shall trewlie represent unto you,
the face, form, and differenc of there punishments.

Charles the 5. at Worms 1521. decreed against Luther, only Exile, and Fire
for his books. Anno 1526. at Machlin, he set down this penalty against
Heretics, or those that disputed of controuerses of religion, or that keapt
books prohibited: for the first offense 40. shillings: for the second 4.
povvnds: and for the third 8. povvnds, and perpetual banishment (as a proper
remedy to remove them from infecting others.)

Anno 1529. if at a time limited, they ded not repent there errors, nor
disclayme then, he adjudged Viris ignem, mulieribus fossam (as the Canons
ancientlie prescribed, and as Calum him self used Seruetus.)

Anno 1531. he confirmed the former acts, adding that these who keapt such
books, and defaced and pulled down images (male animo,) should loose there goods.
and yet he used some limitation. and for heresy, if he vvear worth 6. l. and
be convicted of it, the delinquent should pay. 3.

And to avoid all quaestions, 1555. he interpreted and explayned him self, for
the penalty of these laws, with the advice of Viglius. to taik away all
occasions that might hinder traffic: he limited that the penalty against
those that vvear receauors or abettors of such men; should not extend to
inkeapers, victuallers, merchants or mariners. and if the accusors ded slander
any injuriously, they should be punished for example sake. this though it
wear generally enacted, yet it was both intended, and accordingly more
seuearly executed against Anabaptists and Libertines (the greatest plages of a
state.) After ward king Philip 1555. set down instructions, rules, and orders,
direct (this court properly erected for heresy, and to prevent secret
conuenticles the moothers of sedition:) and these regia mandata exquisitorum, I
refer you to see in the story of Vander Hare. Whearin the king adds no new
amerciements, nor deuiseth any new severity: for as he answered Montigny, he
purposed not to bring in the Inquisition of Spain, but to revive his fathers
laws: nor to create any new offenses, but such as wear of old censured for
offenses both in the Church and state. And yet this proceading ded work ill
effects: bred in the Catholics a commiseration of there contriemen, and a
greater obstinacy in the protestants.

Now look upon E. match and compare The laws of England against Catholics.
them together: and you will find the penalties far more, and more seuear.

To acknowledge the Popes suprematie in spiritualibus, is Treason. To be
reconciled, is Treason.

To refuse the oath of supremacy, is for the first offense praemunire, for the
second, Treason. For preasts to come over into E. is Treason. (1585. or if they
stay in E. 40. days after the parliement: or if they wear maid preasts sinc 1.
Elizab. To harbor a preasts is fellonie.

If young students continue beyond the seas, and return not, and abjure there
religion, and show them selfs conformable: it is Treason. To bring in an agnus
Dei, beads, or crosses, is premanire. To bring a bull from Room; or any
sentenc of excommunication, which touches the Queen; is Treason.

To absolve or reconcile any man, is Treason. He that comes not to Church
upon each sunday, was to pay 12. d. and be further censured: but afterward he
that refused to hear there prayers, and communicate, (27. Eliz.) is to pay for
every month 20. povvnds: and he that can not pay it, his body shall fine for
it in prison. To depart out of the realm withowt the Queen's licens, and not to
return within 6. months after the proclamation, is an offense so great; that the
offender shall forfeit his goods, and his lands during his life.

To hear mass* is an offense fined at a 100. marks. If a man suffer his son or
his servants (being not a merchant) to go beyond seas: he shall forfeit 100. l.
There ar many mo: but these ar too many. now, whether of these, ar whipped
with the greatest scourge? whether of these laws ar most seuear, and have
most nead of mitigation? the name only of Treason, is terrible, and overgoeth
far the rigor of the most rigourous and capital laws of the Inquisition: and
when I have named that, I slightly pass over the loss of goods, emprisonment,
reproaches, chains and fetters, exile, aggrauation of offenses, (which would
have appeased the wrath of Minos or Rhadamanthus.)

But the rigor of the execution of these laws, is most to be noted. The
tower, was full of such patients; and new prisons erected to entertain them:
and how they vvear at that time used; you may best know by the exampl of
dealing with master Tregion at Lanson, of master Rigby; of master
Christophor watson, who perished at york, with the infection of the prison,
as 18. other prisoners for religion ded, 1581.

Add to this, the strict examination of Justices; the proceading of the high
commissioners (the inquisitors in E.) the Harpies, at visitations; the
promoters in temporal courts informing against them: purseuants searching the
houses of men but suspected: and how much they wear noted, that affoorded any
charity or alms to such persons. And surely it is a thing I maruelat, that
so great and wise counselors would not remember that note of Tacitus as a
stayne of government; that ^o^ esse delatores in republica, was a certan
sumptome of a diseased state.

I can not forget, tho I would Racks and torments, (the examino^s of Fa
Campion, and Fa. Sowthwel, and many others:) but satius est pertransire
calamitat^m publi^am.

Therefore I may justly affirm, that the Catholics in England, ded endure
greater torture by the laws of the realm: then the Geuses ded by the
Inqu^sition, and had therefore nead of more commiseration, (specially when
pu^itans, Anabaptists, Arrians, nor Atheists wear so curiously searched for,
nor so terriblie afflicted.

But the great cross Crosslet, is this, exceading all punishment, that they
generally gave out in proclamations 1591. and in the book of execution of
justice: that no man was punished for religion, no man's conscienc was examined
for his faith.

A politic devise, to blind the world with show of humanity, and to preserve
the opinion of the Queen's mercy unstained with any aspersion of creweltie:
so they abuse the credulity of foreign states, to aggrauate the offenses of
preasts and prisoners.

But was no man punished for religion in Q Eliz. time? 1. there was a general
pardon 1581. whearin, a strict caution and prouiso was. that the benefit
thereof should not be extended to any person in prison, or recusant, for
matter of religion (and yet all malefactors, had there part in the pardon.) and
was this no punishment, nor partiality? 2. the Recusants pay 20. li. povvnds a
month, in regard of there religion: is this no punishment? is not this properly
called Sawl moonie? The Turk lays not such a tribut, upon the conscienc of
Christians, nor Christians upon the Jews. 3. the old prelates and Clergy all
dyed in prison, or in exile, for there religion: and yet no man is punished,
either in goods, or body, or liberty. What contradictions ar these? and how
palpable.

The Lady Morlie La. Brown, and La. Guildeford. 1575. Hollinshead records,
as a matter to be noted, that thresuch ho. persons, wear committed to prison
only for hearing Mass. and was this no punishment? leases wear maid of two
parts of diverse of there lands: and was that no punishment?

But to conclude, the loyalty of these Recusants might appear to the king
plainly, by there petition to his majesty 1604. and many times after: and
ever by there obedienc. and in Q. Eliz. time, by there protestation 1588. maid at
Ely whear they wear keapt prisoners: by the offers they maid to the Lord North
(Liuetennant there) by the justification of them by the letters of the Lords of
the counsel, (and by there submission sent to the Lords not withstanding all
excommunications.) and so the Irish Recusants joining there forces with the
Queen's. 1600. at Kinsal, showed them selfs subjects absolute and not ex
condition.

Now it is time to draw to a conclusion, An answer to the questions proposed
in the beginning.
and deliver up an accoumpt and sum of all. and decide those quaestions,
proposed in the beginning of this discourse, that Princes may know, how far,
and how safely, they may repose them selfs, there persons, and states, upon the
loyalty of Catholic subjects. First therefore, touching the last quaestion,
whether to be a protestant and a loyal subject, be not more in compatible, and
more improbable; then to be a Catholic and loyal? It is in this discourse,
largely demonstrated, both by there first generation in Germany and Geneua: by
there progress in France, by there proceading in Holland, and by there sedition
in Scotland. The scope and end of them all was, to set up the doctrine of
Luther and Calvin, to ruin the Church, and aduanc the desseins of ambition
(often intermingled with these fair shows of Reformation.) Now as you can
never plant any new sect withowt, faction, conuenticles, associations: so to
faction and schism, sedition is an accident inseparable; for thereupon all
magistrates and laws ar resisted, and that with violenc (for no war is so
passionate, as the wars of conscienc.)

Remember the nativity of Lutheranisme, the Huguenots, and Geuses: and how
well they vvear mantained by the svvord, even from there Cradle: so as they
grevv to that height of presumption, that either they would unking there
soouerains, and create them selfs Lords, as in Holland: or by tyring and
terrifijng there Princes with arms and tumults, force them to pacification, as
in France: or absolutely depose there Princes, (when they became masters and
commanders of the state) as Scotland can well remember, and haith cavvse.

So likewise on the contrary part, consider exactlie; whether it be so
impossible (as some by there books have misinformed the world, for a Preast or
a Roman Catholic to be a good subject, which question concerns us most.

If you look back to former ages you shall find that from the Saxons, to king
E. 6. To be a Catholic, was never taken as a bar to loyalty; neither was
there ever any opposition fovvnd in the essenc and nature of loyalty, and the
grownds of the Catholic faith, And good reason; for that religion, which most
aymeth at mortification of the body, and best armeth him to combat with
sin: and disposes best the consciences of men, to peace and dew obedienc;
and is aprooued by experienc of all ages, least to embroyle and endainger a
state with practices, and treasons: must neads (of all indifferent men) be
esteamed more consonant and agreeable, to allegianc and fidelity, then that
vvild and popular doctrine of the consistorians; which (out of presumption and
licensiousnes) will be confined into no circle of order; but ever contemning
law, will dominer and rule as transcendents, and taik upon them the
jurisdiction both of preasts and kings in a kingdom.

2. Secondly no man can deny, but that Spain, Italy, France, he Empire, and
Poland, account him the best affected subject, and least daingerous to the
state, who is most devoted to Catholic religion. And then if to be a Catholic
ded bread and engender any ill blood in the body, or secret infection of
disloyalty, and so vvear in regard of the state, malum in se, and naturally;
then upon the general trial of nations, in so many ages, it would have bean
discovered and detected, for that imperfection. which it never haith bean
charged withal, neither in all these foreign contries; nor heartofore at any
time in England.

Therefore, seeing it is not malum in se and simpliciter, (as T. M. and parson
White, have in there books scandalouslie slandered that religion, and the
Preasts and professors thereof:) seeing, it can not be verified (...), neither
genarallie of the profession (as Calyinism may justly, if the Lutherans say
trewlie;) nor particularly of the persons professing it: nor originallie and
ordinarily in precedent ages, neither for doctrine or exampl, they can be
taxed: I may justly infer, they are acquitted.

And surely it was an error both uncivil and vndiscreat, to maik there
proposition so general, and thereby to maik the whole Church so odious to the
people, and so much suspected to the king: for we acknowledge, that there are of
there sect, verrie many calm, and moral men, boni viri, boni ciues, of sociable
nature, and not apt to blow the coals of sedition, of persecution.

And so also the autho of the execution of Justice, ded give a good testimony,
of the love and loyalty of diverse worthy and noble Catholics to Q Elizab.
(even when they had greatest cawse to the contrary, when oppressions and
contempt might have provoked flesh and blood to mutinies.) and though each man
wishes the propagation, and advancement of his own religion: yet in the means
to procure it, and in the course to seak, and in the manner and order of
proceading to find it, this treatise heith proved, that there is great odds
and differenc betwean them. as the confession and supplication of the preasts;
the patienc, and obedienc of recusants; the piety and doctrine of the
Seminaries have sufficiently proved.

3. Now let us compare, and parallel them (to maik it more plain.) The
Catholics generally both in France, Germany, and England, ar the patients,
the Protestants ar the agents.

1. The one stand as defendors, the other as inuadors.

2. Preasts songht to keap that de iure they had, Ministers to get that they
had not, for haeresie being a separation from the body, could not enjoy the
liberties, or benefit of the Church, til it was maid no heresy.)

3. The Preasts vvear possessors: the ministers disseisors, and injurious.

4. The Catholics obey ex conscientia, and absolute: the protestants
conditionaliter and with a quatenus, and only for policy and government.

5. Preasts ar punished, not for any injustice inhaerent, but by imputation
only, and not for trespasses, but for opinions. not for that which is,
defacto, but to prevent fiendum (if Priscian will pardon me.) But Caluinists,
ar guilty both of action, usurpation, and treasons reallie, as this last year
Lescun (president of the assemblies at Rochel,) Haute-Fontain, Chaumier
(preacher of Saumur suffered in France. and P. Gombault, (all for real
treasons.) And Bischarcy in Polland, for attempting to kill the king, whom he
wounted greauouslie (as he went to the Church.)

6. And there practices, and there spirits differ as much: for as.

7. They object, the positions of some private and disauowed persons, and words
only: the Catholics object there rebellions in dead, there battles, there real
conspiracies, at Amboys, and in the wayle of Charmentras near Meaux, to
surprise the king.

8 They reform per populum and tumults: the Catholics by order, law and
superiors.

9. They charg the Catholics, with treasons newly enacted, strayned, and upon
suspicion: contrarily they are condemned by ancient laws, current in all
Ghristendom by consent, and by all civil and municipal laws.

10. The Catholics seak not to hinder succession of kings that are protestants:
as knox holds null is Pa^ista in regno utherano aut Calumiano, in regis
principis aut aliam quam cunque dignitatem euehi potest.

11. The Catholics prefer a Monarchy: Calvin, Wolfius and Swinglius, an
Aristocracie.

12. Yet the Catholics, and our English protestants agree in this (as in many
other weighty matters) that princes are not to be deposed: but the Caluinists
hold the contrary. and therefore master T. M. by ^. sovvnd propositions;
condemns, both the practice of the Hollanders, Bohemians, Sweuelanders,
Parraeus, etc. and that iudiciously. 1. in his 6. reason. they who suggest a
doctrine, of forcible deposing Princes, ar manifestly rebellious. 2. in cap. 4.
they that upon any pretenc, deny the right of election or succession of
Princes, ar seditious (for tho he says is of protestant princes, I taik it he
means a^l, and generally, or else h^s gap it to vvyde and partial.) 3. when
the king is established in his throne, who seduceth the hearts of subjects, and
withdrawes there obedienc, ar traitors. apply these well, and commend master
T. M. for his plain dealing with Holland, and there fellows.

But I perceive they will object that the state of England, ever since. 13.
Eliz. upon jealousy and distrust had of Catholics: armed there magistrates
with seuear laws, against them (as the most capital enemies of the crown:)
and therefore have branded the Preasts, with the bleamish of treason, (as a
character inseparable, and a stayn never to be taken out.) From whenc
proceadeth it, that to be a preast, should be reputed as a poison to corrupt
obedienc? surely upon certan new laws, maid in the time of Q. Elizabeth:
whearby that is made malum prohibitum, which before was never judged in
England, to be malum in s^: and that vocation was maid Treason; which was wont
to sit in the chair of government, and by whose oracles and decrees, the
people was directed, both in Chancerie, Rolls, and all Ecclesiastical courts.
I have before revealed there reasons: and pulled of all visards, which hyde the
face of truth. After the supremacy was enacted, and the Oath commanded: the
next care was; to compel men to the exercise of the religion then established.
but the seminaries being erected, the society of Jesus increasing, and preasts
being often sent over into England; then begonn fire and sword to rage: the
acts of 13. of 25. of 27. the proclamations of 1580. and 1591. wear published
against the preasts and fathers. and no man is so blind, but may discern, the
occasion of this rigor, was for religion (being for hearing mass, and
confessions, which are the foundation and pillars of religion: and yet I confess
the iealousies, fears, and suspicious of the time set for ward these seuear
courses. for these provident Counselors, ded think it necessary by the horror
of laws, to maik the seminaries of no use by barring out of the realm the
Seadsmen. for tho they ded observe how far the zeal of the Church, had
transported the preasts, that they preferred the Triumph of Truth before there
lives: yet by all wordlie conjectures they probably conceived, that the name
of Treason (as a Medusaes head) would have amazed and terrified them: 1.
because it stained them all with a most reproachful blott: 2. and specially,
because they tought it deprived and robbed them of the crown and glory of
martyrdom, the trophies of religion. 3. besides they supposed, that the loss
of there lives (in so infamous manner) the bleamish and hazard of there friends,
and the punishment of there partakers and abettors, would have utterly
discooraged them, from resorting any more to England.

But this devise ded not prosper, it proved quite contrary; ex cineribus
Phoenix, religion increased by persecution out of the ashes of martyrs: so
these politic laws wrought not the effect, they wear enacted for, and yet
wear verrie offensive to all foreign princes, as leges Draconis, and
phalarismus, (for these ar ever held to be most godly laws, that are least
sanguinarie, and yet mantain.

Now forasmuch, as upon worldly respects, A petition and reasons for
mitigation.
many acts have of passedin parliement, to try what operation and cure they
would works in the state: and if they proved fruitles medecins, or as
empirical purgations (too violent, fitter to kill then to cure,) then to be
repealed. and because these provisions and laws against religious persons, ar
proved to be such: so they likewise ex gratia speciali, and ovvt of his
majesty's gracious compassion, may be well abrogated. for as they wear maid for
the fears, and suspicions of that time: so by the grace and mercy of this time
(when they are both neadles and causeles) they may with honor be cancelled (if
his majesty shall please,) and the execution thereof suspended: to whose
royal consideration, I most humbly offer. these few lines, as petitions
rather then reasons, not for justice but mercy.

1. It was ever held against the wisdom and policy of this realm, to
fetter them selfs with too many shacles of treason and dainger. and therefore as
25. Edw. 3. at the petitions of the subjects, the king ded declare and
determine, what should be taken and judged for a case of treason, by the common
laws of the realm. so 1. Henry the 4. c. 10. it was confirmed and
established, that nothing hearafter should be deamed treason, otherwise then
was expressed by E. 3. And albeyt diverse actions wear strayned, up to be
treason for a time (which vvear not within the list of 25. E. 3.) as H. 6. the
taking and surprising of persons and goods in Wales, (so to stand for the space
of 7. years only.) and 8. H. 6. burning of howses: and 22. H. 8. poisoning,
etc. which of there own nature, and simply wear not treason, (and therefore had a
limitation of time annexed to them. yet prudently all such former acts vvear
repealed and maid void 1. E. 6. for a more indifferent and merciefull
proceading with subjects; that the remedy might not be more daingerous then
the disease; and that the Lillies and roses of the crown, might not be dyed
with innocent blood. For both in the time of Civil wars, and now (while this
great controversy of religion depends in England undecided) such statutes
open the gate, to let in ruin, desolation, and confiscation both into the
prisons of preasts, and into the castles of the nobility and gentry: as
appeared by the exampls, and daingers of Arondel, Northumberland, Arden,
Sommerfeld, and diverse others: ane what ded happen to them, may endainger all.

2. It will be a thing incredible to posterity, that so wise a nation would
maik that to be treason, by parliement: which so generally, so perpetually,
ane so ancientlie haith bean honored end approved, by all laws. was not
preasthood used and exercised by the patriachs, under the law of nature?
established by Moses, and the law of God? continued yet in Christ, and his
Churches, and never repealed by any new decree, under grace and the gospel?
and if which is impossible,) the Church erreth in that point of preasthood,
all ages, all fathers: all counsels, all nations, have lived (as blindmen) in
darkness and a chaos, till Luther dispersed the mist: is it not likely?

Religion and preasthood, wear like Hippocrates twins, born and bred, laughing
and weaping beginning and ending together. for in Moses law, the preast, wear
the inquisitors, inspectores omnium, iudices controuersiarum, punitores
damnatorum: as Josephus l. 2. contra Appion, sets Down. if any difficulty
arise, venies ad Socerdotes, 17. Deuter. and in c. 44. Ezech. Sacerdotes
populum meum docebunt, quid intersit inter Sanctum and prophanum, and so Philo.
l. 3. de vita Moysis, Iosaphat 2. paral. and the Sanhedrim it self does witness
it. the reason of these remains yet in the time of the gospel, and there for
by the laws of England, such reuerenc was ever showed to religious men: that
if a bond man ded enter into a cloister, the law held it more reasonable, that
the king should loose his interest in the body, then to be taken ovvt of his
order. the like was judged: if the kings wards should enter into religion:
besides an alien can hold no lands in E. yet if he be a preast he may be a
bushop hear, and enjoy his temporalties, as Lanfranc, and Anselm wear (who
wear never dennisons.) Besides the state reposed so great trust in them, that
they wear, masters of the Rolls, Six Clarks, nay often, Chancellors and
Threasorers of the realm. And therefore it was a course of Summum ius, by new
laws, to punish men for an ancient vocation, and so generally received
(specially when the storm is overblowen.)

3. Besides, in Germany, Charles V. punished Luther by Exile: and in Scotland
by Baratre, banishment they punish haeresie. so they ded vviselie distinguish
Haeresie and Treason, as several offenses, by several punishments.

4. Add also, that if you prejudice it so far, to be a preast or religious
man, as to think it opposite to religion: then both there fault and there
punishment had bean more properly marshalled in the rank of Heresies, then of
treasons. So ded Calvin deal with Seruetus at Geneua: so ded the Bushop of
London lately with Leggat the Arrian. for Haeresie, is most properly to be
judged by the Church, as appears in the preface of the statut, 24. H. 8. C.
11. that by the laws and customs of this realm, and by the goodness of the
Princes, the knowledge of Testaments, matrimony etc. of old appartained to the
spiritual jurisdiction. and all Canons for heresy wear maid and judged by the
Clergy, as by 25. H. 8. C. 19. and by Linvvoods constitutions appeared; and
by the act 32. H. 8. whearby preasts wear maid judges to enquire of the 6.
articles. and the two jurisdiction be distinct as D. Ridlie proves; and no
prohibition can lie in the courts at westminster for matters of heresy.
Therefore these great and politic men, to avoid infinite disputs for religion;
and to insinuate to the Q. there rare, prouidenc, and preservation of her, and
the preventing of many daingers, (to uphold there credit daily with her, and
show how much she neaded them) they ded think it best, to accuse them for
treason.

And yet there was an other cawse also, for there was no Canon in esse, to maik
them haeretikes.

For if you vvil maik papists, to be a sect: it is so old a sect, as it will
trovvble the best Doctor, to find directly any other beginning, them from S.
Peter: (of whose sect and fowld all the fathers desired to be.)

5. Lastly and principally, seeing that as Sails so Laws, ar to be turned;
and as occasion time, circumstanc, and reason of state shall direct, either to
be altered, or revoked. and seeing also, as the case, so the caws of Queen
Elizabeth, and his majesty ar far different (for the king haith no
Competitor; no reason for such iealousies and fears as Q. Eliz. was subject to:
he holds amity and good correspondenc, with these foreign princes the Q.
dowbted; the roses grow not up now among thorns, as heartofore.) and Therefore
his Majesty may be pleased, to grant that out of grace to his subjects, which
other Princes have permitted to there subjects, for occasions of state. and to
stopp and stay a litl the passionate humors of those that are adversaries to
that grace: I humhlie offer these few considerations, to qualify and cool the
heat of vndiscreat zeal, and a supposition of incompatibilitie.

For I dowbte noting on his majesty's behalf, who haith bean ever constantly
disposed to mercy, (if there had bean no crooked instruments to hinder it.) he
who at first, told us, My m^nd was ever free from persecution, or thralling
my subjects, in matters of conscienc. he, who in writing told the world, Fate
or me non libenter suspendere Presbyterum, pro sola religione, aut celebratione
Missae. he, who judged that it can no way become a man, to pronounc lightly,
sentenc in so old controversy: what preast or religious man could appeal to a
better judge? or expect a judgment of more compassion. he that sent to Franc to
mediate for the peace of straingers: who can dowbte, but he will as gracioustie
deal with his own: for charity beginus with it self, and tho they differ in
religion, they agree in obedienc: there bodies ar at the kings command, and
sowles he vvil lean to God: put them to be tried on all actions, and services,
he will find cawse to trust them. who would not them bury a quaestion or 2.
in silenc, to save the lives of subjects, and to be assured of loyalty? for
the greatest offense is verbal, but the heart is reallie loyal.

If the rules of civil society, and moral conversation, may bear any swaye:
then I dowbt not, but mercy, and grace will ever sit in the highest place of
the throne, and become it best.

1. For is majesty out of his wisdom Reason for the toleration of Cathol. in
E.
haith long observed, that too seuear persecution, makes men desperate, non
coercet, sed prouocat violentia. and too heanie a hand upon those, that the law
casts down: showet a will rather to oppress the offender, then cure the
offense. It is the greatest honor to a king that his mercy is more then his
justice; and that his benches and courts can witness compassion. for he that
setts open the prison doors, (in so wise, and gracious manner:) means not to
conquer the hearts and consciences of his subjects by torments, but winn them,
by mercy and virtue.

2. If you respect the ancient Aphorisms of state: It haith bean ever in such
cases the wisdom of the greatest princes, punire raro. It was ascribed, as a
title of honor, to Aug. Caesar, nunquam ciuilem sanguinem fudisse. And great
reason, for clemency is a virtue royal, sometimes of as great policy as
piety: because yt begets love, and love breads loyalty: commands the verrie
sowl, and layetha the body at his feat. A kings mercy kindles fire and zeal
in the hearts of subjects; pity and toleration, as they maik the obligation of
the offenders greater; so it maiks them repent to have offended him, who haith
so obliged them. the reason is infallible in all noble spirits, fidelem si
putaueris, facies: who eueraccoumpt, that the greatest disgrace, is to be
distrusted.

3. It haith bean a common rule, and seldom fayles, being so true, malus
custos diuturnitatis metus. and therefore Tacitus, could not describe the
tyranny of Tiberius, but he must declare the morks, and properties thereof,
vbi delatorum authoritas magna, lesoe maiestatis crimen frequens obijcitur, ac
boni cuiusque viri inuadendi, vel tollendi pretextus est, and he adds
frequens accusatio, and in quouis crimine adiuncta, de laesa maiestate
principis. Nothing shows more evidently, that authority inclines to
tirannte; then the multitud of promoters, continual informations, and the name
of treason maid as a liuerie to put upon all offenses: and it fitteth well both
the case of preasts, and of there entertainors. Seneca (who lived under a
Tyrant) fownd by experience, that frequens vindicta paucorum odium reprimit,
omnium irritat. and is not that an error? but it is a greater error to punish,
all crimes, with the penalty of treason. Vltima supplicia supplicijs vltimis
ponat; vt nemo pereat, nisi quem perire etiam pereuntis intersit. The speech of
Abnar, to Ioab. 2. regum. c. 2. may not be forgotten, Number vsque ad inter
necionem huius mucro deseuiet? an ignoras quod periculosa est desperatio? vsque
quo non dicis populo, vt omittat, persequi fratres suos? it is both good
counsel, and good exampl. Germanicus is noted to have vveapt, when he see the
slanghter of the soldiers of the legions, that mutined; non medicinam illud,
sed cladem appellans. And do you think that pity dyed with Germanicus, or
that there wear not many, and great persons, moved with the butcherie in
England of some preasts? it is the property of commiseration, to be touched
rather with the calamity it sees, then to examine the cavvse, it sees not.

4. I must plead this, as an argument, (by exampl of a pagan Prince) for
compassion. Marcus Aurelius, (tho the law was strict at Room, Deos perigrinos
ne colunto:) yet he permitted toleration to Christians, as Tertullian in Apol.
c. 5. Theodosius and Gratian, (the most Christian Emperors) wear content, to
tolerate the Arrians, (enemies reallie of Christ.) and Josephus notes of Onias
Megalita, the same permission, to continue brother hood for the peace of the
state l. 14. c. 13. Antiq. The Venetians suffer the Jews to live among them,
as the king of Spayn ded the Moors, (till necessity forced him to expel
them.) How much more reasonable is it to tolerate Catholic religion, the
moother of the new religion: and the law maker and judge heartofore of all
religions.

5. It is a falls proposition, and proceaded from gall and Splean, that
Catholics ar unsociable: that they can not live with protestants in one
commonwealth; withowt iarrs and tumults: and lasthe (which is given out,
only to bread an exulceration in the hearts of the people) it is not tolerable
in a Christian and well governed commonwealth, to grant toleration to papists.

Touching the first point, the better and more charitable sort of protestants,
will not endure to hear so gross a paradox, which day lie is before there eyes
proved false. for the Recusants in E. live among you, both peaceably and
neighborlie, and withowt scandal. you buy and sell with them: they perform
all the offices of neighborhood, they deny no temporal duties, neither
tithes to ministers (tho for sacraments.) nor devvtie to magistrates, nor
society even with puritans. and it is a falls Surmise, that Catholics hold
Protestants, as haeretiques and excommunicate (a skarcrowe, to keap them a
sonder, and noorish division, as if there vvear a natural antipathia betwean
them) But these Doctors, (who play therein the Boutefeus,) remember not, that
the Catholics, deseru more respect, and favor, by the law of Senioritie (as
the right heyrs of the Church, disinherited of there patrimony.) The old Church
ded leave them there privileges, and honor: she erected there Cathedral Churches
for our preasts, she endowed there colleges for our professors, she builded
there alters for our sacrifices. Most of there ancients have there baptism from
her the Bibles, Cread, and ceremonies: and surely it requires some better
respect, for if they had not left them, you could not have fovvnd them, and
they hope, they shall not find charity buried in England: the contention is
not general, and personal, but for opinions: so if you force them not to be
insociabl by scandals and prouocations, you can not find them unsociable; tho
they meat not at Church, they may meat at market. Hitherto they have lived
among you, and withowt just complaint, and should they be worse respected, if
the king be pleased to show them mercy? remember, that chacun a son tour;
forget not, that sinc k. H. 8. religion haith had his chainges; and what God
pleases to determine, man must obey: they that are now in Gloria Patri, may be
hearafter Sicut erat in principio. The Pure Caluinists will not endure Bushops,
therefore further not oppression, least you find suppression when you look not
for it. Continue amity; and forget not, that the bonds of religious unity ar
so to be strenthned, as the bonds of humain society be not dissolved.

I dowbt to mutiners, if the king please: for reason of state is a kings
priuiledg, which may dispenc with civil ordinary courses, for his own safety,
and preservation of the realm. and he deserves not to be respected as a
subject, that will seak to bynd the hands of his Princ, and bar his beneuolenc.

6. And touching the last point, that religion will not permittanie such
toleration. I know and acknowledge, there ar many reverend, learned, and good
men (protestants in E.) who ar verrie charitable, nor enemies to there persons,
tho to there profession: with whom friendly and safely they may converse,
withowt offense: for how can there be offense, where there is discreation? But
heartofore most, of the ancient protestants ded defend, and desire this
toleration (whearat now malice does so snarle. Vrbanus Regius, locis Theol.
Deus non docet comburere errantes ouiculas, sed sanare infirmas, pascere
macilentas. The same is Luthers opinion and assertion art. 33. de non
comburendis haereticis. The same Musculus teaceth loc. com. de haeres. and
Osiander, Epitom. Centur. 7. the same Acontius mantaineth lib. Stratagem.
Satanae. Dominus, non permittit haereticorum supplicia, (and definite
declarauit magistratus non esse idoneos iudices dogmatum, and interdixit illis
talis jurisdiction is vsum.) And to omit Castalio, Chytraeus in his Chron.
Anno 1593. shows how much the Protestants of Swecia desired toleration. And
D. Fulk l. de successione Ecclesiae. reprooues the king of Spayn for too much
austeritie and severity in that point. Hispaniarum Rex vnicus est, tam alienus
a nobis, vt nec foueat, nec palam coire Ecclesias permittat in ditionibus suis.
Calvin ded once hold the same opinion. and you your selfs, generally and
continually object, the Creweltie of Queen Mary's bonefyres: and if you so
dislike it then, why do you like it now? but it is now against the law: and
was it not so then, prohibited by law? but yet we claim nothing by law, but
appeal to grace. It is true, that rigor to Catholics, is the way to bread
Atheists, when they are barred from all exercise of there own religion they are
not easily drawn to an other, and so they cast away all religion. and that
was the reason, why (these wise protestants,) M. Lanoue, in his discourses,
persuaded princes to grant toleration: why Cassander, Sturmius, held that
opinion: why Belloy, in his Apol. and Melancthon consented to the like: why at
first, the Geuses in the lovv contries ded so vrgentlie solicit the Religions
Vried, and by so many books: and why Erasmus, libro de sarcienda amabili
concordia Eccl^siae, donec Synodus, labored to prove the necessity of it.

7. I will give you examples; for matters of fact, move more, and ar subject
to less dispute. At Hieusalem, in the time of our Savior Christ, there wear two
sects much differing in religion, and yet ded live sociablie together, and
withowt offense either to the Church or the state. The Pharisei, and Sadducei.
and they vvear not men, of one religion, and differing only in rites, and
orders: but they vvear of opposite religions. No man will dowbt, but that the
Sadduces vvear haereticks, for they denied the resurrection, and the
immortality of the soul (an articl of our beleafe, and the foundation, both
of faith and hope.) that there was opposition betvvean them and the Pharisees,
it is evident, by cap. 5. Acts, exsurgens Pontifex and omnes sadducei qui cum
eo errant, etc. and c. 23. Sciens Paulus, quod vna pars esset sadduceorum,
altera phariseorum, exclamauit, etc. you may then conclude, they vvear
opposites, and ded contradict one an other. The Sadduces mantained the templ of
Garisim, and agreed with the Samaritans, and sacrifised there (contrary to
the law, and to the prejudice of the templ at Jerusalem.) The people
fellovved the Pharisees, the scribes and Elders applauded the Sadducees: and
both vvear heresies (as Sigonius de repub. Hebrea p, 538. and Epiphanius l. 5.
c. 11. do testify:) and all the city was divided into these two sects, in
the time of Herodes Antipas, (as Josephus says, lib. 18. antiquit.) and yet
ded they live, quietly vvithowt discord, riots, or tumults.

8. To come home to these times: in Swizzerland, (tho Swinglius was violent,
owtragious, seditious, and by arms sought to compel, the five pages to the
religion of Barn and Zurich;) yet by agreement, all is pacified; they hold
there private Churches in there particular towns, and yet mantain the
liberties, the Common-welth of the Cantons, all contributions, confaederations,
traffic and society.

To pass over Svvecia: that famous kingdom of Poland, and the Empire of Mosko,
have thought it neadfull, to suffer the Religions Vried, in there dominions:
both to taik away all domestical quarrels, and by a general unity (as a brazen
wall) to fortify them selfs against the Turk. and shall England degenerate so
far from there ancient glory and virtue, as to show more barbarism then Mosko
or more unnaturalness then Poland? (who reserve the blood of there neighborts to
be shed with honor in the feald against the common enemy, rather then by
tyranny to weaken the body.)

Germany also may be an exampl that toleration is expedient, and that it is
both possible and faisibl, that two different religious may live together in
peace. call to mind, how quietly the Catolicks have suffered and conuersed
with Lutherans, these 100. years, and withowt any tumults. And surely
Charles the V. and Ferdinand, as they wear great and wise Princes, so wear they
provident and merciefull: there grownd was the same, the kings Majesty stands
upon, Salus populi suprema lex esto. And therefore they ordered that caueret
vtraque pars ne in suis dominijs, quenquam ad suae religionis professionem
cogat, aut reuocet, aut depellat, contra ipsius consc^entiam, a religione quam
profitetur. So says Dresserus; and afterward, confidentlie (against those,
that are so preciselie scrupulous) nec hic metuo eorum reprehensionem, qui
putant, non nisi vnam religionem tolerandam. For conscienc can not be
compelled, it may be persuaded.

9. How often and how merciefullie ded the french kings, grant there edicts of
pacification. And to what conditions, vvear they content to descend, only to
preserve life, and avoid bloodshed of there people.

Look upon the old articles of peace, granted for the liberty of co^scienc,
set down by Laual. l. 3. fol. 141. and by Pig. l. 6. c. 7. Poplonnier l. 18. a
general freedom, to preach in all parts of Franc: to revoke the condemnation of
the admiral: to licens them, to hold there forts, as pledges for there assuranc:
and that the king should pay the Germans, there wages, who came to aid the
protestants, etc. The present king Jews, in Oct. last. 1622. was content to
let Majesty descend, to article with his subjects; only for pax publica, and
bonum publicum. He granted, 1. that the edict of Nantes should continue, as yt
ded in his fathers time 2. that the exercise of Catholic religion, should be
reestablished in all places, vvhear it had bean interrupted: and the like was
agreed for these of the reformed religion, (except only Nerac.) 3. the
Caluinists to be discharged of all judgments against them for matters of
religion, no judges nor the kings counsel to proceade or pursew them, but to
grant them an vlterius non vult prosequi. 4. all prisoners to be set at
liberty. Rochel and Montauban to stand as towns of surety: with many other
articles; vvheareof the Catholics of England, would be glad, if they ded but
participat a share of such grace. to there is some differene: for in E. they
pray for it, in France they wrested it: princes intercede for us, arms for
them.

10. Now to conclude all, seeing the Turk permits Christians to live freely
in his dominions; seeing the President and exampl of the greatest Princes, in
Europe, does set yt forvvard: the Preasts and recusants hope they shall not
fare worse, because of there patienc and obedienc, (which deserves more.) There
ambition is to be accoumpted good subjects to the king, and servants to God:
all there platts and wars ar against sin, and the world: and there only
suite is hanc animam concede mihi, ^ua caetera sunto. And to whom shall his
majesty do this grace? to men that groan under the cross of Christ: to men
that ever prayed, as by his great grandfather he was right heir to the roses
united, so he might live to inherit the kingdoms united. to which title no
man better knows then him self, who have bean the greatest hinderers, and
who the most assured friends (not only in his virtuous moothers time) but
ever sinc. He knovveth who employed Beal in foreign universities, to aduanc
the house of Sussolk: how Hales ded sweat by law and litl art to set forward
that title: what a volum S. N. B. ded write to maik a royal nest for the
Phaenix: he knows likewise, who vvear the true Champions of his claim, Sr
A. Brown, the wise and nobl author of the book against the E. of Leicester: and
that Ajax (whom no man ever durst encounter therein) master Ploydon. all
Catholics, all welwillers.

Who now hope, that there ancient, and tried fidelity shall so move the king,
that he will refresh and eas them (as he may with his breath;) that they may
find the vvarmenes and comfort of the son shine at last, in England: and that
he will grant there humbl supplication, subscribed with the services of so many
worthy man, presented by men of Piety, religion and obedienc: and signed with
the blood of his royal moother.

So as he came to the crown with peace and applause: he shall end the
catastrophe of his days, with the general plaudite of the whole world. and
this vvil follovv (as the fruit end effect:) peace within, and honor
vvithovvt: love at home, respect abroad: and so maik a concord of discords, an
union of divisions, and a religious contention an both sides; for devotion and
good life, for peacable conversation, obedience to magistrates, excellency of
learning: who shall do most good in the state, and deserve the prize.

And such an Vtropia, only can he make England; who shall deserve the Olive
brainches for mercy and peace, and the laurel for wisdom, government, and
constancy (the crown of all.)

FINIS.
THE III. PART. THE TOVCHESTONE, APOTHEOSIS LVTHERI.
HEAR I purposed, to have An excuse or Apology of Luther, and Calvin.
ended. but I discover an ambush laid to surprise me, and to beat all my forces
out of the feald. for I perceive it will be objected, that the heat and
vehemency of Luther, Swinglius, and Calvin (which I have named Sedition) was
to be honored, and not worthy of reproof: because the zeal of gods glory and
the truth, ded kindl that fire, and those heavenly sparks in them And
touching Luther, they object, that he was the Elias foretold to come in the
latter age, illuminated by the spirit, and raised up by extraordinary
vocation, for the reformation of error and corruptions, renouation of virtue
and good life, and the detection of Antichrist, (who had captiuated, and
seduced the whole world, in many ages:) and therefore such a prophet, was not
to be teddered within the compass and rules of ordinary professors. If
thereupon, he neglected the sway of authority, the titles of laws, the glory
and majesty of Princes, the peace of common welths: you can not object and lay
it more to his charg, then Achab ded to Elias, Tune is es, qui conturbas
Israel? The whole world was possessed with a Litargie and Frenzy, (two
extreme diseases,) which could not be cured with Manna, and gentl remedies: a
violent disease requires strong purgations, and he is the true Hippotrates,
that can apply the proper cures to the world so infected. gods power is not
abated, he can raise up at his pleasure extraordinary men, to deliver his
people, from Aegipt and Babel, sin and ignorance. And if that be granted,
vndowbtedlie then was Luther the Angel of the west Church, and the messinger
of God, to set up the golden Candlsticks, and give light to his people.

Stay there and pawse a litl. how can you maik me know, and beleaue, that Luther
was gods purseuant, and not the harrold of Antichrist? They will hear produce,
the Colloquie of Altenburgh, wherein page 80. and 587. they term Luther Angelus
Dei, Elias, and tuba nonissima, he that revealed Antichrist, multo illustrius
quam vnquam antea. they will cite Aretius, that Luther was sent immediately
vocatione Dei, cum totum mundum impijs opinionibus fascinatum esse constat.
they produce Calvin, who calls him a singular Apostl of Christ, from whose
Church they had there gospel, Cum densis tenebris suffocata esset Dei veritas.
they use Jewels authority in his Apollogie, that he was a man sent from God
to lighten the world, veritas tum inaudita, cum Lutherus and Svvinglius primo
accessissent. I pass over Fox (in Apocal.) who proves him the Elias: and John
Amsterdam lo. de prophet. Lutheri. But what neads more? for it is evident that
at the sownd of that tromper, Svvinglius a Chanon of Constanc, Bucer a
Dominican, P. Martyr a Chanon regular, Pelican a Minorite, Oecolampadius a
monk of S. Brigits order, and infinite other like to the locusts, (9. Apocal.)
who broke out of all orders, ded sting the verrie sovvles of men, and fought
the battle under that A, bad-don, there Capitain; and to them was power given,
to hurt those men, who had not the sign of God in there fore heads. So I dowbt
not but Luther was the first that broke unity, as a M. Wutton calls him
trewlie, a scholar withovvt a master, and a son vvithovvt a father, (and so
he must be either a bastard Church man, or a miracle.)

But these wear all protestants, the Mirmidons of that Achilles of Saxony: and
he him self, haith taught me, not to beleaue any matter of faith, except Sic
dicit Dominus, be my warrant. and therefore because it is a daingerous point, and
subject to many deceptions and tro^peries: prove unto me, that Luther was the
Elias foretovvld, and that he had his vocation extraordinarily and immediately
from God: otherwise you labor in vain. for I remember, how Mahomet abused
the world, with the name of the angel Gabriel: how Theudas blinded the Jews:
and how Barcosba drevv them to there destruction, and prevailed so powrfullie
and generally with them; that Akyba one of the cheaf scribes and eldors,
reverenced him, as the true Messiah, and applied, all the prophecies (proper to
Christ) to the honor of that Impostor. And Galatinus (l. 4. c. 21.) notes yt as
there error, that these wise men ded not demand signs and miracles to approve
his divinity. neither ded they, (till it was to late, that Titus came to
beseach Jerusalem) and then the peopl seeing they had bean seduced, and that he
could not work any miracles, to give them hope and comfort for there delivery
they put him to death.

So ded Nuncer possess the Bowers of Germany, as a man to whom God had
committed the Sword of Gedeon: so (about Luthers beginning, the age for new
worlds, and new chainges) Thekel, persuaded Ismael of Persia, that God in the
top of the Anti-Taurus, had appeared and revealed to him the reason he used to
reform there religion. And Because, it is no dainty practice of Satan, and
that David Georg, Hacket, H. Nichols. and others, have bean of late so seduced:
I am induced to stand upon my guard, in a case that concerns my sowl so nearlie:
till I can sift out the truth, whether Luther wear called in dead, as an
Elias, and an apostl, or he ded intrude him self? and if he wear sent, only
and not called, whether it was to reform the Church, or to power out the vial
of wrath, and scourg the world? And why I maik this dowbt, I learned my
lesson of Beza, p. 86. l. vindicia cont. Tyran, Because (says he) God does not
now speak him self, nor send his prophets extraordinarily, we ought to keap
watch of our sowles, for if any man think he is inspyred by the holy ghost,
and taiks upon him that authority, (as called of God:) I desire him to sownd
him self well, and see if he be not inspired with pride, and maik him self an
idol to him self, and conceive such an opinion of his own head. Let the world
taik head, least thinking they war under the banner of Christ, they fight
under the Deuels Flagg. etc. well then how shall we know, when God does raise
up, and send such men? Beza answers, page 80. By having a spirit void of 1.
all Ambition, 2. 2 true and perfect zeal, 3. right knowledge and conscienc, 4.
and not vvorshypyng Idols, or our selfs rather then God. Then these ar the
marks by which (as Beza appoints) I must examine Luther. and not withowt
reason for they agree with that 2. Ep. S. Pet. c. 3. v. 3. in the last days
shall come mockers, walking after there lusts. and Bushops must be chaste 1. Tim.
3. v. 3. modest. not puffed up in pride. v. 6. a Christian, must be no raylor,
fornicator, etc. 1. Cor 5. v. 11. patient in persecution, and deputed to death
c. 4. v. 9. 11. 12. not contentious and authors of division 1. Cor. 1. v. 11.
13. (for Christ is not divided:) loving the charity of brotherhood. Romans 12.
v. 10. patienc, etc. (whear all the virtues of a true religious man ar set
down.) upon so good grovvnds I will first examine Luthers vocation, his life
and piety, his doctrine, and his charity (the badg of Christianity) and
what fruit, the world haith reaped for the sanctification of sovvles by him.
and as you and I find cavvse, so let us follow and favor him.

First therefore touching his Vocation. Beza 1. His vocation.
at Poissy affirmed that he and his fellows wear called by extraordinary
vocation: then must neads Luther have the like honor, (whom they all ack
novvledged, there lantern and there guide.) but ask him self his title? and he
will tell you, Ego Domini nostri Jesus Christi indignus euangelista.

In his book to king Henry, Certus sum dogmata mea, habere me de caelo. I am an
evangelist (vnwortilie in dead) and I have my doctrine from heaven. I was the
first, that brought light to the world. Com. in 1. Cor. 1. Euangelium tam
copiose nunc predicatum, vt tam clarum non fuit temporibus Apostolorum. Ser. de
destruc. Hierusal. the gospel was not preached so clearlie and plentifully in
the Apostles time, as it is now.

In l. de falso statu. Ego Lutherus sum, alter Elias, and currus Israel. Now to
show you the greatness of this prophet, in l. contra Regem Angliae. Christum
spiritum mihi suppeditabat insignem. Christ bestowed upon me a great spirit. In
what kind, and how excellent? Tanta est dignit as mea; quod ad doctrinam and
ministerium mihi diuinitus datum attinet, and quatenus vita ac mores cum illo
congruunt, vt nemo vnquam (precipue tiranns) nec patientiam nec submissionem
etc expectaturus est. Debent me sanctum Deiorganum agnoscere. Trewlie that
tanta est dignitas, would maik a man think it had bean the prologue of Miles
gloriosus. I will now therefore examine, what opinion the world haith, of so
famous an Organ.

1. Calvin in vlt. admonit. says thus. Volunt de Luthere intelligi hoc
vaticmium, de ^lia venturo: qua falsitate non minus faedarunt ^utheri nomen,
quam Egipty Hieremiae corpus and sepulchrum adorando. and in an other place,
Atque vt Eliae nomen I uthero concedatur, Sacrilegae tamen temeritatis est,
asserere vltimum Eliam, ac si precisaesset Deo manus, ne quem vel
praestantiorem, vel parem postea emittat. you see Calvin dislikes that title,
as if he would leave his successors no credit, nor place, to erect the pillars
of there glory; but would vsurp all him self.

2. Conradus Regius, deals more plainly, in admonitione C. 6. scimus isto^
magnos Theologos, magnis clamoribus regerere I utherum e^^ Prophetam, quia and
ipse immediate, and extra ordinem a Deo excitatus ad officium propheticum sc.
repurgationem Ecclesiae, etc. Ideoque sine exceptione tanquam Prophetam
audienu^, qui errare non potuerit, etc. Manifestum est illos, pessime de tota
Christi Ecclesia mereri: qui Lutherum in catalogum Prophetaru^ referunt,
tertium Eliam faciunt, examini and censurae Ecclesiarum eximunt, libros ipsius
regulam iudicandi ^^uunt, etc. So hear ar two, great Doctors of the pretended
reformation, who give there opinions of his vocation; and how far ar they from
gening him the honor of Elias, and exempting him from the censure, and
examination of other Churches? and from esteaming his writings, as the rule of
faith, (as at Altenburgh they ded?)

Now touching his vacation; his ordinary calling could not authorize him with
so extraordinary a power, as to reform the church, and preach new doctrine
never hard of before. (and whether there Apostasy, haeresie, excummunication,
have not deprived them of all vocation; learned D. Champnie, in his book of
that argument can best satisfy you.) And concerning his extraordinary
calling, to be an Apostle, an Evangelist, Elias, how can he maiks it appear to
the world and satisfy there co^scienc that dowbthe of it, whether God haith
given him such commission, and created him so in dead. For his own words, want
weight: and this must sowndlie be proved, and the rather because Beza affirmed
the like extraordinary vocation at Poissy; and his opinion was impugned there
by Cl. de Saints and others, and in England by D. Sarauia etc. They that are so
called, must prove it by external signs and miracles, as Moses and Elias
ded: and if he be an apostl, I may vrg him with that of Tertullian de
prescript, c. 30. probent se esse Apostolos. He who called them to so high an
office, could also give them power to approve there vocation, and induce the
world to accept, honor, and reuerenc them, by there extraordinary works, and
the testimonies of there supernatural virtues. But Luther had no such calling,
for that was ever inseparably accompanied with miracles (as was manifested by
Moses and Elias.) besides it was not in use since the apostles time. if I can
prove that, I shall hitt the byrd in the eye: and to prove that, I pray you
let Luther Judge him self. for he affirms the same proposition tom. 5.
VVitteb. in c. 1. ad Galat. p. 376. and in loc. com. class. 4. ca. 20. and so
does Musculus locis com. p. 304. so does Sarauia against Beza: so does Piscator
vol. Theo. These. 1. loc. 23.

But to come home nearer to the purpose, if Luther be Elias, it must only be
spiritu and virtute: then let us parallel these two, and see hov well they are
matched for piety, and virtue. Elias (3. Reg. c. 17.) at mount Oreb. would
sequester him self, in his cave from the noyce of the world, from the sight of
vanity, that he might eleuate his soul from mudd and earth, and maik yt more
capable of divine inspirations, and pray with more feruor of spirit, and break
that wild coult (the lusts of the flesh) with fasting and prayer. and so ded S.
lo. Baptist. Esdras, so ded. compare them, and there actions with Luthers, and
see if they be suitable.

I must now therefore of force, paynt him out in his coolors, and dravv his
picture with his own pensile: his own mouth shall judge him. For Elias his
retyrednes, Luther and he wear not matches: for Luthers mott was, solitatienes
is an enemy of pleasure. he was as dainty as Calvin, he thought it an error
to contristate the spirit; he reproved and rejected S. Hierome for such
inhumanitie. lib. de seruo arbitrio. Hierom inepte scribit. quid magis
sacrilegum, quam id quod scribit, virginit as c^lum, coniugium terra replet.
Virginity fills heaven, marriage peopleth the earth. and therefore, in colloq.
conuiual* Nullum scio, cui aque infes^us sum ac ei, tantum scribit de ieiunio,
virginitate, etc. There is no man I condemn more then Hierom, he does so
magnify fasting, virginity, etc. he ought not to be accoumpted among the
Doctors of the Church, for he was an heretic.

You see this holy Evangelist, would not imitate Esdras to fast and pray so
long: nor choose to live in the wilderness, and deprive him self of all wordlie
pleasure. Therefore, tom. 6. germ. Witteb. page 252. lib. ad dominos ordm. Tenton
he does inueigh against vows of Chastity, quomodo fieri potest, vt tale voium
non sit peius quam vllum adulterium? a good lesson to teach katharin Bowr. But
he maiks it better yet. ponamus, quod aliquis voueat condere nouas stellas, an
non iure vocares amentiam? his reason he sets down tom. 6. vviteb. germ. p.
171. haec res non est arbitraria seu cons^lij: sed neces^aria, vt omnis vir
mulierem hab. at, and omnis mulier virum. Estque hoc plusquam preceptum,
magisque necessarium, quam comedere, bibere, dormire, vigilare. It is a matter
of necessity, that every man should ^^ap a vvoeman, and every woeman
entertain a man: it is more then a commandment, and more neadfull then to eat
or drink. nay hear him still, be not weary of so religious counsels. In mea
potestate non est vt vir non sim: tam parum in mea potestate est, vt sine
muliere sim. As it lies not in my power, to maik my self no man: so litl also
is it in my power to live withowt a wench. tom. 7. lat. Wit. p. 505. Cast
viuere tam non est in manu nostra, quam omnia reliqua miracula Dei, qui celebs
manner vult, ille nomen hominis a se deponat. It is a miracl to live chaiste:
and against the nature and humanity of man, imposs^bilia tentat, he would work
wonders. I could with ease repeat many such lectures of that heavenly
apostl; of whom his brethren of Zurich gave this worthy testimony, in the
confess. Tigurin, Germ. anno 1545. Nullum vnquam mortalium, I uthero vel
faedius, vel inciuilius praeter omnes modestiae Christianae terminos, in
negotijs illibatae religionis nostrae, scripsisse luce clarius constat. And yet
there own Saint, V. Svvinglius in Parainesi ad com. Helu. ciuit. fol. 115.
shows the same lasciuiousnes: and confesses him self, aestu libidinis, and
carnis cupiditate sic fuisse incensum, vt carnis libidinosae studia animo suo
versauit, in ijs solis, omnes cogitationes insumpsit. Was it not high time, to
grant that ministers should have vviues, when these two great patriachs vvear
so entangled: and ded execut there lusts with pleasure, as natural motions,
rather then strive to mortify and supress them. for neither of them, liked, or
practiced the fashion of Elias.

And his counsel to others was as vvanton, and sportfull. read his book de
vita coniugali fol. 147. Si cui mulieriimaritus frigidus: posse eam a marito
(tam nullius pretij homine) cum ipsius fratre, aut agnato proximo, concubendi
licentiam posiulare, ad eamque permittendam, cornigerum and semimarem maritum
lege teneri. And the like sermon he preaches fol. 152. part. 2. and in c. 16.
Genes. fol. 95. above all his lectors, there is one for which the ladies in
England will persequut him. Non prohibi^um est, qum vir plures vxores habeat:
neque ego id hodie pro^ibere possem, suadere tamen nollem. It is not prohibited
by the law, but that a man may have many wives. Quae^unque Patriarchas veteris
testaments, exterius fecisse l^gimus, integra ac libera esse, nec prohiberi
debeant. Is this a spiritual or a carnal lesson: be these reformers of life, or
patrons of vanity?

Now observe what excellent remedies, what virtuous counsels, he geues against
sin tom. 1. lat. Epist. ad Philip. fol. 345. Si veragratia est, verum non
ficium peccatum ferto, Deus non fac^^ sal^os fic^os peccatores: esto peccator,
and peccafort^^er (sin with a coorage,) sed fortius fide and gaude in Christo.
Ab hoc enim non auelut nos peccatum, etiam si millies millies vno die
fornicemur aut occidamus: sin can not divorce us from Christ, though we
committ adultery or murder a thousand times in a day. For as there is no sin
but incredulity: so is there no justice but faith. and therefore in 1. Pet. 1.
fol 442. Ait quia f^de renati sumus filij atque h^redes Dei, pares sumus in
honor ac dignitate D. Petro, Paulo, S. Deiparae Virgini, etc. By faith we ar
maid aequall in honor and dignity, to S. Peter and Paul and the Virgin Marie,
habemus enim eundem thesaurum a Deo, bonaque omnia tam largiter quam ipsi, we
have all graces and gifts as largely as they. And for the fathers, his
insolency is incredibl, so vndiscreatlie to condemn them all. No wise and
virtuous man, would use such words, papistam and asinum, vnum and idem esse:
and in an other place, I will taik asses that can speak, judge you that are
Sophisters of Paris. But to tax, skorn, and reject all fathers, is a note of
intollerabl presumption. I will omit all other places (which would fill a
volume) in conuiual. sermon. cap. de patribus. Of Hierom he says, de fide and
vera religione, ne verbum in ipsius scriptis extat. Originem iamdudum diris
deuoui. Chrisostomum nullo loco habeo, nam est loquaculus. Basilius nihil
valet, totus est monachus, ne pilo quidem eum redimerem. Apologia Philippi
omnes Ecclesiae Doctores exisperat. Tertullianus inter Ecclesi^ Doctores merus
est Carlstadius. Ciprianus martyr infirmus est theologus. Augustinus nihil
singular habet de fide. Ambrosius ^e^^ne in Genesim scripsit. Bernardus vincit
omnes concionando, sed cum disputat, nimium tribuit libero ar^ ^^rio, etc. It
was no marvel, if he professed and bragged, nemo prorsus a me patientiam
expec^e^ vel humilitatem: for in that you (...), he is master of his word. I
pass over his gifts and rare excellency in Railing, (whearin he is ^ans pear.)
and in lying: (having collected out of him and Calvin 50. places of moment, and
material, whearin they slander the Catholic religion.) as de capt. babylon. c.
de p^nitent. Babilonia adeo sdem exim^^t, vt im pudente front desiniret
haer^sim esse, si quis fidem necessariam esse assereret. which was as perfect a
lie as Calvin maid l. 4. c. 7. that in the Popes divinity primum ca^ut est,
nullum esse Deum: doctrinam de resurrectione, fabulas esse: quae de Christo
scribuntur* esse imposturas. Now examine the worth and value, of this Prophet,
by the fruits and benefit, which the world haith received by his doctrine, and
examp. Ex fructibus little cognoscetis eos: Erasmus, in spongia aduersus Hu^t.
says he, Lutheranos video mulcos, Euangelicos nullos aut paucos. Circumspice
mihi populumisium euangelicum, and obserua number minus ill^^ indulgeatur lux^i,
libidini, and pecuniae, qu^m facium illi, quos detestamins, profer mihi, quem
is^ud Euangelium, ex comessatore sobrium, ex impudi^o reddiderunt verecundum?
Ego tibi ostcndam, qui facti sunt seipsis deteriores. Quis vnquam vidit in
eorum concionibus, quemquam fundentem lachrimas, aut ingemiscentem? And Luther
in self confesses as much in postil. Super 1. Dominic. Aduentus page 623.
Mundus fit quotidie deterior, sunt nunc homines magis vindictae cupidi, magis
auari magis immodesti and mdicisplinati, multoque deteriores, quam suerunt in
papatu. Aurifaber pronounces from Luthers mouth, that post reuelatum
Euangelium, virtus est occisa, deuotio pulsa, etc. And Calvin complayneth, that
omnes fere ad corruptelas degenerant. and Smidelin says, vt totus mund^s
agnoscat eos non esse papistas, nec bonis o^eribus ^u^^quam sidere, illorum
operum nullum exercent penitus. I will conclude with Bucers testimony, l. 1.
c. 4. de regno Christi. Maxima little pars visa est, id tatum ex Euangelto
Christipet^^sse, vt iugum qualiscunque disciplinae, penitentiae and religionis
quae in papatu reliqua fuit abijcere^t, proque carnis suae arbitrio ac libidme
instuuere^t omnia. Nec pauci eorum qualem cunque euangel ^predicatione^ eo
tantum receperu^t, vt in opes muadere^t Ecclesiasti^as. If you desire to know
the most probable cawse, of this confusion, sin, and impiety? Luther him
self, having set open the port of liberty, and broken down the hedges of order
and discipline: could not so easily shut it again, nor give laws to them,
that come in.

When a multitud haith learned the way of pleasur, you can hardly restrain
them: you bet them from confession to preasts, from penance, from fasting; and
advanced the reputation of sola fid^s, as a medecin for all diseases.) by so
many new quaestions of faith, they have buried charity: and by there disputes
of religion they have frozen up all devotion, and reuerenc of piety.

So, having showed you, how well and 2. His reformation and de^ection of
Antichrist.
effectuallic Elias haith restored and reformed all things, let us examine how
well he haith detected Antichrist, and how like a Prophet? or whether he haith
not mistaken him self, like a head trowbled with vertigo, and giddienes.

First consider well, how wear to know Antichrist, and what characters and
marks, the holy ghost haith set down, that the Church might not err in so
weighty a matter. 1. his title is the man of sin, and son of perdition: 2.
an adversary to Christ, 3. extolled above all that is called God, or
worshipped as God: so that he sits in templo Dei, as if he wear God. 5. his
coming is in all power, lijng signs and wonders. 6. he must be revealed
before the revolt. 2. Thessal. c. 2. 7. and S. John, 1. Ep. c. 2. v. 22. adds
this. he is a liar that denies Jesus is not Christ: this is Antichrist, which
denies the father and the son. 8. and as Daniel described him, so Apocal. c.
13.. 1. he must have upon his dead the names of blasphemy. and. 7. a power to
maik batl with the Saints; he must have horns like the lamb, but the mouth of
the dragon. and c. 19. the beast (and with him the false prophet) who seduced
them that took the character of the beast: these two, vvear cast alive into the
pit of fire and brinstone.

Now examine, who does bear these badges, and to whom ar they most proper.
The infallibl and certan mark is; to be opposite fully to Christ, ex diametro,
(...), most contrary (more then a diversity or difference.) king of a
kingdom, opposite to Christ's: a prophet and law maker opposite to Christ's: an
enemy both to his preasthood, to his testament, to his royalty, to his name
Jesus, and to the son of the living of God. And one that strives with Christ
both vter esset, and vter imperaret, and so persequutes his saints, and
servants. It is not vice, not superstition, not a false worship of God: nor
errors of opinion, that must rear up the vvalls of this Babylon; it must be,
kingdom against kingdom, and crown against crown. and contain and express the
full power, pride, and malice of satan. Whether then can this be trewlie and
properly applied to the Pope? No in dead, and I will show my reason.

1. Luther contra Anabaptistas. Ego dico sub Papatu esse verum Cristianismum,
imo nucleum Christianismi, and multos pios. Fatemur apud Papistas Ecclesiam,
quia habet baptismum, absolutionem, textum Euangelij, etc. in 1. Galat. ibi
verum concionandi munus, verus Catechismus, vt sunt oration dominica, dece^
paaecepta, fidei artic. And whitacre says, haec ad nos ab illis deuenerunt.
Iunius confesses, in fundamento essentiali conuenimus, controuers. l. 3. c.
19. Inuito satana, tenuit Ecclesia illa precipua fidei fu^dame^ta says
Zanchius. Sarauia, de gradibus minist. p. 30. says Ecclesia Romana, Ecclesia
est, ipsa est matter nostram qua and per quam Deus nos regenerauit. And manet
ibi ordinatio, vocatio, ministerium verbi. And there is reason for to acknowledge
it, bycaus otherwise the ministers have no calling, nor can prove it. and if
she be the moother Church, and filia deuorabit matrem? no there is in that
Church yet remaining, verus baptismus, verum Sacramentum, verae claues ad
remissionem peccatorum. The Bushop of Elie, calls it membrum, sed non sanum: and
Calvin acknowledges as much, but calls it Ecclesiam semirutam, deformen and yet
Ecclesias Christi, Resp. ad Sadoletum. And l. 4. c. 2.. 11. Instit. foedus Dei
apud eos inuiolabile permansit. And vvhitacre says, est apud illos quoddam
ministerium, and aliqua verbi praedicatio, quae valet nonnullis ad salutem sine
dubio. Lay these together: and put them into the balance.

The Church of Room, by the confession of there cheaf adversaries: holds
entirely baptism, the Lords prayer, the ten commandments, absolution, foedus
Dei (the ark of covenant) both the testaments, the three Creads, the fovvr first
general counsels, the fowndations of faith, ordination, vocation, and the
preaching of the word. Nay I will add one, no small pillar: they teach and
mantain the true doctrine of the blessed Trinity, which no protestant Church
does hold inuiolatelie (but only the Church of England.) then under whose
banner do they fight? under whom is the Pope Vicarius? at whose alter, and
to whom, do they offer sacrifice? if to God, to Christ his son and there
redeamor; then surely, we must look for an other Antichrist, he is not heart
to be fownd. wresting of words, and straining of some texts of the Apocalips
will not serve your turn. Luther at first denied the Apocalips to be
Canonical scripture, as appeared by his preface upon that book, (which is now
suppressed.) And to fownd a new doctrine only upon arguments drawn from
prophecies, and the Apocahps (so obscure and hard to be understood) whether it
be of sufficient force, I leave it to the learned to resolu. Only this I must
say, S. John received the Apocalips, from the Angel of God: and when Brightman
(the Puritan) can prove, that immediately from God or infallibly the true
sense thereof was revealed to him: then will I subscribe to his babble
Apocalypsis Apocalypseos.

2. But to come nearer to the matter, and omit trifles. Melancthon (the
Pronotharie of the confession of Auspurg) in his common places, Basil. 1562.
confirms me in my opinion p. 164. says he, in monarchijs caeteris,
gubernatio precipue spectabat, ad ciuil^s and h^nestae societatis defensionem,
ettamsi erat ignota religio: 1. sed in regno Antichristi, leges perpetuae and
precipuae regno, sunt de nouo cultu contumelioso in Christum, etc. 2. (says
he) finis principalis eius regni, est delere nomen Christi: and hoc N^^.
ipso pretextu, conditum est regnum, quasi glortae Dei intersit,
ex^irparinomen, and doctrmam Christi. Tale est regnum Mahometis. So hear is law
against law: a falls God, against a true god: the Alchoran advanced above the
Gospel hear they at ex diametro opppsita: and all for the glory of the God
Maozim. but go on a litl further, and Melancthon. will make it plainer. 3. Lex
ip a Mahometis est manifesta contumelia erga Christum. 4. Deinde est mandatum
de latrocmio: quia iubet interfici cos, qui credunt Christum esse filium Dei:
precipit ergo propagari suos errores gladio. And all these things he says wear
foretold by Daniel c. 7. of the litl horn. and so he concludes, in eo regno
neclex est a Deo, sed diaboliciu furor: and his end is not civil government,
but the propagation of his Alchoran. And therefore, this being so plainly and
distinctlie set down, Slusselberg says, that Melancthon in many things fell
into error after Luthers death, and seamed to dowbt whether the Pope was
Antichrist.

But I will show you as learned a pillar to lean upon; and a protestant of
same, (for it is vain to alledg fathers, as I learned by D. Sanders.) Zanchius,
in his answer to the Arrians 2. tom. 7. p. 875. alleges in defenc of the
Pope, constat, ex doctrina de Deo, Christo, forma baptismi retenta, Ecclesiam
illam non penitus a Christo Apostafiam fecisse. Agnoscit adhuc Christum, pro
filio Dei, rege suo, and saluatore: eius legibus se subiectam profitetur: adhuc
publica sui regis insignia (licet conspurcata) baptismum nimirum and caenam
retinet, and veneratur. But the Pope haith added images, etc. and withowt Gods
warrant, haith devised a new worship, ex quodam erga eum honoris studio. To
that objection he answers, he is to be reprehended for it, but he is no
Apostata: for all that melius competit in Turcam, qui est ex diametro, in
duello contra Christum, and an Antagonist. and his reason is strong for (says
he) Mahomet, veram and plenam apostasiam, cum suo populo fecit: abrogans
qu^cunque Christus instituit, praedicationem Euangelis, baptismum, caenam,
inuocationem in suo nomine: and contra, reuocans quae abrogata erant a Christo,
doctrinam legis, circumcisionem: negat eum filium Dei, and verum Deum esse, and
risit Trinitatem. And therefore, he making him selfs above all Cods, sets Christ
an inferior Prophet under him. But Mahomet sits not in templo Dei. That ded a
littel shake Zanchius, yet he answers, that all the fathers confessed, by the
name of the temple, the temple of Jerusalem to be understood, and not
impertinentlie (for there Mahomet haith long bean worhipped.) And at this day,
there is a Moschee called, Temple de la Roche, builded by Homar, Mahomets
nephew, in the verrie place of Salomons templ: there Maozim is worhipped; and
all pilgrims, that go or come from Mecha. taik that in there way, as a holy
place. And admit, it wear to be understood, sedet in templum Dei, id est
Eccles^am Dei: it may also stand with Good co^gruitie. For Mahomet penes se
solum dicit esse Ecclesiam, and se illius esse caput, a quo regatur. He is the
Princ of the Damned Empire, and by his power, all the Candlsticks of the
Churches of Jury, Alexandria, Antioch, Asia, Greece, Corinthus ar removed, and
the lights quite extinguished by him: and therein is set up the abomination of
desolation in loco sancto, and yet he sits also in Ecclesia Dei, and whear
Christ is worhipped. For in the Church of the Saepulchre, at Jerusalem the
Christian Marronites Georgians, Aethiopians, Graecians, Latins, have there
alters and offer there sacrifices, to God (the which the Turks forther profit,
as the Soldans and Saracens before the^, have fuffred and permitted.) So as in
that city both God haith his church and the Deuel haith his chapel (and
soouerainlie commanded for many hundred years which is all they stand upon.
And contrarily for many ages, no man haith showed a more fatherly care, to
resist his tyranny: no man haith more solicited the princes of Europe with
united forces to expel and repress that Nimrod, then the pope. As appeared by
the wars in the Holy land, by the support of Malta, by the aid of Hongarie,
by Tunis and Algieres, and by that memorable battle of Lepanto. And for the
increase and prapagation of Christ's glory, he haith also erected seminaries
for Grecians, Asians, and Jews: that the world may discover who is the
Antichrist.

3. My third and last reason is. that they who ar so desirous, to create the
Pope Antichrist: can not agree among them selfs when he fell so fowl, as to
deserve the name of Antichrist. They can not name the person who was stella
cadens de caelo: nor the age and time: nor the errors he ded fall into, whereby
he was so judged: nor produce any accusers, testes fide digni, to justify the
same. ask Calvin when the defection was, he answers multis abhinc seculis. S.
Francus says presently after the Apostles. Napper, says Antichrist ded
beginn his raing about 313. in the time of Pope Siluester. Melancthon, that in
Sosimus time, the defection appeared 420. Beza assigns Leo the Pope 440. Fulk
names Boniface (and so do willet, and downam anno 607.) Bullinger names
Hildebrand (Gregor. 7.) anno 763. Whitaket, that Gregory the Great, was the
last pious, and true Bushop. Parkins, about 900. years sinc. Hospinian ab
annis 1200. Lanaeus, about 574.

So then, the vncertantie maiks there judgment erroneous: for all can not say
true: and who says trewest they can not define. We are not bownd says D
Whitacre, to answer in what age superstition crept into the Church, by whom,
nor at what time: and yet, in his answer to D. Sanders, p. 799. he swears, by
him that lives, that the Pope is Antichrist.

4. But I wonder that they mean to maik the Pope Antichrist: and the true
Church to be in Papatu, and yet Papatus not to be in Ecclesia. Aridl; my dull
wit can not apprehend. but seeing I am sure of this, that out of that Church all
haeretikes ded go: that exire, teaches me that the sanctuary: out of which
they fled, was the Ark of Noah, the Church of God.

5. One thing, yet moves me much c. 19. the beast: and with him the false
Prophet shall be cast into the pit of Hell. hear at two, distinct persons (and
so named by the scriptur, and the one subordinate to aduanc the other) and
distinct calling, if the Pope be the beast, then who is the false propher? and
contra if he be the false prophet, who is the beast, (whose character the false
prophet shall seduce the world to taik, and to adore his image^) there can not
be two Antichrists, at once: and whether the Pope, or Mahomet should be he, the
Marks and notes will best testify and if you compare 39. Ezech. with the 19.
of Apocalips, it will give you good direction; (so you fall not upon Sergeant
Finch his rock.) but vndowbtedlie, his description there, will show you an
Antiochus, an Antichtist (...), and such a one, as will maik a conquest with
his sword, of fowls and consciences; and only Vorstius against Bellarmin,
acknowledged yt was neither a matter improbabl, nor impossible.

But how can you prove, or assure me, and with what vvarrant of scripture,
that no such Antichrist shall come. De futuris contingentibus, I think D.
Whitacre, does aduentur far, to engage his sowl, by such an oath. But the
Evangelist having set down his name, (the name of a particular man 666.) he
that can maik Apocalypsis Apocalypseos: why does he not, or can he not detect
that Pope, and reueal to whom that name was dew?

3. As by the first argument, you may The vocation of Luther by the deuel.
discover his vanity; and how greatly he differed from Elias: and by the
second, his calumniation proves him an Impostor: so this, will unmask, and
uncase him, he shall appear in his proper Coolors. His vocation they call
extraordinary: and so it is in dead. For it was by conferenc with the Deuel,
(as he confesses him self l. de Missa private. contigit me sub mediam noctem
subito expergefieri: ibi satan mecum cepit huiusmodi disceptationem. So the
deuel and he disputed. D. Fulk, and Chark, interpret it, to have bean a
spiritual combat in mind, and such a contemplation as good men ar subject to,
(as Christ had, S. Paul, and others:) and no bodily conflict and conferenc: 1.
whether these reasons came from the deuel, by bodily conferenc or inward
suggestion, all is one, so it came from the deuel. 2. but hearby Luther maiks it
plain, when he describes, the deuels voice to have bean, a great base voice,
and so fearful that yt maid him sweat, as he confessed (by haec illo dicente)
3. besides he calls him (Doctor Perdocte:) which if it wear a dream only (as
Doctor Sutclif imagined) it shovved that he was subject to Philautia, and
arrogancy, to conceive such a title and salvation* but is rather argues a
personal conferenc, because he confesses there, that Oecolompadius and Empser
wear slain by the like encounters (and surely neither of them dyed, by
spiritual temptations nor by dreams.) if you read Luthers own words out of the
old and first edition of Iene: they will confirm you much, for so Hospinian in
historia Sacrament. recited them.

But Luther him self, calls it disceptationem, and neither a drean nor a
temptation. And if it wear a spiritual temptation; that excuses not Luther,
for he yealded to the Deuel, so ded never holy Job, not any sanctified vassel.

Balduinus a Lutheran, writes of purpose a book of that disputation 1605 and he
confesses it was a real truth, and not a dream (as D. S. dreamed:) and that
it was not spoken hyperbolice but historice. But he excuses it, witst a shift
and evasion. Luther (says he) had before abandoned the mass? and this
diologue the deuel, maid, to call to Luthers remembranc his old errors, and
that he had said Mass fiftene years, and so to drive him to desperation for so
great an offense. and that therefore he ded speak always in preterito not
presenti. These ar but Skarcrowes and conceits: 1. for in the text and words
of Luther, there is no mention of despair, nor passage of any words to induce
him to despayr 2. the deuel reproves Luther and the papists for thinking
Christ vnmercieful, and therfar seaking Saints for there mediators. this is far
wide from Baldwins mark. It rather proves that the conferenc was before
Luthers fall; for otherwise it had bean a dart cast at rouers, and an idl
temptation, if Luthers had bean bean all ready so persuaded (as after his fall
he was.) Besides, if it wear after that Luther abrogated the Mass, (as Bald.
says) then his sola sides, was a sufficient buckler, to ward any blow the
deuel could give him, there was no imagining of driving him to dispayr, who had
professed that neither sins, nor defects, nor I dolatrie past, could be
cavvses of his damnation, but only incredulity. and as falls is it, that the
deuel spoke always de preterito, and not presenti, for he says, vanior est
haec vinctio tua, quam baptisatio saxi, and so persvvades him to contemn his
unction, which is spoken de presenti, and nothing touching desperation. read
the words, and weigh them, and all the deuels arguments against the Mass: and
you will then find your own error.

I vvil maik it more plain that it was not a spiritual, but a personal
combat. Io. Manlius a Lutheran loc. com. I uthero saepius spectra apparuerunt:
and that usually after such apparitions in the night, his head aked: and at
one time, he was almost, in a trauns after yt. And Luther, against the
Swenfeldians, (who bragged of there revelations:) he witnesses of him self,
vidi spiritus and forte plus quam ipsi videbunt, intra annum; so it appears,
these personal conferences betvvean satan and Luther wear neither so rare, nor
so incredibl. Ioh. Regius l. Apologet. obiecteth vnde constat tibi malum fuisse
spi^itum? qui Luthero hoc dixerit: and posito, licet malus genius fuisset, non
sequitur statim eum menti^um fuisse. Hear it a Champion, that fights with an
other weapon, and because he dowbts, whether he was malus genius: let him hear
his half-brother, Hospinian, in historia Sacrament. Lutherus (says he) narrat
se a diabolo edoctum esse, quod Missa priuata res sit mala, and rationibus
diaboli conuic^um, aboleuisse eam. And Luther confessed, that he was haunted
and affrighted by satan personally. Epist. ad patrem tom. 2. VVitteb fol. 269.
and Melancthon says as much, in his preface to that 2. tom. and surely Regius
ded never read, that God used to reform the world by the oracles and service
of deuels, to reform sin by the instruments of vice, or to teach the truth by
impostors. the Deuel was suffered to try the virtue and patienc of Job, and the
Saints: But was never sent to catechize them. Neither ded ever such spirits
appear to Daniel, Esdras, and the old prophets. And why may we not think that
Luther was taught by such a schoolmaister; for he obiecteth that Carolostad
had his exposition of Hoc est corpus meum, from the deuel. and in loc. com.
class 5. puto non vno diabolo obsessum fuisse illum miserabilem hominem
Carolostadium. He had bean in the oven, him self, and so knew what it meant:
and therefore Alberus said the deuel posseded corporally that Carlestad: and
Chemnitius witnesses l. de Caena, p. 214. that Carolostad was wont to boast,
that head his exposition by revelation.

Hear rests yet one wound to cure B. Murton in his Apol. l. 2. part. 1. does
not answer it, but euadeth by retorting a report of Delrius (l. 4. de magia c.
1.) that the deuel appeared to an abbot, and persuaded him to say mass. So hear
is quid pro quo. bycaus we object, that Luther was taught by the deuel to
oppugn the Mass: he shows, likewise whear the deuel persuaded one to say Mass.

But the case is not a like; he erred, it was not an Abbot, but a monk. 2. the
said Simeon was not yet preast, and so it was against the Canons for him to
say Mass, and a sin: and therefore the deuel tempted him to it (and this he
leaves ovvt, as not for his turn to be remembered.) 3. Neither is there hear
any disputation, to approve or disprooue the Mass. 4. Neither ded the party
assent to the deuel. 5. Neither ded the Mass, beginn then first. And so he
both mistaketh, and fails of his purpose.

But to shovv the error of Fulk, and D. Sutclef: Luthers own words fully
clear all. Contigit me sub mediam noctem, subito, expergefieri: so there is the
time (at Midnigth:) and thar it was not a dream, (expergefieri) proves it: and
the manner (subito.) And he maid that book, 1521. afther his revolt from the
Church. Besides he yealded not at first, nor was not of the deuels opinion and
gave his reasons for it, sum vnctus Sacerdos, etc. and the deuel strongly
opposed him with the verrie arguments used by the confession of Auspurg. And to
show that it was neither a dream, nor a spiritual conflict, says he (when he
was overcomed,) at hic ridebunt sancti patres, etc. an ignoras diabolum esse
mendacem. And then he shovveth, that his lies are not simplicis artificij, sed
instructiora ad fallendum. Si vobis sustinendi essent ictus diaboli, you could
not sing the song of the Church. And his manner he reueals, sic adoritur vt
apprehendat aliquam and solidam veritatem. So it is certan it was a personal
conflict. And if it had bean a dream what is the differenc, whether the deuel
seduced him, sleaping or avvaked? the ministers of Zurich, insinuate so much.
tract. 3. confess. Lutheri. Say they how maruellouslie, hear does Luther bewray
him self with his deuels, quam impuris vtitur verbis, quot daemonibus crepat?
and in an other place, of the same book, Edidit L. librum, in quo condemnat
Svvinglium and Oecolampadium, liber plenus est demonijs, impudicis dicterijs,
etc. So by the opinion of the Swinglians, (the Tigurines;) it was not thought
as a dream, or a concept, that Luther had conferenc with deuels. And
Schusselburg in Theol. Caluanist. proaemio, recompenceth the Tigurines with the
like charity: diabolum ipsissimum, Svvinglio per sumnium, suam haeresim
Sacramentariam inspirasse: and Luthers objects the like tom. 7. Witteberg. fol.
386. against the Phase, revealed to Svvinglius. So on both sides, hear ar
deuels in the play; and there familiarity with him, induces me, to distrust,
if not to condemn them both.

And surely, if there wear no other argument, 4. The divisions sects, tumults,
r^is^d by Luther.
to prove that the Deuel had schooled, and taught Luther his divinity; the
sects, tumults, discord, begotten by him, and that issewed out of his brain,
do approve it. Documenta damus, qua simus origin nati. As if his sectaries,
had bean like Cadmus his issew, homines ^lipe^ti, grown out of the earth,
whear the vype^s (...) wear sown. and Luther the the Cadmus, and cawse of all,
for in temporal matters, origo damni, est causa peccati. And this discord and
division, was among his disciples even from the beginning, from the cradl.

D. Whitacre, in his preface to W. Raynolds, excuses yt thus. page 8. greater
differenc shall he not find, among the true professors of the gospel, and
Churches reformed, then may be among the children of God. About the passover
in the east and west Churches, there was bitter dissensio^, yet they ceased not
to be Churches of Christ. Perfect concord is not to be hoped for, etc. S. Peter
and Paul, Augustine and Hierom disagreed. And afterward. yet by Gods grace, all
Churches reformed agree sowndlie in matters of faith, substancial, and
necessary to salvation. So 1. he denies that there is any such discord 2.
that all Churches reformed agree sovvndlie in matters of faith. 3. by exampls
he extenuates there divisions.

And Gualter professes in prefat. Ep. ad Romans that there is good agreement for
all articles among them, sola Sacramentaria velitatione excepta. I wonder of
this confidence, and bold asseueration, in a matter so clear. It is true, the
varianc betwean the two Apostles, and betwean these two Doctors of the Church,
was great: but as it ded neither break there union, nor hinder there communion,
nor maid any sects: so also, it was managed with such Christian modesty, and
temper, as ded not stain there profession. and when that is proved, D. Wh.
haith his answer. and to prove yt, look upon the disorder and discord, betwean
the Lutherans and Sacramentaries, how vvhote fyres have bean kindled among
them, and how long? what care was taken, at Swabach, at Marpurg, at Smalcald,
and at Montpelgart, to have reconciled the^: and they parted ever with so litl
charity, that the world had no cawse to hope for any unity. And for there
harmony how sowndlie they agree in matters of faith; as D. Whitacre affirms,
you shall best find by Schlusselberg his works, whearby it is maid manifest
that they vary, in these points, de omnipotentia Christi, of predestination,
of the force of Baptism, of the Eucharist and real presenc, whether Christ
dyed for all men, of original sin, in there discipline, in there liturgies,
touching images, etc. and ar all these trifles? The Palatinate Churches, in
there act. (as I have showed before) would not permit the Lutherans, and for bad
there books: totus Lutheranismus e medio tollatur, generally and preciselie;
and yet do they agree sowndlie? Philip Nicholai, rector of Tubing, a famous
Lutheran, accuses the Caluinists of Arrianism: Henricus Petri proves at
large Nestorianismum Caluini. A great learned man in E. affirmed, that those
Lutherans ded object it in spirit of opposition: and whether they judged right
or no, is an other quaestion. an other ansvvered, they wear but there private
opinions, and not to be regarded. So then you confess there spirit of
opposition, there contrarieties and wars, which is that I desire and labor to
prove, (whether rightly or wrongfullie, is not pertinent to my quaestio^.)
yet neither is it only there private opinion, but the public doctrine of all
there congregations. Albert Gravver rector of Magdeburg, mantaineth as much as I
affirm, libro Called. Bellum Iohannis Caluini and Christi. Aegid. Hunnius,
describes how Calvin does Iudaize; and that learnedlie, and with applause.
And Luthers own warrant, maik it no private quarrel. Se his confess. se his
Theses contra art. Louan. these. 27. haereticos serio censemus, and alienos ab
Ecclesia Dei Svvinglium, and sacramentariosomnes, And in an other place, Beatus
vi^, qui non abijt in consilio Sacramentariorum, etc. lib. de c^na Domini
Fatcor me Svvinglium non amplius in Christianorum numerum refer posse, etc.
And on the contrary side, the Tigurint tract. 3. contra Luth. confess. ar as
vehement. let Luther look (say they) he do not declare him self an
archehaeretick, seeing he will not have society with the professors of Christ.
Calvin, notes him, for a man distemperet: and minus excusabilis inconsiderati
zeli feruor, vt pollet eximijs virtutibus, it a magnis vitijs laborat. Daniel
Tosianus, accuses him, maligni spiritus instinctu, to patronise his followers,
against the Sacramentaries. Bucer contra Melancth. accusatur Lutherus ab
omnibus imperiosae dicacitatis. Campanus says that diabolicus mendax est
Lutherus. Svvinglius tells Luther, demonstrabo te, Euangelij splendorem,
nunquam adhuc plene cognouisse. Oecolompad. resp. ad Luth. confess. priorem
illum librum a daemone auspicatur, hunc vero eiusdem auspicijs absoluit. Is
this unity, ar both these in Noash ark? is Christ divided? Bonum semper malo
contrarium est, malum nunc bono nunc malo: so they incline to the malum for
they are violent in there civil wars, and yet as furious against the
Catholics. I will now conclude for Luther, that he was far from the virtues,
spirit, and wisdom of an immediate vocation from God. For* if you comment
Moses he says, nihil ad nos pertinet. Vide vt sis prudens, and Moysem cum
lege sua longissime amoliri, and Sermon. de Moyse and ad Galat.
in malam rem abire iubeas: neque quicquam illius terrore and minis mouearis.
non mihi sed Iudaeis Mosem tuum predica. If you magnify Admonit. ad Argentin
tom. 3.
the lyse of Christ, he tells you non esse hominibus opera Christi inculcanda,
and exempla eius. Christi enim opera minimam and vilissimam particulam in
Christo, eaque in re Christum caeteris sanctis parem esse. And in an other
place. Non multum mihi opera Christi prosunt: sed verba eius. Touching the
Trinity, he likes it not, vocula haec nusquam in scripturis repetitur. It is
Man's invention, and frigide sonat, and therefore he put it ovvt of the Letanie.
and because he will stop your mouth from alleging the council of Nice, he
says, Nullum vidi concilium in quo Sermon. de not. Mariae.
Spiritus sanctus reperiatur. If you praise our lady, he says, sumus pares
matri Christi, and aeque sancti ac illa. But above all other things this is to
be noted, that God ded not reueal unto him, his secrets, and inspire him with
perfection at first, as he ded S. Paul, and the prophets and Apostls. For
Luther confesses of him self, at first, fouebat me aura popularis: and, per
imprudentiam in istam causam lapsus. and l. de seruo arbit. ego vltra decennium
motus eram authoritate Ecclesiae tam confidens and certus non fui. This
dopocagione assures me, he was not called immediately of God, nor can be no
other then an impostor for challenging it. I will conclude with the relation of
his own virtues; for of him self he geues this euidenc. in Coll. Francof. f.
445. Nihil singular in vita mea eminet, possum to cari, potare, sum facetus
conuiuator, saepiusque been bonum baustum cereuisiae facio in Dei gloriam.
scilicet. He professes him self a good companyon, and that he does often carrous
and drink largely a health to the glory of God. And if you read all the
Ecclesiastical story, you shall not find such a ruffianlie phrase, and passage
of vanity: and so, I leave him to Clebitius his prophecy. who haith foretold
the ruin of the Pope of Saxony.

FINIS.
APPROBATIO.
LIbrum hunc Anglico idomate ad Serinissimum VValliae Principem, Iacobi primi
magnae Britanniae Regis filium scriptum, cum aliter mihi quam ex aliena fide
censere probareue non liceat: quia talis reuerendi atque eruditi viri, natione
Angli, D. Leandri de S. Martino, Prioris Benedictinorum S. Gregorij Duaci, nunc
absentis, qui librum integrum accurate legit, per ipsias ad me, ante menses
aliquot, literas esse renunciatus est, qui magno in Re^p. Christiana^ vsui
futurus sit, vt qui praeterquam quod eleganti ac modesto stylo scriptus,
optimis rationibus, ex rerum hoc seculo gestarum comparatione desumptis, quam
perniciosa fuerit Angliae professio haeresis, quam contra salutaris ipsi
Catholico-Romana fides: quam fida ipsi Romae and Hispaniae amicitia, quam
contra perfida, infirma, and damnosa haereticorum confoe deratio sit doceat,
multaque in apricu^ proferat, que hactenusaut latuerunt in scrinijs aulicis,
aut long aliter quam acta fuere, narrata and credira sunt, atque ita multis
clausos hactenus oculos aperturus sit: propterea fit, vt tam graui and accurato
tanti viri testimonio fretus, calculum meum hic adijciam, vt dignum praelo, and
qui multo cum fructu legi possit, esse asseuerem. Actum Tornaci 15. Maij, anno
1623.

I. BOVCHER, S. Theol, Doct. Can. and Archid. Tornacens.

Blame not my will, but my wants; that the Latin is not translated into
English: I had not paper, nor means, (being stinted.)


