COACH and SEDAN, Pleasantly Disputing for Place and Precedence The
Brewers-Cart being Moderator.

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici?



LONDON: Printed by Robert Raworth, for John Crowch; and are to be sold by
Edmund Paxton, dwelling at Paul's chain, near Doctors-Commons. 1636.

To the Valorous, and worthy all title of Honor, Sr. ELIAS HICKS, KNIGHT, and
one of the honorable band of His Majesty's Gentlemen Pensioners in Ordinary.
NOBLE SIR,
THat I prefixe so deserving and eminent a name before such light stuff: I do
n^ more then Tavernes and Innes do, with us here in England, and in other
Countries, to credit their houses, hang up at the porch, the Pictures (for
signs) of Kings; Queens, Princes and other eminent Persons, under whose
subjection they live, or unto whom they stand most affected. The Great Turk
sets his own stamp upon Terra Lemnia, an Earth, or Clay; Virgil thought his
Gnat not unworthy the view of Octavius Caesar: and with the same confidence I
offer these few lea^es unto your view; who are so beloved at home, and honored
^br^ad, especially for that your memorable service sometime at Mount Auban in
France, that Town even to this day acknowledging her safety, and preservation
to your valor only, and whom for your resolution and forwardness in our late
Fleet, your Noble Admiral, the Earl of Lindsey honored with the dignity of
Knighthood: If your self, Sir, or any else shall ask me, If I had no better
employment to set my self about then this, I could answer them; The wisest
Counselors and greatest Scholars have ever seasoned, and sweetened their
profoundest Studies, and greatest employments, with these and the like passages
of inoffensive Mirth. Erasmus commended the Fool. Homer writing his Illiads,
wrote also the battle between Froggs and Mise. Fannius extolled the Nettle;
Sir Phillip Sydney made good sport with Rhombus his Country Schoolmasters:
and the like many others. Besides, we live in that Age, wherein Difficile est
Satyram non scribere. But the truth is, I being at this time in hand with a
serious and laborious work for the Press, ere long to see light; my Printer
desired of me, that he might not sit idle in the mean time. Sir I take my
leave, desiring to be remembered and recorded among the number of those, who
for your own worth and goodness, truly love and honor you.

February 19. 1636. Yours ever, Mis^maxi^s.

To the Reader.
AS it is usual in Country, and homely houses, when guests come upon the
sudden, to tell them at the porch before hand, what they shall find within;
So I here at thy entrance (Ingenious Reader) tell thee there is not so good
provision for thy entertainment, as I could wish; wherefore resolvedly with
the Cynick I say (who inviting great personages to a dinner of Radishes, Salt
and Bread, and being by some blamed) answered, If they be my friends they
wilbee content with any thing, if only to fill their bellies, this is too good
for them. And to say truth, I am sorry I come forth no better provided, I am no
ordinary Pamphleter, I would have thee to know; only in Mirth I tried what I
could do upon a running subject, at the request of a friend in the Strand:
whose legs not so sound as his Judgment, enforce him to keep his Chamber,
where he can neither sleep or study for the clattering of Coaches: I showed
him the Book; he smiled, and only wrote underneath out of Martial.

Dum vernat Rosa, dum madent capilli
Tunc te vel rigidi legant Catones.
Vale quisquis es.
To my worthy friend the Author.
WHo is it (under thirty) that believes
Big-bellied-dublets, made with cloak-bag-sleeves,
That would hold pecks a piece? Wings, that below
The elbowe reached? And for the better show,
Every large Button that went down the breast,
(Broad as an Halfe-crowne Piece) to grace the rest?
When the short breech, not reaching past the knee,
(Crosse-garter'd at the hamme) a man might see
The Calfe apparent; with the anckle-joynts,
Not Frenchified (as now) with Aglet points
To hide their gowtie shin-bones; when the ruff
Wide, as a Fore Coach-wheele, with starch enough,
Wear only in the fashion? And (Friend) than
Some Coaches were in use, but no Sedan:
Nor do I think, but if the Cust^m^ were
T'^ee hurryed in Wheele-barrowes, t'w^ld appear
(In process) well: and they would take the wall
Of Carres, of Coaches, of Sedans and all.
And wh^ can tell, whether't be now a breeding?
And may perhaps pr^^e so in Times succeeding.
N^^ when we l^st discourst, close by the Mill,
Which over-lookes the Town from Hamst^d-hill,
Thou told'st me of this project; I then said,
This thy dispute there t^lk't of, and since made,
I thought would apt this age, and further v^w'd,
'T should be no sooner finished, and alow'd.
But that I would Commend (as all may se^)
It, to the World first: Next myself to thee.
Anonymos.

A PLEASANT DISPVTE Between COACH, and SEDAN.
IT was just, about the time, when the Cu^kow (not daring to come nearer to the
City then ^slington) warned the Milk-maides, it was high time to be gone with
their pailes into Finsburie: and nodding to the Cheshire Carriars, told them if
they made no more have, they would not reach Dun^table that night; when my
self with an English-Tailor, and a Frenchman (who newly were come out of
France) where they had spent half a year to learn, and bring home the newest
fashions there, to their Ladies here in England) coming down Iack-^^^apes
lan^, we perceived two lusty fellows to justle for the wall, and almost
ready to fall together by the ears, the one (the lesser of the two) was in a
suite of green, after a strange manner, windowed before and behind with
Isen-glasse, having two handsome fellows in green coats attending him, the
one even went before, the other came behind; their coats were laced down the
back with a greene^-lace suitable, so were their half sleeves, which persuaded
me at first they were some cast s^i^^^ of their Masters; their backs were
harnessed with leather cingles^ cut out of a hide, as broad as Dutch-collops of
Bacon, whereat I wondered not a little, being but newly come out of the
Country, and not having se^ne the like before.

The other was a thick burly square set fellow, in a doublet of Black-leather,
Brasse-button'd down the breast, Back, Sleeves, and wings, with monstrous
wide boots, fringed at the top, with a not fringe, and a round breech (after
the old fashion) gilded, and o^ his backside an Atcheivement of sundry Coats
in their propper colors, quarterd with Crest, ^Helme and Mantle, besides here
and there, on the sides a single Es^ut^hion or ^rest, with some Emble^aticall
word or other, I supposed, they were made of some Pendants, or Ba^ners that had
been stolen, from over some Monument, where they had long living in a Church.

He had only one man before him, wrapped in a red cloak, with wide sleeves,
turned up at the hands, and cudgelled thick on the back and shoulders with
broad shining lace (not much unlike that which Mummers make of strawen hatts)
and of each side of him, went a Lacquay, the one a French boy, the other Irish,
all suitable alike: the Frenchman (as I learned afterward) when his Master was
in the Country, taught his Lady, and her daughter French; Vshered them abroad
to public meetings, and assemblies, all saving the Church, whither she never
came: The other went on errands, helped the maid to beat Bucks, fetch in
water, carried up meat, and waited at the Table.

I seeing them so hot, and hearing such rough, and disgraceful words to pass
betwixt them, and fearing they would presently have mischief'd one another, I
earnestly desired the Tailor and Frenchman, to make haste along with me, to
part them, and to see the peace keept, as it is the duty of every honest
subject; The Tailor fearing his skin, and not having (as the saying is) half
the heart of a man, took him to his heels, and run away; the Frenchman,
under a color to fetch the Tailor back again, ran as fast as he, whom to
this day I could never set eye on. Seeing my self left to my self, I stepped
in to them, and in cool and friendly manner, thus I began.

Gentlemen, albeit I am a stranger unto you both, yet the Law of Nations, yea
and of Nature too, requires that humane Society should be maintained, the
life of man preserved, and the peace of that Commonwealth, wherein we live,
by all possible means advanced; wherefore let me entreat you to forbear one
another, if either of you be pleased to intimate unto me, the ground and
occasion of your grevance, I will do my best to compose your strife:
quarrels, both in this age and Kingdom, are grown poor and ridiculous; and
to challenge the field of any man, is either to choose his own death, or an
halter: It is true my my friends (quoth I) the times were, if one man had
slain another, he might presently have taken Sanctua^y (usual also among the
Jews) or being taken, have put in bail, or fled unto some private friend,
where he might have kept out of the way, and have been sheltred, until by
means of a Courtier, he had procured his pardon, for a small matter; or else,
as in Germany and the Low-Countr^ys, have gotten some handsome young wenc^ to
have begged him for her husband (for if I be not deceived, they love
Englishmen well) but those days are gone, and the necessity of our times,
require stricter courses to be taken; otherwise our streets of London, like
Leig^, Venice, Paris, Pad^^, Millan, Rome, and other places, would every night,
ring with outcries of bloodshed and murder, especially, being pestered at
this time, with such variety of sundry Nations, which till of late was strange
to London, but as good luck was, they had no weapons (save one whip) betwixt
them both.

They hearing me talk sensibly, and but reason, they began to be som-what
pacified; he in the Leather, with brass Studds and Buttons, demanding what I
was; I told him I was a piece of a Scholar, and had seen the World abroad in
my travells, in many Countries, and was now returned to make use (for the good
of my self, The end of Travel.
and Country) of whatsoever I formerly had known, or seen; and here-upon I
required his name.

My name Sir (quoth he) is Coach, who am a Gentleman of an ancient house, as
you may perceive by my so many quartered coats, of Dukes, Marquises, Earls,
Viscounts, Barons, Knights, and Gentlemen, there is never a Lord or Lady in the
land, but is of my acquaintance; my employment is so great, that I am never at
quiet, day or night: I am a Benefactor to all Meetings, Play Houses, Mercers
shops, Taverns, and some other houses of recreation, for I bring them their
best customers, as they all know well enough.

This other that offers me the wrong, they call him Mounsier Sedan, some Mr.
Chair; a Greene-goose hatched but the other day; one that has no legs to
stand upon, but is feign to be carried between two, and whereas he is able
with all the help and furtherance he can make and devise, to go not above a
mile in an hour; as gross as I am, I can run three or four in half an
hour; yea, after dinnner, when my belly is as full as it can hold, (and I may
say to you) of dainty bitts too.

Sedan. Sir, the occasion of our difference was this; Whether an empty Coach,
that had a Lords dead painted Coat and Crest, as Lion, Bull, Elephant, etc.
upon it without, might take the wall of a Sedan that had a Knight alive within
it: Coach swore he would prove by the law of Arms, and all He^aldry, he
ought to do it. I stood against him, and told him, it was against all Law
whatsoever, and that our Master would avouch: hereupon, he threatened to have
us all put down, and that I should not pass whe^esoever he came, much less
have any Precedence.

It is true, my name is Sedan, and I am (I confess) a mere stranger, till of
late in England; therefore if the Law of Hospitality be observed (as England
has been accounted the most hospitable Kingdom of the World,) I ought to be
the better entertained, and used, (as I am sure I shall) and find as good
friends, as Coach has any, it is not his big looks, nor his nimble tongue,
that so runs upon wheels, shall scare me; he shall know that I am above
him both in esteem, and dignity, and hereafter will know my place better; but
in the mean time, I will do nothing without good advice.

Neither I hope, will any think the worse of me, for that I am a Forreiner;
has not your Country Coach of England been extreemly enriched by strangers:
Who in your own opinions, have attained to perfection in any excellent Art, or
Science, but they? The benefit this land has by Strangers.
Who makes all your delicate, and most excellent Pommanders and Perfume for our
Ladies here, but Italians? Who fits our Lords and Ladies so exactly with
variety of fashions, even from the Perruke to the Pumpe, and Pantofle, as the
French? And who so curiously skillful (to the great benefit of this Kingdom)
in painting of Paving-tiles for Chimneys, making conceited Babies for Children,
Hobby-horses, Rattles, Bristle-brushes checkered black and white, for which
we are much beholden to the Wes^phalian Swine, and Spanish black Hoggs: with
such variety of Drinking-pots, Beads, and Whistles; to making of which,
neighbor Coach, you know not how to turn your hand: Nay, whereas you, five or
six hours together, are feign to stand waiting at the Court gate, Playhouse,
or you wot where; I am many times admitted into a Ladies chamber, had to the
fire, dried, rubbed, and made clean both within and without; but the plain
troath is ( Coach) I will no longer be made a fool by you; I will have it
tried, though it cost me a fall, whither I be as fit to walk the streets as
you, or no, and to take my place ever next to the wall, when all the World
knows, the kennell is your natural walk.

I would (quoth I, it is true) have strangers well entreated, but not so to
doat on them as ordinarily we do, as if we were guilty to our selves of such
gross ignorance, and asinine stupidity, we should think nothing well done,
except an Italian, French, or Dutchman have a hand in it, (the best is)
sounder judgments are not infected with this opinion; these are but the
Fancies of fools, and women.

But I now believe Sedan you are made a free denizen, and may safely pass
wh^re you please without any cont^oule, or question about your freedom, and
think your self as good as Coach, saving that he has more liberty then you,
going abroad in the Country at his pleasure. For my part I am acquainted with
neither of you, only Signior Coach, some twenty, or four and twenty years
since I knew you, by the same token your guide was drunk, and had not certain
Noble Ladies by my advice, walked on foot over those little bridges between
Gormanchester and Huntington on foot, they had layne (where you, and your man
lay) over the head and ears in a River very deep of Mud: these mischances I
confess befall you but sometimes, and that is, when your horses have been
watered in a Noble-mans-buttery, or a Merchants Cellar.

Being in this discourse comes whistling by with his Carre, a lus^ie tall
fellow red-hayr'd, and cheeks puffed and swollen as if he had been a
Li^colne-shire-baggpiper, or a Dutch-Trumpeter under Grobbendonck, in a Canvas
frocke, a red-cap, a pair of high-shooes, with his whip in his hand: I calling
unto him, he stayed, and asked me what I would, I craved his name, he told me
Roger Dudgin, and that his dwelling was at Puddle-wharfe; in good time, (quoth
I) you may stand us in good stead to end a controversy here between two
strangers, yet I doubt not but you know them well-enough; what are they (quoth
he?) why Coach and Sedan, said I, cannot agree for place and precedence. You
are a dweller in the City, and may soon end the difference?


Car. The Devil agree them for me, I can never go in quiet for them, by day
nor by night; they talk of Rattle Snakes in New England, I am sure these be
the Rattle Snakes of old England, that keep the whole City from their
natural rest; it is long of them that poor Prentices are raised up (before
their hour) to their work, when their Masters who have bin hard at it, at the
Tavern overnight, would (but for their rattling) have lain till nine or ten;
poor Maids who were raised out of their beds to washing or skowring of their
Brass and Pewter, cannot take a nap in their shops: Children that go in a
morning to school, or of errands in the street, go in danger of their lives.
Noe man having his Chamber near to the street, can be private, or follow his
study, Coach, for your noise; and in streets about the Suburbs, and places
unpaved, you so bee-dash Gentle-mens Cloakes or Gowns, without all shame and
civilitie; that let a man but come from St. James to Charing-Crosse and meet
you in his way, one would swear by his dirtie Cloak, he had come po^t from
St. Michaels-Mount in Cornwall. I marvel whence we had you at first Coach; if
you and all your fellows were on a light fire upon Hounslowe-heath, the matter
were not great?


Coach. It were better a hundred such rascally Carmen as you were hanged?


Carman. Sirrah, you Robin-redbrest, wish your Lady to pay my Master for four
load of Billets, which has been owing him ever since the great snow a
twelue-month ago.


Coach. Well Iack-sauce, we shall talk with you, when you come back from
Tyborne.


Car. Nay I prithy Coach go along with me. and I will have done with thee
there presently.


Coach. Sirrah, goodman rogue, pay my Master for an old Coach-horse, you had to
put in your Carre; and here is your companion Sedan, almost in as good credit
in the City, as your self.


Powel. Does i^ talk against i^ Master; Powel a Welch-man, one of Sedans m^n.
pray you Master stay here a little while, while i^ run to Shrewsbury, to
fetch a Welch-hooke, her great Grandfather gave her father, when her was a
great soldier to Sir Rice ap Thomas, at Milford haven, when i^ Countryman,
King Henry the s^ven came into Wales, it is in Shrewsbury, and lies over her
hostesses beds head, at the sign of the Goat and the Green Leeke.


Sedan^ Powell; you Welch-men are well t^mper'd, but you smell a little too
much of the fire: Mr. Coach of Hackney, has a cooling-card dealt him already;
he may walk now whither he will, to Vtopia, New England, or the Amazons; The
Amazons fought on horseback, with Bows and Arrows, and their Semitars.
for those Ladies, after they are weari^ of riding, love to be carried. We
Sedans man now go quietly by you, without nicknames, nor shall we ever have
half those curses of the people, you are wont to have; in every street and
lane, we take up less room as we go along; we are of an easier charge,
our journeys are short, we carrey no Lackquies, or Foot-boyes, when we are
empty, nor have we to do with D^^ Turn-up, and Peg Burn-it, your ^ilken
wenches of Hackney, to car^y them to the Red-Bull, and other Play Houses, to
get trading, or Citizens wives to St. Albanes, South-mimme, Barnet, Hatfeild,
Waltham, I^ford, Croidon^ Brainford, and other places, under a color of seeing
their children at nurse to banquet with their sweet-hearts and companions, the
match being agreed upon a month before; we pleasure the lame, sick, weak,
and impotent, women with child, and such as are corpulent and unweldly, and are
not able to endure the jolting of a Coach, we defend, and keep Gentlemen, and
Ladies from the fogge, and rotten mistes, that morning and evening arise in
Towns and Cities, near to great Rivers, and many other stinking and gross
exhalations, which corrupt the lungs (as dewes and mistes rot sheep) breed
long and dangerous Coughs, and Catarrhes; the very breath we breath, being
nothing else then ra^ified water: moreover, we are places fit for privacie, or
meditation, where a man may read or study, even in the midst of the throng,
and open street, which men in Law-suites, and business of weighty importance,
often times stand in great need of; beside, we have our name from Sedanum, or
Sedan, that famous City and University, belonging to the Duke of Bovillon,
and where h^e keeps his Court.


Powell. Nay, do you hear me Master, it is from Sedanny, which in our
British language, is a brave, fair, dainty well-favoured Lady, or pretty
sweet wench, and we carry such sometime Master; but tou sone.


Carman. Well, may a man now pass quietly by you both; hayt, stand up there.


Coach. Carman be gone, and keep a good tongue in your head, and while you
live, give way to your betters.


Carman. Never to the Devils Carter, while I live.


Coach. Well well sirrah, there is a place called Bridewell.


Carman. Yes marry, where some of your fine carriage has been lodged many a
time and often.


Powel. This Rogue will never have done, shall I beat him Master.


Sedan. Powell by no means, for that is the next way to be beaten our selves;
they are sturdie companions, and there is a world of them about the City.

Being all this while in such like discourse as this, the morning began to be
well up, and people in the streets to cluster about us, like the
ballet-singers auditorie, when by chance, came by a plain Country Farmer, who
newly it seemed, had passed the Thames (for a Waterman followed him with a bag
full of writings or such like) and demanded of me what the matter was, I told
him in brief that there were two (well known in the City, Coach and, Sedan)
fallen out about superiority, and place, and in a contention, which of them
should deserve best of the commonwealth.


Water-man. Deserve (quoth the Water-man) they deserve both to be thrown into
the Theames, and but for stopping the channel I would they were; for I am sure
where I was wont to have eight, or ten, fares in a morning, I now scarce get
two in a whole day, our wives and children at home are ready to pine, and some
of us are feign for means to take other professions upon us, as some in
frostie weather to gather Dog-wood for Butchers, to get burch and broo^^e for
beesomes, and sometimes to catch birds with lime, or set springes in the
marshes for water foul, honest shifts, it is true, in necessity. But we are
an ancient company, and though the last in the rank of companies, yet are
we the first and chief in getting our livings honestly (and as God
commands) with the sweat of our brows, our profession is free from deceit
and lying, which many trades are subject unto, and being the most of us strong
of body, and skillful upon the water, we are able (and as ordinarily we do)
to serve our Sovereign in his fleet Royal, or armies by land, many of us
being Western men, of Somerset, Gloucester, Wiltshire, and and other places
there abouts, who generally are esteemed the strongest, and most active men of
England, when take one of your common, or hackney coachmen from his box, he
is good for nothing except to marry some old Ale-wife, and bid his old
acquaintance welcome, to turn horse-courser, become a Gentleman's baylie or
butler in the Country, or by means of some great man, get a place in an
hospital; I speak to show the incertaintie of service: not only in regard of
them, but others.

We serve God and our King only, and some of us for countenance sake, or
affection, wear the coats and badges of Noblemen, which dependence
impeacheth not our liberties, no whit at all. The Coach upon the least error
committed, either mistaking his way in an evening, the falling lame of an
horse, though not his fault, breaking of a wheel, overthrowing his coach
against an hill side, tree-roo^e, or the like, he is presently sent to seek a
new master, yet are some of them grown so proud because they are advanced i^
the street above their Lord and Master, they cannot afford us inferior
watermen (that labor beneath them in the liquid Element) a good look, or a
good word.

As for you, Master Sedan, you are the hu^bler, and I believe the honester of
the two, I hear no great ill of you, nor have I had any acquaintance with your
cowcummer-cullor'd men, only I believe you are a close companion: and that you
conceal most of our delicate feminine fares, in your boxes by land, that were
wont to be our best customers by water, for Coach his seentence is past, and
except you tread evenly you may follow after.


Countryman. Nay honest water-man give not so rash a censure, we must not
gainesay what the state tolerateth, for some reasons perhaps unknown to us,
neither will I enquire; my Sedan in the Country is a plain Wheel^barrow, and
my Coach my cart, wherein now and then for my pleasure I ride, my maids going
along with me, with their Forkes, Rakes, and a bottle or two of good Bee^e,
with an Apple-pastie, Potted butter, Churne-milke, bread and cheese, and such
like, into the fields in Summertime to cock corn, make hay, and the like; and
now and then, on Fair and Market-dayes I walk with a neighbor or two to the
Fair or Market, to buy, or sell, and having drunk a dozen of Ale amongst us,
we come home the same night, scarce feeling the ground we tread on: and if
our great Lords and Knights would use their legs as we do, they would not
(so many of them) be troubled with the Gout, Dropsies, and other diseases,
which grow upon them, through ease, fullness of Diet, drinking many sorts of
Wine, and want of bodily exercise; I won^er in my heart, why our Nobility and
Gentry cannot in fair weather, walk the streets as they were wont, as I have
seen the Earls of Shrewsbury, Darbie, Sussex, Cumberland, Essex, Northampton,
with most of our Barons, without any disparagement to their Honors. Beside
those unimitable Presidents of Courage and Valor, Sir Francis Drake, Sir
Philip Sydney, Sir Martine Frobisher, Sir Thomas Bas^ervile, with a number
others; when a Coach was as rare almost to be seen as an Elephant: I would
our Coached and Caroched Gallants, who think their feet too ^ood to tread upon
Mother Earth, had, or were ever likely to deserve so well of their King and
Country, or could but show those scarres, leave such a testimony of their
virtues to after-ages, as these Footmen have done, who were the true sons of
Honor: yea and many times have I seen some of them walk to the farthest part
of the City and to invite them s^lves in love to di^ne^ to ^n Alderman or
Mer^hants table, and other private houses as they thought good, as the Noble
George E. of Cumberland to Master Garrets an Apothecarie in Lime-street, Sir
Francis Drake to Alderman Martines in Cheap side, and the rest in like manner,
where they were content with such as they found, and were each with other
heartily merry, and as truly welcome; having perhaps learned this of A^gustus
Caesar, who would leave his Court, and go eat and drink familiarly in the
private houses, of his Roman Citizens: for Majesty and greatness (like a
bow) cannot stand so long extent but must have (by fits) a relaxation, and as
the most daintiest dishes of flesh or fish, have commonly their sauces prepared
of mean and course things, as onions, vinegar, water and the like, so privacie
and converse with inferiors among great persons, as also homely sports, and
exercises, take off and sweeten the teadiousnesse of rugged cares and high
emploiment: as when I was a Grammar-scholler our master to revive our spirits
dulled with study, would make us Comoedies, and because even now I spoke of
Onions I will repeat the prologue of one of our plays, which I my self spoke
upon the stage, and it was this. Even as the Duck in river navigable,
Is served with Onions to a great man's table;
So, will we do our best to give co^te^t,
To the meanest of this rascal ^ablement.


Which I pronouncing distinctly, and with a good grace I was mervailously
applauded (by clapping of hands) of the multitude; maids tossed apples to me,
and our Schoolmasters wife offered me her bottle of Rosa-solis to drink, and
I well remember too, at that time a Knight of our Country (who this last year
married his Mothers Chamber-maide, (and birladie, maintains her in her Coach,
with four horses) played the fool most admirably; yea, I knew a Lord, who
journeying in the Country, would leap out of his coach, to play a game at
stooleball with Country Wenches; and one time above the rest; when a Gentleman
of his told him it was past three a clock, and that they had yet twenty miles
to ride, he called for a watch, and set it back to twelve, now said my Lord,
we shall have time enough; I will have the other game.

And one thing (Coach) I am sure of, it was never good world with us in the
Country, since you and your fellows have so multiplied; the Devil of good
house is any where kept, where you have to do; and I have observed, where a
Coach is appendant, but to two or three hundred pounds a year, mark it, the
dogs of that house are as lean as rakes, you may tell all their ribbs lying
by the fire, and Tom-a-Bedlam may sooner eat his horn, then get it filled
with small dri^ke, and for his old alms of Bacon, there i^ no hope in the
world; I may tell you, some houses of thousands by the year, are become little
better; when a poor laboring man that has perhaps lived all his time in the
parish, shall hardly get a load or two of Hay to keep his Cow al winter, but
the Baily tells him his Lady cannot spare it from her own Ki^e, and
Coach-horses, and now adays, we must pay two shillings for a pecke of
Oate-meale, which we were wont to have for sixteen, or eighteen pence, and
all long of Coach-horses: before ( Coach) you came into request, one of these
houses maintained sixteen, or twenty Propper tall fellows, to march from the
Kitchen to their Masters table, in their blew coats and Cognisances, every man
carrying a dish of good meat, either boyld, or roast, now the case is so
altered, that the Coachman alone must take upon him three or four of the
prime Offices about the house; without doors, he is Gentleman of my Ladies
horse, and Coachman; within, he is Butler and chamberlain; and if strangers
come, perhaps some poor boy of the Town is sent for to assist him, for the
scraping of Trenchers, and emptying chamber-pots; who within a day or two must
return to the place from whence he came; and if ( Coach) your man have ever
been versed in brewing, or baking, he must undertake that too; I heard my
boy, who is now at Cambridge, say out of Aristotle (which is well observed in
your great houses now adays) frustra fit per plur^, quod fieri p^test per
p^^^ci^ra. And by the Logical fallacy, Compositionis et divisionis, they will
make two eggs pa^se for three, and many times turn away their cook for
roasting a whole breast of Mu^ton to breakfast, when he should have roasted but
half; as a great man both of rank and revenue, some one or two and thirty
years since, set his cook in the stocks at Huntingdon upon the very same
occasion, as the cook (fast by the heels) told me himself, all this Coach I
can impute to none other then your self, and your appurtenances; nay, let a
man have never so earnest an occasion of business with your Knight or Lady,
at your houses, let him come at dinner time, he may knock his heart out ere
any body will hear; and indeed, to speak truly, I blame them not, for,
Venture non habet aures, says the old Proverb. I knew a Knight, an especial
friend of mine, of himself a free and and a Noble Gentle-man^ who lay sick of
a Burning-feaver, or Causos (as the Phisicians call it;) and a very skillful
Gentleman, both a Physician and a Chyrurgian, being sent unto him by a Justice
of Peace (his loving friend and neighbor by, in the country) who much tendered
his health, the Physician came at night, wringing wet in snow and rain, when
his Lady was at supper, where he continued knocking, and could not be let in,
but was feign that night to take his supper, and lodging at the next Alehouse
in the town, and before morning the good Gentleman was dead, whom
blood-le^ting (the present remedy in hot-feavers) that night, by all
likelihood might have saved, he being in his best years, strong and able of
body, of sanguine complexion, and his spirits not yet spent, or decayed by the
vigor of the disease: and most lamentable it is, to see (upon fasting-dayes, or
in time of Lent) how closely, the poor Eele, Haddock, and Herring are
imprisoned, and so strongly kept up, within barred and bolted gates; that if a
man would give ^ever so much, as but to speak in private with any one of them,
or whisper in his ear, he should not be admitted. And now I speak of
whispering, A merry tale of Mackerell.
I remember a good fellow of Goose-toft, near Boston, came to a Fish-monger in
that market, who had Mackerels to sell (a fish very rare in those parts) and
taking up a Mackerell in his hand, whispered in the Mackerills ear, then he
laid the Mackerills mouth to his ear; which the Fish-monger observing, said;
Friend do you make a fool of my fish, and of your self too? No, said the
fellow, I make bold, but to ask him when he was at Sea, and he tells me not
these three weeks, but this by the way.

And Coach, twice or thrice a year you must needs make a boon voyage to
London with your Lady, under a cullor to be new cullourd, gilded or painted,
covered, seated, shod, or the like, when her errand indeed is as one says
well, speaking to such Ladies, as love to visit the City. To see what fashion
most is in request,
How is this Countess, that Court Lady dressed: In a funeral Elegy, upon the
C^u^tesse of Warwick, lately Printed.

While ye your beauteous faces, so disguise,
We neither see, your forehead, nor your eyes,
(That wont the seats, and Indices to be,
Of Spirit, Love, and ingenuitie.
Like Dutch boores houses, where the straw hangs over
The low thatched ^aves, and does the windows cover.


Hence it happens, Coach, that by your often ambling to London, Sir Thomas, or
Sir John, sinks (as in a quick-sand) by degrees, so deep into the Merchant,
Mercer, or Tailors book, that he is up to the ears, ere he be aware,
neither can he be well drawn out without, a teame of Usurers, and a crafty
Scrivener to be the forehorse, or the present sale of some land, so that
wisemen suppose this to be one maine and principal reason, why within a
Co^ch journey, of a day or two from the City, so many fair inheritances, as
have been purchased, by Lord-Majors, Aldermen, Merchants, and other rich
Citizens, have not continued in a name to the third, yea, scarce the second
generation, when go far North or Westward, you shall find many families, and
names, both of the Nobility and gentry, to have continued their est^tes two,
three hundred years and more, in a direct succession (as in Cumberland, and
N^rthumberland, the families of the Graies, Groystocks, Lowthers^ Musgraves,
with many other in Yorkshire, of the Dacres, Scroopes, Nevell^, Huddlestones,
Savill^, etc. The like may be said of Lan^ashire Cheshire, Devonshire,
Sommersetshire, Norfolk, Suffolk, and many other places ^at remote from
London) without racking or raising of rents; or enclosing of whole Towns, and
Lord-ships: which every where (neighbor Coach) they say is long of you, and
your costly carriage.

As for you Sedan, I hear no great complaint of you, save that my Wife and
Daughter thinks that you have made Say dearer then it was wont to be, for
whereas they used to buy it for sixteen pence a yard, you have brought it to
two shillings^ seven and eight groats, and and none of the best neither, and
Co^ch I entreat you if (you being now banished the City) happen to come into
our Country of Lincolnshire; let me know of it, that I may remove my self,
ten miles off from where you shall have to do: Sedan because you are a
stranger you shall be the welcomer of the two; for as yet you were never seen in
our parts.

But to be short, my masters agree as you can, I must follow my law occassions,
and to tell you true I can skill of neither of you, and so fare-ye-well.


Sedan. Coach do ye see, how neither in Coun^rie or Citi^, any one can give
you a good word, you have carried your self well in the mean (...), have you
not^


Powell. Her would hang i^ self before she would have so great deal of ill
words in the world.


Coachman. Welch-man keep you quiet, there is no great fear, or danger of
you, but when our Coach-ma^es and horses, are put to grass.


Powell. Sirrah you Grimalkin, who was a knave and a fool, when your Lady
being pig with schild, and could not endure the jolting of her Coach up that
s^eepe stony hill beyonnd Ferribrigges in Yorkshire, you made her sell two
exellent stout mares, to buy a couple of ambling horses, believing as long as
they ambled, she could never be jolted, where was her wit then.


Coachman. Well well Wood-pecker, we shall meet with you when time serves.


Powell. I Will meet her where and when her dare.

Here I interposed my self and said before the company; truly honest Coach
(if I be not deceived in your name) I cannot see but you may pass well eno^gh,
concerning that plain Country man and his speech, you must know, that the
common people of the Country affect not, very well, the Gentry, nor the
Gentry them, there being a kind of Antipathy between them: First they envy
Gentlemen, as living more plentifully and at ease then themselves. Invidus
al^erius rebus macrescit ^pimis: again they do not greatly love them, because
Gentlemen hold them in a kind of aw, and they are fearful to displease them.
Oderunt quem metuunt. Thirdly if they be tennants, their rents are often
raised, if strangers, they ar^ overlaid many times with leavies, and paiments
either to the King, or some public charg^s and occasion in the Country, and
sometimes extraordinary courtesies by great men (their neighbors) are exacted
of them, which grumblinglie they yield unto, as borrowing their Carts, to fetch
home (five or ten miles off) Stone, Coals, Timber, and the like, sometimes
their Cattaile to Plough their grounds, or help home with harvest, sometime
they are troubled with bringing up a whelp or two, till they become ravenous
^ounds, and undo a poor man in his dayrie, and if they be faulconers, they
must afford them Pigeons, from their dove-coates, besides New-yeers-gifts,
which are conditioned in leases, and with the yeerelie paiments of rent, as
Capons, Geese, Henns, Lambs, Conies, Neates-Tongues, Pigges, Swannes, all
manner of Fish, and wild-^oule, with a thousand such. I ommit the general
murmur, and complaint of the whole Country against them, for depopulation,
enclosures, and encroaching upon public commons; nor is it to be forgotten,
how in levies, ceasements, and charges of Arms at public Musters, they can
befriend themselves, and in the last place (as he said truly, their miserable
housekeeping, wherein had they been, free and liberal, they might have made
some part of amends for the rest, but commonly the poor of parishes are feign
to be releeved, by the Farmer, Husbandman, and the middle rank, or else they
must starve, as many upon my knowledge did this last Snowie-winter.

I tax not all, God-for-bid, there are numbers left, who with their
forefathers lands, inherit their noble virtues, of Loyalty, Fortitude,
Bounty, Charity, Love, to learning (learned themselves) and whatsoever is
good or excellent. I condemn not, neither, the lawful use of Coaches, in
persons of rank and quality, yea and in cases of necessity: no more then I
do tilted Boats and Barges upon the water, they defend from all injury of
the sky, Snow, Rain, Hail, Wind, etc. by them is made a public difference,
between Nobiliti^, and the Multitude, whereby their Armories without speaking
for them, they are known and have that respect done to them, as is due to them:
they are seats of Honor for the sound, beds of ease for the lame, sick and
impotent, the moving closets of brave Ladies, and beautiful virgins, who in
common sense, are unfit to walk the streets, to be justled to the ke^nell, by
a sturdie Porter, or breathed upon by every base Bisogn^: they are the cradles
of young children, to be convei'd with their Nurses, too, or from their parents
into the City or Country. And if all Inventions have their just, and due
praise from the goodness of their Ends, whereto they were ordained; surely
the Coach invented for the necessary use and service of man cannot be
condemned, if regard be had to those circumstances, of Person, Time, and Place.

Paul Tomorree going to the young King, lying at Viceg^ade, to complain of
the Friar, used Coaches first, being so called from a town where they were
made whence they had there name Kot^ze.
Their first invention and use was in the Kingdom of Hungary, about the time
when Prier George, compelled the^ Queen and her young son the King, to seek
to Soliman the Turkish Emperor, for aid against the Friar, and some of the
Nobility, to the utter ruin of that most rich etc flourishing Kingdom, where
they were fi^^t ^alled Kotoze, and in the Slavonian tongue C^riti, not of
Coucher the French to lie-downe, nor of Cu^hey the Cambridge Carrier, as some
body made Master Minsha^ believe, when he (rather we) perfected that his
Etymologicall Dictionarie, whence we call them to this day (...) ^the first
(they say) that was seen in England was presented to Q^eene Eli^beth, by the
Ea^^e of A^undel^, but whether it were an open Chariot, or covered over the
head as our ^^^^^es now are I doubt, for such a one Q^eene (...) rode in, from
Sommerset-hou^e to S. (...) to hear a Sermon, presently upon the victory
obtained against the Spaniard i^ Eightie-Eight. Master Nowell Deane of Paul's
Preaching at that time, when I remember ^being then a Schoole-boy in London,
abut ten years of age) so many Spanish-Ensignes, in triumph were hung up,
that the leads of the Church, and houses round about, seemed to be veild or
curtain'd round-about with Gold, Silk, and Silver.


Sedan. It was a glorious sight indeed. But (quoth I) upon a more glorious
occasion.

Talking in this manner, unexpected, there comes by a Morrice-dance of
Countrey-fellows; away goes Powell, and takes the Maide-Marian, and the fool
along to a Tavern, the promiscuous bystanders left us to follow the
Morrice-dancers, when there steps in to me, an honest plain Countrey-Vicar,
of mine old acquaintance, and claps me on the shoulder, calling me by my name,
and saying, It is a wonder to meet you here in London, which I think you have
not seen in these dozen years.

It is true (said I) and somewhat more, and I find my self to be a great
stranger here, for whereas heretofore, I could walk in some one street, and
meet with a dozen of my acquaintance, I can now walk in a dozen streets and
not meet one, yea both in people and building, I find, N^vam rerum faciem.


Vic^r. Yes, I dare say since you and I were first acquainted in Cambridge (the
world is altered) it is a good while, I was laid hold on in an evening, by our
Vice-master D. R. for whistling in the Court; and I told him (and told him
truly) I could never whistle in all my life; you made answer, No sir, it was
not he; for could he have whistled, his father would never have sent him to
Cambridge^ meaning, he would have made a plough-boy of me.

Let me remember you likewise (said I) of another merry accident when we
were boys, and Sophisters in the schools, when you, and two more of your old
acquaintance, went one frostie morning to eat Blacke-puddings to breakfast,
and wanting a penny of the reckoning to pay ^or an odd pudding (having no more
money amongst you all three) you venter'd on it, and spet out a single penny
that was buried in the Puddings end; so that by wonderful fortune, the pudding
paid for it self; and after you declaimed upon, A^daces Fortuna juvat.


Vicar. Come, these merry passages are gone and past, I am heartily glad to see
you alive and well. And in good faith (quoth I) I am glad to meet with any of
my old acquaintance, they are so rare in these parts.

Here is a Gentleman, my friend, said the Vicar, who much desires your
acquaintance, he is an excellent Surveior, limmer in Oil, and water colors;
besides, a skillful Musician both for song and Instrument, and you are met in a
good time: So having saluted one another, I smilingly told them the occasion of
mine Idle stay there at that time, which was a neighbourly office of
^econciling Coach and Sedan, who in that place, fell foully out with either,
opposing each other to the utmost for place and precedence; neither would they
yield a jot one to the other, without the mediation of friends.


Vicar. Is he in the black, with brazen studds on his sleeves, wings, back,
and breast, called Coach?


Surveyor. Yes, and I am sure, the other in the green is Sedan; Let me
entreat you (quoth I to them both) to talk with them, they will surely hear
reason, if one of the Church (which I think neither of them cares for) shall
go about to persuade them.


Vicar. I will. Sir, I understand your name is Coach.


Coach. Men call me so about the Court.


Vicar. Out of my love, understanding the time of your execution is at hand,
and that quickly you must expect to be turned off; I come to give you the best
admonition I can.

First, you have been these many years a lewd liver, accompanying your self
with Pandars and common Strumpets, both of City and Country.

Secondly, you have been suspected for many robberies (I am sure you have
heard of Madam A Lady that robbed in her Coach by the Hieway.
Sands) for there is not an Highway, street, back lane, or odd corner in the
City, or within five miles, but you are well acquainted with the same.

Mary are carried in their Coaches to execution.
Thirdly, you bring many a one to the gallows.

Fourthly, you never ca^ed for the Church, since all sermon-time we hear you
hurrying up and down the streets, insomuch, that the Reader of Devine
Service, or the Preacher, can hardly hear himself speak for you; or say you
bring your Lord, Knight, and their Ladies to Church, you stay in the street,
while your man commonly goes to the Tavern, or Alehouse, till service be done.

Fifthly, you live not in love and charity one with another, but give one
another (if you are crossed in the street, or in a narrow lane) the worst
words you can; and another great fault you are guilty of (in the judgment of
that late reverent Justice, Sir Edward Cook) you will in no place give way to
the Carre and Cart, your elder brethren.

Sixthly, if you have gotten your cup (like Iehu) ye drive as if you were mad,
and become very dangerous in the night.


Surveyor. Mr. Vicar, these are but personal faults, you conceive not what
damage the State receives by Coaches, and how the whole Commonwealth
suffers in their increase and multitud^; now if it please you, I will show
you wherein.

They first consume an infinite quantity of ou^ prime and best leathe^, which
also by reason of the d^cay of Woods, and consequently of bark for Tanners)
Leather is grown extreemely dear, and hardly that which is principal good,
to be gotten for any money.

Again, we can hardly have a young Ash grow till he be seven years old,
within forty miles of London, but he is cut off before his time for the
Coach-makers use, in spokes for wheels, beams, bodies, and the like.

More-over a wonderful quantity, of our best broad-clothes is consumed and
wasted, about the lining of Coaches, and their seats. I ommit, other
superfluities of Lace, Fringe, Guilding, etc. Last of all, and which is worst
of all, and withal speed (if it shall so please his Majesty) to be
redressed, the breed of o^r best horses in England, are reserved, or rather
bought up in Faires and Markets, only for the use of the Coach, hence it comes
to pass that at any general Muster taken of Horse, you shall see so many
arrant Iades shown, Scarce one in ten serviceable, some send thither their
ordinary saddle Geldings, and Nagges, some their Cart-horses, where you shall
see their necks and sides miserably galled with collars and traces, and their
riders Serving-men or ploughmen, just answerable to their horses.

I speak I confess the more freely, because I know what belongs to
horse-manship, and have been my self an horseman, and in service beyond the
seas, in so much as I dare say, no Nation in Europe, is more back-ward and
careless in breeding and managing horses, then we in England, God be blessed
for our peace, Quid postera ferat di^s nescimus: if it would please his Royal
Majesty (which with my self all true Subjects ought from their hearts to
wish) to command our Coach-horses, instead of hearing a Coach rattle at their
heels, to listen to the Trumpet, I believe the poor beasts themselves would
be better pleased, and since they cannot speak, express their joy by bounding
and neighing, as they ordinarily do, when they are to go upon service, and
are by the Trumpet called to charge the enemy; or if their Noble owners are
desirous, to get as good as they can for their Coaches, they should provide as
many other, as good fit and able, always to be in a readiness, ^or his
Majesty's service.

I speak not as if I did altogether, condemn, and disallow of Coaches in the
general, we know that the Kings, Princes, and Nobles, of Israel, had their
Charriots, equivalent (at the least) to our richest Caroches, it is most fit,
and requisite, that Princes, Nobility, the more eminent and abler among the
Gentry should be allowed their, C^^ches, and C^rr^^^es, and ^ll others who
hold ^^y place of Dignity, either in Church ^r Commonwealth, a^ our Bishops,
the Reverend Judges, Doctors of Divinity, Law, Phis^cke with the chief^
M^gistrates of E^inent and Honorable Citie^ ^ith others of like and equal
rank, but what I pray you ^^e the Coaches of these few, to that multi^ude at
this day in England? when in L^nd^n, the Suburbs, and within fou^e miles
comp^ss^ without; are reckoned to the ^umber of six ^housand and odd.

I easily (quoth I) believe it, when i^ cert^ine places of the Citie^ as I
h^ve often observed, I have (...) I have there, the w^y (...) with ^ C^^^h, t^o
o^ th^^e, that wha^ have, or business soever a man hath^ he mus^ wait^ my
Lady (I know ^ot whose) le^^^^e (who is in the ne^t shop, buyi^g penda^^s for
her ears or ^ colle^ for her ^ogge) ^^e he^ can find any passage.

The mos^ eminent places for stoppage, ^^e Paul-ga^e into Che^pside, Lud-gat^,
and Lud-gate-hill, especially when the play i^ done (...) the P^iers, then
Hol^or^e-Gundoit and Holborne-bridge, ^^villanou^ly pe^^ered with them,
No^^er-la^^, S^^ith-fi^l^, (...) Coe-l^ne ^ending all about their new or old
mended Coaches, then about the Stocks and Poultrie, Temple-barre, Fetter-lane
and Shooe-lane next to Fleet Street; but to see their multitude, either when
there is a Masque at White Hall, a Lord-Majors feast, a new play at some of the
play houses you would admire to see them, how close they ^tand together, like
(M^tton-pies in a Cookes-oven) that hardly you can thrust a pole between.

My Masters quoth I, we have a great deal of talk, and discourse all this
while about nothing, here comes one that if you will be ruled by me, shall
determin^ the quarrel without more ado, because our occasions call us away,
about weightie^ emploiments.

With that, comes up unto us a lusty tall fellow, sitting upon (...) axel^r^e
between two monstrous great wheels, drawn by a great old jade blind of an
eye, in a leather pilch, two empty beere-barrels upon a brewers sling^ beside
him, and old ble^-cap all bedaub'd, and stinking with yest, a^^ the spurging
of beer, him Coach, and Seda^ knew, as soon as ever they saw him (for it
seemed they had been old customers of his Masters, and true stakes to the
beere-barrell) ^ee seeing them familiarly talking together, I cra^^ his name:
my name is Beere-car^ quoth he; in good time, you may (said I) by me^^es of
your (...) acquaintance with these two, Coach and Seda^; do a good office and
reconcile them, being fallen at difference, who should be the better man, and
deserve the most respect, my self and these gentlemen, have labored what we
could herein, yet can we do no good.

When according to our relati^n, he had heard the whole substance of the
business, he shook his head, saying, will this never be otherwise, I made you
friends once before, when you were together by the ears at Charing-crosse, and
you vowed to either (and drank upon it) you yould never square, and fall-out
again, but Live, and Love as brethren, but let that go if you will once
again, wholly refer your selves to me, and promise before to morrow at night
to enter into bond, to stand to my censure and agreement, before these
honest-Gentlemen (who are strangers to me) I will set you straight, and make
all quiet; are you not mad men, to wrangle and fall out in the street, to draw
boys and wenches and every rascal about you, to wonder and laugh at you?
Coach this is your fault, you are choleric and cannot forbear; and Sedan, you
think your self so countenanced at the Court, that such a one as my self
dare not speak or meddle with you, but I would have you know, I am of
auncientes standing in England then both of you, I came into England in Henry
the Seventh^ time, what time I was brought into this land with Musi^k: my
brother Al^, is far auntienter then I, and was in England, Beer and vlols de
gamba came into England both in one year, B^ita^ni, potus genus habent quod
Alicam vocant. Plini.
as I have been told by Scholars, in the time of the Brittans and Romans; but
what do we talk of our antiquity, let us boast of our Goodness and
Strength, which makes us to be so well thought on, and beloved where ere we
come.

But let these things pass, are you content to stand to, and here my verdict,
and will promise to observe what I in reason shall propound, and so to make a
final end of all controversies betwixt you.


Coach and Sedan. With all our hearts.


Serveior. We are h^^re, th^ee or four, witwitne^^es, and shall ca^rie the
news unto your best friends, who surely will be glad of your reconcilement.


Vi^^^. Now Master Beere-cart, since you have taken upon you to be ^ moderator
betwixt them, let us hear the conditions you mean to propound for their
^greement, because we are not like altogether to meet again.

Nay (quoth I) ho^e^t ^eere-c^rt, will have a c^re of his credit, and do
nothing but what shall be just, and right, I dare say.


Beere-cart. Nay, if I do other-wise let me never walk upon London stones,
or see Saint Kathari^s again, there^^re understand me well, and hear what I
shall say.

First, Coach and Sedan, you both shall reverence and ever give way to Beer
(or Brewers) Cart, wheresoever you shall meet him, either in City or
Country, as your ancient and elder brother.

Secondly. You both again shall be constant custome^s to Cellars, Innes and
Alehouses, as being the upholders, and principal maintainers of Brewers-Cart.


Coach, you shall now and then give your man leave to take a nap at noone,
especially, when your Lord or Lady, is to see a masque at the Court, my reason
is, when he is fast a sleep upon his box, his Curtains are commonly cut off,
and his Cushions stolen.

Thirdly. See your man give his horses their due allowance, in Hay and Oats,
and that he beguiles them not, to maintain his wench, or follow the Tavern,
beside charge him to keep their manger clean, without dust or feathers.

Fourthly. More-over give him especial commandment, that while he is drinking
Wine, his horses want not water.

Sixthly. Again Coach, if your Lord or Master, be disposed in an evening, or
any other time, to go to an house of good-fellowship (the rude and unmannerly
multitude call such Baudie-houses) and your Lady or Mistress, when you come
home, ask where you have been; you shall say, your Lord or Master has been
turning and looking over some Books in a French liberarie.

6. You shall leave altogether your old wo^nt, that is, when your Knight or
Lady or both, are gone to the Church, suffer your man to go to the Alehouse
and there to stay, till prayer or Sermon be done, but see him a Gods name go
to Church, to learn to serve God better, and to mend his manners.

7. Your man also shall leave that old knavish trick, of tying a horse hair
very straight, about the pastornes of your horse feet (which presently will
make him halt) then to tell your Master he is lame, and will not serve his
turn, procuring after some horse-courser to buy him at an under price; then
sell him again, and after you two share the money betwixt you.

8. Speak well of Watermen, and offer them no wrong, besides know they are a
Corporation, and boats were before Coaches; I will undertake for them not to
hurt you, they are my friends, and acquaintance, and I deal much in their
Element.

9. If your Lord or Knight, be invited to my Lord Majors, the Sheriffs, or any
other great or eminent man's house to dinner (because we know not in these
times who we may trust) let your man be sure to search and examine the celler
well, for fear of Treason.

10. If Coach, you happen to go to a Christening, or any public banquet, see
that you turn your man loose like an Hog, under an Apple Tree, among the
comfitts and sweete-meates, and let him shift.

11. Leave in any case that ill custom ye have of running over people in a
dark night, and then bid them stand up.

12. In Term times, you shall drive in the streets fair and softly: for
throwing dirt upon Gentlemen's clokes, and Lawyers gowns going too, and coming
from Westminster.

13. You shall have an especial ^are, of little children playing in Summer
time in the streets, greens, highways, and such places, you shall endeavor
to keep your selves sober, from over much drinking, for by Coach-men overtaken
with drink, many have lost their limbs, yea some their lives.

14. You shall carry none without leave, of your Lord, Lady, or Master.

15. You shall not Coach (as you are accustomed (take up into you every groom,
and lacquay, to lie tumbling with his dirtie feet upon your Lords Velvet, or
cloth Seats, and Cushions, but let their legs carry them in the open street,
with a mischief.

16. You have a trick, and custom (which I wish were amended and reformed)
that if your Knight or Lady be out of the way from home, out of the City, for
some spending money to carry tradesmens wives, waiting-maides and
young-wenches: sometime to Brainford, to Barnet, Tottenham, Rumford and such
places, to meet, and to be merry with their sweet-hearts, while all the way
they go, they sit smiling and laughing, to see how the poor inferior sort
foot it in dirt and mire, and hereby they grow so proud, that ever after they
accoun^ themselves companions for the best Ladies.

17. Coach, if you are to go a journey, twenty, thirty, or more miles into the
Country; see that you are provided of all necessaries^ that your Lady and her
women may stand in he^d of by the way, you know what I mean, and never be
unprovided of a bottle or two, of the best Strong Water.

18. You shall be no hindrance to poor people, who shall demand and ask the
charitable alms of your Lord or Lady, much less revile them, or lash them
over the fa^es with your whip.

19. And honest Coach, at my request, be very careful in going over (...)
places, quicksands, unknown waters, and narrow bridges.

20. If a man of manlike behavior and fashion, casually fall lame by the way,
or by some accident be wounded, whereby he is unable to travel, you shall out
of Christian Charity, imitating the good Samaritane, take him up, help him
wherein you can, and ^ar^y him ^o hi^ Inn.

21. You shall offer your brother Sedan no manner of wrong, but entreat him
with all love and friendship, giving him the wall, you keeping your natural
and proper walk, the middle of the street.

22. Lastly you shall be affable and courteous to all, endeavoring to get the
good will, and good word of every one, especially your fellows in the house,
that having the love of your Master and Lady, they may settle you in a Farm of
theirs in your old age, and marrying the Chamber maid, ever after give them
leave to lash that will.

So much brother Coach for you; now honest Sedan, something I have to say to
you, though not much.

First as you tender the love and friendship of your Brother Beere-Car^,
observe these rules and admonitions.

You shall from this time forward, live with Coach in perfect Love and Amity,
to defend and help him in all casualties, and ever-more to speak well of him
behind his back.

You shall never carry any infected person.

You shall never take into your charge, any one that is bea^tly drunk, at any
Tavern or Alehouse, but rather give a Porter leave to carry him to his
lodging, in his Basket.

You shall not meddle with any Exchang-Wenches, Semsters, or hand-some
Laundr^sses, to carry them to any Gentle-mans private Chamber or Lodging,
ther^ to show their wares and commodities.

You shall never endanger your selves with carrying matters of great charge, as
Money, Plate, Jewels, Boxes of evidences, writings and the like.

You shall never carry Coachman again, for the first you ever carried was a
Coachman, for which you had like to have sufferd, had not your Master been
the more merciful.

You shall see your bottomes be sound, that gross and unweldie men slip not
through.

You shall carry no manner of Beast for any man's pleasure, Bears-Whelp,
Surbated-Hound, Baboone, Musk-cat, or the like.

You shall have an esp^^iall care to keep your Chaires, clean and sweet, both
within and without; suffer no Tobacco, which many love not, to be taken in
them, and wish the Painter, to add to his Verd' grease and Linseed-oyle, in
his painting, a small quantity of the Oil of spike, for the better smell.

And ^ince the w^akest goes to the wall, take you the wall I charge you, of all
Porters, Bakers, Costard-mongers, Carm^n, Coaches, and in a word, of all in
general, saving Beere-Car^, who after you are wearrie, and tired, will be at
hand to do you any manner of servi^^, especially to revive your decayed
spirits.

And last of all with which I will conclude; because at the Court you are
friendly used, and often times admitted within the gates, (which your brother
Coach never is) you shall take nothing at any time, for carriage of the Kings
great Porter.


Surveyor. But Master Coach, what say you to a late Proclamation, that is come
out against you, and your multitude?


Coach. It concerns not us who follow the Court, and belong to Noblemen, it
is chiefly for the suppressing my neig^bours of Hackney, who are a Plague to
City and Country; it had been the better for us, if it had come out seven
years ag^e, for being, we shall (I hope) be better rewarded, and better
respected.

I have read I remember in Herodotus, of Sesostris, a Tyrant, King of Egypt,
who causing four Kings whom he had taken prisoners to be yoaked together by
the necks, and to draw his chariot; one of these Kings, ever and anon cast
back his eye, and looked over his shoulder to the Charriot-wheele, which the
Tyrant observing, demanding of him the reason why he did so; the captive King
made answer, Quia in rota, video statum humanum: Because in this wheel, I see
the state of man: The spoke of the wheel, that was even now aloft, is now at
the bottom, and below (as we our selves are) and that below, anon gets up to
the top, Sesostris knowing this to be true, and fearing his one estate (being
as others subject to change and mutabilitie) forthwith released them of their
bands and set them at liberty.

So Coach, you men that were aloft, and above others, they must like (the
spokes of their wheels) come below; and why not? but by some other profession
and calling, mount as high again: Lucan.
-- Sic sors incerta vagatur,
Ferique ref^rtque vices, ^t hab^^t mortalia c^sum.



Serveyor. Well Gentlemen Coach, and Sedan, are you both pleased with those
honest propositions (tending to a perpetual reconcilement, of one to the
other) made by Beere-cart, so that here after you will bear no grudge, one to
another, but speak kindly at your meeting, salute one another, as you pass,
and in a word do all good offices you can one for another, that ye may no
more make your selves laughing stocks to the world.


Coach, and Sedan. We will with all our hearts, and Gentlemen we thank you
heartily, for the pains you have taken, and especially, you Master Vicar.

Well Gentlemen (quoth I) we have now done a good office, and Beere-Cart, they
are much beholding unto you.


Surveyor. So are we; for you have made us wiser then we were, in
understanding the abuses, and misdemeanors either of them are subject unto, for
which we, and the world shall heartily thank you.


Beere-Ca. I could indeed say much more, but I am in good hope of their
agreement, and they will not fail but visit our house three or four times in
the week, to see how their brother Beere-cart does; and with what liquor he
is laden.

So now (quoth I) we have made (honest friends, and good-fellowes, Coach and
Sedan) an end of your business; Mr. Surveyor, and honest Master Vicar, we will
go dispatch our own: which way lies your way?


Survey. To Westminster-ward, we both go.

And I into the Strand; and for this merry meeting, and old acquaintance sake
honest Vicar, and Master Surveyor, I have for you a quart of the best Canary in
Westminster, which I think is at Mr. Thomas Darlings (a very honest man) at the
Three-tunnes by Charing-crosse.

We will bear you company (quoth they) and so we three, (leaving the other)
departed.

But in going along, to beguile the way, we fell I know not how, into
discourse, what alteration in Commonwealths, Cities, Countries, Buildings,
manners of Men, and Fashions in apparel, the Revolution of Time, contrary to
the opinion of man, brought forth; the Vicar earnestly maintaining the latter
times to be the wisest; as I stiffely maintained the contrary against him.

His first Argument was; that we in our age have more learning then ever,
Ergo, more wisdom.

I denied his antecedent, replying, Quod efficit, tale, majus est tali: meaning
the Ancients who were our Masters, aledging Chaucer: Whence comes this new
Corn, men have from year t^ year,
Out of old fields, old men says,
And when^e comes this new learning that men teere,
Out of old fields, in good faith.


Secondly, The Inventions of latter times far excelled those of former; I
denied that also.

He instanced Guns, PRINTING, Watches, Wind-mills, etc. Against these, as rare,
I opposed Archimedes his Burning-glasses, wherewith he fired Marcellus ships
from Syraecusa; the perpetually burning Lamp, made of the Spirit of Gold;
malleable Glass; Dying of that highly esteemed Purple; that rare manner of
guilding called Let common Schoolemasters observe this, who take Pyropus in
Ovid, for a Carbuncle or great Rubie.
Pyropus, mentioned in Pliny, wherewith those round balls on the top of the
Roman houses, shone like fire; with many other, which are lost and forgotten.


Surveior. And I am persuaded we have had many rare Inventions, even here in
England; which are forgotten, or quite out of use.

Yes quoth the Vicar, four especially, Daggers, Flat-caps, French-hoods, and
Cod-peeces; But here we brake of our discourse, being at the Tavern door,
the period of our Journey.


FINIS.

