THE WARN-WORD TO SIR FRANCIS HASTINGES WAST-WORD:

Containing the issue of three former Treateses, the Watchword, the Ward-word
and the Wast-word (entitled by Sir Francis, an Apology or Defense of his
Watchword) together with certain admonitions and warnings to thesaid knight
and his followers.

Whereunto is adjoined a brief reiection of an insolent, and vaunting minister
masked with the letters O. E. who has taken upon him to write of the same
argument in supply of the knight.

There go also four several Tables, one of the chapters, another of the
controversies, the third of the chief shifts, and deceits, the fourth of the
particular matters contained in the whole book.

By N. D. author of the Ward-word.

Tit. 3. verse. 10. Fly an herttical man, after one or two warnings, knovving
that such a one is subverted, and sins damnably against his own judgment.
Permissu Superiorum. Anno 1602.

THE ENCOVNTERS THAT LIE IN CONTROVERSY BETWEEN the VVatch-man and the VVarder,
Sir Francis Hastings, and N. D.
















Lastly there is a speech of the Warder to the Right Honorable Lords of her
Ma^ies. privy Council, remitting to their wisdoms the judgment and arbitriment
of the whole controversy.

The first two Encounters are handled only in this book the other are to
follovv in other several books afterward.

THE EPISTLE TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
I HOLD not for needful (good Christian Reader) to make any, large presace for
thy instruction in that which is to ensue in this book the controversy being
sufficiently known by that which hitherto has been written and printed thereof.
The sum of all is this.

There happened some ^ew years past (as often also before) a certain false
all-arme of a Spanish invasion, An. 1598.
then said to be upon the Seas toward England, upon the rumor whereof, one
knight more hasty then the rest (for that he was of the Hastings) stepped forth,
Sir F. Hastings.
and offered not only a swift foot to the field (for so are his words) but a
much swifter tongue to accuse, and bring in question all Catholic men within
the realm, himself being known to be of the Puritan crew.

And to perform this with more probability of just occasion he made himself
(without commission) a general VVatch-man over all the land, and wrote a most
bitter and bloody pamphlet against thesaid Catholics, under the title of a
Watchword replenished with all kind of slanders and most odious
calumniations, The VVatch-vvord.
which being joined with the iealousy of the time, and the disgrace wherein the
said Catholics were before for confession of their religion, was very likely to
have brought them to some general ruin, and consequently this knight also to
some desired diuident of their livings.

Wherefore this intemperate inuectiue coming to the hands of a certain
Catholic man that took compassion of their oppression, and some disdain at
the malicious devise of this watchman, he thought good to write a temperate
Ward-word to this ^urbulent watchword, The VVard-vvord.
drawing all that the other had uttered in many wyld and wast words into 8.
several Encounters, intituling his book a Ward-word; which being published it
seemed to touch the matter so to the quick as the first news after the
publication thereof was in most men's mouths, that the knight disauowed the
watchword, attributing the same rather to certain ministers of his communion,
that either wrote the same or induced him thereunto, then to himself, and most
men commended the discretion and modesty of the knight in so doing.

But as men are not always constant in the best; so Sir F. making a new
consultation with his presbitery at Cadbury, took another resolution to reply
again under the name of An Apology, The new reply of Sir F.
and heerby the matter has grown to a larger discussion then was expected,
for that the book (after long expectation of more then two years) coming to
my hands, I was drawn to enlarge my self much more in this my reioynder, then
at the beginning I purposed: in so much as having ended the whole answer, with
in few months after the receipt of the book, it grew to such a bulk, as
conveniently it could not be set forth in one volume; and this was one cause of
some delay and longer deliberation.

But another more principal was, an advise written unto me, O. E. his book.
that one O. E. a minister had published another volume of the same argument in
supply of the knights defense, much more intemperate and maligna^t, then the
other; which being understood, it seemed necessary to expect the same before the
publishing of the former, which has caused much longer delay then was wished
or meant, especially some other impediments also co^curring therewith, whereof
most men cannot be ignorant.

Now then these being the causes of the enlargeme^t both of time and matter, it
seems I should tell you also of the reasons, why these two first Encounters
are set forth a part from the rest; but this is sufficiently declared by a
certain addition in the end of this book set down by the publisher thereof,
whereunto I remit the reader, only I am to advertise him to consider how easily
words do beget words, and how a few lavish speeches spoken at ra^dome by the
knight in his watchword have given an occasion to the handling of above fifty
controversies in these first two Encounters only; and then may you imagine how
much more the rest may amount unto.

And one principal reason of this increase and growth is, The causes of
enlarging this Treatese.
for that our adversaries do handle matters of religion so confusedly, and with
so little order, sincerety or truth, that we must either shuffle over things as
they do, scarce understood either by themsel^es or others, or else we must be
forced for drawing them into some method and perspicuity to spend much time and
labor, to explicate, and distinguish the same, and to yield to each thing his
true ground, reason and probation; which point, for that I had rather the
reader should learn by proof and experience of the things themselves here to
be handled, then by my spech, I will proceed no further; but remit my self to
the ensuing treateses, beseeching almighty God that all this may redound to his
glory and to their good for whose spiritual benefit I have most willingly taken
this small playnes.

Your hearty friend that wishes your greatest good. N. D.

THE FIRST TABLE OF THE PREAMBLES AND CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN these two
Encounters.
The first Encounter.
AN answer to a certain vain and Certain breef notes and observations,
Other observations upon the Praeface A brief Summary of all that before has
been said, or Cap. 1. Of the first charge of flattering the State of England,
Cap. 2. Proctor O. E. is called up the stage to tell his tale, and Cap. 3. Often
new blessings devised and brought in by S. F. unity in verity. And how false
and vain this is. Cap. 4. The same matter is prosecuted, and the disunion of
Cap. 5. unity in verity, among riged and soft Caluinists, named protestants and
Puritans in England and Scotland. Cap. 6. Cap. 7. reading of scriptures, and
publyke service in English. Cap. 8. Cap. 9. Cap. 10. deliverance from
exactions, long peace, power in forrayne contreys, wealth of the land, and
multitude of subjects increased. Cap. 11. Cap. 12. Cap. 13. Cap. 14. Cap. 15.
Cap. 16. Cap. 17. insued by the same. And how O. E. behaueth himself in this
controversy. Cap. 18. The Warning or admonition to S.F. Hastings and his Cap.
19.
The second Encounter.
The sum of that, which before was set down between Cap. 1. About the
general charge of false dealing laid to S. F. Cap. 2. How long the Cath. Roman
religion has flourished in S. Bid and Arnobius abused by S.F. together with a
comparison examined between our learned men. and those of the Protestants. And
first of John Husse bragged of by S. Francis. Cap. 3. Of the learning and
glorious disputations of Martyn Cap. 4. Of two notable untruths laid unto S.
F. his charge for Cap. 5. The examination of that which O. E. has written Cap.
6. The second part of this Encounter containing four Fides explicita and
implicita. Cap. 7. The minister O.F. is called upon to help out his knight Cap.
8. Of the second forged principle, that laymen must not Cat. Church does
forbid some books and purge others. c. 9. Cap. 10. Cap 11. Cap. 12. Cap. 13.
Cap. 14. Cap. 15. c. 16. Cap. 17. Cap. 18.
THE SECOND TABLE OF THE CHIEF CONTROVERSIES HANDLED IN THESE two Encounters.
In the first Encounter.
WHo are properly Catholyks, and who annotat. upon the epist. of O.E. and cap.
2. number. 2. How a man may make a most clear and evident deduction How old
Christian Emperors did promulgate laws What was the old rule of faith, so much
esteemed, and Whether the English-parlament rule of faith set down by O.E. be
sufficient to discern Catholyks from heretics: and whether a pa^lament can
make any rule of faith. Cap. 16. number. 1.2. etc. Whether Canonists do call the
Pope God or no? and In what sense a creature may be called God, and how What
wonderful reverend opinion the ancient Fathers had of the high and divine
power given to Priests upon earth, especially to the highest Priest. Ibid.
teach us or no? which O. E. denies. Cap. 11. number. 12. Whether the sacrifice of
the mass be a new invention How far Catholyke men do depend of the Pope for
the Whether any one new or old heresy can be proved What differences of
doctrine or opinions may be How co^temptuously the Protestants do speak not
only Whether temporal blessings entered into England and How many and how great
Inconveniences in matters
In the second Encounter.
Whether there were more darkness and ignorance in Q. Whether friars we^e
brave liars in K. Richard 2. his Whether scripture were read generally in
English in S. Whether John Husse and Martyn Luther offered disputation anno
Domini 1561. had the better. Cap 4. number. 14. Lucifugi scripturarum or
scripture-battes, used by Tertullian do properly agree to protestants or
Catholyks. Cap. 6. number. 24.25.26. etc. implicita and explicita be a true and
necessary distinction for the salvation of many men's souls, which cannot
possibly be saved without the use thereof. Cap 7. number. 6. that laymen must not
meddle in matters of Religion, and how far they are to meddle. Cap. ^. Index
expurgatorius against the corruption of heretyks and their books; how it must
be used* and what great good ensues thereof. Cap. 9. number. 23.24. etc. saints
or Pope-made Saints (as S.F. calls them) are more substantially Canonized.
Cap. 11. number. 15.16. etc. Whether Catholyks do hold, that the Pope or any
Whether the merits and sufferings of Saints, may be Whether no man may say to
the Pope, why do you so, Whether Catholyks do use the Popes pardons for their
In what degree or sense pardons are available to Christians. Whether James
Clement, that slew the last K. of France Whether it be true that K. John of
England was poisoned Whether the doctrine of salvation by only faith, be a
The third and fourth Tables as well of shifts and wilful falsifications, by
Sir Francis and O. E. as of the principal matters contained in these two
Encounters are to be seen in the end of the book.
AN ANSWER TO A CERTAIN VAIN, AND ARROGANT EPISTLE OF O. E. minister, unto
N. D. author of the Ward-word.
SMall contentment (gentle reader) can any Christian modest man take, that
having to handle a grave and serious cause sees himself drawn, or rather
driven from the same, to contention of words, by the insolency, and
importunity of his quarrelling adversary, 2. Tim. 2.
which te^deth to nothing (as the Apostle also notes) but to the subversion of
the hearer, and yet when we are forced to this disorder somewhat also must be
said least silence in speech show diffidence in truth, and that a fool (as the
Scripture insinuates) if he be not answered in his folly begin to think
himself wise. Proverb. 26.
We have signified before in our preface, how a certain contentious minister
desirous to be doing, and to play a part, but yet not without a visard in
respect of the follyes perhaps he was to utter, resolved to mask, and cipher
his name under the letters of O. E. and then having perused the reply of S.
Francis Hastings to the Ward-word, and misliking (as it seems) the same as
insufficient he b^ckled himself to make in his own opinion a better defense,
though in other men's judgment of two bad this is far the worse both in
resp^ct of the substance of matters, and controversies handled (whereof this man
treats no one groundedlie any where, but only quarrelleth at the words and
sentences of his adversary) as also in regard of his outrageous intemperate
speech, which runs al^o oftentimes both to turpitude, and scurrilitie, the
reason whereof we think to be in part for that the minister persuading
himself to be masked, presumes to utter any t^ing as unknown, and I am
content for this time to let him so pass, though in deed his deportment be
such against all kind of Catholic men never so learned, virtuous, worshipful,
or honorable, as no way he deserves any such favor, and that I could dismaske
him, he may perceive by diverse points which afterward I shall have occasion to
touch.

Now ^hen letting pass this, we shall look into the argument of this present
Epistle of O.E. to N.D. which you shall see to consist of three principal
points, T^^e points of ^his Epistle.
to wit, notorious folly, apparent falsehood, and ridiculous vanity, in
bragging and vau^ting, let us see them all in order.

To N. D. al^as Noddie, O. E. wishes knowledge of truth, etc. and then
begins he his Epistle thus; Sir N.D. or Noddie, or howsoever it shall please
you to style your self, being a man but of two or three letters, etc. Hee^e
you see begins a grave contention between O. E. and N. D. about the word
Noddie, which none but a Noddy, in my opinion would ever have brought into
examination, especially in print; ^or that N. D. being but consonants, and
having no sound of their own cannot make Noddie, exc^pt you ad the sound of
O.E. unto them, that are vowels, to give life unto the word, whereof it
follows, that seeing consonants are but the material part of a word, and
vowels the formal, O. ^. must needs be the formal Noddie, and that N.D. does
but lend him a coople of consonants to make him a Noddie, and thus much for the
name it self. But as for the nature, and essence of a Noddie to which of the
two it does best agree shall appear afterward in the discussion of matters
throughout this whole combat, and one point of a Noddie you may presently
perceive in these very words alleged, whereas O.E. objected to N.D. that he
is a man but of two or three letters, which is answered sufficiently by
numbering only how many letters O. E. do make, and so again afterward, and
very often in his repli^, he obiecteth to N. D. that he durst not put down
his name at length, which yet himself being at home upon his own ground and
among his own friends, and favorers, thought best not to do, and
consequently we must conclude, that as Cicero does call him a Noddie orator,
Cicero lib. 1. de oratore.
which alleges such matter, as makes no less for his adversary, then for
him self, so may we hold O.E. for a Noddie writer, who obiecteth that to N.D.
which with far less reason, or excuse he practices himself, and thus much
about the jest, and allusion of Noddie, wherein while the minister would needs
be pleasant he is now become ridiculous.

About the second point which is of his apparent falsehood albeit we might remit
our selves to the for whose discredit he tells us, that the same man has
written in all eight contemptible treatises, which he takes upon him to
register, and number up: The first being (as he says) certain chart^ls
written against his friends in Oxford: secondly a book against the Earl of
Leicester, entitled (as in the Margent he notes) Leicesters common wealth.
Thirdly an other against the late Lord Tresorer, called a confutation of
pretended fears. Fourthly that he helped Cardinal Allen to make his book
against the ^tate anno Domini 15^8. These are four books named by him to which
he adds four more to wit, Philopater against the proclamation. Dolmans book
of tytles, the disputation of Plessis, and the Ward-word against Sir Francs
Hastings. All which books he a^cribeth resolutly neither more nor fewer to
Father Persons: and albeit it were over long ^o examyne here all the
particulars, yet for the first four of them, I never heard any man of notice,
and judgment ascribe them to him before, and if I be not deceived, other
particular authors are known to have written them, namely the later three of
the first four; for as for the first of all I hold it for a mere fiction,
neither does the minister allege any one proof to show these books to be
his; and on the contrary side, he pretermitteth wilfully four or five other
books, which most men lightly do account by common fame to have come from him:
and this good fellow could not probably but know it also, to wit, the reasons
of refusal about Catholics going to protestant Churches. The discovery of
Ihon Nicols. The Censure and defense thereof against William Cha^cke. The
Epistle of persecution. And the christian directorie, or book of resolution;
So as in recounting us here eight books the minister tells nine lies, four
positive, and five privative, no less falselie affirming the one then
fraudulently suppressing the other, which being discovered at this his first
entrance to his answer, and not being able to be excused, each man will see how
little truth, or conscience he has, and how little he is to be trusted in any
thing else that he says or writes.

The third point is of his ridiculous crowing, vaunting and chalenging, as
though he were not Job. 41.
and his nostrels fyerie smoke, who esteems iron as straw, and contemns
brass as rotten wood, which is spoken of a proud co^temptuous spirit
discovered every where in this fellow, not only by his fuming, fretting, and
f^cing throughout this idle Epistle, but by his contumelious words, and
reprochful speeches also in all other parts of his writing, provoking and
chalenging as a giant, and yet when he comes to grypes he shows himself one
of the poorest, and weakest worms, that ever lightly has come to combat in
these affairs as after you will find by experience, now let us hear him a
little cracle if you list. I do dravve you (says he) into other five
Encounters (besyds the former eight) and do protest, Examples of vaunting and
chalenging in O. E.
that if you come not forth, you shall be baffuld for a Covvard, unworthy to
bear arms in this kind of vvarfayre. Lo here the courageous champion, but if
you chance to behold afterward this menacing mate that here threatens such
terrible baffuling, to be soundly beaten; how childish will this bragging seem
unto you, well then I remit me to the issue. Yet cease he not, but goes
forward thus: I have taken upon me (says he) to join with you upon your
own ground, and to t^y you at your own vveap^ns, etc. And yet more; If
you be not at leisure, let Cresvvel, or some other babbling Jesuit stand
forth and try his skill, it stands you much upon. Do you see how desirous
this man is of an Antagonist? as for his demand of Father Creswel, I may
answer him, nos^is, quid petis, for he would be ouermatched, and Creswel would
crush him: and let him take heed how he provoke him overmuch least he shake him
up and say as Cicero did of a like good fellow, ^^cero. Phi^^p. 2.
non tam despectum, quam vexatum dimittam. Which I am forced also sometimes to
do, by his importunity, and intolerable petulancy.

And to the end the reader may partly also understand, what this masked
minister O. E. is, who under a visard so egregiously plays the vize, and
would byte also even to blood if his teeth were equal to his tongue. Relation
about O. E.
You must understand that according to the relation we have of that man, he
has been a soldiour and pyrate as well as a minister, and no marvel seeing
all these offices or occupations agree not euel in a man of his quality,
neither is there any irregularitie (you know) in the m^n of his Clergy. And
further I understand, that he has been judge martial among soldiers, since
he was a minister, and now when any bands of men are to be made in his country,
he is a chief Muster-man, walking up and down with his truns^ion in his hand
(in steed of the bible) to beat and break soldiers heads, that range not to
his liking, or obey not his beck, wherein yet they affi^me him to be so
vntemperatelie chole^^ke, or rather frantike, and furious when he is angered, as
that he were, intolerable to be a comiter to beat slaves in a Galley, and
much more to guide or direct free men, that serve voluntarily their Prince.

He is married (as they say) and matched as a minister ought to be, and thereby
perhaps somewhat restrained, yet is his tongue so exorbitant, when he begins,
as no reason, hones^ie, or religion bears rule with him though much trouble
it has brought him already, and may do more if he have his due, for that out
of Ireland he was forced to retire in haste about injurious speech uttered
against the Earl of Ormond, and Irish nation, and nobility generally, and
hereof can the knight bear witness, whose name begins with a B, and wa^
forced to witness against him. I could allege also diverse other witnesses
omni exceptione maiores, as well of his own order as otherwise; of his
intemperate and odious speeches against the present state, and such as manage
the same for temporal matters, complaining grieuouslie among the rest of the
servitude, and great poverty of the English clergy affyrming in particular,
that they paid the third penny of all that ever they had, and finally showing
himself as deeply discontent as any man could be that lives in external
show of obedience.

And for all these and other such points I could name many particu^ars both of
matter, men, time, and place, when and where they were spoken, as also, I could
resolve the name of O. E. into his true sillables if it be true that his
surname begin with S. but, I have promised to spare him for this time, and
will keep my promise: And if it please him to go forward in this controversy
taken in hand with christian modesty, and convenient terms of civility as
men professing learning ought to do, I shall be content to answer him in the
same style, attending to the matter, and not to the man or his manners, but if
he delight in the other vain style of scolding, and scurrilitie, I mean to
leave him, and deliver him over into the hands of some, which may chance t^ke
him up also in that kind according to his deserts, and in the mean space the
man before mentioned that is most iniuried by him in his malignitie of speech,
leeseth little by his lewd detraction, but gayneth rather exceedingly both in
merit with God, and credit with all good men, and as for the trial of their
cause, it will appear sufficiently by that which afterward comes to be
examined in these Encounters.

CERTAIN BRIEF NOTES AND OBSERVATIONS UPON SIR F. HAStinges Epistle to the
Christian Reader.
THOUGH whatsoever Sr. F. writes in this Epistle be

First of all he begins the very first paragraphe Epist. page 1.
as I confess I understand him not; for thus he says: Having observed (gentle
Reader) from the words and wrytinges of the learned, that it is a maxim, A
ma^^m^ evil applied.
or rule in Philosophy Finis est primus in intention, the end aimed at is
first settled in the intention of man, and findinge this Romanist to boast and
brag much of his lea^ning it is not unlike, that like a conning Clarke
(whatsoever his learning be) the end of this his work, was the first ground of
his writing.

Thus he writes and if the Reader understand his meaning, and what he would
conclude, it is well, for I profess my ignorance therein, only I know the
Philosophers maxim to be this: Aristo^.
that as the end of ^oing any thing is first in our intention, so is it last in
preformance and execution. The later part our K. has left out, the former I
know not why he has brought in, except perhaps his hidden conceyt should be,
that the last part of my Wardword (which is the remission to the Lords of her
Ma^ies. Counsel) was the first thing intended by me, and inducing me to write,
which yet is evidently seen to be false, for that the K. Wachword and iniuryes
offered therein to Catholics was the motive, enforcing rather then inducing to
that work, and to oppose my ward to so sla^derous a watch: so that here S.F.
his Philosophical Maxim is fondly applied, or not applied at all, and
consequ^ntly his brag of having observed the same from the word: and wrytings of
the learned, is vain, seeing how unlearnedly he uses it. But this is easily
pardoned in a Knight; and so let us go forward.

After thi^ he takes in hand the title of my book, which is A te^perate
wardword etc. saying a he proclaymeth temperance in his title, Epist. ibid.
and pursues the a^te of railing in the whole process following, and in the
end of all he persuadeth ruin both to Church and comon-w^lth, etc. For my
railing I remit me to the judgment of the indifferent Reader, who w^l
distinguish between railing and round answering, or rigorous reiection of an
importune adu^rsar^ that multiplyeth calumniatious without ground, number or
measure, especially in that kind of bloody sycophancy wher^n the watching libel
was written, though I do confess as before has been signified, that I was the
more earnest and eager sometime, for that I did imagine the said byring libel
not to have proceeded from the knight but from some K. of another kind, not
from S.F.H. of so honorable a house and calling, but from some Crane, some
W^lkinson, S F. Presbytery of (...) min^^^ers at Cadbury.
some Sipthorpe (if I remember well their il favored names) Doctors and Rabbyns
of his puritanical presbytery at Cadbury, but now that I see the knights
humility to be so great as to dishonor himself with taking the name of this
work upon him, I shall endeavor to use more patience also with him in my
answer, except he over strain it sometimes by the intemperance of his tongue
against Catholykes, and so much of this.

But for the second which he obiecteth that I seek the ruin both of Church
and common wealth by my exhortation to peace, atonement and mitigation in
religion which afterward goes in my remitter to the Lords of her Mat^es.
Counsel, their Honors and not Sr. F. worship, or wisdom must be judges of this
point: and why an exhortation to peace and union should be accounted a cause of
publyke ruin I see no cause; nor yet reason of state or religion therein,
except the knight and his puritanical camp do hate peace; following therein that
other Maxim, that in troubled waters is best fishing. Which conjecture is
shrewdly confirmed by the attempt of their Puritan Captain the Earl of Essex
(brought by puritanisme into such calamity) who having been stout against
peace with forrayne Princes for diverse years, The Earl of E^sex pitifully
seduced by the Puritans.
under pretense of home security, had wrought such a troubled water under hand
in the mean space, as if his stream had not been troubled, and turned upon him
before his time, he might chance to have inhooked the greatest fish of
England. And whether Sr. F. were one of those anglers or no, I cannot tell,
being so far absent, nor will I accuse him, though he being of the
sermon-sect, and exercising society, which under that occasion and pretense
laid their hooks to this troublesome and dangerous fishing, it may be
presumed he liked well inoughe the matter, though, perhaps not the manner, and
so til a new captain be found, the enterprise mustly raked up in the ashes,
and out cries be given again against Catholykes as the only men, that by peace
union and pacification do seek the ruin both of Church and common wealth. But
this art now is vnde^stood, and so I doubt not but it will be considered of
accordingly by her Matie. and her wise council, whatsoever false alarm, or
sayned counter-word the sentinels of the adverse part do give out for their
commodytie. And this is sufficient for a warn-word in this affayre.

The rest that follows in his Epistle is of no moment, until he come to
delight himself somewhat with a certain fensing allusion, to the title of the
ward-word, saying: I doubt not, but so to break the strength of all your
chief wards (for all your fensing skill as to leave you at length to your
hanging ward, The hanging vvard^. Ibid. Page 4.
which proves always a dangerous ward, if it be sharply followed by the
assaylant* Lo here, threats that go before arguments, wherein I confess both
him and his to be very eager and sharp assaylants, and that no fencers, nor
swashbucklers, nor cutters (as they call them) of Queen hiue or other kilcowes
could ever follow the fray more sharply upon Catholics, then he and Topclif
and such other have done, for these many years, by hanging so many Priests and
other servants of Christ, that have rested upon this hanging ward of patience
and suffering for ancient religion; which ward yet has proved much more
glorious then dangerous to them, their hope and assurance depending of the
promise inviolable of their Captain and Master, assuring them upon his honor
and power, that no one hear of their head shall perish, which they have seen
performed in all former suffering and martyrdomes for the same cause, and so do
hope it will be in the^, for which respect they contemn easily, whatsoever the
malice of man can work against the^. And so (Sir) your bloody jest of ha^ging
ward, returns to you again, without applause of any that has feeling of
piety or humanity.

There follows further in his epistle: The violence (says he) of the
Puritan spirit is added by ^^m (the warde^) ^or a reason why he is provoked
by me, by which words (for all his difference made between Protestant and
Puritan) both of them are apparently known to pro^esse Christ Jesus crucified
in religion, etc. ^ F. vvil not tell whether he be a Puritan, or not.
Here is first to be noted that our K. by no means can be forced throughout
all his whole book to declare himself clearly, whether he be of the Puritan
faction or no, only in this place he would feign deny (as you see) all
difference of those names and professio^s, which being ridiculous to all
English (even children) that know the contrary (and I am to show it largely
afterward in the very first Encounter) Cap. ^.
yet he blusheth not to deny it here, yea further he endeauoreth to prove yt by
a strong demonstration saying: that both of them do profess Christ Jesus
crucified in religion. But grant that Christ be crucified again in their
religion and that both protestant and puritan do conspire therein, is this
sufficient to prove them both to be of one religion? And do not all the
Anabaptists, Trinitarians and other sectaryes of our time confess the same,
that is Christ to have been Crucified? also in their religion? Yea all the old
heretics, except only such as denied the manhood of Christ; did confess
Christ crucified? And we Catholykes in like manner (whom yet he rejects as
most opposite to him and his) do we not profess that Christ was crucified? how
then is this agreement in Christ Jesus Crucified brought in for a sufficient
argument of their unity in belief and Doctrine? A foolish argument of
agreement between Protestants and Puritans.
Consider (good reader) what notable arguments you are like to have in the
rearward and rest of his book, seeing these and other like are put in the
vauntgard.

There ensues yet further in his epistle. This encoun^ere^ (says he) seems
to glory that the years of her Ma^^^ grow on fast^ but the God of mercy I
trust will prolong her da^es, Page 5. Ibid.
to the holding out still of the Popes usurped authority, etc. Here are two
apparent abuses, Calumniation and flattery.
calumniation, and flattery. calumniation in that the Encounterer names not
her Ma^e^. many years by way of vaunt, but by way of sorrow and compassion to
the Realm and comon-welth. The flattery consists in that the K. will needs
persuade her Mat^e. of holding out still, which as every man desires to be
long, yet this (still) is so gross and palpable a flattery as no man of
judgment and gravity can but scorn him for yt, especially since the Essexian
assault, which may be presumed would have abbreuiated this (still) if it had
prevailed, if not in the Earls own intention, yet in many other of the puritan
hot brotherhood* that egged him on to this attempt.

A little after when I persuade to union of hearts and good wills in England by
tolleration and mittigation in matters of religion, he (as though there were no
need thereof) answers thus: As for his unity, if yt be unity in verytie (as
his is not) no Christian man can or will refuse that, Page 7.
but praise God for that, and (if our unthankfulness bereave us not of yt) we
enjoy that already by and under her Ma^^^. with great comfort. Here if by (we)
he understand all his new gospel brethren, to wit Lutherans, Suinglians,
English Protestants and Puritans (as in the rest of his book he holds them
for true brethren) then how this (we) do agree in unity of verity all men that
have ears or eyes, do hear and see, which matter yet shall be examined more
largely in the first Encounter cap. 3.4 5. and 6.
following where our knight does assign it for the first and most special
blessing of their religion to have this good unity in verity among them.

But in the mean space, for that he does seem to restrain his speech somewhat
in this place to England alone, by saying, that they enjoy it already by and
under her Matie. it is not hard to see or judge what unity in verity there is
between protestants and Puritans at home, Comfort of protestants and puritans.

See the book named the su^u^y of pretended ^oly discipline.


and how comfortable a matter it is to the Puritan party to be restrained by
her Matie. and her Bishops (as they be) to exterior unity with the Protestants
(for to the interior no force will prevail) and what great and singular joy
they take thereof yt appears in part by their several books of heavy
complaynts about this matter, L. Daunge^rous pos^tions.
some of them being driven also to the hang^ng ward as well as Catholykes by
their brethren protestants, L. Martyn Marprelate^ etc.
so as S. F. tale seems rather a r^diculous jest then a serious narration.
But let us go forward.

He comes at length (which perhaps he leueled at in his first words of this
his epistle) to censure my inte^tion in pleading for toleratio^, and especially
for offering the vewe o^ my book to the Lords of her Ma^^e Counsel, which
offends him much, and therefore he say^h thus or me: S F. Epist. Page 7.
Notwithstandi^g all his fawning and crowching to the ^e^^rable lor as in his
^emitter, their wisdoms (I doub not) will easily find out his subtyle Syno^s
intention^ who s^ameth not with a brazen face, to seek to bring in ^is brazen
horse laden wit armed calamityes for Englands ruin, etc. This who^e matter is
handled afterward both in the remitter it self and other places of the book,
where the K. besides this blast of brazen words has no one argument in the
world to reply, or to prove any calamity either armed or unarmed to be likely
to be brought in by this brazen horse (as he will needs term it) of
mittigatio^ or toleration, The imagined brazen horse.
nor answers he any one letter or syllable to the many vtilityes and public
emoluments which there I show to be pretended and intended thereby, nor does he
so much as go about to answer or remove any one of the great hurts, dangers,
damages and inconveniences which I declare in my first Encounter, partly to
have been received already, and partly daily imminent by the course held of
change of relig^on and rigorous manner of pursuing the same: only the poor man
shows to fear extremely, that if any toleration of Catholic religion should
be permitted, then his Pandora (as Irenaeus calls heresy) would fly or fall to
the ground presently: ^rem lib. 2. cap. 54 and lib. 4 cap 2. Fear of toleration
in the puritans.
Which fear of Sir Francis is notwithstanding most dishonorable to him and his
sect, and quite contrary to that which at the beginning they preached to the
world, affirming nothing to be more reasonable or convenient, then to suffer
both religions to stand together, as at this day in Germany, France, and other
places, where both sorts are found to be permitted for greater peace and
concord of the commonwealths; And why then should our K. so much fear ruin
thereby to his religion in England, except only for the causes before cyted.

Toward the end of his Epistle he having censured mine intention, as before
you have hard, he sets down his own very confidently in these words: Being
called, as it were, into the field by him, Ibidem.
I have adventured upon the height of his swelling pride, and have shaped him a
plain and sound answer to the material points, etc. whereby I hope (Christian
Reader) thou shall find me cleared and free from the force and fury of his
false imputations and biting blows, etc.

Here for that he remitteth the matter to the Christian Reader, I am very well
content to subscribe to the same remission, who first of all must needs judge
for me, and condemn him in the very first words that he alleges, to wit that
he was called into the field by me, whereas his Watchword being the first
challenge that sounded the trompet of war, Manifest untruths impudently
auouc^ed.
and my answer but only a necessary ward thereunto as both the title and
subject of my book declares how can he so confidently tell so open and manifest
an untruth, and witha^l remit the same to the judgment of the Reader, except he
hold him without judgment or conscience. And here I would ask how far this
is from impudency? and yet according to the same suit do follow the rest, that
is to say: of my swelling pride, of his plain and sound answer shaped to all
material points: and that he is fully cleared from all imputations of falsehood,
etc. For if my pride be no more swelling, then his mishaped answer is sound
and material, I may think my self a very humble man. And if in Westminster
halle S. F. should be accused of treason or felony or other greiuous
criminations (as many Catholic Priests are upon less occasion) and should
clear and free himself no better therein, then here he does in this reply,
from imputations of falsehood, he might quickly expect both judgment and
execution, and consequently himself be driven to that hanging ward, which
here he threateneth to drive us unto.

And lastly whereas he writes for the conclusion of his Epistle, that this
answer of his being ended and published (which I held my self bound (quoth
he) in duty to do, for thy satisfyieng (gentle Reader) and my own c^edit, his
full reso^utio^ is not to toil any more by contending with such railing and
wrangling spirits. etc. This resolution, I say, of the K. though it were never
so full and firm at that time (as being weary perhaps of so difficult a work)
yet I doubt that it will be broken, and he enforced to toil yet further in the
matter, if he will satisfy the reader, or maintain his own credit, which
poor credit he will find (I believe) so much crased (in steed of amended) by
this his reply; as if it were somewhat shaken before by the Watchword, it will be
quite overthrown now, by this his own Wastword and the answer thereunto; and
if before it were battered, or beaten, it will now be utterly broken and
shiuered in pieces, seeing that much more falsehood deceypt and other infirmityes
are found and discovered in this his supply, then were in the first assault:
and if he were troubled before in defending he will be toyled now. The proof
whereof, I leave to the trial, and combat following, whereunto our K. says that
he hasteneth like a corragious defendant taking his farewell of the Reader in
these words. To our God I commend thee (gentle reader) and will now hasten to
join the combat with this proud Romanist, The K. commendation and farevvel.
t^uching his Encounters severally. Thus he says, and so ends his Epistle.
And if when he names our good God, he mean the common God of heaven and
earth, and of other Christians, his haste to the combat may chance to be more,
then his good speed, seeing that this God, is God of truth, and not of shifts
and falsehoods which are hear discovered, and consequently is like to prove no
great good God to S. F. cause, that stands thereon, as the sequeal of this
combat (if I be not deceived) will declare, whereunto I also (to meet the K.) do
make my repair; with no less haste though I hope with better speed then S^.
F. Hastings.

OTHER OBSERVATIONS UPON THE PREFACE OF O. E. TO THE REAder containing a full
answer thereunto.
O. E. his plot and project.
but to irrite, and stir up her Majesty and her honorable counsel with the
rest that s^and at the stern of government, to ingulf themselves in Catholics
blood, and spoil of their goods; whereby he, and his hungry crew standing by,
and for desire thereof licking their lips might hope to come to have some share
in the deuidend, O. E. watches for scrappes.
and yet for avoiding public hatred, and notorious shame he desires to
entertayne himself in some darkness for a time and to expect his pray under
the shroud of a cyphred O. E.
name, for as he said which knows well such compagnions, qui male agit, Io. 3.
verse. 10.
odit lucem, and non venit ad lucem vt non arguantur opera eius, he that does
naughtely hates the light, and will not come to it least his works may be
convicted, but yet we must draw this Owl to light, and see what he says
under the vizard of O. E.

His drift in this Epistle, and in his whole writing

His first mean of persuasion is by extolling exceedingly Rare cleme^cy
toward Catholykes.
which clemency he says has been most singular, and admirable, and to prove
this (leaving all home testimonies) he runs into Italy to seek a witness,
bringing forth one Petrus Bizartus in his story of Genua, Pet Biz. lib. Hist.
Genesis 33. Pres. page 1.
who says, that for the first 20 years of her Majesty's reign no blood was
shed, nor any suffered to be punished but by lavvful trial and sentence of
Judges, etc. But what need was there to go so far to fetch so slender a
testimony? this fellow wrote a 1000. mile of, and tells us only that there
was no bloodshed, nor punishment without some sentence of Judges or lavvful
trial for the first 20 years. And what then for the second twenty? shall we
infer (as it seems we must) that for these later twenty years bloodshed
has been used without lawful trial or sentence of Judges? and does not our
minister show himself more then Bizarro in Italia^ a light and fantastical
head.
Bizarro (I speak to him as understanding the Italian tongue) for bringing in
Bizarus to so fond a purpose? so that by this you may take a scantling of the
man's discretion at the very first entrance, you shall see it more in the next
and other points that do ensue.

Ibid. page 1.
In the mean while Thomas Harding obtained a Bull from the Pope to exercise
Episcopal jurisdiction in England, to dispense with irregularities, and to
receive all that would be reconciled to the Pope.

And then he notes in the margent anno Domini B567. by which entrance also we
may be much confirmed in our former conjecture of our man's deep wit, seeing
that at the very beginning he would bring in such impertinent stuff, for the
foreshew of his wares: for first it was never hard of before (I think) that D.
Harding after his departure out of England to Louayne in the beginning of her
majesty's reign, Whether D. Harding returned into England.
came home to live in England again, or to exercise Episcopal jurisdiction
therein, but rather about the time this man assigns; he was busy writing in
Flanders against his adversary M. Jewel. Secondly what need was there to give
him Episcopal Jurisdiction in England at that time, who abiding as I have said
in Flanders, there were diverse Bishops yet living in England, and other learned
men to have exercised that Episcopal jurisdiction, if need had been. But this is
more ridiculous which ensues, that he had a Bull to dispense with
irregularities, and to receive all that would be reconciled to the Pope, for
what needed either Bull or Episcopal jurisdiction for this, seeing every
ordinary Priest may have authority to do it, without Bull or Episcopal
jurisdiction, or what special need was there at that time to dispense with
irregularityes or to reconcile men more then before? Does O.E. know what
irregularitie means? or will he tell his reader trewly, what is understood by
reconcilling to Catholic religion, which he calls to the Pope? no, I trow
not, it is not their fashion to deal sincerely in any point, for proof whereof
hear his exposition, All that were reconciled (says he) to the Pope,
renounced their obedience to the Prince, Spiritual obedience may stand with
temporal.
and is it so in deed Sir minister? woe then to the Emperor, and to the kings of
Spain, France, Polonia, and Princes of Italy and other places, whose subjects
are either all, or the most part reconciled to the Pope in the sense that we
talk of Catholyke religion, and yet have they not I trow renounced thereby all
obedience to their temporal princes: So that reconciliation to the Pope may
stand with due obedience to their naturel princes also, if O.E. and his
seditious mates will be content to understand matters a right, and not to cauil
wilfully against their own consciences.

As for D. Mortons sending into the north by Pius Quintus for declaration of
his sentence given in Rome (which is the next point that follows in this
ministers tale) it being so long ago, and but a particular English man's act,
cannot by any reason prejudice any more the residue of Catholykes now in
England, The Earl of Effex his attempt.
then the late attempt of the Earl of Essex did or may do all English
puritanes, and protestants, that were of his religion, or shall be hereafter,
though not privy to his attempt, nor any thing so much, as the said late
attempt may touch perhaps this hungry minister, if matters were well examined,
who being of his retinue, and of more need then his master; is likly enough to
have been of his council, and partaker of his golden purposes.

As for that which follows of recusant Catholics, that they do enjoy their
lands, goods, country, and liberty, notvvithstanding they are secretly
reconciled to the Pope and do adhere to her Majesty's enemies (as by a marginal
note he says) does appear by diverse letters of priests ready to be shevved*
Catholykes enjoying their goods, and liberty.
for there enjoying, I would the ministers joy were not greater in his
benefices, and then I doubt not, but he would be more calm then now he is, and
his hawty wives hair would soon grow through her french velvet hood, but for
their adhering to enemies, testified (as he says) by Priests letters, we have
as little reason to believe him against Priests (not showing their letters) as
they should have to write any such untruth, which we believe not, but take it
as a stratageme devised, to set us at division among our selves.

O.E.A. notorious fyrebrand of sedition.
that too much extraordinary favor, and remissnes toward Catholics has
caused diverse rebellions, both in England, and Ireland, and that it has
dissolved the very synevves of government, and that it is more profitable, and
expedient to excute laws then to pardon offenders, etc. All which this
sycopha^t chaunted out lustely, at that very time and season to fill up her
Majesty's ears, when his Lord and young king Essex was most busy in plotting
her Majesty's overthrow under pretense of meeting at puritan sermons; and
seeing that this plot was laid in Ireland (from whence this minister under
pretense of running away for fear of punishment of some intemperate words
spoken, came into England not long before his master, as here is reported) it
may be he came about this negotiation, and fearing least it might be discovered
before due time, he took in hand to write this book of all-arme against
Catholics to disguyse and shadow the other, A treacherous devise.
and to divert men's eyes another way: but for this let her Majesty's wise
counsel look unto, and provide as they shall find need, I am only to proceed in
refuting of his malice, and folly, let them punish his treachery and knavery
if they find it.

After his spite is spit ou^ against the Catholics, Bragging of Sir F. book.
and says that the good knight of a zealous mind toward religion g^ueth the
word to his countrymen. And I say N.D. gives the Ward, and who gives or
receives most venewes let our countrymen be judges as they may also of this
champion his success, who seeing his good knight driven to the wall, with more
have then good speed, comes running to his succor, receiving for his gain
the first broken head as wrangling sticlers ar wont to do, and so I suppose you
will say also when ye see all that passes. Yet does he with a con^ident
interrogation commend unto us the whole work, saying, what one sentence in
all the whole discourse can be noted unworthy either a true Christian, or a
loyal subject, or a worthy knight? whereto I answer that there will so many
sentences be found in the treatise following unworthy of al three points
mentyoned, to wit, Christianity, loyalty, and chiualry, as if this worthy
champion can defend them he will show him self worthy to be knighted also, and
to have a K. for the first letter of his title.

But to return again to the prosecution of this man's inuectiue against
Catholics, their lives, honors, liberty and goods; all which he impugneth at
one time, and for some flourish, and show of proof he alleges first certain
examples of Scripture where kings of Judah were reprehended for permitting
unlawful woorship and then out of the old Roman laws recounted die Cicero and
Vlpian, ^. Reg. 1^. ^. Paral. ^3. Cicero lib. 3. de leg^ bus. Vlpian l. quo
ties ff. de poe^is.
which do prescribe diverse kinds of punishments for malefactors, and ^hirdly
out of the laws of ancient Christian Emp^rors that willed heretics to be
punished, and with this thinks that he has proved very substantial^y, that
Catholic men also may, and must be puni^^ed in England.

Petrus iacet in lectulo, ergo h^^ulus siat in angulo, these examples have no
affinity or coherence with our cause, but only so much as they make against
this Noddy, His argument against him self.
and for us, for if old Roman laws do give general authority to the body of
the common wealth to punish particular offencers and non e contra, as Cicero
signifies in his book de legibus then follows it in good reason that the
Catholic christian church being the universal body of Christ's common wealth
upon earth, has authority to punish Protestants, Puritanes, Lutherans,
Arrians or any other sect that does or shall arise: but not that the^e have
authority, or may have to punish the other, for matter of religion, though
they should get superiority of temporal power in any place of the world, for
that they are but particular men and members of members at all) and the other
the body and true common wealth to whom only it appertains to punish.

O.^.
Oules eye but s^ewe me one example from the beginning of Christendom, that
ever any man or woman in any age, was punished as an heretic by the Christian
common wealth for sticking to the religion of the Pope of Rome, and it shall be
sufficient for all, I ask but one example out of all antiquity.

As for the examples alleged by him of Asa and Manasses kings of Judah who
notwithstanding, 3. Reg. 15. 2 Paral. 33. Idolatrous vvor^hip on hills among the
jews out of the Temple pre-figured heresves among Christians. Hierem. in c. ^.

Amos and in c. 12. O see Aux. de vri^^tate ieiun^ cap. ^. Deutt. ^3.

Aug. de ciuit Dei l. 1^. cap 51.

Cypr. lib. de un. Eccl.

Hier. in cap. ^ Ezech. in c 1^ Osee and in c. 1^.

Zach. and in c. 8. ^ an.

Aug. enarrat. in Psalm. ^0. part. ^9. and sup lib Iosue cap. 27.


their other good zeal, did not remove the unlawful service and sacrifice
accustomed on hills, and high places, they make nothing against us, but
altogether for us, and expreslie against this ellow, and his people, with their
new devised sects, and heresies, which according to the ancient Fathers
expositions, were prefigured by the schismatical places of Idolatrous worship
out of the temple of Jerusalem (which temple prefigured the Catholic Church)
and consequently were true figures of heresies and heretics among us. The text
of Deutronomy also, which here he cyteth for putting to death false Prophets,
and dreamers of dreams that entised men to Idolatry (which sentence in like
manner he puts for his poesy in the first page of his book to make men
understand whereunto he leueleth) this I say, is clearly also against him, and
his, for that hervpon ancient Fathers do ground that heretics may, and ought
to be put to death; which are the proper Idolators of the new testament that
adore their own fancies, selfe-wil, and judgments, all other external Idolatry
being abolished by christ's coming, and his religion, whose proper work was
prophesyed to be to destroy Idolatry.

All this then is against himself as most clearly might be showed by
exposition of all antiquity if of punishing Catholics. Romans 16. page 7.
The Apostle (says he) vvriting to the Romans exhorts them, to mark sutc^
diligently, as should cause division, and offenses among them, contrary to the
doctrine which they had learned, and to avoid them. The Emperors Grati^m,
Valentinian and Theodosius put heretical teachers to perpetual silence, ^.
Omn^s cod. de haeret. and ma^ich.

Cuncti. ibid. Atriani ibid. lib. 1. contr. Ep. Parmen. c. 6. and ^p. 166 and
ep. 62.


and charged inferior officers not to vvinke at them. Arcadius and Honorius
dep^yued them of al exercises of their false religion. Theodosius, and
Valentinian the younger banished Arrians, Manichees, and all heretics out of
the Roman Empire. And for this cause did S. Augustine highly commend the
Emperors justice, and teaches, that it was necessary that all heretical
teachers should be repressed and corrected.

that it never pleased any good man of the catholic church, (...). 6.
that heretics should be put to death. Which there I do refute by diverse
evident testimonies of S. Augustine him self, and do show the place by him to
be egregiously falsified, and here it is contradicted also by his champion O.
E. who says that S. Augustine highly commended the Emperors justice, and
albeit he say only that it was necessary that heretical preachers should be
repressed, and corrected, yet that the said Emperors justice passed further
appears clearly by the decree of Theodosius and Valentinian, whose words
are: Manichaeis etiam ex ciuitate pellendis, Cod. lib. 1. cit. 5 leg Ar^ian.
and vltimo supplicio tradendis, etc. That the Manichees should not only be
driven out of the cittyes, but also be put to death.

the Emperors decrees, the third out of S. Augustine; all against himself. I
shall say a word or two of each one in order and thereby vow shall discern the
man's judgment. S. Paul alleged by O. E. against himself.
The place of S. Paul is directly against sectaries that make division among
them that were in peace and unity of religion before, and do bring in new
doctrine different from that which they had learned and received publicly
before, which makes the case of our controversy very clear: For whether
Martyn Luther, Vldericus Zuinglius, John Caluyn, and the rest of that crew,
have done this or no in our age, and whether the protestants in England fynding
Catholics in peace, and unity, have done like offices in bringing in new
opinions and dissension which was not before, let all the world judge. Sure I
am they cannot say, that we fynding them in unity did trouble their peace, or
go out from them, so as this place of S. Paul is wholly against themselves, and
this to the first point.

The second for us, and against them is, of the Emperors decrees alleged
against himself and his by O.E.
he blusheth not to affirm that which all his fellows have denied until this
day, as after you shall see in a number of points) and here now I would ask
him, why he brought in these Emperors decrees of punishing heretics? what
heretics they were? how they were defyned? by what they were distinguished
from Catholics? why and for what causes they were punished?

The decree begins thus: Arriani, Macedoniani, Leg. Arriani Cod. de
haereticia.
Macedonians, Apollinarians, Nouatians, Sabatians, Valentinians, Montanists,
Donatists, and the like, named in this place to the number of 34. are commanded
to be punished for heretics by these catholic Emperors Theodosian and
Valentinian in the year of Christ 428.

Damnato portentosae superstitionis authore Nestorio. Cod. lib. 1. ^^t. ^^g.
dam^^^^.
etc. seeing that Nestorius (the Author of a most monstrous superstition for
saying that the blessed Virgin was not mother of God, but of man only) is now
condemned (by the late Council of Ephesus) we will that his followers have the
note of a fit name du^ unto them; to wit, that they be called not Christians,
but Nestorians of Nestorius, as the followers of Arrius were called by the law
of Co^stantyne (our predecessor of happy memory) Arrians, and the followers of
the sect and heresy of Porphirius porphirians, etc.

Names of Lutheranes Caluinists, etc.
and do you not think that if Luther, Zwinglius, and Caluyn had been in their
days also, and had raised such a company af Sectaryes after them, as they did,
would they not have called them as we do; Lutherans, Zuinglians and Caluinists?
yes truly; for that by any other name they could not be understood.

But hear yet a further distinction given by the same Emperors between
heretics and Catholics: Q^cunque in hac sacra Vrbe, etc. whosoever in this
holy city, etc. or other where, do follow the profane peruersitie of Eutiches
condemned in the late Council gathered at Calcedon, and do not so believe in
all points of faith as the 318. holy Fathers of the Nicene Council, Who are
heretykes by the sentence of ancient Christian Emperors.

An Domini 457.


and as the 150. venerable Bishops gathered together in the Council of
Constantinople, or the other two councels following of Ephesus or Calcedon,
sciant se e^ie haereticos, etc. let them know that they are heretics.

of the east and west, nine and twenty years after the former decree. And the
like made the Emperor Maximilian after the late Council of Trent against all
kind of Protestants, Luthera^s, Zuinglia^s, Anabaptists, Caluinists, and the
like condemned by the said Council, so as the same reason that moved
Valentinian and Marcian almost 1200. years ago to proclaim them heretics
that were condemned by the Council of Calcedon in their days, wherein Leo
primus B. of Rome had the chief hand, and confirmed the same. The same I say
moved Maximilian the Emperor of our days to proclaim for heretics all
protestants condemned in the Council of Trent, gathered in his time by like
authority, as that of Calcedon was: but yet let us see one deduction further.

Of what religion (think you) were these Emperors

Truly the first decree of al Justinians Code The religion of Gratian,
Valentinian and Theodosius.
Valentinian, and Theodosius, whose first words are. Cunctos populos, etc. Does
appoint and command all Christian people both of the Roman and Greek Empire to
follow the faith and religion of the Roman Church delivered to them by S.
Peter, and continued unto that day, which (say they) Damasus the Bishop of that
City does follow, as also Peter Bishop of Alexandria, and whosoever did not
follow this unity of Religion should be counted infamous heretics: This is the
substance of that first decree, which being so, tell me now, if this does touch
our protestants or no? who can abide neither Roman B. nor Roman Religion.

Leg. omnes de haerer. lib. ^. Co^. tit. 5.
in these words: Haereticorum vocabulo continentur, and latis aduersus eos
sanctionibus debents succumbere, qui vel leui argumento a iudicio Catholicae
religionis, and tramite detecti fuerint, deuiare. Who are truly hereti^es?
Those are here called heretics, and to be punished by our laws made
against them, whosoever shall be detected to dissent and disagree, even in any
small matter, from the judgment and path of Catholic religion. Thus say they.
And seeing in their first Decree they do declare that the Roman religion under
Pope Damasus was the only Catholic religion to be followed, it is easily seen
whether Protestants or Papists at this day be comprehended under these penal
laws made against heretics, or no?

Gloriosissimo and clement^ssimo filio Iustiniano Ioannes Episcopus vrbis
Romae, etc. wherein among other praises which the Pope gives him, one
principal was, that notwithstanding he was Emperor of Constantinople, and that
some emulation now began in that Empire against the City of Rome, yet he
persisted in his Catholic due obedience to the said Church of Rome head of all
other Churches; amore fidei (says he) and chaeritatis studio, Cod. lib. 1.
leg. inter claras tit. ^.
edocti Eccis disciplinis, Romanae sedis reuerentiam conseruatis, and ei cuncta
subijcitis, and ad eius deducitis vnitatem, ad cuius authorem, hocest
Apostolorum primum Domino loquente praeceptum est, pasce oues meas, quam esse
omnium vere Ecclesiarum caput, and Patrum regulae, and principum statuta
declarant, and pietatis vestrae reuerendissimi testantur affatus, etc. You
being moved by the love of faith, and study of charity and well instructed in
the discipline of the Church, do continue your reverence to the Roman sea, and
do subject all other thereunto, bringing them to the unity of this Church, to
whose fou^der, the first of all the Apostles Christ gave this precept feed my
sheep which Church as well the rules, 10.21.
and traditions of ancient Fathers as the decrees of former Christian Princes
have declared to be truly the head of all other Churches, And the same do
testify your Majesty's most reverent speeches and behavior toward the same.

This wrote the Pope to him, which letter he Victor Justinius pius faelix
Imperator, etc. Ioanni Smo. Archiepiscopo Alme Vrbis Romae, Cod. ibid. leg. nos
reddentes lib. 1. tit. 3.
and Patriarchae, etc. Nos reddentes honorem Apostolica sedi and vestri
Sanctitati, etc. We rendering due honor to the sea Apostolic, and to your
Holiness (which always we have desired as becomes to a Father) we have
endeauored, in honor of your beatitude to bring to the knowledge of your
Holiness all things that do appertain to the state of all Churches for that it
has been always our study to keep and conserve the unity of your Apostolic
sea, and of the holy Churches of God, which unity has always hitherto
perseuered immouable without any contrariety, and consequently we have been
careful to subject and unite all priests of the whole east cou^tryes, to the
sea of your Holiness.

Caput omnium Ecclesiarum, head of all other Churches, and that whatsoever
doctrine is different from the doctrine of this Church is heretical; by which
rule he condemns for heretics in this, and in two other that follow
immediately, and are extant in the Code both in Greek and Latin, Nestorius,
Leg. eum recta. and ^eru^torem, ibid.
Euthich^s, and Apollinaris as dissenting from the Roman Church and Bishops
thereof? Now then let the reader judge whether these laws of the Emperors made
against heretics do touch us, or protestants. And so much of this second point.

S. Augustine alleged by O. E. against himself.
and commending much these Emperors for punishing heresies, and for making
laws against heretics is altogether for us in like manner, and fully against
protestants, August. lib. 1. contr. Ep. Parm^n. cap. 6. and 10. ep. 62. and 166.

Aug. ep. 4^. ad Vincent.


for that S. Augustine dealing specially in this point against the Donatists
and Circumcellians who denied the visible Church dispersed over the whole
world, and restrained it to their sect only in Africa (as every sect of our
Protestants does at this day to the particular place, and Society where they
live) it is easily seen who were heretics, and who to be punished by S.
Augustines opinion, to wit those that do rise up against the universal known,
and visible Church of their time, and do condemn it, or are condemned by it,
and let Sir minister bring but one example to the contrary in any age from
Christ to Luther, and it shall be sufficient, to wit, that any man condemned by
the general known, and visible Church of his time for an heretic, was not
held and taken for such by any of that time or any time after that was not an
heretic himself, let Oules eye I say spy but one example of this, out of all
antiquity and it shall be sufficient.

Wherefore to end all his matter about Imperial A manifest deduction and
demonstration against new sectaties.
that made laws against heretics, they held the Roman religion in their days
to be the Catholic, and true Christian religion, though diverse of them were of
the Greek Church and Empire. They professed the Bishops of Rome to be the
heads and chief leaders of this universal and visible Catholic Church, as
before has been showed by the example of Gratian, Vale^tinia^, Theodosius to
Pope Damasus and of Arcadius Honorius, Theodosius the second, and S. Augustine,
Pope Innocentius primus, and of Justinian to Pope John the first, and
conseque^tlie they pronounced for heretics all those that did rise up apart,
under particular Authors differing in opinions from this universal church, as
Arrians, Donatists, Montanists, and the like. This universal visible and
external Church has endured ever since under Popes and Emperors, and other
governors of Christianity until the time of Pope Leo the tenth and his
successors, and of Emperors, Ferdinand, Charles the fifth, Maximilian and their
followers when Luther began to brake out from that Church, and against that
Church, and others following his example since that time.





Pope impugned his predecessor in matters of faith.

This demonstration is as clear then as that 3. A most ^leere and palpable
demo^stration.
our Church was held for the only Catholic, and true Church of christendom,
and so did both Luther, Zuinglius and Calvin hold it also before they fell, when
the one was a Friar, the other two Priests, and all three said Mass how then
by their falling from it, the said church should be made no church, and their
new congregations to be the only true Cathol. Church, and that they should come
now to-call themselves Catholics, and us heretics, and that we should be
punished for heretics by the former Imperial laws made against themselves,
and their like, this I say, is a mystery, and metamorphosis that passes the
reach of all sober men, and none but mad heads can either say it, or believe
it, for that by the same argument may English Puritanes at this day (which is a
younger brood of protestants as you know in our country) taking some port, or
town in England, and fortifying themselves therein, call Parliament Protestants
to account saying (as they do) that they are the elder church, and that they
will punish parliament Protestants with the same Parliament laws which
Protestants made of purpose to punish them. But I am ouerlong in a matter so
clear, and therefore I crave pardon of thee (good reader) and will here end, and
so much the rather for that I am to handle this point more at large afterward
against O. E. in his new challenge, to wit, who be heretics, and who be not,
for that he will needs take upon him to defend this mad, and desperate paradox,
that papists be heretics, and protestants Catholics, but I think we shall
shake him out of his clouts when he comes to that combat and somewhat you may
guess by that which here has been said.

that the proud and presumptuous Jesuit calling himself N. D. had presented
his vvard-vvord to her Maties. Counsel, he tells us what an heretical new
enterprise he has taken in hand, A new ^raking challenge of O.E.
to wit besyds the answering of the ward-word, to make an other challenge of his
own. I have (says he) to meet him at every turn with my answer to this
noddy conjoined a brief discourse, and in certain new Encounters dravving
him into a new combat, proved, that Popish religion is neither Catholic nor
ancient, nor true religion, nor the true Church of Christ, nor the Popes agents
that have been executed for traitors; true martyrs, etc.

Thus he vaunteth what he would do as Goliath 1. Reg. 17.
Dabo carnes tuas volatilibus coeli, etc. but what he will perform when he
comes into the field, where he and I must try who is the Noddy; that we shall
see after. And I am content the reader be both looker on and Judge, if the
sturdie minister receive more blows then he expected, and return home beaten
back and side in this first combat about the Ward-word, then may his friends
bemone him if they list while other do laugh and then shall we have little need
to enter into his new combat which he offreth after this, but if he prove
himself a man in the first then may he more be trusted in the second.

No presumption to have offered the VVards-vvord to the Lords of the Counsel.
I see no reason, besyds this Ministers anger and disdain, why it should be so
called or taken, seeing their honors are public judges and vmpyres by office,
for all sorts of persons to have refuge unto. And for so much as the iniuryes
offered by the Watchword as a famous libel, as well to great forrayne Princes
and nations, as to honorable, worshipful and most honest subjects, did touch
the honor and public weal of our kingdom and nation very near, to whom
should I have gone for remedy in this matter but only to their Lordships?
should I have made my moan to the Puritanical and tyrannical Presbytery of Sr
F^ Ministers, or to the rude rabble of O. E. his pyratical compagnions? we have
seen the issue of both these sorts of late, and thereby may we gather what
equity we should find at their hands, seeing the Prince whom they most
flattered, has found at their hands so egregious treachery and conspiracy.

To their Honors I appealed then with just reason, and shall do now again in
the end of this my

Last of all the Ministers conclusion is this, not This (says he) I may boldly
say that I have not follovved the adversaries vain in scurrilous scoffing, nor
his vanity in ruffinlike bragging. Boldly you may say it S. Minister, but how
truly your writing it self wi^-shew afterward, and has in part already. And I
doubt whether ever any of your coat (if you have any certain coat to be
known by, and be not of every coat) have so much exceeded in all these three
points of scurrility, vanity, or railing as you have done, for which cause you
are forced also to put on the visard of O. E. for covering your shame. It
follows further.

But why should I go about (say you) to excuse my self Lo here an other
qualification of the matter, before he denied it, now he puts it in doubt
and percase, but hear yet further. And were it a fault (says he) yet I trust
thou vvilt bear with my weakness, seeing as the Apostle says, O. E. calls
his railing vveakn^s.
all of us offend in many things. Here Io is the last refuge and excuse of all
to wit, by weakness, and that all do offend in many things. To the first if it
be weakness of brain and wit, it is pardonable, for that it is forcible, but if
it be weakness of manners and honestly it is a foul fault in a prelate and
preaching deane that should strengthen others. To the second, though all offend
in many things, yet that it is no just excuse in every thing, for if this
answer might be admitted at Newgate sessions, when those good fellows are
brought forth to be arraygned of their offenses, then few or none would go to
Tyborne, but as there in those kind of people many wickednesses are pardoned,
and some offenses punished, the one in mercy the other in justice so it should
be with this fellow also, and may perhaps one day, if he come to an indifferent
session: In the mean space I am content to conclude as he does to the reader,
and in his own words. Read (says he) with indifferency, and weigh my
allegations and compare deligentlie my defense with the Noddyes challenge, and
then use thy liberty in judgment, to discern who is the Noddye.

THE FIRST ENCOVNTER ABOUT BLESSINGS AND CVRsinges brought in by change of
Catholic Religion in England.
THE ARGUMENT.
This first Encounter about blessings and benefits, cursinges and calamityes
ensuing upon the change of Catholyke religion in our Country, or threatening to
ensue, was the first and principal matter taken out of S. Francis Hastinges
Watchword by the VVarder to be incountred upon, as an argument both of moment
and vtility to be handled, and well considered, as sufficiently appears by
the VVarders discourse thereof; whereunto both the knight and his advocate O. E.
having replied, N. D. makes this reioynder, dividing the same for more
perspicuityes sake into 19. Chapters, which follovv in order.

A BRIEF SVMMARIE of all, that before has been said, or now is to be added
about this first Encounter of Blessings and cursinges by change of Catholic
Religion. CHAP. 1.
TOUCHING the several arguments VVast-word and my Warn-word, as in like manner
the late arriual of O. E. his, Wrangle-word sufficient has been said before in
the preface to the whole work, as also in the epistle to O. E. himself, and
in the annotations upon both their letters to the Reader, so as now we are only
to treat of the proper subject of this first Encounter, which is this, that
Sir. F. H. being entered into a serious contemplation in the height of his
careful watch over England and thinking to imitate perhaps herin the spirit of
some hidden prophet (whom he desired to resemble) esteemed it not only
expedient, but incident also to the vigilance of the office of a general
watchman, taken upon him by his own election, and not by any man's commission
to forwarne the people not only of great and mighty feigned dangers hanging
over them, from Catholics, but also of innumerable new devised blessings,
benefits and benedictions abounding among them, and flowing to them daily by
the fortunate change of old religion into Protestancy, The subject of S F.
book.
breaking forth into these words of fervor: Pap. 2.
If I should take upon me to enter into the enumeration of all the bene^its and
blessings that from the Almighty have been powered upon this little Isle of
England, etc. And hereupon concludes that seeing they had gotten so greatly
already by the bargain, they should be merry and go forward, and never think
of return, etc. and this was the beginning of his watchword.

Ward word
takes up S. F. for a false and flattering Prophet by these words of Esaias:
Esaias. 3.
my people they that say thou art blessed, are those that deceive thee* showing
further the great inconveniences, hurts, dangers, damages, and pernicious
effects of such flattering tongues in common wealths, and that himself does
contradict himself in this very point soon after; talking nothing else but of
fears, frights, and terrors by dangers and miseries imminent to our
country, A brag of blessings examined.
without specifying or setting down to the contrary any one particular
blessing at all comen hitherto to the realm, or like to come by their new
gospel, but only feeding them with those general fair words of fleering
adulation, which the warder holding for fond and contemptible in so manifest,
and important a matter, rejects them without further answer.

And then passing on to the point it self

A vain reply by the Knight.
which upon just causes (as you shall see) I have termed a VVast-word, and first
of all he makes a solemn flourish by detesting all flattery and alleges
diverse sentences of sundry Poets and Philosophers in despraise of flattery, and
then adds, that there is far greater flattery in Rome to the Pope, then he
uses in this place, and further that there was no contradiction betwixt his
words of present dangers now imminent to England, and of former blessings by
their ghospel received, so as though England be not blessed at the present, yet
has it been heretofore, and then letting pass all that ever, the warder has
said, in the examination of the foresaid two heads of spiritual and temporal
blessings, he brings in ten new benedictions freshly framed out of the forge
of his own imagination, to the supply of his former want; assuring us that
they are proper fruits of his new ghospel and ghospellers: Ten new fresh
blessings.
And that they have ensued by the former change of religion: which blessings,
and benedictions he auoweth to be unity of doctrine, Liberty of reading
Scriptures in vulgar languages, Public prayer in English exercise of good
works more then before, freedom from persecution, deliverance from intolerable
exactions, long peace; power in forrayne countries, wealth of the land,
multitude of subjects seuenfold increased, since the beginning of this change
of religion.

Encounter, VVarn-vvo^e replyeth.
our which comes again the warne^ now (who before was only a warder as you
have heard) and besyds his wards, warns also the watchma^ of his wants in
this his VVast-word, showing first, that all his defense is but verbal and
impertinent speech, and consequently justly termed by him a VVast-word: for
that to flatter, and detest I flattery at one time, is no defense, or just
excuse, of flattery but rather folly, and impudency joined to flattery, and
that it little eases him or helps his cause, if there should be so great
flattery in Rome as he says, seeing that this justifies not* nor authorizeth
any flattery used by him in England, that it is vain and ridiculous to vaunt
of blessings past, and not present, seeing the present and future is that which
imports most, and not that which is past, and more ridiculous, for that if
they were true blessings which are past, they were brought in and left by the
old Catholic religion, and if they be not now present, it is for that the new
religion has lost them: that the ten new felicityes now freshly devised, and
brought in by the K. are neither true in themselves nor in the nature of
blessing, but rather quite contrary, and others nothing pertinent to the
purpose, and diverse of them of no consideration at all, but rather fond and
contemptible mockeryes.

And finally that Sr. F. his running out of the The Knight flies the true
co^bate.
and flying from all the ways of trial offered by the warder both about
Spiritual, and temporal blessings, and cursings, is a plain argument, that he
dares not join really and substantially in the combat, but only to flourish
for fashion sake, and to make a show of skyrmishing in the air for holding up
his credit with the bare name of a new Apology, keeping himself warily
notwithstanding within his own listes only, and far of from the true
Encounter, and running now and then, when he is sore pressed, behind the cloth
of state, that is to say protecting himself with the name, and authority of
her Matie. and of the present government, where all other arguments fail him
for his defense; and this in general is the sum of all this Encounter with
the K. Now must we come to examine what his Minister champion or martial
procter O. E. has brought in his supply; coming forth after the other.

The argument and sum of O. E. his ^nsvvere.
that he is far more impertinent, impudent, and impotent in his writing and
railing, then is the K. or any other perhaps that ever took pen, in hand for
having taken the visard of O. E. upon his face, he thinks that his tongue may
walk at random, and utter any thing without blushing. And so to the first
point about flattering the state with feigned blessings and benedictions, the
minister going quite from the matter, falls to flatter her Matie. a fresh,
and that most grossly in the very first lines of this Encounter, as though the
controversy between him and us were about her Maties. praise or dispraise, or
as though the Warder, had not expressly excepted against this sottish refuge
of theirs, VVard-vvord Page 2.
by seuering the inconueniens ensuing upon the change of religion, from the
rare good parts both in nature, and government of her Mat^e. as after in this
Encounter is handled more largely. But yet this masked O. E. showing himself
no less full of malice and poisoned hatred against Catholics then furious in
heresy, falls from flattering her Matie. to bloody sycophancy, and
calumniation of Catholics, as though they hated her Maties. person, and
passing from this to skore up the blessings received by his new ghospel (which
is the principal point (you know) of this first Encounter he agrees with S.F.
in number only of blessings, (for he reckons ten) but neither altogether in
name or nature, quality, or order, for he sets the^ down thus. 1.
Deliverance from the Popes decretals, The blessings of O.^.
excommunications, taxes, and exactions, 2. Scriptures in the vulgar tongue. 3.
true administration of two only Sacraments. 4. true worship of God according to
Scriptures 5. peaceable government established, and persecution removed, 6.
Catholic rytes, and service abolished, 7. deliverance from the thraldom of
Spaynards, 1. how does this 8 diff^r* from the first.
8. abolishment of the Popes power, and exactions, 9. Peace restored with
forrayne Princes, 10. Strength of the land grown to be great.

This is his Catalogue, which if you compare presumed, that this man had seen,
for so much as it was first published and printed) you shall perceive that
saying of old Tertullian to be true, Tertul lib. de pres^^ip con^^. herer.
who wrote above 1400. years ago, that it was impossible for two heretics to
agree in all points, for that both of the^ being proud, and both of them
following his own brain, it is impossible that one proud brain should yield
to follow an other. But this shall better be seen afterward in the prosecutio^
of all this first Encounter, wherein O. E. contemning perhaps the long discourse
of S. F. about his new devised blessings, says ^itle thereof besyds the bare
enumeration now set down, but takes an other course, which is, to follow the
warders words, as a dog at his heels, barking, and gnybling at every step,
but yet so confusedly (and this of purpose as it seems) as neither the
reader, nor hearer can well understand by his reply, what the watchman, or
warder said before him, or what he would say now, but only contradict, and
unsay that which the other had said before.

Confusion of heretical vv^y^ers.
for that I doubt not, but any reader commonly falling upon their books will
either not understand them, or quickly be weary with the vanity and fondnes
thereof, or at leastwyse, if he persevere to read, his head will remain so
stuffed with confusion of contradictions (which is the point that many of these
men seek) as they cannot tell what to judge, think or determine (especially
the unlearned) but only that all is in controversy doubt, and dispute, and that
nothing is clear or certain among them, which often is occasion of turning
again to the beaten path of Catholic Religion especially to the^ that have due
care of their own salvation. Wherefore I have endeavored on the contrary side,
as the duty of Catholic writers is (that seek to instruct, and not to
confound the readers) to bring every thing to method and perspicuous order as
near as I could and as I did before in the Watchword (which was but a
co^fuse, wyld and wandering inuectiue) gather all to 8. heads, and principal
members, distinguishing them, by the names, and titles of 8. several Encou^ters
of different substance and argument: The ^^^thode and distinct order of this
book.
so now to the same author who was enforced by that my division to follow the
same order in his answer, I have replied again conform to that method, but
yet more distinctly for better capacity, and memory of the reader, for that I
have divided every Encounter into several Chapters, and yet more then this also
I have prefixed before each Encounter a summary, as it were of all (as here you
may see by this first chapter) and in the end of each Encounter for
recapitulation, as it were of the whole I have added an admonition, or warning
to my adversaries concerning their faults, and defects in that Encounter.

And for that the supplements added by without order or method, S^opae so^u^.
much like loose and broken broomes as the latin proverb is, I have taken
pains to bynd them up, and kint them together, the best I could, for the
readers use, though little they are worth when all is done, but such as they be
you shall see them in their places, when occasion is offered to present them;
which must be commonly after the Wast-word of S. F. has been first examined;
for that this pedling merchant coming later to the faier with his
wrangle-word, can not have his pack viewed, but after the other, and so with
this we shall pass to the said view it self, and the discreet reader shall be
judge of all.

OF THE FIRST charge of flattering the state of England, laid to Sir F. and of
his own contradiction to himself therein; about the devised blessings of his
new Ghospel. CAP. II.
VVast-vvord Page 3.
Because (says he) he does so heinouslie charge me with the odious crime o^
flattery (which I hate naturally as a badge of a bas^ mind, but much more
through Christian knowledge as most contrary thereunto) I have thought it not a
miss to shape a short answer unto it, in suspicion of heresy; Hierome (as
Bishop Jewel alleges him) would have no man pacient, and though I will not
burst out into any impacie^ce (as considering more what is fit for me to speak
then for him to hear) yet I hold that in the greiuous accusation of flattery,
I ought not to be silent.

Mark reader the points; he will shape an but how he shapeth it, you shall
after see, he will not break into any impacience, this promise how well it is
observed his future scolding, and contumelious words will declare, and I shall
endeavor to put you in mind thereof, now and then when I pass by it. Hierome
said (as Bishop Jewel alleges) that in suspicion of heresy no man must be
pacient. Jewel is aleadged here with more honor then Hierome, Jewel is named
Bishop which he never was, and Hierome is not called Saint, which he was; and
is, no place in either of them is cyted where the words may be read; Hierome
speaks of heresy not of flattery, S.F. would excuse himself of flattery,
not of heresy for in heresy he delights; and how then do these things agree,
and if for further proof I should ask him whether he or M. Jewel will stand to
S. Hieromes definition of heresy and heretics even in those very books where
he has this sentence of impacie^ce against heresy, to wit in those he wrote
against Iouianus and Vigilantius, whom he condemns, and calls heretics for
the very same opinions that Sir F. and M. Jewel do hold for ghospelyke good
doctrine, Heretics out with S. Hierome.
I mean about Virginity, prayer to Saints, lights at Martyrs ^ombes and the
like. If I should ask them (I say) this question, whether they would stand to
S. Hieromes definition of an heretik, all the world sees they would fly from
it for so much as he calls them heretics for holding those protestantical
opinions contrary to the universal consent of the catholic Church in those
days, as our men do at this day, and how then do they allege S. Hierome in
matter of heresy, as though he were there friend or favored them?

borne papist, and scoulding doctor. Ievvel against D. Harding Fulke against D.
Allen and D. B^istovv.
Let us see in particular what our knight answers to the charge of flatte^ie
for making England so happy by change of Religion, Diverse shifts of S. F. for
his defense.
whereunto he deuiseth diverse defenses for first he alleges very solemnly
the sentence of Antistenes, and of some other Philosophers in reprehension of
flattery, but what proves this, or what is this to the purpose? nay rather is
it not much more against himself, if he clear not well the charge of flattery
laid unto him, for that the more Poets or Philosophers or other Authors do
condemn flattery the more is the K. condemnation also if he be found faulty
therein. Wherefore this first dedefence is no defense, but impertinent wasting of
words as you see, let us behold his second which perhaps may prove worse or
more impertinent then this.

His second defense is that greater flattery I would send you (says he) to
the Popes palace where a man may find more shameless flatterers then I think
were ever to be found in any Christian Princes Court. VVast-vvord Page 5.
Well, suppose it were so (Sir) what does this excuse you, why should a knight
flatter in England for that a Courtier or Canonist does flatter in Rome? You
know that company in euel doing excuses not nor dedem^n^sheth the sin, and
S. Hierome whom you allege says, Hieron. in Epist. ad caelantiam.
nihil agimus, cum nos per multitudinis exempla defendimus, we labor in vain
when we go about to defend our selves by the example of the multitude, and this
in case it were as you say: but how do you prove it Sir, harken (gentle Reader)
and hear his words.

Panormitan (says he) as by sundry learned men he is aleadged shameth not to
flatter your Pope so far, VVast word. Page 6.
as to make him almost aequal with God, saying Eccepto peccato Papa potest
quasi omnia facere quae Deus potest: Sin excepted the Pope can in a manner do
all things that God can do.

Thus says our knight wherein I would Panormita^ or at leastwyes some one of
those learned men of his side, by whom he says that Panormitan is alleged,
if he omitted the citation by negligence it was great oversight in so weighty
a matter, if of will and purpose it was fraud, if he red no^ the Authors himself
but trusted Ministers notebookes, it was lightness and simplicite, if his
learned men that aleage Panormitan and accuse him as he does, do not cite or
quote the place no more then he, it is the same fault in them, and a sign that
they are afraid to be taken tripping, and this complaint I shall be forced to
make often, for that this shifte is ordinary among them, not to cite their
Authors.

Panorm. part. 1. decret. de Elect. c. Licet.
I have found at length the place, and therein the words by him and his
alleged, but with this difference, that Panormitan cyteth the sentence not as
his own; but out of Hostiensis, and shows the meaning to be that in matters
of jurisdiction and spiritual authority for government of his Church upon
earth Christ has left so great power unto his substitute S. Peter's successor,
as he may do thereby and in his name and virtue in a certain sort,
what-so-euer his Master and Lord might do in his Church, if he were now
conversant among us upon earth, I say in a certain sort, for that all both
Deuines and Canonists do agree that potestas excellentiae whereby our Savior
could institute Sacraments, pardon sins and impart the other effects of
thesayd Sacraments without their use and the like, is not left unto the Pope
as not necessary to the government of his Church, but all the rest requisite
to that end is given to him according to that great commission in S. Matthew.
Matthew. 16.
I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, whatsoever thou
loosest shall be loosed and what soever thou byndest shall be bound, etc. upon
which commission Panormitan says, that Hostiensis founded his doctrine in
these words: Host. in c. Quanto de translat. Episcoporum. Panorm. sup. part.
1. decret. de Elect. cap. venerabilem.
Cum idem sit Christi atque Papae consistorium, quasi omnia potest facere Papa
quae Christus excepto peccato. Seeing that the Consistory or Tribunal of Christ
and the Pope is one and the same in this world (as appears by the former
commission) it follows that the Pope can do (in spiritual jurisdiction)
whatsoever Christ can do, except living free from sin.

This is the doctrine of Hostiensis expounded Panormitan and Hostie^^is both
abused.
and if it be rightly understood it has no more absurdity in it, then if a
man should say, that the Viceroy of Naples can do all in that Kingdom which
the king of Spain himself can do except being free from treason. And the like
of her Majesty's deputy in Ireland or any other substitute, that has the
Superiors authority fully and amply.

And albeit heretics do wrangle herein Wrangling and cauelling of haeretikes.
yet are there so many restrictions mentioned even in this place of Hostiensis
(if they would consider them, as easily might answer all their cauillations.
For first where they compare the Pope with God both Panormitan and Hostiensis
explicat the comparison of Christ not as he is God, but as he is man, that is
to say, between the head of the Church and his Substitute. Secondly the
comparison is not in all things (as in miracles, holiness of life, nor power of
excellency as have been said or the like) but only in the highest jurisdiction
of Ecclesiastical matters deryued from Christ himself, and given by him, as
appears by the word consistorium used by Panormitan. Thirdly even in this
also is added quasi, which is a diminution in the excellency and generality of
the thing it self. Fourthly is put Excepto peccato, which exception though
Panormitan do affirm to be improper in Host^ensis manner of speaking, for that
to be able to sin is no power, but rather a defect of power: Yet is it added
here to signify, that the Pope may sin or err in matter of fact, even in
the exercise of this power that he has under Christ. If he use it not well, for
which respect is added also the last restriction of all even in that very place
by Panormitan, where he says: Intellige tamen quod Papa omnia potest claue
dis^retionis non errante, Panorm. Ibi
that the Pope can do all things of jurisdiction which Christ his Master can,
What is Cla^is discretionis in the ^ope.
so long as the key of discretion does not err; which is as much as if he had
said that the Pope is bound in conscience to use discretion consultation,
inquisition, due deliberation and other fyt means to inform himself in
matters that he will do or determyne, which in points of faith we are most
certain that Gods holy Spirit promised to his Church will ever direct him
unto; and never suffer him to err.

And so much of this scornful objection

And in a word (says he) the Canonists say roundly in the gloss, Dominus
noster Deus Papa, our Lord God the Pope. If the Canonists so roundly affirm
it, Sir F. taken in cyting Canonists.
why has not Sir F. either roundly or squarely quoted us the text? Sure it is
that I can not find it though much I have sought, and hard yt is to believe
that any such text may be fownd, which is much confirmed by that S. F.
Proctor coming after him to fill up the gappes that he had left open, and
strayning himself much about this point could not find any one text of
Canonist or other that had those words, and therefore was forced to Father them
upon Aug. Steuchus with a notorious falsification, as in the chapter following
shall be showed. But yet here to help out S.F. with some part of his credit, A
devise to help out Sir F.
and for very compassion I will ad a conjecture of a friend of his, how he might
chance to have been deceived about Dominus Deus noster Papa, if he cite it upon
his own reading, for that perchance he might find it written thus; D. noster
D. Papa. both D.D. signifying a double Dominus, which some cauilling heretic
espying, and judging it inconvenient to repeat Dominus twyse, would needs
enforce the second D. to be set for Deus; This is my conjecture confirmed
somewhat by the similitude of a like fond chance whereof I have heard as happened
in the subscription of an English letter written from certain Maryners to the
Lord Admiral in these words: To the right honorable our good L. the L. Admiral
which second L. a simple fellow interpreted to signify the lady Admiral
saying, that the first L. signifying the Lord himself, the second L. must
needs signify also his lady. If I miss in this conjecture or comparison S. F.
is cause thereof that cyted not the text, thereby to clear all matters, and to
deliver both us of this doubt, and himself of new suspicion of imposture.

How a creature may be called God.
I will ask him and his ministers in this place the meaning of a text or two
out of scripture it self, Exodus 7. v. 1.
as first those words of God in Exodus, dixitque Dominus ad Moysen, ecce
constitui te Deum Pharaonis: and God said unto Moses, behold I have made thee
the God of Pharao did God give away his deity with this think you? And again
I would ask him the interpretation of those words of Christ, when he says,
Nonne scriptum in lege vestra est, Ego dixi, Dij estis? Io. 10. verse. Psalm.
81. verse. 6.
Is it not written in your law, I said you are Gods? And then answers to the
question, himself thus: Si illos dixit Deos, ad quos sermo Dei factus est, and
no^ potest solui scriptura. If God called them Gods to whom the speech of God
was directed, and that this scripture cannot be answered or denied etc. These
two questions I have proposed from S. F. and his Ministers instruction, not for
that I do think any writer to have been so simple as to call the Pope
expressly God, though yet we see clearlie by these examples that the word Deus
in some sense may be appyed, Hierom. lib. 1. in Mat.
also to creatures without injury of the creator. And S. Hierome waying and
pondering the words of Christ unto his disciples 6. mat. Quem dicunt homines
esse filium hominis, etc. And then again, Vos autem quem me esse dicitis? has
these words: Prudens lector attend, quod ex consequentibus textuque sermonis,
Apostoli nequaqua^ homines sed Dij appellantur. Mark prudent reader, that it
is evident by the consequence, and illation of Christ his words, that the
Apostles are not called men here but Gods. Thus said S. Hierome, who yet knew
as well what Idolatry means as S.F. of whom I would ask, why he reprehendeth
not Cambden, and other protestant writers, that say to her Ma^ie. Diua
Elizabetha at every word, but all may pass with these men so it be not to the
Pope. And yet one thing you must note, that whatsoever Canonist, or other
Catholic do attribute to the Pope it is not in respect of his person, but of
his office, and place under Christ, so that if they flatter they flatter the
office, not the man, but Diua Elizabetha flattereth the person, and so it is
flat and gross flattery. But let us go forward.

A very foolish defense.
in that telling us of so many blessings, and English benedictions, yet in the
very same lives confesses infinite fears, frightes, and dangers of the
realm, he has nothing in effect to answer, but that England has been blessed
for times past by the entrance of their ghospel, though now through their
unkindness, they may be feared to be near to misery, which kind of defense, how
childish it is, who sees not, and is as much as if he should say the head, and
face, and first show of his ghospel was fayer, and frolike, as are the sweet
singing Syrienes, but the tail is troublesome, and end pernicious, and byteth
like the scorpion. But let us hear both the warder, and the Apo^oger together
in their own speech. Page 2.


He that will consider (says the warder) The present state of English blessings.
and indifferency the present estate of matters in England, and round about it,
(and this especially by reason of change made in religion) and shall read
together the fleering tale which Sir F. tells us in the first lines of his
book of the infinite, and innumerable blessings received (as he says) by the
said change, he will either say, that the man lacked wit, and discourse to see
the deformity, and contradiction of his own talk, or else modesty, and
shamefastnes in uttering it.

For notwithstanding the rare parts, and The vvachman contrary to himself.
which this man calls the fountain and welspring whence all the rest of this
our little Islandes benefits, and blessings do issue and flow. Nay does not the
seely man himself in all this furious, and sk^rneful libel of his, endeavor
to lay before us a thousand fears, and fryghtes of imminent perils, which he
says hang over us, by the division of hearts, of hands, of judgments of
affections, of parts, and partialityes, and factions within the realm? or is
his whole argument any thing else in effect, but a timorous abodement of
infinite ruynes, that do beset the realm at this day? And are not his own
words these, after a long discourse of peryls, I doubt not) dear countrymen)
but that you are men of VVisdome, and can easelie conceive what dangers we
stand in, by that which has been set down before. And after a little. The life
of religion; of Queen and country; is at the stake. And how then does he pipe
unto us this feigned note of melancholy music, amidst so many dreadful cares
and sorrows? has he not read that Musica in luctu importuna narratio. Eccles
22.
It is importune chaunting when other men are weeping.

Encount. 6.
and therefore oftentimes we have store thereof. But what more? nay no more
argument, or reason alleged at all, but only this sentence noted in the
margent, No contrariety betwixt our present dangers and our former blessings.
VVherby he yeildeth to his adversary in the thing it self as you see, and
varyeth only in the time, confessing that England is not blessed for the
present, but was in old days, which being past it remains rather cursed now,
if perils, cares, and frightes be curses, and yet in his former book (if you
remember) all seemed to be present b^essednes, Foolish trifling in matter of
moment.
who can suffer such tryfling in a matter of such moment? And yet delights he
so much in this devise of his conning distinction of times past, and present
that he makes a long narration ther-vpon how the people of Israel were blessed
under diverse Kings, VVastvvord. Page 8.
and namely Josias for a time, and yet afflicted in the end, for their
ingratitude by this said Kings fearful slaughter.

In which example though I could trip him 4. Reg. 25. 2. Paral. 35.
he would needs fight with Nechao King of Egypt yet am I not delighted with
this example, for that it proves nothing, but that which it should not; to wit
that our blessings of England be not present, Josias slaughter evil applied.
but past, and includes further some evil aboadment toward her Matie^ person,
(as some may interpret) for which cause it was not the wys^st part in the world
for the K. to bring it in; but that he sees not or discerns not always what
makes for him or against him.

No way then can S. F. deliver himself he could show us in deed some special
Catalogue of blessings, and benedictions which England has recey^ed either
spiritual or temporal or both by chang^ment unto his religion, more then it had
before under Catholic Religion which obligation of plain proof the K.
preceyuing, has taken upon him at length to set upon that enterprise, and
laying his head together with the consistory of his ministers has shaped us
out ten new fresh benedictions, and blessings never hard of before, or had (I
think) in consideration: which now we are to examine and discuss as they ly
in order. But first we must see what Minister O. E. brings after the K. whose
book came to my hand when this was written, and I have promised to give him a
place also in the interlude when his turn comes, and when he brings any
thing different from the former or worthy the mentioning.

PROCTOR O. E. IS called up the stage to tell his tale and to help out Sr. F. in
this matter of flattering the state, and how he plays his part far worse
and more ridiculously then the knight himself. CAP. III.
I Have promised the (gentle Reader) to exhibit VVrangle-word freshlie come
out of England which brings such trash so stuffed with impotent and impudent
railing as makes Sr. F. seem many times a grave and moderate writer, though
often also he will not yield to the other, we shall compare both and so you may
judge. First this O.E. sets down my beginning of the Ward-word thus;
VVrangle-vvord. Page 9. Diverse impudencies of O. E.
He begins with a long tale of flattery (says he) and of the harms
ensuing thereof, and at his first setting out enters into a common place as it
were into a common Inn pleasing and resting himself, but tyring and harrying
his reader with his n^edles fooleryes. By this you may see the man's vein,
desyring to say somewhat, and aduenturing to say any thing, true or false, for
that the matter of flattery in the Ward-word is but touched in a word or two,
and the application insueth presently; his humor therefore is discovered in
using so base a similitude of common Innes and common places thereto adjoining,
wherewith it may be, this minister is more delighted, then every one of his
fellows, But let us hear him out further.

What skilleth it (says he) to know what a dangerous beast a flatterer is?
VVrangle-vvord. Ibid.
and who denies, but that flattery is an odious thing? but what is this to
us? can he show that Sr. F. is a flatterer? no, nay he does ^ot so much as go
about to prove any such matter, nor does he apply his common place to his
purpose, but leaves it as a fragment borrowed out of some Fryarl^ke declamation.



But will you here, an other impudency as gros as this, and thereby learn to
know the man, here at the very beginning, harke^ then what he says of the
Warder, for talking of difficulties risen and rising by change of Religion. His
adversaries (says he) do easily discover his notorious ympudency,
VVrangle-vvord. Page 1^
and his friends do rue his simplicity, seeing him to take as granted, and
boldly to affirm that all men see and acknowledge the difficulties that arise
out of alteration of Religion, when none either see it or justly can affirm
any such matter. Lo gentle Reader, what he says and whether it be notorious
impudency in me to say, that some difficulties have risen in England and other
countries by alteration of Religion, or in him to hold this for impudency, and
further to affirm, that no man can see or truly affirm any such matter, of
this I say be thou thy self judge, who perhaps daily feel some part of
these difficulties by the troubles feared as rising from this fountain and
origyn.

But now to go forward in this matter of flattery how does this minister
proceed O. E. a famous flatterer.
First he sets down a long recital of the personal praises of her Matie.
out of Bishop Ozorius a Portugal in his Epistle written to her very near 30.
years ago, and out of Petrus Bizarrus an Italian in his storye of Genua and is
glad by this occasion to say somewhat, whereof he may hope to receive a good
fee, and withal to make yt seem that we are enemies of her Maties. praises
which is calumnious and parasitical for we do disioyne the harms ensued by
change of Religion from her Maties. government, and do most willingly
acknowledge the personal praises of her Ma^ie separated from Religion, whereof
the Warder laid not the fault on her, nay rather expressly excepted yt, though
this companion in repeating his words omitteth that part of purpose and most
maliciously, not being desirous the Warder should show so dutiful affection and
good opinion of her Maties. person, and thereby cut of the argument of this
cauillers long and idle babbel fownded upon this calumniation; The false
dealing of O.E.
the Warders words I have related in the former Chapter and forteenth
paragraph. where you may read them, and thereby judge of the true dealing of
this false Minister or rather the false dealing of this true Mynister, which I
account all to be one. But let us go forward.

O.E. Page 2.
And to prove this he runs about the whole world to seek witnesses, for
besides Sanders Harpsfeld, Ryshton Englishmen, Bozius and Ribadinera, the first
an Italian, the second a Spanyard (out of all which notwithstanding he
alleges noe one word but their bare names) he desires also King Solomon to
bear him witness in these words The wicked does abhor those that walk
aright, Proverb. 29.
assuring us that by the wicked are meant the Catholics, and by the other
part of the sentence her Matie. and from Solomon he leapeth again to Clement
7. and Paulus 3. Popes of Rome for their sentences against King Henry's marriage
with Lady Anne Bollen, and the legitimation of their Children, alleging
words which I think not fit to be repeated in this place, and so should be
have done also if his discretion had been as great as his head, Indiscretion and
temeritye of O.E.
seeing they are now past and forgotten, and were written when her Matie. either
was not yet borne, or of that Infancy as she could have no part in any fault
there objected.

Yet this prating companion to seem to Odious matter brought in by this hungry
parasite. 1. Page 3.
The Popes adhaer^ntes in England never ceased until they ha^ brought her
Maties most innocent Mother to her end, which was the greatest grief that
tormented the King lying on his death bed, sore repenting himself for the
wrongful shedding of the innocent Queens blood, neither did they only murder
the innocent Mother, but also sought by act of Parliament to disable, and from
the succession to exclude the daughter.

All this how true or untrue it is, the story testify, Lib. Statute. cap. 7.
an. Hen. 2^.
especially that of the 28. year of his reign, and whether matters passed so
long ago, with such public authority, deliberation and consent as these did,
may be called now into question again to the infamy both of the said K. her
Majesty's Father, and of his state counsel and nobility, by such a petty
compagnion as this is, only to flatter, and to get himself a bigger benefice,
and without all ground, or former testimony thereof in story, or other
authentical register, let all the world judge, as also how near O. E.
resembles here Oedipus who killed his own Father to marry his mother, which
mystery, I leave to the curious reader to apply in this place.

Cromwell and Cranmer that could do most with him at that time, The dealing of
Cromwell and Cranmer about Q. Anne Bolle^.
and in effect all, and the first of them was principally employed in the said
Queens condemnation and death as appears yet by public records; and the
second was used for her defamacion after her death, as is extant at this day in
the foresaid statute it self, where Cranmers sentence is recorded iud^ciallie
given by him, An Henry 2^. cap. 7.
as Archbishop of Canterbury, affirming of his own accord, and knowledge such
things as no wise or modest man I think will believe, and I ^or the same cause,
and for dewtiful respect to her Majesty do forbear to repeat the same here
though it be under his hand and seal, but such a good fellow was Cranmer the
first pillar of protestant religion in England, Sand. lib. 1. de Schis.
that for gain of living or favor and for enjoying quietly his woman which he
carried about with him in a tru^ke at those days, he would say or swear or
unsay any thing, the sentence may be seen by him that will, for it is extant in
print in the English book of Statutes; Neither can this Sycophantes
calu^niatio^ affirming the said Queens death to be procured by the Popes
adhere^ts in England have any probability at al, seeing that no adherent to the
Pope was in credit or authority in that time, but rather in all disgrace and
danger and so much of this.

After the foresaid Sycophancie and foolish Sup cap. 1.
about particular blessings, wherein (notwithstanding he agrees not with the K.
as before has been and after shall be showed) he runs to the same common
place before mentyoned of flattery, used by courtiers, and canonists to the
Pope, the force of which shifte and refuge how vain it is you have heard
before discussed, Cap ^.
and it neadeth not to be repeated here, and the examples, and instances which
he brings are the same for the most part which Sr. F. touched before and are
before answered, as that of Panormitan and other canonists affirming, Panorm.
in c. licet de election.
idem esse Christi and Papae Consistorium, Christ and the Pope as his
substitute to have one and the self same Consistory or Tribunal, Joan. in c.
Quanto de translat. Epis.
whereof we have treated in the former Chapter.

Augustine Steu^hus does honor him as a God, Audis (says he) Pontificem Deum
appellatum and habitum pro Deo, Do thou hear the Pope called God and held
for God? and then notes in the margent, contra donationem Constantini,
Steuchus says it in his book against the Donation of Constantyne; in which
few words, there are so many cousenages, or rather knaueries used, as no man
would believe, but in such a cogging M^nister as coming lately from Irish
wars has not learned yet to have any conscience or honesty. For first of
all that most learned man Augustinus Steuchus Eugubinus bishop of Kysam wrote
no book against the Donation of Constantyne as here is imposed upon him,
Diverse falshoodes of^ the co^scie^celes minister.
but rather for it, proving the same most learnedlie out of all antiquity
against Laurentius Valla the grammarian that fondly had impugned the same.
Secondly the words here alleged out of Steuchus though they be in his book
yet are they alleged by him not in his own name, but as coming from
Constantyne the great by the testimony of Nicolaus primus Pope of Rome about
800. year ago, who cyteth out of the said Donation of Constantine, Cap. 2.
that amongst other honorable tytles he calls him also God (in that sense no
doubt which before is showed by scripture that both Moses and other holy men
were called Gods) and hereupon Bishop Steuchus adds those words before
mentyoned, Aud^s summum Pontificem a Constantino Deum appellatum, habitum pro
Deo? Aug Steuchus in Lauren. Vall. de donat. Constant. fol. 230.
hoc videlicet factum est cum eum praeclaro illo Edicto decorauit, ador^uit vti
Deum, vti Christi and Petri successorem, and velut viuam Christi imaginem
veneratus est. Do you hear how the Pope is here called God by Constantine,
and held for God, this was done when he did honor him so highly with that
excellent edict in his favor adoring him as God, and as the successor of
Christ and Peter, and reuerencing him as the lively image of Christ himself.

Here now we see how Pope Siluester The great honor done by Constant. the
great to Pope Siluester.
that he committed Idolatry, when he called the Bishop of Rome God, for the
meaning was plain that he did it only in honor of Christ his Master which
was true God, and had left his place and power upon earth to this his servant,
as the Bishop explayneth, in the rest of the words following, which the
deceytful minister left out of purpose, and corrupted also those few words he
alleges by shutting out the words (a Constantino) thereby to make it seem
that Steuchus spoke this of himself, and so to make way to his lying
calumn^ation saying as he does, Augustine Steuchus does honor him as a God, and
by this you may see in what case men are that believe these lying lips of
conscie^celes Ministers upon their words in matters of their salvation, which
are commonly at this day without controlment in England, seeing they dare
adventure to falsify so openly in points which they may probably doubt to be
called to reckning for, by their adversaries, as we do O.E. in this and other
matters, wherein we are to charge him hereafter.

Cusan. epist. ad Eohem.
Mutato iudicio Ecclesiae mutatum est and Dei iudicium. The judgment of the
Church being changed about any matter, the judgment of God changes also, and
here the ministers mouth ouerru^neth exceedingly saying these good fellows
for their bellies sake speak rail, Ouerlashing of the minister.
hold their peace, write, faune, flatter and unto the Popes pleasure tu^ne
their style. But ho, (Sir swash-buckler) harken to others that had l^sse care
of their belly then you and yours; this of the change of Gods judgment, after
the judgment of the Church, and of the supreeme Pastor in particular, is a
common saying of all the Ancient Fathers upon those words of Christ Whose
sins you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven and whose ye retain shall be
reta^ned. Matthew. 16.
And S. Chrysostom goes so far therein (who yet was neither belly God nor
flatterer) as he attributes this of drawing Gods judgment after theirs; not to
the whole Church and chief Pastor only, but to all and every lawful Priest
also in absoluing from sin, whose power and dignity he prefers before
Emperors, Angels, and whatsoever else, but the only son of God, which may
answer also the idle cauillations of S. F. among his other allegations of
flattery in the former chapter, where he complayneth that some canonists
prefer the Popes Authority before Emperors and Angels, let him hear S.
Chrysostom.

Qui terram incolunt says he in his 3. book de A discourse of S. Chrisost. of
Priests author tie l. ^. de sacerdoti^.
To Priests that dwell and converse upon earth is it committed to dispense
matters that be in heaven; an authority that God has given neither to Angels,
nor Archangels (...) time in the Church of God? what are you I say? You are
the great Priest, the highest Bishop, you are Prince of Bishops, and heir of
the Apostles, you are in Primacy, Abel, in government, Noe, in Patriarkship,
Abraham; in order, Melchisedech, in dignity, Aaron; in authority, Moses; in
judicature, Samuel; in power, The judgment of S Bernard about the Popes tytles
of honor.
Peter; in unction, Christ, to you are given the keys, and the sheep are
committed to your trust, there are other porters of heaven, and other feeders
also of flocks besides your self, but you are so much more glorious then
they, by how much more different your title is which you have inherited above
them all. They have their flocks assigned severally to them in several, but to
you all universally are committed, that is, one general flock to one general
Pastor, neither only are you the Pastor of all sheep, but of all Pastors also,
do you ask me how I can prove it? I answer out of the word of God.

Thus far S. Bernard, and then goes he on to show diverse plain places of
Scripture for his proof, and those especially which S. Chrysostom, and S.
Hilary before mentyoned, and now I fear me our minister Oedipus will say here,
that S. Bernard is become a flatterer of Popes also as well as Card. Cusanus,
Bellarmin, D. Stapleton, and other like, whose sentences he cyteth, but either
understands them not, or wilfully peruerteth their meaning to deceive his
reader, and thereby to seem to have somewhat ever to say, though he say
nothing, or worse then nothing.

And here I would leave, now O.E. with his art of cogging to him self, but
that he passes on to a contumelious calumniation, or two more against a fre^d
of mine, and my self. Page 11*
Gifford (says he) calls Philip the second the K. of Spain the greatest
Monarch under the sun to show himself to be one of the gressest flatterers
under the moon, About D. Gifford. Deane of Lile.
and I say you show you self on of the veryest fools under the 7. stars to
print this for so gross a flattery, which no man of knowledge, and judgment,
in matters of story, and cosmography, can deny to be truth, if he consider the
multitude and greatness of countries under him, and your self, that have been a
rouing and theuing about the Indyes and other his dominions how large and wide
they ly, cannot speak this, but of wilful insolency against your conscience.
And as for M. Doct. and deane Gifford, who has his deanery by true adoption,
and not by intrusion as some friend of yours, and has his learning by study,
and not by borowing and wandering, he I say being often injured by you in this
book will answer for himself I doubt not, and for that you brag much, that you
have set forth (if I mistake you not) a book in Latin entitled
Turco-papismus (which is nothing else, but an apish imitatio^ of M. Raynolds
Caluino-T^rcimus printed by M. D. Gifford after the Authors death) and that you
require so earnestly to have it answered, I hold him obliged to satisfi^ your
demand, and so I make account that he will take the pain to look over your
said worthy work, and give both it and the Author the colors, which both
deserve. And thus much ^or my friend, now for my self I may be briefer.

and this Noddy to show himse^fe a n^ble paras^e, Page Ibid.
upon whom the (...) of his whole inuectiue against flatterers does mo^^ f^^l^
fall, (...) the Pope of Rome, and K. Philip the second of Spain (...) g^eatest
monarchs of Christendom, etc. And so we ^ee^t a^ all this common place of
flattery si^^eth this no^^y, and his consortes very properly. Who is the true
Noddy in name, and sense, has been discussed before in my Epistle to the
Noddy-maker, but who is Noddy in fact, and merit (namely in this place) either
I for saying, the Pope and the K. of Spain to be the greatest monarchs of
Christendom, the one in Spiritual jurisdiction, the other in temporal; or this
Nodifying Minister for calling me noddy and noble parasite for this speech, let
all be Judges that be no Noddyes, and whether all these before mentioned, whom
he calls my consorts in flattery may be counted noddyes also as here he
signifies for speaking so honorably of the Pope (wherein S. Bernard, and other
ancient Fathers must enter as you have seen) let wyser heads then this man's
noddle determine, and so I leave him for this first combat; after we shall
buckle again, as occasion is offered, and now will I pass to continue my former
treatise with S. F. about the view of those fresh new blessings which he has
presented us as brought into England by change of Catholic Religion. This
dilatio^ has been made to give his advocate O.E. place to play a pageant also
who as being I hear grosser in body the^ in his two lettered name he could
have no less room for the present, the next time he comes up, we may chance
thrust him down again more quickly, in the mean space he may breath
himself until he be called upon again for an other part of the Interlude.

OF TEN NEW Devised blessings brought in by Sir F. as peculiar to his Ghospel:
whereof the First is Union in doctrine termed by him unity in verity, and how
false and vain this is. CAP. IIII.
ALL the former subject of dispute and Religion to the novelties that after
have spronge up, which absurd proposition the warder having impugned as
ridiculous and evidently false* has pressed them to show some part of those
infinite blessings, whereof they bragged, and Sr. F. for credits sake having
consulted with his Ministers very seriously as is to be presumed about this
weighty point, comes out now with a decalogue of them, The Decalogue of Sir
F. blessings.
answering perhaps to the ten Commandments, (for whose observation the Jews
have many blessings promised them) and in the margent he gives this title to
his enumeration a short view of blessings spiritual and temporal, Two sorts
of blessings. Page 11.
etc. and then offering me the favor as to follow my division and order therein
(for indeed they are so confused in their own treatesyes as it is more hard to
bring their speeches to order then to refute them) he says thus. I proc^ed to
your aduertisment for a better direction to men's judgments that all blessings
of a common wealth may be reduced to two heads, the one spiritual belonging to
the soul and conscience, the other temporal concerning the body and weal
public.

This is the division which he promises to prosecute and to lay us forth in
both kinds the benedictions, which he and his ministers have devised for us,
great and goodly ones I doubt not but they will be, you shall have the^ as they
come, whereof the foremost as lady and mistress of all the rest is termed by
him, unity in verity importing that Protestants have received this special
blessing above Catholykes, that they have great unity and concord among
themselves in matter of doctrine, Unity among protestants.
which is as very a jest, as if a man should say that sparowes do not chyrpe,
nor hens cackle, nor dawes pratle, nor women chide, or as the fool that said
to him that had an extraordinary great nose, You have no nose (Sir) and this
is your privilege above other men, which is as good and true a privilege as
this is a blessing of the Protestants to live and agree without dissension,
which I am forced for decyphering this first objected blessing to prosecute
more largely then I had meant, though yet I doubt not, it may be both
profitable and not unpleasant to the Reader, to see the progress thereof; but
yet first, it is reason that we hear Sir F. who going about to imitate my
speech used before in the ward-word for expressing the unity amongst
Catholics, by the points wherein they agree, he will needs say the same, and
apply it also to Protestants, which I would have you to consider, how fitly it
agrees. For thus he says.

First (says he) there has been in England since Page 12.
one God worshipped in spirit and truth, one faith, one belief, one form of
service in prayer, one number of Sacraments, one head of the Church, which is
Christ the Lord, and his substitute anointed and aeppoynted over us our
Sovereign and Queen, A notorious untruth.
etc. And if you can like to look upon the harmonyes of confessions, you shall
find all the Churches of Christendom where the Ghospel of Christ Jesus is
embraced to be of the same judgment: and in this blessed unity grounded upon
verity the Lord for ever keep us.

S. Angust. lib. ^. contr. Iul. cap. 3.
That the ^orhead of heretics is no forhead, if we understand thereby
shamfastnes, and not the material part of their body. For what man in the
world that has any shame or modesty in him would set down in prynt such a
protestation as every child that has read any thing or knows the state of
England at this day can controu^e, and those which have read nothing by common
report of the whole world can convince to be false? Yet he begins this first
blessing (if you mark it) somewhat reseruedly, saying: there has been in
England, since this happy alteration, one God, one faith, one form of service,
etc. as though he would deal only with the vnio^ of England, but after he
enlarges himself, saying: you shall find all the churches of Christendom,
where the gospel and truth of Christ Jesus ^^s embraced to be of the same
judgment, by which occasion I am enforced to lengthen somewhat my confutation
and first to examine a little the unity of protestants in foreign lands and
churches, where their gospel is preached, and after returning home to England
to examine somewhat the same points there.

unity in verity then in forrayne churches (for this is the gay devised title
of this first benediction) I could be content, Unity among foreign Protestants.
that our knight could show us, if not unity in ve^ity (which is impossible)
yet unity at least in falsity, among his professors, so as some name of unity
might be among them, for in verity (which is but one) the Protestants cannot
possibly be at unity, being so divided and repugnant among themselves, as
presently I shall show. In falsytie also it is very hard for them to hold
union, Tertul. prae^script. contra haeres.
for that (as Tertullian says) mendac^um mendacio difficulter cohaeret. only
does hardly stand with another ly in peace and concord: for which cause he
shows that all heresies lightly have fallen at bickering among themselves;
but in none more has this been observed then in the new gospel of our time
brought in by Luther, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius Carolstadius, Ca^uyn, Melanthon,
Beza, and others the head doctors of Sir F. externe churches in Germany,
France, Suizerland, and other places, which have been lights and lanternes to
ours of England, and their first doctors, and as it were Apostles, who yet were
no sooner known to the world, but that they fell at mortal debate and
dissension among themselves, and so continued all their lives, sealing it also
with their deaths, as by their own works, testimonies, and historyes
appears.

For first who knows not that Luther beginning ^leida^. Surius Lauater and
alij in hist.
altering, chopping, and changing for 7. years together, before it could be
made any certain body of doctrine, Luthers beginning and going forwards.
consisting in it self, it fell out, that with-in those 7. first years to wit
an. 1524. three of Luthers cheifest scholars, Andreas Carolstadius, Ioannes
Oecolampadius and Vldericus Zuinglius (the first and last of the number
Apostate priests, the second a friar, as Luther also had been) began the new
sect of Sacramentaries, quite opposite to Luther, and within two years
immediately following the three named doctors, Sacramentaries and their
deuisions.
profited so well in new divisions also among themselves, as by Luthers own
testimony publicly given in a sermon after printed, they were divided into six
several sects: Luth. ser. de sacra. Haga (...) habit anno 1527.
Yea the Lutheran preachers of Brema writing not long after that again to
VVestphalus a great Superintendent in Saxony, do sole^nly avouch, Concionat.
Bremens. Ep. de Eucharist. ad VVestphalum.
that there was in^^nita pene opinionum apud Sacramentarios varietas, an
infinite variety of opinions amongst the Sacrame^taries that denied the Real
presence in the Sacrament.

Genebr. Su^ius hoc an.
No truly: but rather increased daily, even unto their deaths and after also;
for out of Luthers doctrine besides these Sacramentaries, there arose in like
manner the Anabaptists, Sectaries sprung from Luther, Svvinglius and Calvin.
anno 1527. as themselves glory, taking occasion by his Epistle ad Waldensis,
where he says: That it is better to leave of baptism altogether then to
baptize children that have no faith: Whereupon they left of baptism of infants,
and went forward in the rest of their heresies, even against Luther himself at
the last.

After this there sprung up also out of the molles and rigidi Lutherani, which
endure with open emnity to this day as their books do testify, Rigid and soft
Luthera^s
VVestphalus, Illiricus, and others of high Saxony, being the heads of the
rigid faction (who resemble our puritans in England that would have nothing but
Caluins pure prescription, as these men would Luthers) but on the other side
Melanchton and his folowers founders of the softer party would follow Luther by
discretion, taking so much as ^^rued for their purpose and no more, where unto
also do draw near our Parliament Protestants in England as you know, who
receive Calvin with the limitations and restrictions which they think best,
that is nothing at all of his ecclesiastical plot of government, nor diverse
points of his doctrine. And thus much of Luthers own sect.

But out of that of Vldericus Zuinglius father Calvin. Seruetus Valent. Gentiles.
to wit: John Calvin and Theodore Beza, and from these again departed into
another faction, other good fellows as Michel Seruetus, Vid. lib. Caluini de
Act. Seruet. and libel. Geneuae editum de act. Valentin.
John Caluins coleage, whom they afterward burned at Geneua for denying the
blessed Trinity, and Valentinus Gentilis a new Arrian, whose followers yet
remain, though himself was burned also by other Protestants at Argentine.
With these joined Ioannes Paulus, Alciatus, Gribaldus, and others which made
afterward the sect of new Arrians and Trinitarians that yet remain in Germany,
Poland, and especially in Transiluania, as their books do show.

All these and many others not only Sectaryes but Arch-heretikes and heads of
new sects have sprung up out of the new gospel with-in these fourskore years,
and have framed Churches and conuenticles to themselves in diverse contreyes all
opposite and repugnant one to another, and themselves also divided amongst
themselves, though at the b^^ginning all proceeded of one only division from
Catholic union, raised by Luther.

So as we Catholics may well insult, and rightly say of them, as S. Augustine
said to Parmenian* Aug. contra Parm. lib. 1. cap 4.
multa frusta de isto frasto per totam Africam facta sunt: sic sic necesse est,
vt minutatim secti, conscissique dispereant, qui tumorem animositatis suae,
sanctissimo Catholicae pacis vinculo praetulerunt. Many pieces are already made
throughout Africa of this one piece or division) wherewith you began; so so is
it necessary that they should perish by division and renting into most small
pieces, who have preferred the pride or swelling of their own animosity before
the most holy band of Catholic peace and unity.

which are the only pretented means admitted by them, No means of union
amongst Protestants see of this more infra cap. 14. and 15.
every party pleads for himself, with such obstinacy in his own sense, as
no judge being acknowledged, it is impossible to come to any determination. And
as for Synodes and councels, whereon old fathers rested much for decision of
controversies, these men laugh at them; though yet at last pressed by
necessity, and much wearied with continual wrangling about scriptures, diverse
sects of our times (for all it is impossible to draw together) have been forced
for some show that they desire agreement, to make among themselves an infinite
number of Synodes, meetings parlies and co^uenticles, to wit above threescore
and ten as Stanislaus Rescius and other writers have gathered, Rescius li. 1.
de Atheis. Euang cap 5.
but yet to no effect, not being able to agree upon any one thing in
controversy between them before, but rather after infinite braulings chidings
and furious inuectiues, the one against the other, they have departed evermore
disagreeing, and more enimyes then ever they wear before their meeting: whereof
some few examples I shall recite in this place.

In the town* of Hala in Saxony, in the The first general council of
protestants in the world 1527.
there was made the first general Council of Lutherans together against
Sacramentarie Suinglians, where, by a solemn decree (which they called
Syngramma) they condemned the doctrine of the said Zwinglius, and his fellows
Carolstadius and Oecolampadius about the Sacrament, as damnable heresy, and
pronounced iudicially (Luther being President of the council) all the followers
of that doctrine to be prenicious heretics; which decree was published
presently and printed in the German tongue (with a preface thereunto of Luther
himself) by Ioannes Agricola one of Luthers chief scholars, in the same
year. But what did these men obey or yield to this supreme authority of their
new Church? noe: but presently Oecolampadius answered Luthers preface, accusing
him of much pride and vanity: Oh humility of a new gospeller! Suinglius also
wrote an epistle in the Germane tongue ad E^s^igenses, wherein he courseth and
canuaseth Martin Luther extremely, calling him and his partakers furious and
fanatical Swe^merers, (behold the spirit) and this was the event of this first
Synod of Lutherans, Svvermers.
from which time until the year 1529. that is for the space of some two
years, I read of no other public meetings, Synods or councels of moment had
amongst these primitive Church Protestants, but that by books and wrytings
only they did vex, and gaul one the other extremely, and Luther himself gave
this severe censure of this controversy to them of Arge^tine, dema^ding his
final resolution; Luth. admonit ad Argentorat
Aut Lutheru^ aut Sacramentarios Satanae ministros, etc. that either he, or the
Sacrame^taries were certainly the ministers of Satan: but he that would say
both, should best perhaps determine the cause.

In the year then 1529. by meditation of Philippe Lantgraue of Hessia, Three
other Synods of Luth. and Suingl. in vain anno 1529.

Lauat hist. 1529. and Sleid. eodem an.


an earnest protestant, there were three Synodes gathered of Lutherans and
Suinglians in one year to make agreement. The first in the town of Marspurge,
the second at Suabachium, the third at Smalcaldia, as both Laua^erus a
Suinglian and Sleidanus a Lutheran do testify in their histories, and out of
all these three Synodes they departed with less agreement, then they met; and
after their departure every man hasted to put in print the victory against his
adversary. The Suinglians published 300. arguments, which they said they had
alleged against the Real presence, and other articles of the Lutherans in that
Synod, and could get no answer at all. And on the other side, Melanchthon to
prove the Suinglians to be obstinate heretics, gathered together all the
sentences of the ancient Fathers and Doctors for the Real presence and
published them in printe. Luther also published that Suinglins in that Synod
desired him with tears in the presence of the Lantgraue, that he might be
received as a brother, but could not be admitted. Melantho^ also writing to a
friend of his of that Synod says thus: Quantum attinet ad factionem Zuingli ego
^oram agnoui, Melanchton epi^t ad Martin. Go^^i^iu^ Pastor. Brunsnicensem.
etc. for as much as appertains to the faction of Suinglius I did publicly
profess in the mee^ing at Marspurg 1592. having hard their chief Doctors of
that sect say what they could, that they have no doctrine at all of Christ, but
only do dispute childishly, and so they cannot endure. This was Melanchtons
judgment and prophesy of Suinglius, as also of Caluinists in this behalf, to
wit, that they hold not Christ nor cannot continue; but let our men consider
whether this be true, and like to prove a true prophesy or no; And this was
the effect of these other three Synods. Let us yet go ^oward.

The death of Zvvinglius and Oecolampadius. 1531.
the former slain in the field in rebellion against his country and common
wealth; the second found dead in his bed by his wives side, strangled by the
devil (as Luther holds) or as writers rather think, Luth. lib de missa
priuata
killed by his own wife. But what? was the controversy ended with this? No:
for to Zuinglius succeeded presently Bullenger and to Oecolampadius Michonius
their scholars, and others that took upon them to defend that faction begone.
And some few years after that again, there arose a famous new Apostle one
John Calvin a French man of Picard^, The beginning of John Calvin and his
doctrine
who though at the beginning would seem to approve the substance of the
Sacramentary doctrine in denying the Real pres^nce, yet not content to follow,
but to be followed, framed out a new opinion quite different from the ^ormer of
Zuinglius and Oecola^padius, as the whole church of Ma^sfeld does testify in
these words: Confess. Mansfeldens
The Caluinists (say they) do reject by a new devise, the doctrine of the ^l^er
Sacramentaries S^inglius and Oecolampadius, who did hold that Sacrament for an
external sign only, but these men confess it (in words) to be the very body
and blood of Christ substantially, and truly, but yet figuratively and
spiritually, so as Christ's body remains notwithstanding only in heaven, for
that it cannot be in two places at once. Thus they.

So as here now we see no agreeing at all hitherto, but rather more eager
dissension amongst protestants, the further we go down, even in the same sect
it self: and where then is our knights first blessing of general unity among
his people? But this shall be enough for Synodes and councels, for the breuity of
this place.

THE SAME MATTER is prosecuted, and the disunion of Protestants is proved and
declared by diverse other means, out of their own books and writings,
especially of foreign Protestants Lutherans, Zuinglians and Caluinistes. CAP.
V.
AND whereas I might prosecute this War of Lutherans and Sacramentaries.
both Lutherans against Sacramentaries, and they against Lutherans, and one
sect of Lutherans, against the other, as the ridged of Saxony against the soft
of the lower parts of Germany, or the Suinglians and Caluinists amongst
themselves; I do not think it expedient in this place to detayne the reader so
long, this being sufficient and more then sufficient (though it be not the
hundredth part of that which may be said) to show the impudency of Sir Francis
his assertion, where he avouches no less blyndly then boldly, that all the
churches of Christendom, where his gospel is embraced, are of the same
judgment, and in blessed unity of verytie. For refutation of which mad paradox,
he that will see more, let him read first Luther and Luthera^s books against
Sacramentaries: Haereticos serio censemus (says Luther) and altenus ab
Ecclesia Dei esse Zuinglianos and sacramentarius omnes. Luth. lib. contra
Sacramentaries.
We do earnestly censure all Suinglians and Sacramentaries for heretics, and
out of the church of God. Luth. epist. ad ^lbert. Marchion Prussiae.
And again in another book: Haud aliter caueant omnes a Zuinglio, quam a
Satanae veneno. Let all men take heed of Zuinglius, ^s of the poison of Satan.
Vid. Auti^ab. Luth. tit. de haeresi.
And again: Sacramentarij sunt perdiabolati, superdiabolati, and
transdiabolati haeretici. Sacramentaryes are indiueled, ouerdiueled, and
thoroughe diueled heretics.

Co^fes. Tigur. tract. 3. fol. 108.
Ego (says he) qui iam sepulchro vicinus obambulo hoc testimonium and ^anc
gloriam ad Christi saluatoris tribunal perferam, etc. I that now walk near to
my grave will carry this testimony and this glory with me, to the tribunal seat
of Christ my Savior, that I have ever, with all veheme^cy damned and fled
those fanatical heretics and enymies of the Sacrament, Suinglius,
Oecolampadius, Stinkefel^ius and their followers, whether they live at Zuricke,
or at what place else in the world.

And finally the same Luther in an epistle to Luth. epist. ad Jacob. presbyt.
Ecclesi^^ Brem. Doct. 1546.
Mihi satis est omnium infoelicissimo, vna ista beatitudo: Beatus vir, qui non
abijt in concilio Sacramentariorum nec stetit in via Zuinglianorum, nec sedit
in Cathedra Tygurinorum. Habes quid sentia^. It is sufficient for me most
unhappy man to die with this one blessing. Blessed is the man that has not gone
in counsel of Sacramentaries, nor stood in the way of Suinglians, nor sitte^ in
the chair of Tygurines (by following their sacramentary doctrine) and thus you
understand what my judgment is.

Thus much I thought good to cite out of Fox in his Calend. makes Luther a
saynct.
and John Fox does put him in his Calender for a saint and holy co^fessor upon
the 18. day of February. Doctor whitakers also Sr. F. great Doctor prefers
Luthers judgment in diverse points expressly and precisely before Augustine,
Whitaker against M. Martins discovery. Page 6.
Cyprian, and a thousand Churches, to wit (says he) when he brings scripture
for his proof, which is a very foolish and childish exception for that the
importance stands in the interpretation of the scriptures alleged, seeing
that Luther as well as other heretics alleged commonly every where scriptures,
for every purpose; but then especially when he writes against Sacrame^taryes,
that is to say against Whitakers himself, and his people, whereby the said
Doctors foolish censure is easily discovered to be no less void of wit, and
reason then of shame fastnes; but such men they are.

Zvvinglians against Lutherans.
and Caluenists have returned home again, to Luther, and Lutherans, or on the
other side, what Lutherans amongst themselves, and Caluinists amongst
themselves, have written one against another, let them read the Apology of the
Tygurynes together with the confession of their Church, set forth anno 1545.
where they show the malignity of Luthers spirit, his pride, and insolency, and
other such virtues. Let them read the admonitions of Ihon Calvin to Ioachimus
Westphalus, Calui^. vit. admon. con. VVestph. and in harmonia Euang.
where he calls Lutherans, Temulento^ cyclopes, gygantes, latratores,
phreneticos, etc. Dronken cyclops, giants, mad barkers and the like. Let them
read also the answer of Westphalus, VVestph. lib. co^tr. Calvin.
what he says of the Caluinists, exhorting the men of Frankford to drive them
out as hypocrites, and pestilent doctors, infecting the people with venomous
heresy. Ochin. lib. contr. sect. teor. ter.
Let them read the dialogue of Bernardinus Ochinus (once a preacher of heresy
in K. Edwards days in England) contra sectam t^rrenorum Deorum. against the
sect of earthely Gods, meaning by the earthly Gods, his old masters Calvin;
Pharellus and other teachers of Geneua, whom he calls heretics, and profane
Gods of Geneua, and Tygurine. of whom he says amongst other things: Quod noctu
somniarunt, id chartis mandant, excudique curant, suaque scripta and verba pro
oraculis haberi volunt. That which they dream of in the night, they write by
day, and do cause it to be printed, and will have their wrytings to be holden
for oracles. And yet these be the reverent ringleaderes of our new Religion in
England.

Stankarius a famous new Protestant sectarie Polonia, Stank. lib. de Trin. and
Mediator.
writing against not only Calvin, but Peter Martyr also, and Bullinger (two
principal Zwinglians, and the one our principal Oxford professor of new
divinity in K. Edwards days) calls them deploratissimos haereticos, most
desperate heretics, and adds, that they are far worse then papists, and
that one Peter Lombard (master of the sentences, though he were a sworn
Papist) yet is he more to be esteemed for wit, honesty, and learning then a
hundred Luthers, 200. Melanchtons, 300. B^llengers, 400. Peter Martyrs, 500.
Caluins, all which (says he) if they were ponded in a mortar, there could not
be gotten out of them one ounce of true divinity. This is his judgment of our
best Zuinglian, and Caluinian teachers.

Hessusius a famous Lutheran, writing also the first to be a very sycophant and
delicate Epicure of Geneua, Hessus. in defens. contr. Caluinum.
and the second a very beast and lascivious Cyclops, and his Doctrine to be
more filthy, His judgment of Caluyn and Beza.
and venomous, then the poesy of Martial, and Catullus, fitter for the stews
then for honest men or women to read. And this of Caluinists.

Flaccus Illyricus, War betvveene soft and ridged Lutherans.
Vigandus, Gallus, Ampsdorphius, Osiander, and the foresaid Hessusius all
austere, and ridged Lutherans, against Philip Melanchthon, Eberus, Sturmius,
Cl^be^ius, Chy^r^us and other of the sect of softer Lutherans, there would be
no end, if we should run over all, for that the fayers of Fra^kford every
year do bring forth so many new books in this kind, of one of these Luthera^s
against an other, as they cannot be read; and so enough for the present of this
external strife.

What union in England by one iudg^^nt of fo^^^ne Protestants.
and in England, if by the way you will give me leave first to note one only
point more, about these forayne sectaries, which I cannot omit, for that it
touches England also in particular, and is taken out of an authentical Author,
Ch^min. epi. ad Elect. Brand.
whom our English Protestants do highly commend in all their writings, to wit,
Martynus Chemnitius, for that he took upon him to examine, and ce^sure the
whole council of Trent (a valiant act of a typling German) but that which is
worse, he censureth the Queen, and Parliament of England also, in that which
now I am t^ allege, and so goes further then he should do. For in a letter
which he writes to the Prince Elector of Bra^de^^urge, allowing first his
judgment, and praising it greatly, quod consultum non esse iudicat, vt cum
Caluinistis generalis synodus habeatur. That his highness thinks it not
expedient to have any general Synod with the Caluinists as they desired; and
secondly he adds his own judgment to the Dukes, about their punishment, to
wit, that it is not convenient, vt punitionis officium contra Caluinistas,
interea temporis penitus quiescat. That the ^ffice o^ punishing Caluinists in
the mean space should utterly cease, but rather be continued. Thirdly he
passes over to talk also of the Religion of England, Chemnit his censure of
English religion.
and of her Ma^ie. by name, saying, that no good thing in Religion is further
to be expected of her: That she has used hardly the protestants of Germany;
That she sees and seele^h now a third sect risen up in her realm of
Puritanes, which hate both her, and Caluinians, and are enemies also to
Lutherans: and then he scoffeth, that she being a woman has taken upon her to
make Ecclesiastical laws. And lastly, quod soemineo, and a seculis ^naudito
fastuse Papissam and caput Ecclesiae fecit. That with a womanly pride (I am
forced to interpret his words as they ly) never hard of in former ages, she
has made her self a she Pope and head of the Church.

Thus says he and much more, and if any the unity they have among them? did
Lucifer and his angels ever more furiously fight among themselves, then these
their folowers do? But here we must stay our hand and go no further in
foreign fights, but rather get home (as I promised) and see what passes
there, among only Caluinists, and whether they be at any better peace then
their brethren are at abroad, and if not then will we laughe at Sir F. again,
for his unity in verity.

THE CONTINVATION of the same narration about unity in verity, among ridged and
soft Caluinistes, named Protestants and puritaines in England and Scotland.
CAP. VI.
that all their churches in Christendom were of the self same judgment, and
blessed unity; there wants not matter to make a far longer recital of their
domestical bickerings, hatred and dissentions, risen among the Caluinists of
England and Scotland, since the reign of her Majesty seeing there are extant
so many books of those matters, both between Cartwright, Whitgyft, Lupton,
Martyn Marprelate, Mar-martyn, and amongst the rest O. E. also (as is reported)
together with whole collections of the issue made and divulged by public
authority, wherein the controuersyes, Books betvveen protestants and Puritans
the one against the other.
stryfes, and manner of defending them are particularly set down, together
with the combats, and assaults sleights, shifts, endeavors and policies of
each side, which comedy though it be over long for me to bring into this place
yet will I touch some few principal points for the readers instruction, and
partly also for recreation, concerning the good agreement of th^se people, or
rather their war and bickerings; being all professors of one and the self
same sect, to the end we may see what unity in verity they have, as our knight
braggeth, or rather how their spirit of division is no other then that of the
Lutherans, Swinglians and other sectaryes, before rehearsed, and as all other
heretics have ever been before them, and shall be after them, for that the self
same spirit of one and the selfsame find, does and shall possess them all to
the worlds end.

First then to begin with some points of Caluinian contention about Princes
authority
wherewith the knight seeks continually to press us, as though we denied both
spiritual and temporal which is most false in the one; but his men (I mean
English Protestants and Puritans) are so divided among themselves in this
point, as is incredible, especially to him that hears the fauning flattery of
Sir F. to her Majesty in his watchword, and knows not what his doctors do
hold and practice elsewhere to the contrary. For harken now to his Ministers
assertions in this behalf.

Princes (say they) may be deposed (by the people) if they be Tirants against
God and his truth, Knockes in hist. Scot. Page 78. and 372.
and their subjects are free from their oaths of obedience. Again the people
are better then the king and of greater authority, Bucchan. de iure reg. page
61.13.25.58.40.62. etc.
they have right to bestow their crown at their pleasure, they may arraygne
their Prince and depose him: To them it appertains to make laws, and to the
prince to execute them; they have the same power over the king, that the king
has over any particular person: and it were good, that rewards were publicly
appointed by the people for such that kill tyrants, as there are for those that
kill wolfes and bears.

Objections finely ansvvered.
some places out of scripture, or otherwise to temper this humor, as, that we
must obey kings whether they be good or bad: Knokes appel. fol. 26.
they answer, it is blasphemy so to say. Again when these object, That God
placed evil kings and Tyra^ts sometimes to punish the people. The others
answer: So he does sometimes private men also to kill them. Moreover when they
allege S. Paul, That he comandeth us we should pray for princes, ^uch. de
iure reg. page ^7.
1. Tim. 2. The other do answer, we may punish thieves and pray for them also.
And when these reply that the same Apostle commands expressly, to be obedient
to such a prince. 1. Tim. 3. They answer: Buch. Ibid. Page 50.
That Paul wrote this in the infancy of the Church but if he lived now, he
would say otherwise, except he would dissent from himself. Ibid. fol. 56.57.
I leave much more that might be alleged to this effect,

And all this and much more is testified also Dangerous positions, etc. with
this posy adjoined unto it out of the epistle of S. Jude: They despise
government, and speak evil of them that are in authority. And having given
testimony to this which I have cyted, and much more, he gives his censure of
others also of the same profession beyond the sea: Lib. 1. Pa. 12.
This new divinity (says he) of dealing thus with Princes is not only held by
Knockes and Bucchanan alone (that are Scots) but generally (for ought I can
learn) by most of the chief consistorians beyond the seas being of the
Geneuian humor, as Caluyn, Beza, Hot^ma^, etc.

And the same writer in his second book, afterward does show at large how that
M^. Goodman, Mr. Whittingham, and other English Protestants that fled to Geneua
in Q. Mary's days have left written the same, and far worse positions
against the authority of princes, as in their books, and in the foresaid
collection of this author may be read.



But if we leave the Prince and come to Bishops, which is the second principal
member of their church and body, their disagreement is much more notorious,
then in the former. For as the protestant speaks honorably of them, so does
the Puritan quite contrary: calling them; Dangerous posit. lib. 20. cap. 12.
the greatest and most pestilent enimyes that the state of England has,
unlawful, false, and bastardly governors of the church, thrust in by
ordenance of the devil, petty antechrists, cogging and cosening knaves,
profane, paltery, pernicious, pestilent Prelates, in respect of their places,
enymyes of God, their calling mere Antichristian, etc. And this for their
bishops and chief pastors, whom they ought to presume according to S. Paul's
speech to be put over them (if any be) by the holy Ghost, Caluinian
contradictio^ about the Bish. and chief Pastors.
Act. 20. But if they be enymies of God, cogging knaves, petty Antichrists, and
ordained by the devil himself (as these their own children and brethren say
and swear) then are English protestants well directed by them, and to a good
end will they come. But let us hear what they say of their immediate pastors
and teachers, I mean their ministers and present clergy.

Our supposed ministers (say they) are a multitude Ibid cap. 13. Of their
ministers.

Ibid. cap. 11.


accursed, uncircumcised, and murdering generation. The clergy is endighted
as the followers of Antichrist; they are wolves; it is a Sinagoge of Satan,
their only endeavor how to prevent Christ, they are known to be enimyes unto
all syncerity, Posir. ibid. li. 2. cap. 4.
etc. And in another place: Right puissant, poisoned, persecuting and terrible
priests: The holy league of subscripsion, the crew of monstrous and ungodly
wretches, horned masters of the conspiration house, Antichristian, swynish
rabble, the convocation of devils under Belzabub of Canterbury chee^e of
devils, etc. Thus of them.

And concerning the whole government, Ibid. cap. 4.
and corpse of the Church of England, they say: Antichrist reigns amongst us;
the established government of the Church is treaterous against the Majesty of
Jesus Christ, it gives leave to a man to be any thing but a sound Christian,
etc. And this of their whole Church parts and pastors thereof.

But I let pass what these fellows say and write of her Majesty, About the Q
council and parliament.
head of their Church, denying wholly her ecclesiastical authority, and
subiecting her to their pryuate excommunications when they please, Dang. posi^.
lib. ^.
etc. Of the Lords of her privy Counsel also, charging them not to deal in
matters ecclesiastical. Of the Parliament in like manner and laws made thereby
(which in England is the highest court) saying in particular thereof; Ibid. lib.
2. cap. 1.
that as great indignity is offered unto Jesus Christ, in committing his English
Church unto the government of the common laws, as for hir^lings under any
great king to commit his beloved spouse unto the direction of the mistress of
the stews, etc.

The comm^^ book of Protestants.
(wherein by name Sir F. in this reply braggeth so confidently, VVast. Page 12.
that their is so great unity amongst them) these his brethren write thus:
Dang. posit. lib. 2. cap. 9.
There prescript form of service is full of corruption in all the order of
their service, there is no edification but confusion, The Sacraments are
wickedly mangled and profaned, they eat not the Lords supper, but play a
pagent of their own to blind the people, their public baptism is full of
childish and superstitious to^es, etc.



about the interpretation of Scriptures, War in expounding scriptures.
whereunto all matters being by both their judgments to be referred, and all
other judges and trials left a side, as they require, they come to fall out
presently about the sense and interpretation, wherein it is affirmed by their
own writers, that so many men, so many minds and so many diverse
interpretations among themselves of the selfsame words of scripture, are to
be found, as you may see set down at large in another book of the softer
Caluinists set forth by the same public authority as the former, and entitled
A survey of the pretented holy Discipline imprinted at London An. 1593.
especially in the 31. Chapter, whose title is this. How and with what
disagreement they wrest and misconster the scriptures, etc. Where having showed
by many examples that five or six diverse interpretations are given sometimes
upon one and the self same sentence of scripture, by these his puritan
brethren. He adds further these words. Survey. c. 31. Caterbraulis. of
Protestants and Purita^s.
Unto these Caterbraules and pitiful distractions, (which now I have showed) I
might ad a great heap of other confusions, all proceeding from such
intolerable presumption, as is used, by perverting and false interpretation of
the sacred Scriptures. And again, whosoever does deal with the Scriptures in
this sort, (as these fellows do) well may he speak proud things, exalt
himself, promise mountains, brag of the Prophets, and Apostles, but in the
end all comes to nothing, etc.

Lo here what this brother says of the from them, of their intolerable
presumption in perverting, and false interpreting scriptures, of their swelling
pride, in bragging of having the prophets, and Apostles on their side, when
they have nothing but vanitye, and yet these brags of scriptures, prophets and
Apostles, must be good and current proof, when they deal with us against the
authority of the universal Church, as you shall see by O.E. in the next
Chapter, and when we tell them of any division among themselves, they will deny
it on all hands, as Sir F. does here of the Puritanes, and O. E. afterward,
though he has written against them most spitefully and doggedly (for he has
no other style as it seems) and finally let all men judge but especially the
reader, whom it most imports for his instruction, with what truth, and
conscience Sir F. can say and write as he does (matters standing as I have
showed) that not only the professors of their ghospel in England, but all other
Churches also in Christendom, where the ghospel is embraced are of one
Judgment, and thereupon conclude with this hypocritical prayer to mock God
withal, And in this blessed unity grounded upon verity the Lord for ever
keep us. Whereunto I say also amen, so long as they remain enemies to Gods
Catholic Church wherein only verity and unity is to be found.

AN ANSWER TO three fond objections, or interrogations of Sir F. with an
addition about O. E. who is called up again to the stage to tell his opinion
about this first blessing of unity in verity. CAP. VII.
AND this now might be sufficient for

You vaunt (says he) of a general unity before alteration Page 13.
but how worshipped you one God, when you worshipped so many Idols? To this I
answer that if we worshipped Idols, Three fo^d interrogatio^s ^f the K.
and so were Idolators, this error was so universally received among us, as
even in this point also we had unity, which protestants cannot show in their
errors, and falsityes, as before has been declared. And so this question is
both idle, and easy to answer, for the consequent, but for the antecedent it
is most false, for we deny that any Idols were among Catholics. August. de
vtilitate ieiunij tomo 9. ^ub finem. S. Hier. in c. 6. Amos and in c. ^2. Ose.
S. Augustines and S. Hieroms sentence is clear and sound, as before has been
noted that heretics are the Idolaters of the new Testament, for adoring their
own fancies.

how we could have unity, when as we were so miserably rent into innumerable
sects of friars, and monks? To which I answer, that all these professed one
faith without any difference in any one article of belief. And consequently
this question is more simple then the former, for that difference of habytes,
or particular manner of life breaks not unity of religion.

how ca^ you have one head of your Church, unless you reject Christ, that is
the only head? To this I will answer out of his own words, that we can have
one external, and ministerial head under Christ by the same reason, that
himself in the same place says, that English Protestants have one head of
their Church, which is Christ the Lord, and his substitute anointed their
Sovereign Q. under him. So that if it do not exclude Christ among the
Protestants to have a woman head of their Church under Christ, much less does
it exclude Christ among us, to have a man head, and a Priest head, and of this
reason I am content to make any man judge.

And with this I will end my treatise of the first benediction of unity in
verity, which is as truly, and fitly applied to Protestants, as if a man
should assign it for a special blessing of Greeks and Germans above other
nations, never to exceed in drinking, or of those of Guinea, never to fall out,
or fight among themselves, who never lightly are occupied in other things.

And lastly I will close up all with the sentence, Martyn Luther himself,
Luthers prophesye of Protestants. coment in Psalm. 5.
who writes thus, Certe non alia ratione confligit Deus cum haereticis, quam
vt inter illos existat factiosus quidam dissensionis spiritus; ex ^llorum enim
discordia interitus quoque and perditio consequitur. Truly God does not fight
by any other means with heretics, then by permitting among them a certain
seditious spirit of dissentio^, by which their overthrow also and perdition
does ensue. Thus said Luther a man full of your ghost and extraordinarily
enlightened which the spirit of protestants; whose Father and founder he was,
and he speaks of you and yours in particular to wit, Zwinglians and
Caluinists and therefore you may believe him if you will, and thus much to the K.
about this controversy now to his champion the martial Minister.

O. E. is cauled up to the stage.
now his cu comes in to say a word or two more, and so we must needs make him
room though very briefly, for he has littel or no matter of substance at all
to entertein us withal in this place.

First then albeit he holds and affirms resolutely as the knight does that
on his side there is no division at all of any moment in matters of Religion,
but that all disagreement is among us, Unity no blessing with O. E.
yet does he not put this unity of his people in the Catalogue of his
blessings received by the new ghospel, and this perhaps for that he having
written so eagerly against the Puritanes (as he is said to have done) he dares
not admit them now so easily to the union of brethren, as Sr. F. does, who is
held for a great proselite or rather patro^ of theirs, which matter shall be
discussed more particulerly afterward in this Encounter. Now we are to treat
only of this first benediction of unity among Protestants, whereunto, (as I
said) the Minister vouchsafes not to give any place in his list of
benedictions, though it have the first and chiefest in that of S.F. from whom
this honest man differs not a little though both agree in the number of ten.
Page 4.
Let us hear this ma^s Role, he says that his blessings are of two sorts
spiritual, and temporal, six of the one sort, and four of the other, the
spiritual are these, as he recounteth them. O.E. his decalogue of blessings.
1. deliverance from the Popes decretals 2. Scriptures in English, 3. true
administration of Sacraments, 4. true worship of Christ, 5. fredome from
persecution. 6. abolishing of Romayne Rytes. The temporal are. 1. deliverance
from the thraldom of Spaniards. 2. abolishing of the Popes exactions. 3. peace
restored to the land, 4. the strength of the Realm greatly increased.

This is his decalogue of blessings, whereby Disagreing in the names and
qualities of blessings.
for that five or six of Sr. F. Blessings are quite left out by the Minister,
to wit, unity in verity, public prayer in English, abou^dant exercise of
good works, power in forrayne countries, and multitude of subjects seuenfold
increased. The first spiritual also and the 2. temporal are all one, and the 5.
spiritual of freedom of persecution seems rather temporal, then spiritual.

And on the other side the knights head of Sacraments, and their true
worshipping of Christ (being general points) could enter into the rank of
particular blessings, more then all the rest of their religion, or lastly that
the deliverance from Spaniards may be accounted an effect of the English
ghospel, having been also in so many ages before, when England was Catholic,
for which cause he omitted these blessings in his Catalogue, but finally these
are arbitrary matters, and devises of their own brains, and therefore no
maruayle though each man have his own.

Where the warder says he, affirms that we are divided not only from the
general body of Catholics in Christendom, but also from our selves, he
tells us his own dream, and fancyes, fleeting in his idle brain without
any ground or truth.

all grounds, and withal see on the other side so many and great, grounds,
it may frame a judgment in thee of their manner of proceeding, and of their
resolution to break wilfully through what hedge or wall of truth soever
stands between them, or in their way.

And yet I cannot but warn thee also in this VVardword. Page 4.
We English of the new profession are not only different, and divided from the
general body of Catholics in Christendom with whom we were united before, but
also among our selves, and with other new sectaryes sprung up with us, and
after us, False and fraudule^t alleging adversaries words.
we have implacable wars, and are divided in opinions, as with Lutherans in
Germany and Denemarke, from Swinglians, in Switzerland from Caluinists in
Geneua, France, Holla^d, Scotland, which words if you consider them do make a
more plain and full sense, then those that the Minister pleases to repeat,
suppressing, and leaving out so much as he thinks may explayne, or mollify
matters, as hear the words, we English professing the new ghospel are de^ided
from the general body of Catholics in Christendom, with whom we were united
before, etc. all these words I say which go in a different letter he wilfully
put out, and then in steed of my saying, that we are divided among our selves,
he says from our selves, which makes a far different sense th^n among our
selves: and so using these shifts in every place, matter, sentence, and
almost periode and line which he alleges of mine, you may guess to what
bulk it may arise in the whole work, and what certayntie, the reader may have
of any thing that is alleged by him, and that these false laddes, by these
corruptions, and shifts, do endeavor, not to establish any truth at all, but
to fill all with dowtes, and diffidence, and so much of this beer for that
afterward occasion will be offered to return to some of this treatise again.
Now then let us pass on to the remnant of Sr. F. Blessings.

OF THE SECOND AND third blessings, which are, reading of scriptures and
public service in English. CAP. VIII.
HOw true the former first blessing has Conditions of true blessings.
Now follow the other nine about which we must remember that which before has
been touched to wit, that to prove them peculiar and special blessings of
Protestants, it must be showed that they were not among Catholics before, and
the^ also that they are matters of such weight and moment as they do or may
deserve the name of blessings, and yet further that they are truly found in
deed in Protestants doctrine, and not feigned or supposed by our knights only
fancy or imagination, and lastly that they are general and universal to the
whole Church of Protestants, and so according to these four conditions, and
circumstances of true blissings we shall examine the rank of them that do
ensue, and in this chapter some 2. or 3. of them severally.

Wherefore to come to the matter, he says The second blessing about reading
scriptures in English.
that the scriptures are now in English for every man and woman to read, etc.
This blessing, say I, has not the ^ormer conditions required, for first it is
not general to all, seeing that such as understood the latin tongue before,
receive no blessing herby, nor yet those that had license before under the
Catholics from their ordinaries and pastors (for that was always permitted as
the world knows) to read scriptures in the English tongue have received any
blessing thereby, so that this benediction must needs be restrained to those
people alone, that being simple and ignorant of the latin tongue, were
accounted before by their pastors and Prelates unfit to profit by such reading
of scriptures at their pleasure in their vulgar tongue, but rather had need to
be instructed otherwise, and to have so much scripture delivered to them by
other means of cathechismes, homiles, preachings and such like instructions,
as they were capable of, without laying open to them the whole corpse of
scriptures to conster and misconster as their fancies should aford them.

This was the censure and judgment of the Catholic Church before Protestants
arose, which course our knight calls darkness an^ blyndnes, and the contrary
course of permitting scriptures to all without distinction he (...) needs have
to be a singular blessing brough^ in by his men, Of diverse that perished by
reading ^criptures in vulgar Languages.
but yet I would ask him, wha^ blessing it was to such as fell into heresies
an^ perished thereby, that of liklihood would no^ have happened unto them, if
that liberty and freedom of reading scriptures in English ha^ not been
permitted.

ward^word, an instance of one Ioane Bourcher (alia^ knel) in king Edwards
days, Stow anno 1549 Edovvardi 6. reg. anno. 3.
who being a simple woman, but yet heady and wilful by reading scriptures in
English learned to hold and defend that Christ had not takan flesh of his
mother the Virgyn, In like manner I ask, was it a blessing to the tanner of
Colchester her copsmate, Stow Ibid.
who picked out of reading scriptures that Baptism was worth nothing, and so
held to his death, affirming that he could defend the same by plain and
evident scriptures, so as neither Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, nor the
rest of the Protestants in those days (who had taught them to read scriptures)
could conquer, or convert them by scriptures, but were feign to burn them
with fire for the good effect proceeding of this their own blessing (if it be
a blessing) whereby all are permitted, and invited to read scriptures in English.

George Paris also a simple duitchman was burned by the said Archbishop in the
same kings reign, Stow and Holinsead Ibid.
for houlding, that Christ was not equal to his Father which he avouched to
have learned out of the sacred bible, that he had studied in his own language,
and could not be driven from it by any disputation of Cranmer, Rydley, or any
other our English ministers, but only by the fire, which at length they used,
to convert him into ashes.

In this Queens days also at the very beginning when scriptures were first
published Stow. anno 1561. Reg 3. Elizab.
William Geffrey and John More did read so earnestly, and interpret so
soundly as they learned to hold, and affirm, that Christ was not in heaven,
and were whipped publikelie for the same, until they confessed the contrary:
so as the reading scriptures in English was no blessing to these men but only
a blessing with a whip as you will confess.

Stow an. 1575. and 1576.
and punished in London by order of the L. Matthew Parker of Canterbury, for
denying Christ to have taken flesh, and other such opinions, and two of them
burned in Smythfeild, and five others of the family of love, brought in
public penance at Paul's cross for heresies, who all avouched
notwithstanding, that they had drawn their new doctrine out of the reading of
scriptures in the vulgar tongue, what blessing I pray you was this to the^, or
to such other as have fallen into other sects since that time, both of
Brownisme, Puritanisme, and other fancyes condemned by the Protestants
themselves, and detested by the present state of England, which yet they had
never done (by all likelihood) if this public reading of scriptures without
restraint or due moderation had not been permitted to the ignorant: Systers of
London in the survey of dang^erous positions.
Those busy sisters of London also, and other cities whereof the late
protestant writers do so much complain in their books against Puritanes, who
gad up and down with English bibles under their arms, and will defend any
thing against any man out of scriptures, would not so much have troubled either
themselves, their husbands or the common wealth if this blessing had not been
permitted to them, or if it may be accounted a blessing, and not a cursing that
makes both them and other ignorant people so mad and frantic in heresy.

So as now it is to be considered, whether Encount. 2. cap. 7. and 8.


His third blessing is, that they have not only the Scriptures, The ^,
blessing of public service in English.
but also their common Church service in a vulgar tongue; the weight of which
blessing may in part be pondered by that which has been said about his second:
for if the necessity or Scriptures in the English tongue to every particular
man and woman be so small as before has been showed (many thousands both
protestants and others being within the land even at this day that cannot or do
not read them, and yet may be saved, as I think he will not deny) and that to
some the reading also has been pernicious and not a blessing bu^ rather cursing
through their own insufficiency (as by former examples I have showed) much
less necessity is there of public service in vulgar tongues, seeing that
public service is appointed to be said or song to the praise of God and in the
name of all the people by public Priests and other ecclesiastical officers
appointed thereunto, nor is it needful always for the people to be present at
it, bu^ only in spirit and consent of heart, nor when they be present to
intermedle with that function, but rather to attend each one to their private
devotions, as we read of Zacharias the priest Father to S. John Baptist of whom
S. Luke the Evangelist writes: that according to the custom of Priesthood in
those days he went up into the temple when his lot came to offer public
incense, adding as concerning the people, Luc. ^.
Et omnis multitudo populi erat orans foris hora incensi. All the multitude of
the people did pray without; during the time of his incense, that is to say,
while he performed his office of public Sacrifice, the people stood a loofe
and prayed by themselves, whereby we may perceive that the people in time of
public service and sacrifice among the Jews (in place whereof S. Augustine
says that Christ has appointed his sacrifice of the Mass among Christians)
did not intermedle in the public service, Aug lib 17. de ciui^ c. 20. Leo
sermon. ^. de Passion.
but attended to their own devotions a^ is now in custom in Catholic
cou^tryes, except only in certain hymns, litanies, processions, or other
such part of the service as is generally to be performed by all.

Whereof it follows that it is not necessary Not necessary for the common
people to understand the public service.
nor do we read that ever it was ordinarily but in the three learned languages
of Hebrew, Greek and Latin: sanctified by Christ in the title of his Cross,
nor is it convenient (as ancient Fathers do testify) that all things which are
handled in Church service praesertim in sacris misterijs (to use their words)
should be understood by all unlearned people in their own vulgar languages,
Dion. lib. de Eccles. Hierarch cap. 1. Orig hom. 5. in numeru^. Basil lib. de
spiritu sancto ca. 27. Chrysostom. hom. 24. in Matthew Greg. lib 4. Dialog. cap. 56.
and so does teach both S. Dionisius scholar to S. Paul, Origin, S. Basil, S.
Chrysostom, S. Gregory and other Fathers, for which reverent respect it is
like among other causes, that the said common Church service has ever been
used in one of the said learned tongues.

As for example in Iurye it self and Jerusalem Common service in Jury not in
vulgar tongue.
which yet was not the vulgar tongue, nor understood commonly by the people
without an interpreter as appears lib. 2. Esdrae. cap. 8.

And that the Syrian tongue was the vulgar language of the Jews in Christ's
time appears clearlie by the words Talitha cumi, Marc. 5. Matthew. 27. Marc. 14.
hacheldema, golgatha, Pascha, abba and other such, recorded by the
Evangelists, which are no Hebrew, but only Syriak words, as all learned men
know.

Romans 10. Coloss. 1. Irenaeus li. 1. cap. 3.
is evident, yet shall we never read that they wrote to any of these particular
nations or to their Churches in vulgar languages but only in one of the three
former tongues, as has been said.

Neither can it be showed out of any Author of Antiquity whatsoever, that any
Christian Catholic country since the Apostles time had public service in any
language but in one of those three except by some special dispensation from the
Pope and upon special consideration for some limited time.

Service in Greek.
) As of the Greek tongue in Syria, Hieron. praefat in (...). Epi^t. ad G^^^.
Cappadocia, Egypt and almost in all other the east parts which was not yet
their vulgar tongue as appears by S. Hierome in many places showing that the
Greek edi^ion of the Scriptures by the 70. interpreters was only in use in all
those places. Aug. lib ^. Doct. Christ. c. 13. and lib. de bon. perseue^an.
cap. 13.
And S. Augustine testifies for Africa, that the psalms in his time were wont
to be song in the Church in the Latin tongue, and the same Author also in an
other place, repeating the words used in the preface of the Mass at that day,
(which are the very same we have now) to wit sursum corda, habemus ad Dominum*
Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro, dignum and iustum est, etc. does evidently
declare that the latin Mass was used in his time, though yet the Latin tongue
in Africa was not understood by the vulgar people. Latin service.


And the like has S. Cyprian about the same Latin preface of the mass in his
time at Carthage many years before S. Augustine was borne. Cypr. ser. de.
orat. Dom.


And as for other particular countries S. Isyd lib. 2. de diuini efficijs.
Isydorus a Spanyard testifies for Spain almost a thousand years past that
the Church service in his time was there in Latin, Conc. 4. Tolet. cap.
2.11.13.14.
And the fourth council of Tolet about the same time testifies the same.

And for France testifies the same our great learned Englishman Alcuinus M.
Alcuin. li. de diu. offic.
of Charles the great about the year of Christ 840. Bid lib. 1. hist. Angl.
cap. 1.
And for England testifies Beede before him; as after shall be showed; and no
man can doubt but that S. Augustine our first Apostle brought in our first
service from Rome in Latin. Raban lib. 2. de institu^. clericorum. Rupert. lib
c. de di^inis off^^^js.
And for Germany testifies Rabanus Archb. of Moguntia above 700. years past,
and Rupertus Abbas some ages after him again. And the same might be showed
particulerlie of all other particular countries by ancient Authors of the same
nations and times.

Wherefore if the rule of S. Augustine often by him repeated be true, Aug. lib.
4. contra Donatist. cap 24.
which is, that when anything is found generally observed in the Catholic
Church and no beginning to be found thereof that this comes most certaynlie
from the Apostles by tradition. And if his other sentence be also true, Aug.
epist. 13^.
where he says disputare contra id quod vniuersa Ecclesia facit
insolentissimae insaniae est. It is a point of most insolent madness to dispute
against that which the universal Church does practice: If this I say be true
and that the general practice of the Christian world be evident in this behalf
for using one of these 3. learned tongues only in public service and
public use of scriptures what shall we say of the insolency or madness of Sr.
F. and his fellows that not only will dispute and pratle against this practice
and custom of the universal Church, but also will make the breach thereof a
peculiar blessing, whereas notwithstanding those that pass from country to
country and do find the service in particular vulgar languages which they
understand nothing at all, must needs account it rather for a curse then a
blessing to have it in those utterly unknown vulgar la^guages, seeing that
every man lightly understands somewhat of the Latin either by learning or
use because it is common to all and taught in every country but not so of every
vulgar language out of the country where it is native, and this much of this
first point or part of my answer.

THE SECOND PART of the answer about Church service in English, containing
some authorityes aleaged for it but much corrupted and abused by the knight.
CAP. IX.
BUT now remains the second part Tota Ecclesia instar toni^rui reboat,
Hieron. prol lib. 2. in com^^t. in Gal.
Amen. the whole Church like a thunder did sound out Amen, by which words he
would infer, that therefore the public service was in vulgar tongues in S.
Hierome time, but mark (good reader) by this one example (if there were no
more) the fraudulent manner of these men's aleadging Fathers. For first this
speech of S. Hierome is of the Church of Rome, (as after shall be proved) where
no man can doubt, but that the service was in Latin and consequently the
example is euel brought to prove service in a vulgar language, and secondly it
is no maruayle though the people sounded out Amen, in Rome where most men
understood the Latin tongue and those that did not, yet might they easelie
understand by use what the word, Amen. signifies and when it is to be used.
And I would ask of our K. whether our Church also in England (where yet the
Latin tongue is not so common as in Rome) did not sound out Amen, in Queen
Maryes days and other Catholic tyme^ in the mass, and other service, when it
was in Latyn^ Will any deny this, but either an ignorant or impudent man? Let
him go but over sea to Paris, where the vulgar tongue is French, and hear what
the Catholic people do sound out in the public service though it be not in
their vulgar language? Beed. lib. 1. hist. Angl. ca. ^ and 20.
Let him read S. Beed above 800. years agone, who writing of our Church of
England, and showing first that the use of public service in his days was in
the Latin tongue, (as afterward is proved more at large) rehearses a notable
story, Enc. 2. cap. 4.
how S. Germanus and S. Lupus, french Catholic Bishops called in by Catholic
Britanes against heretics, did set forth a certain army against the Pelagians
and other Infidels, and gat the victory by repeating the word Allelu^a sounded
out like a thunder (as he says) by all the Catholic army.

And yet I do not think that S. F. will go about to prove by this Argument,
that all that Army understood the Lat^n tongue, or else the hebrew for that
Alleluia is an hebrew word, and no mo^e does it prove that the Roman Church
had their service in a vulgar tongue understood by all for that they sounded
out Amen, and so much of this.

notorious fraud of the K. False dealing in alleging S. Hierome.
in this place for that as he and his do never lightly aleadge any Father or
Doctor for their purpose without some sh^fte or imposture (the Fathers being
wholly and every where against them) so here S. Hieromes text and whole
discourse being quite contrary to him, he durst not aleadge the whole sentence
but culled out the words aleadged and framed them to his purpose. Tota
Ecclesiae instar tonitrui reboat, Amen. which words stand not in S. Hierome as
he alleges them, but are altered and patched up by him, to make them seem
in his favor, leaving out craftily both that which goes immediately before,
and presently does follow, for that they made against him and his who^e cause
of protestants religion, which here I shall explayne.

S. Hierome in his pro^me cyted of his second Paula and Eustochium (to whom he
dedicated his book) why S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans praised so much
their faith: Romans 16.
His words in latin are these. S. Hieron. proemio lib. 2 comment. ad Gal.
Romanae plebis laudatur sides: vbi alibi tanto s^udio and frequentia ad
Ecclesias, and ad martyrum sepulchra concurritur? Vbi sic ad similitudinem
caelesti^ toni^rui Amen reboat. The faith of the people of Rome is praised by
the Apostle. For where in any other place of the world do the people run with
so great diligence and concurse unto the Churches and sepulchers of Martyrs as
in Rome? where do they so much sound out the word Amen, to the likeness of an
heavenly thunder?

The Catholic devotion of Rome.
Hierome and proved to be more excellent then of any other Christians in the
world for their earnest devotion and running to Churches and sepulchers of
martyrs, this if Sir F. had put down sincerlie as it lies in S. Hierome it
would have marred his market, and given a great buffet to his religion as you
see, specially if he had added the words immediately following in S. Hierome,
S. Hier. Ibid.
which are these. Non quod altam habeant Romani fidem, nisi hanc, quam omnes
Christi Ecclesiae, sed quod deuotio in e^s mayor sit and simplicitas ad
credendum. The faith of Rome is specially praised by the Apostels above
others, not for that the Romans had a different faith from that which all
other Churches of Christ do hold, but that their devotion, and simplicity in
believing was greater then the rest.

Enc. 7. c. 6.7.
and after his time brought into England again by S. Augustine the monk at S.
Gregoryes appointment, so as twice we have had communication and participation
of this Romayn faith so higlie commended by S. Paul and S. Hierome.

Secondly it is to be noted that the things most praised in the Roman faith by
S. Hierome are two points most scorned at by our Protestants, to wit
simplicity in believing without disputing or curiously asking reasons, and
secondly promptenes of devotion in visiting Churches, martyrs Sepulchers and
the like: for which two points of simplicity in believing and devotion S.
Hierome is of opinion that S. Paul did so specially commend the Romans in his
days; which points being so far different from the judgments and affections
of the protestants of our days, no marvel though Sir F. here would not let
us see S. Hieromes whole sentence, but a piece only cut out, as he thought
best, for his purpose, and yet this piece also not truly nor faithfully
aleadged, as now shall be showed.

And this is one principal point to be considered S. Hieromes text abu^ed.
to wit, Tota Ecclesia instar tonitrui reboat Amen. Adding first of his own
the two first words, Tota Ecclesia, which are not in S. Hierome, and then
changing ad similitudinem (which S. Hierome uses) into instar, and leaving out
the word caelestis, found in S. Hierome and lastly seperating and cutting of
the whole from the precedent and consequent sentence, and true sense as has
been showed, so as in six words four at least have received alteration or
imposture. And yet we know that both in reason and custom when any sentence is
aleadged first in latin and then in English as this is by him, the former at
least should be exact, and in the Authors own words, but necessity gives
this liberty to Sir F. to clip and cut, tryfle and cauil as he may; let us see
yet further.

Psalm. ^^.
expounding these words of the Psalm. Beatus populus q^^ intell^g^t
iubilationem, August. sup. psalm. 99.
which words our K. interprets thus: Blessed is the people that understands
the joyful song.

S. Augustines words falsely applied.
Cur^amus ergo ad hanc beatitudinem, intelligamus iubilati^nem, non eam sine
intellectu fundamus. Let us run to this blessedness, let us understand this
iubilation, let us not power it out without understanding. All which being
meant most playnlie of inward understanding and feeling of blessed ^oy within
our hearts, this gross interpreter will needs transfer all to outward crying
singing and chaunting of Geneua Psalms in their Churches, and for this cause
translateth falsely the words, intelligamus iubilationem non eam sine
intellectu fundamus. Let us understand the song, let us not sing it without
understanding, as though al^ were meant by singing in vulgar known tongues for
that the word understanding is so often repeated, which yet is as ^arre of from
S. Augustynes? true meaning and whole drifte in that place, as if the knig^t
would infer also that because he uses the word Curramus let us run, he
would defend thereby running games in England, or running at bazes or prison
bars in Churcheyards as young people are wont to do, for that the holy Father
in that place handling these words of the Psalm. 99. August. Ibid^ initio.
Iubilate Deo vniuersa terra, let the whole earth rejoice to God, says first.
Non ho^ta^ur velut aliquem vnum angulum terrae, etc. The spirit of God does not
exhort any one corner of the world, or any one habitation or congregation of
men, to Iubilate and rejoice unto him, but for that he knows that he has
sowed his benediction every where* he requires this iubilation every where
also. These are S. Augustines words, and let the reader judge whether these be
spoken of any corporal singing psalms or saying service in particular Churches
and congregations or rather of inward iubilation of spirit which S. Augustine,
expressly means, and for confirmation thereof he alleges also those words
before cyted out of an other psalm, Psalm. ^^.
Beatus populus, qui intelligit iubilationem. Happy is the people that
understands this Iubilation, which word ( understands) for that our
heretyke builds all his argument thereon) S. Hierome enterpreteth nouit
iubilationem happy is the people that knows Iubilation, S. Hieron. in Psalm.
^^.
or as our ordinary latin edition has, Scit iubilationem knows or feels
Iubilation, which later sense also S. Augustine himself follows in other
places reading Sciens iubilatione^ All which senses the Greek and Hebrew words
do bear, that is to say, Happy is that people of God which feels inward
comfort and spiritual iubilation of heart in his service. Which being so, most
fondly and childishlie is this text brought in by Sr. F. to prove external
singing of psalms in vulgar languages quite contrary to S. Augustines
meaning, words, and sense, as now I shall more particulerlie declare out of two
plain places of thesaid Father.

S. Augustine explica^eth himself.
so had he uttered, or not fraudulently concealed the same the question had been
out of doubt. S. Aug. in Psalm. 9^.
For thus says S. Augustine. Qui iubilat, non verba dicit, sed sonus quidam
est laetinae sine verbis: v^x est enim animi diffusi laetitia exprimentis,
quantum potest affectum, non sensum comprehendentis. He that does Iubilate (or
has this Iubilation meant by the Prophet) does not utter any words, for it is
a certain sound of inward joy without words: it is, a voice of our mind full of
Joy, and expressing her affection as much as she can but not attayning to
express the full inward feeling thereof.

Thus does S. Augustine explicate himself* And in an other place more playnlie
yet, A^g. in Psalm. ^^.
asking this question quid est intelligas iubilatione^* what is mea^t by the
Prophet when he wills thee to understand iubilation? and then answers; vt
scias vnde gaudeas quod verbis explicare non possis that thou may know whereof
to rejoice without being able to express the same in words.

Lo here the truth of these good fellows About the words of S. Paul. 1. Cor.
14. to speak in a knovve^ tongue.
And this were sufficient to end this controversy but that the Knight. has a
flourish more out of S. Paul who most divinely (says he) treats this matter
(in his favor belike) in his first Epistle to the Corinthians and 14. Chapter,
And that Ca^etan moved by those words of the Apostle thinks that prayer
should be made in vulgar tongues.

To the first it is evident enough by the place it self, that those words of
the Apostle make nothing at all for public service, and that the former parts
thereof are playnlie spoken of prophesying, and exhortations, when christians
did meet in the primitive Church, Cypr. epist. ad Pomp. and Qui^inum. Aug
lib. 2. d^ bapt. cap ^. Basil. quest. breuite^ ex^l. q. 27^. Amb in 1. Cor. 1^.
which exhortations to the people he would have in a known language, which all
did understand, and not in forayne peregryne tongues which many did speak by
gift of the holy ghost. And so do enterpret this place S. Cyprian S.
Augustine, S. Basil, S. Ambrose and diverse other Fathers.

And in the later part of the Apostles words that it should not be in a
peregryne tongue he cannot be understood to speak or mean of public service
in the Church, for that this public service was already in the greek tongue
at Corinth whether he wrote this Epistle and in no peregrine or strange
language but such as was understood by all (all being Grecians) and
consequently it had been impertine^t in S. Paul to persuade that it should be
in a known language, S. Paul's true meaning. Paul Ephesians 5. verse. 20.
wherefore his meaning was of certain spiritual songs which diverse inspired by
the holy ghost in the Primitive Church did break forth into ex tempore in
their meetings of which S. Paul says to the Ephesians. Be not drunken with
wine which leads to uncleanness, but be f^l of the holy ghost speaking one to
another in psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and rejoicing in
your hearts to Christ. Col. 3. verse. 16
And again to the Colossians: Singing in your hearts to God by his grace in
Psalms and hymns and spiritual songs.

These songs therefore coming of abundance of the holy Ghost and o^ that
inward Iubilation of heart before spoken of in the primitive Church, it fell out
that some Christians by the gift of tongues, very ordinarily in those days,
did utter sometimes these their affections in strange languages, as in the
Arabian, Persian, and other like tongues, which neither themselves perhaps, nor
others did always understand, and sometimes others interpreting by the same
gi^^e of tongues, that which they spoke without understanding, ^ift of to^ges
to the first Christians.
as is plain by the text of S. Paul. who therefore for the common consolation
of all exhorts them, to utter their ^eeling and suggestions of the holy
Ghost, rather in a known tongue, then in externe languages; and this of
private meetings and spiritual rejoicing of those first Christians among
themselves.

But as for public prayer, and reading of

And though Caietan should have any other Caet. come^t. in cap. 14. 1. Cor.
vniuersus textus iste loquitur proprie de donis linguarum and prophetiae, vt
tractando textus ipse testatur. All this text does speak properly of the
gifts of tongues and prophesying as the text it self in handling does
testify, which if it be true, then can nothing for public service in vulgar
tongues be proved out of it: and thus much of this.

OF THE FOVRTH AND fifth blessings affirmed to have been brought in by
Protestants, which are, abundance of good works, and freedom from
persecution. CAP. X.
The fourth blessing good life of Protestants.
I mean to be much shorter in the rest wherefore there follows the fourth
blessing which Sir F. brings in, as peculiar to protestants (for otherwise it
were no blessing obtained by change of religion) which is the rare and singular
good life of Protestants, called by this blessing bringer, Page 18.
their exercise in works of true pietye, and in his marginal note and rank of
blessings, The exercise of true Holiness, which is a strange blessing, if a
man consider well of it, that the exercise of good works, and true holiness was
brought in only or principally by Protestants of our days, for first the
experience of the whole world will deny it, and cry out against it, and
secondly there best friends, who speak most of their faith will and do renounce
their woorks as for example, Erasmus among other, Fox in the life of Bilney and
other first protestants. Erasmi. Ep. ad Carth. apud Surium an. 1^^6.
whom Fox every where would needs make their first founder and favorer though
himself deny and detest them after experience had of their lives, says thus:
Neminem vidi meliorem, deteriores omnes. I never saw any made better in life,
by this new religion, but all worse. And Luther himself upon his own trial,
Luth Po^^i^. sup. Dom. ^. Aduent.
both wrote and printed: Mundus fit quotidie deterior, sunt nunc homines magis
immodesti, indisciplinati, multoque deteriores quam fuerunt in Papatu. The
world is daily worse, men are now more immodest, more indisciplinable, and a
great deal worse then they wear under the Popedom. And Aurifaber, Aurif de
dictis Luth. Page 623.
one of his chief scholars testifies these words of him, that he was often
wont to say, Post reuelatum Euangelium, virtus est occ^sa, iustitia oppressa,
temperantia ligata, deuotio pulsa, nequitia facta quotidiana. Since the ghospel
was revealed, virtue of life is slain, justice is oppressed, temperance is
bound, devotion is put to flight, wickedness is daily increased: Thus said
these men in the very primitive Church of their new ghospel, and what our men
especially in England may say now of this argument I leave it to common
experience to judge.

And Sir F. least he should go to far in Two cautions of the K. against
good works.
we must take heed to avoid two extremities. The first proud presumption before
God, that we put no opinion of merit in our works, secondly that before men
we avoid all hypocritical ostentation. Lo here good reader, two great peryls
of good works laid before thee, but no vtilityes remembered. Truly I had
thought, when I heard him talk of two extremityes, that as the one was to
attribute to much to good works, so the other should have been to attribute to
little, but both are, cautio^s against good works, and therefore I marvel how
they may be called extremities, Absurdity.
seeing they may be both in one and the self same man, to wit, presumpsion and
hipocrisy, which yet is against the nature of extremes, if S. F. remember well
his Sophistry learned in Oxford.

Math. 5. Rom 2. 7. Cor; and 9. Coloss 1 1. Timoth 2. Iam 2. 2. Pet. 1. 2. Pet.
1.
as also that they should shine before men, whereas our Protestants are careful
to warn us, that they are perilons things, to engender presumption; and
ostentation. Wher-vnto their Father Luther adds further that they are also
pernicious to salvation, which if you ponder well is but a cold exhortation to
the exercise of good works, Luth. ^om. 2. ^ol 322 and rom 5 in Gal cap. 4.
fol. 382.400.
for that if not only they have no merit, but are perilous also for
presumption and hypocrisy, yea pernicious sometimes to salvation, and that on
the other side our corrupt nature and sensuality flveth them and swayeth to
the contrary of her own inward instinct, who will leese his pleasure to labor
in them? and consequently it is no marvel, though these fruits grow so thinly
upon protestants trees, as their neighbors (I ween) will bear them witness in
England.

this point of good works (seeing it is a peculiar blessing of his people as
you see) yet I do not hear nor understand that this blessing does so abound in
him for the practice, Sir F. not so famous for good works as he would seem.
as that his tenants, and neighbors will be his witnesses thereunto, especially
if the common fame be true of certain things which here I will not name for
christian modesty sake, and for respect either of himself, or his family, or
of both, though he in his own person little shows to deserve that respect,
not having held the same with others of greater moment, yea princes themselves;
but I shall deal more modestly with him, and let him go free from further
^ouch at this time, but for the matter it self concerning him and his in
general for good life and works (excepting in particular those that may be
excepted) I may conclude as S. Augustine did a little before about the Church
that as it is most insolent madness to dispute against that which the whole
Church does pract^se, so to avouch that of Protestants lives, and good works
whereof all countries and nations do see and prove the contrary, and their own
authors also do confess (as has been showed) is little less madness.

And with this I might end this poor protestant blessing of good works
(especially seeing that after again I am to treat of the same subject) but
that our knight will needs allege S. Bernard for his former caution against
the merit of good works in these words; Cap. 15. S. Bernard abused.
Bona opera sunt via regni, non causa regnandi, which he according to his
fashion fraudulently expounds thus; good works are the way wherein we must
walk to the kingdom of heaven, but not the cause wherefore we shall obtain
that kingdom, etc.

Catholic doctrine about merits of good works.
De gratia and libero arbitrio, showing therein how Gods grace does concur
with man's freewil in all meritorious works, by stirring up man's will to work
with promise of reward, and strengthening him to the performance thereof by the
assistance of his divine grace, in respect whereof, to wit, of the free promise
made by God to reward our good works, (whereto he was not bound) and of the
preventing, and assisting us by his holy grace to the working of the same, our
merits are to be attributed unto him, as to the first and chief efficient
cause, and not to our selves, though our concurrance be necessary thereunto
also, and in this sense S. Bernard in the place by our knight aleadged having
spoken much of the merits of good worke^ wrought in Christ, and by the force of
his grace, he concludes thus: Merita nostra sp^ quaedam sunt seminaria,
Bernar. tra^^. de gratia and libero arbitrio ad finem.
charitatis incentiuae, occultae praedestinationis indicia, futurae felicitatis
praesagia, via regninon causa regnandi: Our merits are certain seeds of
hope, inkindlers of charity, signs of secret predestination, foresages or
tokens of our felicity to come, the way to the kingdom of heaven, but not the
cause of our reigning.

Thus says he, and that he means here, Romans ^.
Quos iustificauit (says he) non quos iustos inuenit, hos and magnificauit;
God has magnifyed and exalted to his kingdom not those whom he found just of
themselves, but whom he by his grace did make just: by which words S. Bernard
does infer that all the merits of our good works together with the reward
promised to them, do come originallie, and principally from God, and
consequently both the one and the other are to be ascribed unto him, as unto
the chiefest cause, though also by our voluntary concurrance thereunto, when we
are moved by God we have our interest therein, and are truly said to merit life
everlasting, which S. Bernard does explicate most excellently a little before
in the same place, his words are these, having spoken first very largly of
good works; Bernard. ibid.
Verum haec (says he) cum certum sit diuino in nobi^ actitar^ spiritu, De^
sunt munera, quia vero cum nostrae voluntatis assensu, nostra sunt m^rita.
Whereas it is certain that these good works (by me before mentyoned) are
wrought in is by the spirit of God, they must needs be called the gifts of
God, And for that they are done also by the consent of our will they are our
merits.

Bonum certaemen certaui, etc. I have fought a good fight, ^. Tim. 4.
I have ended my course, I have kept my faith, and for the rest, then is laid
up for me a crown of Justice, which God the just judge shall restore unto me at
that day. Upon which words S. Bernard says thus: If it be so that the very
will of doing good in S. Paul (whereof all merit does depend) was not his own,
but received from God, how does he call it a croune of Justice, which he
assures himself to be laid up for him? is it (perhaps) for that whatsoever is
freely promised, it may be justly, after the promise made required as due
debt, etc. he says further; for that S. Paul believed the promiser, he now
confidentlie exacteth the promise, which promise though it were of mercy, yet
now it is to be paid of justice, etc. For it is just that God should pay
whatsoever he owes, and he owes whatsoever he has promised, etc. and of this
justice it pleased God to make Paul a partener, Iustitiae Paulum Deus voluit
habere consortem vt and coronae faceret promeritorem. Bern. page 1069.
to the end he might make him also a deseruer of his crown, and in this he
made him both partener of his justice and deseruer of his crown, when he
vouchsafed to make him his helper or coadiutor in doing good works, whereunto
his crown is promised, and further he made him his coadiutor, when he made him
to consent to his holy will and motion.

Lo here how S. Bernard does connect and Aug. hom. 14. lib 50. homiliarum. 2.
Tim. 4.
and upon the same words of the Apostle: For the rest (says the Apostle) there
remains to me a crown of justice, which God the just judge shall restore to
me at the last day. Behold he says that God shall restore a crown unto him,
ergo he is his debtor. Aug. in Psalm. ^^.
And again in another place: vnde debtor? accepit aliquid, etc. Whence is God
become a debtor? has he received any thing, or does he owe any thing to any
man* and yet behold Paul does hold him for his debtor, saying, God shall
restore unto me, etc. what shall he restore unto thee (Paul) but that which he
owes? whence does he owe any thing unto thee? what have thou given unto him?
Truly God has made himself a debtor, not by receiving any thing, but by
promising, so as yt may not be said unto him, restore that which thou have
received, but pay that which thou have promised.

that it is a proud presumption before God to put any opinion of merit to our
works: Page 19.
but you have heard out of the Fathers, how they do not only put opinion of
merit in good works, but do plainly affirm and teach yt, and that it is dew
debt, supposing Gods promise made to reward them: Whereof also it follows,
that albeit the saying of S. Bernard be most true in the sense alleged, that
our merits be the way to the Kingdom of heaven, but not the cause, speaking of
the first and principal cause, yet were those words not truly, but frandulently
translated by our K. that they are not the cause, wherefore we shall obtain the
Kingdom, as though they were no cause at all, which is false and absurd, for
that noe man can deny them to be the instrumental meritorious causes of
obtaining heaven, seeing God has promised heaven as a reward unto them, and
having promised is bound in justice to preforme the same, as now you have heard
by the Fathers declared. And so much of this matter for this place.

The fifth beatitude which this blessing-maker freedom from persecution, The 5.
blessing freedom from persecution.
and as he calls them halcyon days, when he says: The little bark of Christ
Jesus before tossed with the waves and storms of furious and bloody
presecution has found now some repose and rest. Page 20.
About which blessing I would ask the K. certain questions thereby to come to
the truth of the matter and avoid impostures: and first I would ask him,
whether this freedom from persecution be common to all, or to some only, that
is to protestants: and then whether this be passive or active in them: that is
whether they stand out free in themselves or do suffer other men also to be
free from persecution, for if it be not a common blessing to all but particular
to themselves, then can yt not be called a blessing of the land, but of some
part within the land. And again if it be passive only and enjoined by
themselves and not active, so as they procure nor yield not the same freedom
to others, where they may, then is it absurdly called a blessing or
benediction, for that thieves also, and the worst men of the world among
themselves, or to others of their crew do not use persecution: Matthew. 12.
Marc. 3. Luc. 11.
nay devils also (as Christ signifies) do not fight one against another, and
yet that this is not true in protestants but that they persecute one another
also where they fall to difference of opinions is a thing so evident as needs
no proof and the examples alleged by me before out of all the sects of
Germany, Switzerland and other countries, Ke^nit. epist. ad Io. Georg. Elect.
Brandeburg.
and namely that out of Kemnitius, do evidently convince yt with infinite
proofs, for that none of them getting the upper hand in any place does permit
the other sect be yt never so brotherly to subsist with yt, but dryueth them
out, even the ridged Lutherans the soft, and these the other wheresoever they
prevail, as the Puritans also in Geneua, Holla^d, Scotland, France, do not
suffer any one congregation of softer Caluinists or English Protestants to
stand with them, and on the contrary side, whether our English protestants have
suffered their brethren Puritans to live in England without persecution or not,
or whether they have had halcyon or halter days, One side of protestants does
persecute the other.
these later years past under Protestants, the hanging of Penry and other of
the same ghospel may testify, as also the many and grievous complaints written
by themselves, and published in print, Lib. 2. of dangerous positions. cap. 10.
and registered these later days by the Protestants in their foresaid books,
where the Puritanes cry out and say among other things.

This land is sore troubled with persecution, there i^ no place nor being for a
faithful Minister of the word, our blood cries for revenge, an inquisition
much like that of Spain is among us, o lamentable case, o heyno^^ impiety.

Ministers are in worse sort oppressed now then they were by the Papists in Q.
Mary's time; Compla^^^ of persecution by Puritanes.
besides whorish impudency, halter, axe, bands, scourging, and racking, our
Bishops have nothing to desend themselves withal: the Clinke, Gatehouse, white
Ly^n, and the Fle^^e are their only arguments. If I say Hieremy. Ezechiel,
etc. were alive again they would be sent to the Marshalsey.

Lo (good reader) these piteous complaynts, Page 21. Sir F. proves his own
men to be wolves.
but also of ours, The wolf (says he) persecuteth the lamb, not the lamb
the wolf; Well; what of this? this is a certain sentence true in it self, but
proves nothing for your sense, nay rather I might infer against you thus:
You do persecute greuiouslie by your own brethrens testimony them that be
lambs by their profession. Ergo you are wolves by your own sentence; but
harken yet further, what he says also very confidentlie, even of Catholics.
Freedom from persecution in England; VVastvvord. Page 21.
You shall (says he) never be able to prove (so far as I could ever learn)
that any one, either Priest or lay man, learned, or unlearned, has in thi^
land for these forty years, been put to death, only for being of a contrary
religion.

See two Apologyes for the Catholics with other treatises.
and for being ordained to that function beyond the seas, and for defending the
faith belonging to the function, as by diverse treatises written of this matter
does appear. And if this were not so of the killing of so many men for only
religions sake, yet is there no persecution but death? will Sir F. say that his
Protestants do not persecute, for that they kill not all that be different from
them in religion? Persecution against Catholics.
does he not hear and see and know the numbers of them that be daily
apprehended, imprisoned, arraigned, and condemned in their goods, and liberties
for standing in their fathers faith and resisting protestants novelties, and
innouations? and is this no persecution? Is this the blessed freedom which
protestants ghospel has brought in? Surely I will end, and shut up this
absurdity with those words of S. Augustine against Julian the famous
heretic. Aug. contr. Iul. lib. 1. c. 7.
Si nesciens hoc dixisti, cur non miseram respuis imperitiam? si sciens, cur
non sacrilegam deponis audaciam? If thou have said this by ignorance, why do
thou not reject thy miserable unskillfulness, if wittinglie, why do thou not
leave of so impious audacitie? and so much of this.

OF THE OTHER FIVE imagined blessings that remain, to wit, deliverance from
exactions, long peace, power in forrayne countries, wealth of the land, and
multitude of subjects increased seauenfold. CAP. XI.
BESIDES the blessings hitherto recyted Deliverance from intolerable exactio^s.
Long peace at home. Great power abroad in forrayne countries. Wealth and great
riches increased with in the land. And finaly great multitude of subjects
seauenfold increased above that they were at her Majesty's entrance. Which
blessings though the very propounding of them to English ears be so
ridiculous, as they need little examination, and much less co^futatio^, yet for
honoring of our knight that is the propounder I shall be forced to say a word or
two of each of the^, aduertising the reader first (which yet he will of himself
observe, A seditious shift of sir F.
especially by the last words of this enumeration) that the knight plays
notably the part of Scogan in the treaty of these blessings, running behynd
the cloth of state (as often I have warned before, and shall be forced more
often hereafter) and so conioyning her Majesty's government with his ghospel
and change of religion in the praise and disprayse of that which has ensued,
as if they could not possibly be severed in the effects of blessings and
cursings thereof proceeding, which point I hold to be most false and flattering,
assuring my self, and presuming also, that any man of judgment and discretion
will be of my opinion that whatsoever good effects have come to our common
wealth by her Majesty's government, or rare parts of Princely commendations,
A note to be diligently observed.
and which truly may be termed blessings, might have been as great as all
these, or far greater under Catholic religion, and especially in her
Majesty if it had pleased almighty God to have blessed her and the realm
with the continuance thereof, and contrariwyse whatsoever cursings and
calamities on the contrary side have ensued, or may ensue herafter by the
change of religion these are proper effects, and necessary conseque^ts of the
new ghospel, and not of any defect in her Majesty's government and this
foundation being presupposed in all that I shall say, let us pass on to examine
in a word or two, the most ridiculous vanity of these five blessings following
which he calls corporal, accompting his former spiritual.

deliverance from intolerable exactions, ^. Blessing, deliverance from
exactions.
if he mean it of the realm in general, as his marginal note may seem to
importe (which often yet disagreeth in sense from his text) let the Escheker
books be compared of the tributes, payments, contributions, and exactions, that
were used in England in former days, before this new ghospel came in, and
since, I mean of the sums that were paid in old times, when Catholic
religion bare rule, and protestants were not known, and those that later
Princes by reason of troubles, wars, suspicions, and other like occasions
rising especially by difference in religion, have been forced to take of their
subjects since the year of Christ 1530. or there about, at what time K. Henry
began upon the advice, and incitation of Cranmer, Cromwell, and other
Protestants to break with the Pope, and church of Rome, let these sums I
say be co^ferred, and then our knight if he be a good Auditor or Eschequer man,
will for very shame stryke out this blessing and mentyon it no more.

But if he mean this blessing especially or Matthew. ^.
Beati pauperes spiritu, blessed are the poor in spirit, for in body and purse
they are already miserable as themselves every where complain, The poverty
and myserie of the protestant clergy.
and none more grievously or more spitefully in secret, as before has been
touched, then his champion O.E. alleging these reasons, that the most of them
having much to pay both to Prince and Patron in steed of the Pope, and little to
receive (the gleebe lands of their benefices being commonly swept to their
hands) and their charge of women and children so great, as the parishes do
commonly feel, when they die, their beggerie must needs be intolerable;
whereas on the other side in Catholyke Countries, if they contribute any thing
to the Pope as to their head for better maintenance of his state and government
of the whole Church, it is neither so great a matter, and commonly, ^^t out
of the greater benefices, that ca^ better bear it, and in recompense of that
again he defends them against the intrusion or usurpation of seculer men
upon their livings, which imports them much more (as by experience of
Catholyke Countries and Kingdoms is seen) then is the contribution they make
to Rome, though it were so great and grievous, as our K. makes it in K. Henry
the 3. his ^yme, alleging a certain complaynt of our English Church to Pope
Innocentius 4. in a general Council at Lions an. 1245. against his collectors
and officers in England, which being taken out of John Fox) whom this man yet
will not name) makes no more against the Popes Authority, A calumniation of
Ihon Fox. act. and ^on. Page 241.242. etc.
nor yet conuinceth him of abuse that way, then if at this day the same
complaynt should be made by the Church of Spain (as diverse times it is)
against the like collectors or officers there, or when any complaint is made in
England of any of her Maties. officers that abuse themselves in their
collections for covetousness upon the Clergy at this day, whereof I presuppose
there would not want complaints, if all Ministers should be willed to utter
their greifes therein.

And what then does Sir F. and Fox urge Why Pope Innocentius required a
collection of money for recovering the holy land.
when the public necessity of christendom oppressed by Turks and Saracens
enforced Pope Innocentius, (as general Father of all) to lay some contribution
upon the clergy of England, and other countries for defense thereof, to which
effect also in the very same council of Lions he had appointed and declared
king Jews of France for Supreme general, and yet was not the sum exacted
such nor so great, but that more money in these our days has been sent out of
the realm in one year by these me^nes liking and good approbation for defense
of heresy and rebellion in France, Flanders, Scotland, and other countries,
the^ was in this, and many other times in those days for maintenance of the
whole Church and Christianity, and yet co^playneth not our knight of this,
which subjects now feel, for that it is present, but of the other past and
gone which they feel not, whereby is seen his indifferency, and that they
seek nothing but matter of complay^^ and cauilling against the Pope and h^^
doings.

both sweet and profitable) as he terms it, ^. blessing, long peace.
I know not what or why I should answer, seeing Aristotle teaches that to go
about to prove or improve by reason^ that which is open and manifest to our
senses, is to weary reason, and offer injury to sense: who sees not therefore
what has passed in England since protestant religion first entered in K.
Henryes days? for if we talk o^ domestical styrres, and tumultes among our
people, we have had more within these 70. years to wit from the one or two and
twentieth of K. Henryes reign downwards under him, and his three children
(respecting religion only) then in a thousand before his days and more then in
many ages for any cause whatsoever, setting a side the contention for the
crown between the two houses o^ York and Lancaster, which cannot go by
reason in this account for that it was a particular quarrel of certain Princes
of the blood royal, not rising of any reason of state or government at home;
and if in the time of her Majesty's reign there has been less actual home
war, then in her Fathers, brothers and sisters time, for matters of religion,
much may be attributed to her own moderation, especially at the beginning in
not yiedling to the furious humors of some hoate sectaries, that would easily
have put all in combustion had not other counsel been followed to transfer the
fire rather to other men's houses, then to have it in her own, but the most
especial part in this may truly be given to the mylde and bearing natures of
Catholics that have passed so many years under the heavy yoke of persecution
rather with muttering then moving, Patience of Catholykes.
and yet what peace we may truly be said to have at home when such division
of hearts judgments, and wills is discovered, as this knight in this very
encounter does affirm, I cannot determyne, but do leave it to other men, and
himself also to consider.

But as for forayne wars under her Majesty's sweet peace? have not our arms
been seen in France for many years together against diverse kings thereof for
the same quarrel, Foraine vva^res.
let Newhauen speak, by us held, if the knight will not answer, let Lithe also
in Scotland tell us, if our arms were there against their lawful Prince in
favor of heresy, and as for Spain, and Burgundy our eldest and surest
allies in times past, I think no denial can be made but with greater
impudency then this brag of peace is asserted? and now what great treasures
have been sp^ in those continual forayne wars? wha^ numbers of men consumed
both by sea and land in this action for maintenance of thi^ cursed new Pandora
(so is heresy termed by old Irenaeus) it is hard to count, ^enzus li. 2. cap.
19. and 53.
but easy to guess, and yet tells us this man of his long sweet, and
profitable peace, as though wars maintained in Holland, Zealand, Ireland,
France, Spain, Portugal, Indies, and other places by English arms, English
money, English blood, and all for maintenance of Geneua religion, were no
wars, but all peace, all sweetness, all profit, all felicity: wherefore to
obey Aristotle, and not to reason any further when sense conuinceth so
notorious a flattery, and untruth, I will say no more hereof.

of power in foraine countries, ^. Blessing of power in forrayne countries.
which what it may be (we having no one foot of our own beyond the seas since
Calis by heretical treason was lost.) I do not well see, and if we compare it
with the great and large provinces we had before under Catholic Religion, and
especially with the change of our old mighty and honorable allies, and
confederated Princes to our new gotten friends, we shall soon discover the
fayntnes and fondnes of this blessing, which is seen also by the quality of
those persons, and their cause, which our K. braggeth to have had their refuge
in England under a woman's government out of France, Flanders, Swethland,
Scotland, and other countries, who if they have been none commonly but open
rebels to their true and lawful Princes, and their cause heresy or Atheism,
then has their refuge to England, (as also the Turks familiarity whereof this
profane Knight. vaunteth by name) been certain effects of the new ghospel little
honorable to our country or her Matie. though by necessary consequence of a
course thrust upon her, she has been enforced to entertayne them, whom
otherwise of her most honorable and princely disposition she could not but
contemn, and in her heart detest. And so much of them not worthy the memory.

Next this comes the nynth blessing which great wealth of the land increased
by this change of religion, Blessing. wealth of the land. Page 27.
much riches, plenty, and abundance, such as has not lightly been known
before. Wherabout I must tell our Knight. first that it shall be reason that in this
point we stand not only to his relation, but that we ask, our people of
England themselves, what they feel at home in their countries, and not what
pleases him in his chamber to imagine, and to set down ^t home with his pen,
sitting more at ease perhaps then many others especially since the match with
the ritche widow, Hann^ ^^
who has eased well the blow received before by the ^urchasing Yeoens-baron,
Yeoens.
and repaired much he ruinous walls of his Cadburie Jerusalem.

And truly where this so blessed and abundant increase of riches should ly in
particular, which this our K. so greatly boasts of, I do not see, for if we
consider the nobility and gentry of our Land at this day, and compare them
with that wealth, which was wont to be in former times, Old and new riches of
our nobility.
I mean, power with power, riches with riches, multitude of servants, with
multitude of servants housekeeping with housekeeping, and other such like
effects of wealth and riches, I doubt me much how S. F. can verify this
blessing.



Wealth of the commonaltie.
and not this seely procter only, which intrudeth himself, without proxy or
commission, and perhaps also not so well informed in the case as he might be, or
not so faithful in relating, as were convenient: for sure I am this cannot be
denied that when her Mati^s. tributes, and other duetyes are to be exacted of
the common people (though otherwise they pay them willingly to their power)
yet hear I great difficulties and complaints of penury, and where then
consists this extraordinary blessing of so great riches, plenty, and
abundance brought in by change of religion? which yet is so exceeding great by
this man's vaunt as it is able and ready to sustain such voluntary wars,
Ibid. Page ^7.
as honorable respects hau moved us to undertake. So are his words, and
consider here (discreet reader) the wit of our new councelor, which makes
our wars voluntary upon wantonness of wealth, and not upon necessity, as
the wysest Princes are wont to pretend, when they demand helps of their
subjects. Moreover as this K. is lavish in bragging of riches and voluntary
wars, so is his boasting, playnlie Thrasonical when he talks of his own
going, and assistance to the same wars. For in his Epistle of his wach-word
to the Reader he tells him very seriously, and with big words, that to
himself he has set down this law, Thrasonical boasting.
that shall never be repealed that if his wealth were millions; if he could
bring thousands of fighting hande^s to the field; if his life were ten thousand
lives, his wealth, his strength, his life and all should go to be spent,
hazarded, and ended, against that Antichrist of Rome, and the ambitious tyrant
of Spain, etc. And that with confidence, boldness, and assurance of the goodness
of his cause, he and his fellows with heart and hand will be pressed and ready to
take their places, and to march in the field, and their to set forward with a
swift foot against these enemies, etc.



The 10. blessing increase of people.
increased mightily (as he says) since her Maties. first entrance to the
crown ( a great blessing of God (says he) powered upon this land, which God at
the least has seauen-fold increased, to the number that at her entrance she
found. Page 27.
If I should stand with this computist about the precise number of seauen-fold
increased, and ask him how he knows it? or who will believe it? or how
probable it is, that the people of England should be seven times as many now
as they were forty years ago, I should (I think) pose him hardly, and
prove him (perhaps) no less lavish in this, then in the former, but yet
supposing it were, or be so, how can this benediction (so poor a one at it is)
be attributed as peculiar to his new ghospel, seeing that, other religions
engender also besyds Protestants. And for example, let us imagine that
Catholic religion had endured still in England for these later 40. years, or
that the Jews or Turks religion had been in steed thereof, would not the people
have increased also under them think you? yea much more under the later, for
that they profess Poligamy and the multitude of many wives, and yet were it
much simplicity to say that this increase of Children were a special blessing
of their religion, or testimony of the truth therein contained.

And the like may I say of Protestants, though Eunuchs commended by Christ who
geld themselves for the Kingdom of heaven, Holy Eunuchs. Math. 19.
but rather all kind of states, sexes, vocations, offices, and ages as well
friars, monks, nunes, priests, chaplaynes, ministers and bishops, as all others
do fall to marriage, and multiplication, and consequently no marvel if the
people have increased more then before, but whether this be a blessing or a
cursing, a benefit or a burden to the common wealth, let the Parishes, and
Parishioners of England be asked, who by statute are bound to maintain their
brats, when the parents are not able.

S. Augustine said to Faustus Manicheus about a like foolish narration, Aug.
lib. 16. contr. Faust. Manich. cap. 2^.
O hominem se cogitantem dictorem, sed alium non cogitantem contradictorem, vbi
est acumen tuum? Oh fond man that thought only how himself might speak (or tell
us blessings) and not thinking what an other would answer, where is thy wit?
and then goes forward to ask him further; An in mala causa non posses aliter?
sed mala causa te vana loqui coegit, malam vero caeusam habere nemo te co^git.
Could you do no otherwise then you have done in so evil a cause truly your
evil cause might force you to speak so vainlie as you have done, but no man
forced you to have an euel cause.

A brief addition about O.E.
makes five, and like number of spiritual, so as the Minister according to his
vocation is more spiritual by one blessing, then the Knight. and less corporal,
though perhaps not less corpulent. They disagree also in the order, names and
substance of their blessings as before I have showed laying both their listes
together, and now we shall examine how they will join in defending themselves,
and their ghospel from the curssings which the VVarder threapeth upon them, as
ensuing by change of religion, and in this point and part of this first
Encounter I shall be forced to alter somewhat the manner of my answer already
made to S.F. thereby to give room for the Minister to enter with him.

OF THE CONTRARY effects to blessings, that is to say of cursinges rather and
calamities brought in by change of religion, both spiritual and temporal, and
how Sir F. and his minister do answer them. CAP. XII.
AFTER the short and idle defense which his Wachword) into the enumeration of
the former ten blessings which now we have examined, and after that presently
shuts up his whole Encounter as though all were dispatched, and he had
answered all that had been said, whereas in deed he passes over four parts of
five of the warders speech without either mentyon thereof or answer at all, for
that the said warder in his book to show the vanity of the knights brag of
blessings brought in by change of Catholic religion, 4. parts of 5.
praetermitted by the K in his answer.
passes on to declare, the many and manifold myseries, and calamities happened
as well in England as in all other countries round about us by this fatal
change, wherein leaving Germany, Switzerland, Denmark, Suetia, and other such
further parts, where infinite people, have been afflicted, slain, and brought
to myserie by wars and garboyles raised by occasion of this change, he
exemplyfieth only in Scotland, Flaunders, France, and Ireland lying next unto
us, and from thence also passing home to England it self, says thus.

For to begin with Scotland, and to say nothing, of the battayles, Page ^.
ward. Sco^lands myseries by change of religion.
murders, destruction of Countries, Provinces, Towns, Cittyes, houses, and
particular men, which we have seen in that realm, within these forty years,
that the change of religion has been attempted no man can deny but that three
Princes, two Queens, and one King, the mother, daughter and husband, have been
all brought to their bane by that occasion, besides the overthrow, and change
of so many noble houses, Ireland. Flanders* France.
and linages, as Scotishmen can recount, among their Hamiltons. Douglasses,
Stewardes and others, as also the Irish will tell of their noble Desmo^des, and
other Peers destroyed by like occasions. But Flanders and France have no end
at all in these accounts, when they begin, they are so many. And all this, as
they say (and is evident) by the lamentable consequence of our change of
religion in England which drew them after us, or at leastwayes gave example,
heart, and help to their change and euersion also.

But not to step from England it self, where England.
let us examyne the matter indifferently among our selves: we are Englishmen,
and we talk to men of the same language and nation, that know our country and
condition thereof: and many have seen the change, and knew the state of things
therein before the alteration, or at leastwyse have heard thereof since by their
fathers and grandfathers, etc.

Thus said I in the Wardword, and further I passed on to draw all kinds of
blessings to Two kinds of blessings.
and examined them both by diverse means and ways as before has been touched,
showing, that not blessings, but cursings, not felicities but calamities had
ensued every where by this change; and especially wars, tumults, and
garboyles, as now I have declared. And to all this my declaration which is
somewhat large what replyeth (think you) our defendant knight? hear his words
for they are very resolute and eager. If you had any respect of truth (says
he) or care of modesty, Page 10. VVa^^vvord.
you would never make the true religion we profess the cause of murders,
tumultes, and garboyles which teaches dutiful obedience, and condemns all
mutinies, seditions, and rebellions. Thus he faith, and to this I reply, that
if our knight had any consideration of his credit, he would never for shame
affirm this so boldly without answering to some of the examples alleged by
me against him, as also the asseuerations of his own best doctors before
mentyoned by me about this matter of obedience, En cont. 1 ca. 3.4. and 5.
so as having both their doctrine, and practice to instruct us, it is a great
impudency to deny it so resolutelie; but let us go forward.

Spiritual blessings before the change.
First about spiritual benefits and benedictio^s, the warder sets down, how
before the change of religion men had one faith, one belief, one form of
service, one number of Sacraments, one tongue in celebratio^, one sacrifice,
one head of the Church together with the rest of Christendom, and that since
the change all these things are altered for that English Protestants differ in
all those points, or the most, not only from all Catholic kingdoms, but also
with their own, and among themselves, to wit first from other new ghospellers
abroad, for that neither do we Eng^ish protestants agree with any sect of the
Lutherans soft or riged, nor with the Zuinglians or Caluinists of other
countries, nor yet with those of our own, as appears by the Church of
Scotland, and of the presbyteries of our Puritans in England, Holland, Zeland,
and other places. For proof whereof it shall not need to repeat again the whole
discourse of the wardword, for that this is sufficiently proved by that I have
alleged before about the first supposed blessing of unity.

To all which discourse of disunion among Sir Francis is mute in matters of
most moment, Page 13.
but only says, that it is a cunning trick to grate so often upon this
division, calling some puritans, and some protestants, which he hops the Lord
of might and mercy, will turn to the good of the Church, and direct the hearts
of their Churchmen, to see how needful it is to join both heart, and hand
together to desend the doctrine of faith (which they all hold) against the
calumniations of slanders wherewith you, and men of your sort (says he) seek
to lead the truth of our profession.

Behold here a substantial defense, consisting Of this difference see before,
cap. 6 and 7.
puritanes and protestants, as cunningly devised by us what shifte will ye call
this? Then he hops in the Lord of mercy they will agree at length, but when
and how? Encount. 1. cap. 3.
After that by a parenthesis, he says, they all h^ld one doctrine of faith,
this how true it is appears before out of their own words and wrytings
alleged by me to the contrary. And lastly he says, these are but slanders
devised by us to load the truth of their profession withal. This shift also I
leave to the reader to judge of what quality it is, as in like manner of what
modesty the K. is in denying matters so evidently known of all, noting by the
way, that he dares not to speak out, Sir F. of what religion?
and plainly utter his mind about this division of puritanes, and protestants
in any place of his reply, nor yet to discharge himself of the supition to be
one of them, wherewith the warder often charged him, and he has not denied it
flatly hitherto, nor yet fully confessed it, so as we must hold him either for
neutral or ambidexter, until he declare himself further, though in deed he
does sufficiently manifest himself in this place by so many hems, and hammes,
as he uses in puritanes defense, saying, he trusts God will direct them to
agree, Page 13.
and that howsoever some dissent has appeared (as though in deed it were not)
yet he doubts not, but it shall be seen to the world that it is concordia
discordia, with a discord that has concord in yt, etc. Thus he salueth the
matter for his tender affection toward the Puritans; whereas his Champion O.E.
talking of this division, says plainly, and resolutely of them, Infra cap. 15.
and 16.
(as we shall treat more at large after-ward) that they are no more to be
counted of protestants society, then the Papists that are of the Popes retinue,
and the same do say the Puritanes of protestants as before out of their own
words has been declared.

WHAT THE CHAMpion Minister O.E. says to this matter of cursings, and how
absurdly he behaueth himself therein. CAP. XIII.
HOWSOEVER our masked minister vaeun^ parlar, The manner of O.E. his ansvveriug.
and follows up and down the warder, snatching, and snarling at every word
almost he says, but without rithme or reason, order or method, shame, or
modesty, but only says or denies as it turns best to his fancy for the
present, thinking the victory to consist in out-talking his adversary, or
contradicting whatsoever is said, and that he is the conqueror, who has the
last word, true or false, and by this brief note you may square him out
hereafter in all his answer, as by trial you shall see.

First then to begin with that which the he says, Page 12.
that to this, the state of things themselves will answer, laws are
ordinarily executed, no man is wronged either in his person, lands or goods,
but he may have remedy, religion is tru^^ preached, and professed, etc. You see
how far, and how plausibly he may run counter in this point, Whether
change of religion be dangerous.
and how substantially he proves that there be no difficultyes by his own
only denial, but yet mark reader how soon after he puts a moderation to
this general assertion, granting some difficultyes, but denying the true cause.

Secondly (says he) we say that howsoever w^ stand, true religion is neither
the case of trouble nor danger, for if that were so, then were all Princes, and
states that profess religion in the same case: Page 13.
Lo how wise a man he shows himself to be; first in his proposition, and
then in his inference; his proposition is impertinent, that true religion
brings no trouble, for we talk of protestant religion, which is foolery for
him to presume that we grant it to be true religion; and besides this, we
talk not of religion it self, but of the changement, which in religion either
true, or false may breed troubles in any common wealth: but especially the
change of Catholic religion having bin for so many ages established and so
many Princes and Monarchs of the Christian woorld professing the same. His
inference that all protestant Princes by this reason should be in trouble, is
an idle non consequent, for their cases may be different, their states unequal,
the manner of change unlike, and the proceeding therein, after an other fashion:
but yet whether the protestant Princes of Christendom have gained or no by the
change, or whether they be or may be in more danger of troubles for separating
themselves from the Catholic body of christian Princes, than if they had
continued in their Fathers religion, I leave this to wise men to judge, and
time to try.

And this to his first inference, but besides that if change of religion
brings trouble, then all catholic Princes (that have not changed) must enjoy
peace, Fond inferrences.
and be out of danger, which is true, so far forth as concerns this
danger arising by change, which is of no small importance, seeing it deuideth
not only between them, and other Princes of different religion, but between
them also, and their subjects, and if Catholic Princes have had their troubles
also, or dangers in our days, it has been either for other causes, or for
that some in their states have gone about to alter religion against thesayd
Princes wills, as in France, and Scotland, Flanders, and other places, and so
consequently change of religion (though not intended by them) has been the
cause of their said troubles and dangers.

But hear out the minister yet further; lastly (says he) if religion now
professed were the immediate cause, and original of any trouble like to ensue,
then should not the Papists have been the principal means to move wars, and
rebellions against the state, nor the only practisers against her Majesty's
person, and safety, as we have found them to have been. Thus he says, but how
it hangs together, God knows or the devil that taught him to make this
malicious consequence against innocent men, for I see not by any Cambridge or
Oxford logic how this illation may be founded, if change of religion bring
troubles, ergo why do Catholics move troubles? he has brought this kind of
arguyng from the camp (no doubt) for he never found it in school; And as for
the calumniation of this wicked assertion, that Catholics are the only moouers
of wars, and practisers against her Majesty's safety, the instance (I trow)
of his late Mr. the Earl of Essex and the Puritanes, Essex attempt, and the
hopes of his followers.
and other hungry protestants that set him a work (wherein this fellow also
perhaps hoped to have no small share if things had succeeded) does sufficiently
clear us, and so both the form of his argument, proving him unlearned, and
the substance and matter dishonest, I leave him for this first onset, and come
to the second; for thus he goes forward against me.

Page 14.
You see (says he) this Noddy has neither reason nor truth in his discourse,
etc. he tells us that by alteration of Religion in England, Scotland,
Ireland, Flanders and France have tasted of many miseries, tumultes,
calamityes, and desolations, he should have said of many blessings, and friendly
favors. This needs no reply if the reader be of any judgment, for he can see
the impudency of the assertion. And then going forward to answer my
enumeratio^ of so many battails, murders destruction of so many cou^tryes,
provinces, towns, cittyes, noble houses, linages, etc, occasioned by
diversity, and change of religion, he answers thus:

As if we had procured all these battayles, murders, The flourish of the
minister.
as if we or our religion were the occasion, etc. what a shameless fellow is
this to impute the cause o^ troubles, and wars, unto us, that ever avoided
wars as much as we could, and offered force to no man, nor ever styrred, but
as defendants for safeguard of our lives; are lambs the cause of the cruelty of
wolves? All these big words, are but arguments of the Noddyes distracted mind,
etc.

Lo (reader) what a manner of answering this is, and how many books might be
made in this kind of writing? wherefore leaving this, let us come to the matter
of division in religion.

Where I say that before this alteration of O E. damneth all his ancestors.
he answers first, that to speak ^^uly the most part of Christians in those
days lived without all knowledge of God, or of Christ Jesus having ^^thing of
Christianity, but the very name, and the ^^tward Sacrament of Baptism. So that
he yeil^eth not to them the inward virtue of Baptism, nor the true belief of
any one article of the creed before Luther rose which after he repeateth again
in express, words saying, they understood not any one article of the faith.

Page 17.
What will you say to this man, that makes all his ancestors for so many hundred
years together, and the ancestors also of her Majesty, her father,
grandfather, and the rest mere infidels, and christians only in name, and that
they understood no one article of christian faith. Were not this fellow
worthier to be cuggelled then disputed withal? and his tongue rather to be
putted out* then his pen answered by writing? but he goes forward saying, that
I do ridiculously distinguish faith from belief, in that I do say, there was
the^ one faith and belief in christendom before Luther, as though the
conjunction and, did distinguish, and not conioyne together, who is here
ridiculous, or who is the Noddy, or who is the ridiculous noddy, let the reader
judge.

then are m^re palpable and vain untruths contained i^ t^es^ words, Page 17.
then is possible to utter readily with on^ tongue. And yet he with that his
one tongu^ utters readely and desperately five or six notorious open lies at
the least in contradicting that I say.

For first to contradict that there was not one form of service, he brings
in the differences of old Liturges, Page ^8.
saying not only the greek lyturgie does much differ from the latin, but also
the latin liturges do much differ from themselves, and were so full of abuses,
that the council of Trent abolishing a number of old Missals, and portuisses,
was constrained to make new, yet all naught; being nothing like the liturgies
of the Apostolic Church described by Iustyn martyr, Dionise of Athens, and
diverse other Fathers; for those of S. James, S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom are
plainly counterfeited.

Here though I call this but one ly, First notorious lie about old and new
lyturges and Missals.
or impudency, yet are there diverse, for first all these liturges do agree in
the substance of the sacrifice whose manner of offering they do prescribe, which
heretics cannot deny, and Caluyn himself does accuse the Fathers for it lib
4. cap. 18. institut. as a little after shall be showed more at large, and
consequently the difference betwixt these liturges, and Missals, is only either
for that the one is in Latin, the other in Greek, or that they have some
different prayers, and ceremonies, altering nothing the thing it self, as the
Missals in like manner of the latin Church had always that variety permitted
to them without breach of unity, As ^or example, those of the use of Rome, of
Millan, of Toledo in Spain, of Sarum in England, and other national Churches
are at ^his day allowed. Neither did the council of ^rentabolish any of ^^ese
ancient uses, but ^ome newer abuses that might perhaps in so great a body have
crept in. And whereas this man will seem to allow of the lyturges of Iustine
Martyr and of Dionise of Athens as Apostolic rejecting the other of S. James,
S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, as counterfeit, he contradicts himself by ignorance
and malice, for that Iustine martyr and Dionise of Athens wrote noe lyturges,
and the other three, which he rejects, together with that of S. Clement
(which as little he will allow) are the only lyturges; that are extant, so that
if these be counterfeit, then are there noe Apostolic lyturges, for Iustyne
and Dionise to describe, as he says they do, Ciril Hierosol. Cathechis. 4.
and 5. mistach. Ambros. lib. 5. and 6. de Sacram.
but S. Ciril in his Cathechisme, and S. Ambrose in his books de Sacramentis
do describe and expound the foresaid lyturges by this man rejected. And so he
talks he cannot tell what.

2. Notoriouslyes about the number of 7. Sacraments.
The number of 7. Sacraments (says he) was not certaynely established nor
received before the late council of Trent, and in the council of Lateran under
Pope Innocentius there is mention made only of 2. Sacraments which we retain.
Here are two shameful untruths auowched concerning two councelles. For first
the Council of Florence which was an hundred years before that of Trent,
Council. Florent. in instruct. Armeno^um.
to wit anno 1440. does set down plainly and distinctly the number of seven
Sacraments, and in the same order that ^ee do now, and above 200. years
before that council again Peter Lombard Bishop of Paris, Sentent. lib. 4
did. 2.
commonly called M. of the sentences, and all other scoolemen after him do set
down and handle distinctly seven Sacraments without any note of novelty or
contradiction made against them, which is an evident argument, that this was at
that time also the common doctrine of the Catholyke Church. And albeit the
ancient Fathers (as this man obiecteth) do not set down precisely this
number of Sacraments in express words, and in one place all together, yet do
they set down the things themselves, and the same number also in different
places, as by Catholyke writters is showed abundantly when they treat of the
number of Sacraments.

And as for the objection about the council A ^alfication about the council of
Lateran.
to wit, Cap. Firmiter de sum. Trinitate (and he could not choose but see it)
though it be not the councelles purpose, to name all Sacraments there
together, yet does it expressly mention three, to wit: Eucharist. Baptism and
Penance, and other in other places, as Panormitan and other expositours upon
that council do show. Panormitan. in cap. F^r^^ter de Sum. Trinit. and de
fide Catholica.
And seeing that the M. of sentences wrote but 50. years before that council
(for he was made Bishop of Paris in the year 1160. and the council began
1215. and his doctrine and learning allowed by all men as Catholyke, how is it
probable that the council would appoint only two, Sacraments, so soon after
the other, and all other scholemen had written so largely of seven without
reproueing or recal^^ng their doctrine.



About service in the vulgar tongue.
There follows the third point, of service in one tongue before the
alteration, which he denies, saying: that in ancient time it was never
thought unlawful to celebrate divine service in any tongue understood by the
people: Page 1^.
and that the Greeks even to this day retain the Greek tongue, and that the
Apostle 1. Cor. 14. does directly condemn tongues used in divine prayers or
praises if they be not understood of the people. But all this is answered
largely by me before in the third blessing and eight and ninth chapters of this
Encounter, and these are manifest untruths, which he adds here, for he
cannot show one example out of all antiquity or histories that any one
Catholyke country from Christ downwards to Luther used public service in a
vulgar tongue, but only in some of the three learned tongues Hebrewe Greek or
Latin, except only some particular dispensation for some short time and upon
especial causes, Aeneas Syluius lib. de origin Bohemorum cap. 13.
as is recorded of the Morauians where the Priests were permitted by the Pope
to say mass in their Slauonia^ vulgar tongue until they might be instructed in
the Latin, which makes the second part of this objection about the Greek
tongue to be very idle, and the third about S. Paul is true in praises and
exhortations that, they ought not to be in peregrine tongues not understood by
the hears, but of public prayer, it cannot be meant, nor have place, for that
in Corinth it was in the greek tongue which all commonly understood. See here
(good reader) the impertinencie of this fellow.

Here follows the fourth point, and A famous untruth about the sacrifice of
the Mass.
The Popish sacrifice of the Mass was not known of the Ancient Fathers, etc.
but this is refuted first by all those ancient lyturges before mentyoned whereof
some our man grants to be Apos^olike, and all those lyturges do agree upon
one external sacrifice of Christians in the new Testament, calling it the body
and blood of our Savior setting down also the manner how that sacrifice is to
be offered, which John Caluyn so much misliked (as before I have touched) that
he condemns them for it, Calvin. lib. 4. instit. c. 18. ^. 11.
saying, im^^ati sunt propius Iudaicum sacrificandi morem (speaking of these
lyturges) quam aut ordinauerat Christus, aut Euangelij ratio ferebat, the
Fathers did imitate more neerlie the Jews manner of sacrifice, then that which
Christ did ordain, or the nature of the ghospel did bear. Lo here Caluyn will
teach S. Clement, S. Basil, S. Cyril, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, what Christ
ordained, and what the nature of his ghospel will bear or not bear.

The like impudency do use the Centuria^ores in the very first age after the
Apostles, Magd. cent. 2 cap. 4.
who recyting the words of Ignatius S. John's scholar, Ignat. Ep. ad Smyrnenses
non licet sine Episcopo neque offerre, neque sacrificium immolare. It is not
lawful to offer, nor to do sacrifice (among Christians) without the Bishop,
those fellows say, it was inc^mmode dictum, incommodiouslie spoken, to wit for
their purpose, and then again, Irenaeus lib. 4 contr. here is. cap. ^2.
S. Irenaeus says, Noui Testamenti nouam docuit oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab
Apostolis accipiens vniuerso mundo offert. Christ taught a new oblation of the
new Testament, which the Church receiving from the Apostles, does offer to
God, throughout the whole world, of this they say, satis videtur loqui
incommode, Irenaeus seems to speak very incommodiouslie here, And this of
the Fathers of the first age after Christ, to whom also we may join S. Martial
disciple of the Apostles (though the Centuriatores make mention of him in the
third age) cyting his words thus, Cent. 3. c. 4. Mart. in ep. ad ^udegal.
Caena (inquit) Domini, id est sacrificium Deo creatori offertur in ara. The
supper of Christ, that is the Sacrifice is offered to God our creator upon the
Alter; and in the same third age, they name diverse Fathers, that make mentyon
of this sacrifice, to be used in the Church not only for the living, but also
for the dead, Tertul lib. de corona milit. Cypr. lib. 3. ep. 6. and lib. 4 ^p.
3.
namely Tertulian and Cyprian, whom the Centuriatores do mislike and reprehend
for this cause, and with these Lutheran Centuriatores joins also in this
point of defacing the Fathers (though otherwise their open enemy in other
points of religion) John Calvin in his book of reformation, who does reprove
and check five ancient Fathers by name, that is Irenaeus, Athanasius,
Arnobius, Ambrose, and Augustine for holding this doctrine, and misinterpreting
and falselie applying the scriptures to the proof thereof, Vbi supra.
ita ridicule (says he) vt dissentire cogat, and ratio and veritas, that is,
they do apply the scriptures so ridiculouslie (for proof of the Mass and
sacrifice) that both reason and truth does force me to dissent from them; see
the pride here of John Caluyn, who holds for ridiculous so many learned
ancient Fathers, and see the impudency together of our bold and blind bayard
O. E. that dare avouch the sacrifice of the Mass was never so much as known
to the ancient fathers.

His fifth and last cauillation is about one The fifth cauillation about one
head of the Church.
Finally (says he) as the Popes headship is now denied of the Eastern
Churches, and so was for many ages, so was the ancient Church utterly
ignorant of that matter, if this Noddy will persist in his error, let him show
it if he can. Here you see that howsoever I persist in error, he persisteth in
his contumelious speech begun, of calling me Noddie at every word, but where
the noddiship truly lights when the matter is tried, I am content to remit
it to the readers judgment.

And here the very first clause of his speech that have fallen to schism and
heresy also (namely about the holy Ghost) as our adversaries will not deny,
whereas my assertion was, that one head was acknowledged by a^l Catholic people
of Christendom, so as the instance of the late greeks since their fall, does
make nothing to the purpose, and that the ancient greek Fathers did
acknowledge the preeminencie of the Church of Rome above all other Churches,
and consequently also of her governor and Pastor the Pope, is most evident
even at this day by their own wrytings yet extant, as by Ignatius his Epistle
ad Romans Iren. at large aduersus haeres. lib. 3. cap. 3. Athan. apolog. 2.
Epiphan. lib. contr. haereses 68. Basilius Epist. 52. Nazianz. carm. de vita
sua. Chrysostom. Ep. prima and secunda ad Innocentium. Greek Fathers acknoleging
^he principalite and superiorite of the Roman Church.
Cyril. ep. 10. ad Nestorium. and ad 11. clerum and populum constantinop.
^heodoret. epist. ad Leonem Papam. Zoz^m^n. lib. 3. hist. cap. 7. All which ten
ancient greek Fathers let any man read in the places cyted (for that they are
to long here to be set down) and then let him judge also of the second
noddytisme, when he says, that the ancient Church was utterly ignorant of
this matter, for if the ancient greek Church did acknowledge it, how much
more all the ancient latin fathers and doctors. And this may be sufficient for
this first ioynder about unity o^ faith in Catholics, let us pass to the
second about the means to judge or know the truth.

THAT PROTESTANTS not only have no agreement or unity among themselves in
matters of religion, but also are deprived of all sure means and certain rule
whereby to attain thereunto. CAP. XIIII.
THER^ follows in the Ward-word, In certaynty of belief among protestants.
See of this sup. cap 4. number. 10.
but also that it is impossible that ever they can have it, which is as great a
spiritual curse, and malediction as may be, and this for lack of due means to
procure or establish the same. And to this purpose the K. is hardly posed by
the warder about the certainty of his faith and religion to wit, how he can
have any, and by what infallible means he can be sure that he is in the right
way, and not in heresy, and seeing that he, and his do make scriptures their
only assurance, and this depends of the true sense, he is asked, and urged,
whether he has this certainty of Scripture by his own reading only and
judgment or by the credit of some ministers that enterpret the Scriptures in
this or that sense unto him, and whether soever of these two ways he stand
upon it is showed and proved to be uncertain, the first depending only of
the own judgment, the second of others, who being private men, and having no
more assurance of the holy Ghosts assistance then himself, The curse of
uncertainty among protestants.
can be no more sure or infallible then the first, whereof it follows, that a
protestant has not, nor can have any further certainty of the truth of his
religion then human judgment, or probability can give him (which is a
miserable curse, and no faith at all) except he will fly to his inward spirit
and inspiration, which is far more uncertain, and perilous then the other,
all which is contrary in the Catholyke Church, and in the way and means of
trial which she follows, and consequently that the certayntie is far
different for security.

zwinglius, Caluyn, and such others, and he is demanded how he can dissent from
the^e men, as he does in so great points of doctrine, See before cap. 3.4.5.
and yet have no certainty of belief, seeing these men, were as learned as he,
and no less illuminated by his own confession, and if they were deceived in
some points, they might be in all, etc.

From this curse of variety and uncertainty of doctrine and belief, the
warder passes to an other no less markable brought in by change of old
religion, which is, dissolution of life and manners, which protestants
themselves do not deny in their writings as before has been showed, The curse
of euel life. Sup. cap 6.
and if they would, the experience of England it self is sufficient for
proof, and the warder declares it by plain demonstration whereunto
notwithstanding it seemed good to the K. to answer with deep silence, not so
much as mutt^ring any one thing for his defense, so as here I would thank him
as S. Augustine in a like case thanked Faustus the Manichie, Aug. contra Faust.
manich. lib. 2. in fine.
Gratiae tibi agende sunt, vbi nonnulla sic vidisti te refutare non posse, vt
ea malles summo silentio praeteriri. You are to be thanked in that you saw (and
thereby confessed) some things in my book to be so unanswerable, as you choose
rather to pass them over with deep silence then to say any thing unto them.

Then follows in the ward-word another Rome, and sea Apostolyke. 6. Ancient
leagues with forayne Princes mainteyned. 7. much bloody war in our neighbors
kingdoms had been avoided. 8. diverse important damages, and peryls at home by
a^l liklihood had never risen, all which great felicities having been either
lost by change of religion, or greatly weakened, and put in danger, he shows
further that the contrary effects of curses, and calamities have or may ensue
thereby, and having laid them forth he finally concludes thus.

All these inconveniences, and calamities had been avoided, Page 1^.4.
or the most of them, if change of Religion in England had not been made, so
that the innumerable bened^ct^ons which this poor man would neads threape upon
us, by that change, do come to be in effect these that follow.

The sum of all that has been said about blessings, and cursings.
First in spiritual affairs, to have no certayntie of religion at all, as has
been proved, no stay, no foundation, no final rule to try, or judge to determine,
but only every ma^s own private head, and fancy, wrangling and iangling
without end, for that it is without judge or means to make an end: novelties
without number, liberty of life without fear, or force of ecclesiastical
discipline to restrain it. And then in temporal matters the blessings are such
as have been discovered, our realm divided and shiuered in a thousand pieces;
our Princess in years without children, or hope of any, our crown without
succession, our old friends and allies made our enemies, our new friends
uncertain; our own flesh and countrymen most pitifully divided within their
own bowels, and most miserably tossed, and tormoyled both abroad and at home,
abroad and in other cou^tryes, with prisons, yro^s, chains, gallyes, and other
afflictions, even to death it self; for being protestants, pirates, spies,
practisers, or other such imputations incident to enemies. At home afflicted
with no less persecutions of our own Magistrates, for being Catholics, or
deemed to be such. So as I would feign know, who they are in our little Island,
that feel these innumerable benefits and blessings by change of religion,
which this gentleman talks of, seeing there are very few either of one
religion or other, that taste not of the miseries, whereof I have spoken, either
in themselves, their friends, children, servants, kynsfolkes, goods honors, or
otherwise, and most of all the realm and common wealth it self, etc.

To all this speech and reason of the warder Page 2^. Vain and idle answering.
As for your building of Castles in the Air by supposal o^ blessings that
might probably have ensued, if religion had not been altered, because I mean
not to take the pains to follow you in your extrauagant discourses, and
because they are indeed nothing but the imaginations of an idle brain, I leave
them to Mr. Moors Fictio Vtopica. Who could answer with fewer words, or less
matter so large, and important a discourse, then Sir F. does here? or who
could go further from the purpose then he, that leaves out the substance of
all his adversaries allegation, and entertayneth himself in tryfles of his
own devising* Let the reader judge whether his answer be rightly termed a
wastword or no. I must needs conclude as S. Augustine did against Julian with
this interrogation. Aug. lib. 1. contra Iulianum. cap. 1.
Quaero abs te cur lib^o meo saltem spetie tenus te respondisse glorieris, cum
libri mei partem nec quartam reprehendendo tetige^is, eosque saltus in
praetereundis meis disputationibus feceris, quasi omnino desp^rares veriusque
operis, and mei scilicet and tui quenquam esse posse lectorem qui ista
deprehenderet? I ask of you (Sir F.) as good a disputer or shifter rather as
was Julian) how you can glory to have answered my former book, whereas you have
not so much as touched the fourth part thereof, and have made such leapes in
passing over my arguments, and disputatio^s, as though you dispayred that any
reader would view both works, and find out your falsehood in this behalf.

WHAT O. E. Answers to the former chapter about division, and uncertainty
in religion. CAP. XV.
minister, rushing in with more resolution, and masking himself with the
vizard of two vowels. O. E. (which may stand perhaps in his cipher for Owls
Eyes to look thorough and to see, and not be seen again) lays on load both
in babbling, and scoulding, saying somewhat to every thing, though nothing in
deed to all, and following the thread of my speech, and narration, he picketh
quarrels to whatsoever seems most capable of cauillation, and this appears
to be his cheifely intended exployt in this his enterprise of answering, the
proof shall be seen by experience.

And first of all whereas the warder obiecteth Page 4.
as from the Lutheranes in Germany, and Denmark (to use the warders own
words) from Zwinglians in Zuitzerland, from Caluinists in Geneua, France,
Holland, and Scotland, and from Puritanes, Brownists and other sects at home,
that impugn Protestants daily of the parliament religion. This fellow denies
first very flatly, Page 19.
that there is any division among them at all, And here he wynneth the first
garland of impudency as you see, but look upon an other more clear then this.
Great impudency of O. E.
Secondly (says he) the Churches of Zwitzerland, Germany, France, and England,
do neither hold of Zuinglius, Caluyn, nor Luther, but of Christ Jesus, and of
his Apostles and Prophets.

Quae conueniunt in aliquo tertio, inter se et^an conueniunt, those things that
agree in a third^ agree also between themselves, which he expounds also
presently after by the worde^ next following. As ^or our selves (says he) al
of us profess the doctrine of Christ Jesus, Page 19.
according to that rule that was established by common cons^^^ of the Church
of England, from which if any digress, he is no more to be accounted of our
society th^^ the Papists, etc. Mark here (good reader) the guyddy head of
this gagling goose, first he joins together in the true doctrine of Jesus
Christ, Most foolish inconstancy and contradiction to himself.
and of his Apostles and prophets as well all Lutherans, and Zuinglians, as also
all kind of Caluinists and consequently Puritanes whom yet presently he
cutteth o^ again, Page 17.
no less then Papists and those of the Popes retinue (whom before he said to be
no Christians, nor to hold any one article a right of christian faith) if they
do digress in any thing from the rule of faith established by common consent
of the Church of England, which all do, and consequently he does as much as
if with one hand he should embrace, and lul and coople together both Lutherans,
Zuinglians and Puritanes, acknowledging them for his dear and tender brethren,
and with the other should beat them of, and detest them as enemies and public
heretics, for so he does in effect, seeing it is evident, that neither the
sectaryes of Luthera^s, Zuinglians, or Puritan-Caluinists of Geneua, France,
Scotland, Holla^d or England do agree which O. E. his rule of faith here
mentioned to wit, the rule established by common consent at this day in the
Church of England, And this is evidently, and abundantly proved by their
own books and sayings before recyted in the 4.5.6. and seque^t chapters of
this Encounter.

But for that our Minister makes mention here of a certain rule of faith,
whereby he and his are directed, and others that digress from the same are to
be rejected from their communion and society, I mean to examine ^he same
briefly in this place, and to see what (...) is.

And first of all that there is and must be That their is some certain rule of
faith as well how to believe as also vvherby to interpret scriptures.
whereby ^o know and stay their faith, and to discern ^ew Catholykes from
heretykes, is most ^^ident both by reason it self, and by the authority of
the very first founders of our religion, who often do make mention, and
admonish us thereof as S. Paul to the Corinthians secundum regulam nostram, 2.
Cor. 10.
according to our rul^ and to the Philippenses, in eade^ permaneamus regula let
us persist in the same rule. And to the Gallatians, Phil. 3.
quicunque hanc regulam secu^^ fuer^^t, pax super illos, whosoever shall follow
this rule of faith, Gal. 6.
peace upon them, and other such places, Romans 12.
as namely to the Romans, Prophetia secundum rationem fidei, prophesy (by
which i^ understood here principally, interpretation of scriptures) according
to the rule or analogy o^ faith, for so is the greek word.

Orthodoxi or Catholykes, and others that were new fangled o^ wrangling people,
that would follow no rul^ but their own head, and fancyes, of whi^^ rule make
mention also in the primiti^^ Church Ignatius after the Apostles epist.
ad^^^gnetianos, Justinius Apol 2. pro Christianis, Irenaeus (...) 1. cap. 1. and
2. Clemens lib. 4. stromatum aduersus (...) reses, Tertullianus lib. de
velandis virginibus, (...) Alexandrinus as S. Basil cyteth him lib. de spiri^^
cap. 29. and many other Fathers commendi^^ highly, and inculcating often the
obseruati^^ of this rule as well for belief, as also for inte^^pretation of
Scriptures, but especially to c^^^cerne heretics, who (to use these Fathers
own words) do no sooner begin to pratle, but that by digressing from this rule
do bewray themselves, and show what they are, and thus far that there is a
rule, which our enemies cannot deny.

But now what that rule is it may be that What the rule of faith is or was in
old time.
but yet first of all that it cannot be only Scripture is evident by his own
speech and confession in this place, Page 19.
where he says, that his people of England do profess the Doctrine of Christ
Jesus according to that rule, that was established by common consent of the
Church of England, from which rule (says he) if any digress, they are none
of our society, ^o more then Papists. By which words is evident that his rule
consists of the consent and establishment of certain men in England, what to
believe, which is a different matter from scriptures, though they will say
perhaps that in this establishment, they followed Scriptures as will also the
Puritanes and others, that here are excluded by this established rule.

And besyds this confession of O. E. himself, so much as this rule could not
be only scripture the best way perhaps to understand what it was and is at
this day will be to hear some of the ancient Fathers, describe the same. Holy
Ignatius writing to the same Church that S. Paul did (a little before cyted) to
wit, Phil. 3. Ig^. ^. epist. (...) Philippenses.
to the Philippenses, says, id ipsum dicatis omnes idem sentientes, in hoc
ipso fidei regulas praeceptaque seruaui, sicut and Paulus erud^ens n^s dicit.
Do you say and teach the self same and be of one judgment, for by this have I
observed the rules of faith, as Paul instructing us, said. Lo here the
judgment of Ignatius, who affirms himself to have observed the rule of
faith, for that he said and taught that which all said and taught, and thought
that which all thought, and followed no singularity either of his own or
others.

Irenaeus calls this rule the order of tradition from the Apostles time to
his, Iren. aduers. haeres lib. 2. cap 3 and 4. The great estimation of ^he old
rule of faith
by which he says, that all heretics are convinced in such sort that
Catholykes shut up their ears, as soon as they hear them speak contrary to
the said rule of universal faith, delivered by tradition from age to age. Iren.
ibid.
Traditionem Apostolorum (faith he) in toto mundo manifestatam in omni Ecclesia
ade^^ perspicere omnibus qui vera velint audire, etc. We may see the tradition
of the Apostles in every Church if we will hear the truth and we can number
those Bishops that were instituted by the Apostles, and their successors unto
our days, who taught not that which these heretics dream, etc.

Thus said he, accompting this rule to be Ter^. lib. de praescript. contr.
haeret. cap. 27.
To whom agrees Tertullian presently after him calling this rule, the
fullness of the Apostles preaching, si ergo incredibile est, (says he)
ignorasse Apostolos plenitudinem praedicationis, vel omnem ordinem regulae
omnibus non edidisse, etc. if it be incredible that the Apostles did not know
the fulness of the preaching of the ghospel or that they did not deliver unto
all Christians all the order of the rule of belief, etc. And the same man in
an other place, Tert. lib de praescrip co^tr. her. cap. 1^.
Fides in regulae posita est, cedat curiositas fides, certe aut non obstrepant,
aut quiescant aduersus regulam, etc. Faith consists in rule, let curiosity
yield to faith, and let heretics either not prate, or be silent against this
rule. So says he, and in an other place, if says he we will doubt or ask
questions in matters of religion, let us inquyre o^ our own men to wit
Catholykes, Ibid.
and in such matters, as Salua regula fidei possit in quaesti^nem deuenire,
which without breach of the rule of faith may be called into controversy.

By all which sayings we see of what account 1. Cor. 1^.
whereof S. Paul said to the Corinthians sic praedicauimus sic credidistis, so
we have preached, and so you have believed. And afterward partly by writing,
and partly by tradition continued, and conserved to posterity by the general
consent and succession of the Catholyke Church, and her governors, and among
other things this rule contained the Symbo^um or Creed of the Apostles, What
the old rule of faith contained. Tert. lib. co^t. here is. cap. 13. Romans 12.
Tertullian expressly testifies, and besides this it comprehended many things
more in particular, as explication of diverse hydden mysteries with direction
how to understand scriptures, as is plain by S. Paul before alleged where he
would have prophesying or exposition of Scriptures to be according to the
anologie and proportion of this rule of faith, to wit, that no exposition
should be made according to the private spirit of any man, but according to
that faith and belief which before was generally received, 2. Pet. 1.
as S. Peter expressly advises us, whereby it came to pass as says Epiphanius,
that no heretyke could ever put up his head, and begin any thing against this
rule, but that presently by the force thereof he was discovered, and
discomfyted, even as now O.E. in this place as you see goes about to reject
Puritanes, and exclude them from his society, for that they dissent from his
particular new rule established by a few in the Church and Parliament of
England, and this rule of his made but yesterday, and by a few, and not yet
thoroughly agreed upon among themselves is thought of such force as it can
exclude and reject so many learned of their own side, how much more, the
ancient rule made by the Apostles, and continued ever since by all the
Catholyke world is sufficient to condemn all new sectaries of our time that
dare iangle against it.

And this might be sufficient for declaration Tertulian above 14. hundred
years agone, who after the words before cyted, where he says this rule is the
fullness of the Apostles preaching (and note that he says preaching and not
wryring) come down in the Church by dissent and tradition, he not only
teaches but uses also the same rule and the eminent force thereof against all
heretics of his time, who (as ours do now) pretended that this rule and corpse
of faith delivered by the Apostles might perchance be corrupted, altered,
misunderstood, or changed by their successors, and that the later Churches were
not so pure, as the former, and consequently this rule so much urged of
tradition, and universal consent might not be infallible, to which absurdity
after many other reasons and reprehensio^s, Tertulian says as follows; Tertul
lib. de p^es^ contr. haeret. cap. 26.
Age nunc omnes errauerint, etc. Go to now, let us grant that all Churches (or
the most of them) after the Apostles have erred, and that the holy ghost sent
for this cause by Christ, A notable discourse of old. Tertul. against all
heretics.
and for this cause demanded of his Father, to be the teacher of truth, unto
them, has not respected them and that this steward of God and vicar of Christ
has neglected his office upon earth permitting the Churches of Christianity
to believe otherwise, and to understand matters differently from that which the
self same holy ghost did preach by the Apostles. But tell m^ is it likely that
so many and so great Churches over Christendom have all erred, and yet have
agreed in one faith? Error of doctrine by all liklihood would have brought in
(as it has done among Protestants) variety also of doctrine among those
Churches, but that which it found to be one, Quod apud multos vn^^ inuenitu^ no
est erratu^^ sed tradit^.
and the self same among many is not to be thought to come by error but by
tradition, and can any man dare to say that they did err who left, behind
them those Traditions? but howsoever you shall call yt error, yet this Error
raygned for truth until heresies rose up to impugn yt, belike truth being
oppressed expected the coming of Marc^onithes, and Val^ntinians to deliver her
out of captivity, and in the mean space all preaching was in error, A scorn
of Tertullian falling justly upon protestan^^.
all believing in error, so many thowsands of thowsands baptized in error, so
many good, works of faith done in error so many virtues, so many graces and
miracles wrought in error, so many priesthoods and mysteries exercised in
error, and finally so many martyrdomes crowned by error, etc.

Bishops do urge all old ancient Fathers in like sort each one in his age
after Tertullian, August. Vine. ly^. lib. contr. here is. cap. 27.
but in steed of all let S. Augustine be red urging this rule against all
sorts of heretics, but especially, and more largely against the Donatests and
Pelagians, and after him again the very next age, Vincentius Lirenensis who
after a long discourse to this purpose urges the words of S. Paul to Timothy,
1. Tim. 6.
o Timothee depositum custod^ etc. o Tymothy keep well thy pleadge or pawn
left with thee; which pawn as well this father as the rest do interpret to be
the foresaid rule of tradition of faith? Quid est depositu^ (says he) what is
the pleadge or pawn left by the Apostles with Timothy and other Bishops of
the Church, and he answers presently. Id est quod tibi creditum est, non
quod a te inuentum, quod accepists, non quod excogitasti: rem non ingenij sed
doctrine, non vsurp^tionis priuatae sed publicae traditionis; rem ad te
perductam, non a te prolatam: in qua non author esse debes sed custos: non
institutor, sed sectator; non ducens, sed sequens, etc.

This pawn or pledge is a thing given you in credit, and not invented by you,
a thing which you have received, and not devised: a matter not of wit, but of
doctrine: not of pryuate usurpation, but of publyke tradition: a thing brought
down unto you, and not brought forth first by you a thing whereof you must not
be author, but keep only; not the fownder but a follower, not a leader, but one
that is led.

Thus says he of the rule of faith in his time, which rule also serves us no
less at this day against all sort of protestants then it did them at that
time against their adversaries: but rather much more, for that our prescription
of this rule is by many hundred years elder then theirs was, and so this shall
suffice about this matter of the Ecclesiastical rule of faith, what yt was, and
what the ancient Fathers did think and esteem, thereof, and now we will
examine a little what stir the minister makes about his goodly rule of the
present particular Church of England.

OF THE ENGLISH rule of belief set down by O. E. And what substance, or
certainty it has, and how they do use it for excluding Puritanes and other
Protostantes, and of diverse shameful shifts of O. E. CAP. XVI.
A ^ift lib. 1. Phis.
Contraria iuxta se posita clarius elucescunt, That contraryes being laid
together do make each other better seen and understood, as a ragged garment
laid by another that is fair and precious, makes the rags and patches more
evident and contemtible, and even so this ridiculous new devised rule of O. E.
if we compare it with the former ancient rule, commended unto us by the old
holy fathers we shall see more perspicuously the vanity thereof, for that he
says. Page 19.
As for our selves (that is the Protestants of England) all of us profess the
doctrine of Jesus Christ according to that rule that was established by the
common consent of England, and whosoever does digress from this is not of our
society, etc.

But here I would ask him what rule this See the statutis anno Henr. 8.25. c.
14. and an. 26. cap. 1. an. 27. c. 15 and 19. an. 31. ca. 14. an. 34. and 35.
cap 1.
for if he speak of K. Henry the 8. his days, when the first chaunges
began, and when diverse new rules were set down in parliament with this
express commendation that they were taken out of the pure and sincere only
word of God, I do not think that O. E. will admit them, or stand unto them,
though John Fox do hold all that time of K. Henry his mutations after his
breach with the Church of Rome, for the time of the ghospel and so does term
it every where.

In K. Edward days also, he being head of An 1. Ed c. 1.2. and 11. and an. 2.
and 3. cap. 1.21.23.
though but 9. years old, there was two or three new rules made and altered
about matters of religion and their communion book, all pretended out of the
word of God, with reuocation of that which K. Henry the Father and his
Parlaments, out of the same word had appointed before which rule also under K.
Edward. I do not know whether our Protestants will allow in all points now, but
sure I am our Puritanes do not, nor will not, as appears by their own
books; what assurance then is there in this mutable and controuerted rule of
so few years in age?

Warder knew no other when he writ, but the Lords of the Parlame^t, and so
called it parliament religion wherewith O. E. is very angry, Page 19.
and says where he calls our religion parliament religion, he speaks like
himself, that is falsely and slanderously, for albeit the same be received by
authority of the Prince and state, yet is it Christ's re^igion and not the
Princes. Soon spoken but how does he prove it? here is still that old shifte of
peti^io principij, hissed out by learned men, which consists in setting down
that for a principle, which most needs proof, as here where our minister will
needs have his religion to be Christ's religion, whether we will or no, and that
it was but received and promulgated only by the parliament, but then must I ask
him again, what authority besides the parliament has determined it to be
Christ's religion? as also that the Puritans religion is not Christ's religion,
notwithstanding they pretend Christ, and his Apostles no less then does the
protestant? and then if we find that the only authority that defyneth this
matter is the Parliament allowing the one and condemning the other, for that
scriptures of themselves can not do it ( quia actiones sunt suppositorum, as a
little after he urges) and then must needs the credit and truth of English
religion depend of the parliament, and thereof, worthelie be called Parliament
religion.

But harken (good reader) what an example An example making against himself.
that his religion may not be called Parliament religion. The Emperors Gratian,
Valentinian, and Theod^sius decreed (says he) that all people of their
government should hold the doctrine of Peter the Apostle, Page 19.
taught by Damasus bishop of Rome, and Peter bishop of ^lexandria, and that
they should believe one God and three persons, and yet I hope this Noddy will
not call the faith of the Trinity an imperial faith, See this handled more
largely before in the ann^t. upon the letter of O. ^. to the reader.
etc. Yes surely Sir Noddy-maker, I would call and prove it so if the case were
like, that is, if these three Emperors had determined this faith as of
themselves, and by their imperial authority, and that it had been a different
belief from the rule of faith received before, throughout Christendom, as
your parliament religion was and is, having no other ecclesiastical Authority
^or her establishment, but only the authority of your Prince and parliament,
which defyned it to be true religion and conform to the word of God, and
determined that the other which was there before in use, to wit the Catholic
to be opposite and contrary to thesaid word, and therefore to be abolished so
as the allowance of the one, and reprobation of the other proceeded from the
parliament.

Gratia^ and Vale^tinian his son being Emperors of the west, The decree of
the 3. Emp. examined.
and Theodosius of the East, all three do agree to commend to their subjects
the roman faith, and bishop of tha^ place to wit Damasus the^ sitting in that
chair, under pain of heresy, infamy, and other extreme punishments, which
point for that the false minister after his fashion durst no^ put down clearly
as the words themselves do ly in the text, least thereby he should discover
over much the truth, I mean to do it for him, in this place without other fee
for my labor then to prove him a cosening companion, and alleging them
brokenly to his own purpose. Cod lib. 1. de summa Tri^it. c. Cu^ctos e^.
Cunctos populos (says the decree) quos clementiae nostrae regit imperium, in
tali rolumus religione vessar^, quam diuinum Petrum Apostolum tradidisse
Romany, religio vsque adhuc ab ipso i^sinuata declarat, quamque Pontificem
Damasum seq^^ claret and Petrum Alexandriae Episcopum virum Apostolicae
sanctitatis, etc. our will is that all people whom the Empire of our clemency
does govern, shall live in that religion which divine Peter delivered unto the
Romans, as the religion by him taught, and enduring to this day does plainly
show, which religion (left by S. Peter) it is evident, that Damasus bishop of
Rome does follow, as also Peter bishop of Alexandria a man of Apostolical
holiness, etc. to wit that according to Apostolical discipline, and euangelical
doctrine, we all believe one deity of the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost,
with equal majesty in holy Trinity, and this law whosoever does follow, we
command that they do embrace the name of christian Catholics, the rest who^ we
esteem as mad and furious men we will have to bear the infamy of heretical
doctrine and to be punished first by God and then by us.

This is the decree of these three Emperors

Points of the Emp. decree contrary to O. E.
for defense of religion, and the modernal decrees of our Parlaments that take
upon them to appoynte and defyne religion in England, it shows that the
Roman religion was received by S. Peter, and had endured so until their days,
which was more then 400. years, it shows also that Damasus Pope of Rome was
then the chief governor of christian religion throughout the world: it shows
that these Emperors accounted him for their head, and not he them in matters
of religion, it shows how humbly these Emperors did submit themselves to the
decree of the council of Nice made before their days about three persons in
one Godhead, confirmed by Pope Siluester, and continued by Damasus; and it
shows how obedientlie and christianly these Emperors did hold them for
Catholic christians, whom thesaid council, and Pope Damasus did hold for
Catholics and condemned those for infamous heretics, who did dissent from
their obedience in religion; and now whether our later Parlaments of England
have done the same by the council of Trent, and Popes confirming and defending
the same (as our former parlaments were wont to do) I leave to the reader to
judge, and whether this law of these Emperors were wyselie brought in by O. E.
or no; but let us pass yet further in examyning this rule for trial of truth.

The minister having shifted of wittily (as in Q. maryes days our religion
was established more by parliament, then by authority of the Apostles, that we
are divided among our selves, and have more then 200. diverse opinions about the
Sacrament of the L. supper, that the universal Church could not deliver us our
faith, Diverse manifest false objections.
quia ^^tiones sunt suppositorum, that our faith is ney^her Catholyke, nor has
any certain ground ^t all, but is builded upon the particular opi^ions of this
or that mutable and ^ulearned ^ope, that it is not ancient, but full of late
no^eltyes, and old heresies, and other such stuff without end, prating much,
and proving no^ing so as no Mountebank in Italy could ^^ewe himself less
shameless, or more ridi^^lous.

And to say a word or two to every one of days was it any new religion, What
religion was planted by parliament in Q. Mary's days.
or differen^ from the rest of Christendom? or did the parliament then do any
other thing then the former edict or decree of the Emperors tha^ commands men
to hold the ancient re^g^^ of Rome descended from the Apostles? an^ follow the
Bishop of that Church the^ liui^^ as head of all Christendom?

Tertullian spoke a little before, (...) he said quaeramus a nostris, T^^ul.
cap. p^^ced.
quae salua fidei reg^^^ quaestionem poss^nt deuenire. Let us call in questi^^
or dispute among our selves, and with (...) own men (to wit Catholykes) such
po^^ of religion, as may come in controversy wi^^out breach o^ the integrity
of the rule of faith and with this only d^stinction of old Tertullian of the
different disputing among Catholykes and heretics, the one without touching
the ^ntegritie of the rule of faith, the other directly opposite against that
integrity, by this only, I say, all the vain prating and babbling of our
adversaries, that fill up leaves with differences among our schoolmen is quite
cut of, and they like barking dogs that have we^yed themselves in vain may
shake their ^ares, and return to ly down in their ke^els again, until an
other fit of bawling be ^ffred, and he that will see an other like baw^^ng whelp
to O. E. repealed by a vau^t-curre, ^^d his chaps shut up with the very same
di^^^nction, Aug. lib. 1. co^tra. Julian. cap. 2.
let him read S. Augustine against Julian (...) Pelagian obiecting the same
that O.E. does against Catholykes. Alia sunt (says S. Augustine) ^uibus inter
se aliquando etiam doctissimi atque op^ae regulae Catholicae defensores salua
fidei compage (...) consonant, What differences there may be among catholics.
Salua fidei regula.
and alius alio de vna re melius aliquid (...) and verius, hoc autem vnde nunc
agimus ad ipsa (...) pertinet fundamenta. There are other points ^^ong
Catholykes) in which sometimes the ^ost learned and best defenders of the
Ca^^olyke rule of faith do disagree among the^^^^ues, and one does say better
and more truly ^^^haps then an other of the self same thing, (...) yet all
without breach of the common ^^ke of faith, but this whereof now we treat
against this heretyke Julian) perteyneth to (...) very foundation of our faith.

Thus says he, and thus say we, and (...) further to O. E. that which follows
in S^ Augustine against Julian, that he change (...) erroneous, and furious
mind in accusing many grave Fathers, Bishops, and Pastors, (...) the whole
visible church of that opprobrio^ shame, which is proper only to heretyks wit
of division, and dissension among themselves in matters of faith.

quia actiones sunt suppositorum, I might answe^ this sentence quia omnia plena
sunt ^^ultorum, (...) otherwise he pretending to make his adu^^sarie a noddy,
would never have brou^^^ forth so noddilike an a^gument thereby to i^crease the
number of noddyes with additi^^ of his own person, for who will not (...) him a
notorious Noddy who selling him-se^^^ for a doughtie doctor, Whether the
universal Church may be said to teach or no.
and deane of a Church^ understands not a proposition in Logi^^^ and
therefor for his instruction I will send h^^ to no higher a treatise for this
time, ther^ the introduction of Logique or summ^ written by Toletus, Tolet. in
trod. ad dialect. lib. 1. c. ^3.
where among other ^^uisions of terminus singularis, he shall find the
Collectiuus autem terminus est qui tantum plura^^ iuncta significat, vt Roma
etc This I shall expo^^ after, when I shall show that this definition Terminus
overthrows his objection, and co^^sequentlie that he is ignorant in ipsis
termi^^^ artis in the very terms of logique it self.

But yet in the mean space I deny not, but that the said proposition actiones
sunt suppositoru^, is true in it self, Arist. lib. 1. Metaph. c. 1. (...).
and founded in Aristotle's Me^ taphysikes, though Aristotle have not the word
supposi^orum, but singular^um, as the greek word imports, but all is one in
our sense. And further I grant that this proposition is used by many school
doctors for better explication of d^uers highest mysteries of divinity, and
namely of the blessed Trinity, incarnation of our Savior, and others, as
appears in diverse places of S. Thomas, D. Thom. com. in lib. 1. Sent. did. 5
q. 1. art. 2 and lib. 3 did. 2. Idem part. 1. q. 34. art 5. and part. 3. q.
19. art. 1.
though yet as it seems never read, and much less understood by this rude O.
E. as may appear by his foolish application thereof in this place, for that the
meaning of this proposition according to Aristotle and schoolmen is that
Actiones non sunt vniuersalium logicorum, which are otherwise called
vniuersalia in predicando, such as are genus, species and the like, neither yet
are actiones vniuersalum in essendo, as were those ideae platonicae, nor yet
pa^tium conslituentium vel componentium, but only singularium, aut
suppositorum, this is Aristotle's meaning when he says actiones sunt
suppositorum, but what is any of this to our question and speech of the
universal Christian Church and her teaching, which Church though in our
speech she be called universal collectiue for that she co^teyneth all
Catholykes, yet is she reipsa, and in her self, truly and properly
indiuiduum, and not universal logicum vel platenicum, but only as is said
universal collectiuum, defined before by Tol^tus, when he says: Terminus
singularis collectiuus est, qui tantum plura coniuncte significat, which
signifies the comprehension of many in it self, as Rome, London parliament,
cittye, church, congregation, and the like, which according to logique are
properly particular indiuiduals, and not universals, though they conteyne each
of them a multitude in them, and in that sense may be called universals, as the
whole and universal city parliament, common wealth etc. and they have this
nature that the actions of particulars contained in them, and authorized by the
whole, do stand for the whole, and are said to be of the whole as the acts of
Parliament in England, though they be done be particular men (and often times
not by all) yet are they not called the acts of particular men, but of the
whole parliament and the like of the acts of the city, or common wealth.

Acts of particular men attributed to the whole body.
nor as his own act or decree, but as the act of the Parliament and in name
thereof, I may well say that the Parliament delivers me the same, which I may
also say when the city of London, the cha^cerie, the kings bench the court of
wards, or other common bodies makes out any order though it be delivered by
particular me^, yet is it the act of the whole universal body, and so called
and accounted, and not of the particular men, that deliver or execute the same,
which being understood let us now come co the application of our particular
case of the universal Church her teaching, and thereby discover the deep
lurking of our souldiour-masked minister.

When we Catholykes say that our faith is The application of the former
discourse.
or delivered unto us by the universal Church, our meanings, that albeit
particular men as Priests, Pastors, or preachers do immediately deliver the same
unto us, yet for that they do yt not as of themselves, nor as their own, but
from the said Catholyke universal Church, and by her order, we say truly and
properly, and cannot say otherwise, but that we are taught it by thesaid
universal Church, which is the body, and not by particular men which are parts
only, even as when a man strikes an other with his foot or hand, it cannot be
said so properly that the foot or hand struck him, as the man him-self, and
this argument, ru^nneth also in our adversaries cause, if he had wit to see it,
for when a man is taught at this day the protestant faith of England allowed by
the state, may he not say more truly and properly that it is the teaching of
the universal Church of England, then of this or that particular contemptible
minister? but this he foresaw not, when he came in with his actionis sunt
suppositorum, and thereby will see what reason I had to ad stultorum, for so much
as his objection besides the ignorance, and falsehood thereof, overthrows no
less himself, and the teaching of his Church, Ignorance of O.E.
if it had any force and so much of this which indeed is over much for the
fondnes of the instance.

that our religion is not Catholic, but his, and that ours is builded only
upon Popes which are mutable and subject to error and his upon the eternal
truth of God, etc. All which to yes though they have been sufficiently refuted
before, in that I have alleged, and a thousand times before that again by
other writers, yet these men as hungry flies beaten of from hunny do return
still with the very same clamors again, for lack of other better matter, and
here you see are two points the first, whether we or they be Catholics, and
then whether we depend of Popes, and they of God.

Who are Catholykes.
but more particularly it remains to be handled in this fellows first new
foolish challenge added after this for Sir F. wherefore here I will say no more
of that mad paradox for which shame enough abides O.E. in that, when I shall
come to answer it.

acheu^^ as our adversaries are, but yet to meet with this prating calumniators
exprobation we say that we depend not of any Pope as a private or particular
man, How Catholyke men depend of the Pope in their religion.
and subject to infirmities, either of ignorance, euel life, or the like, but
as he is head and chief pastor of Christ's universal Church, Gods substitute
upon earth, to whom he has assured the perpetual assistance of his holy
spirit, and of the omnipotent power of his aeternal Godhead even unto the
worlds end, and by virtue of this promis let Peter's successor be never so
vn^earned, rude, feeble or infirm (as hardly can be chosen one meaner then
himself was in all or most of these points (before he received virtue from his
master) yet shall his learning be incontrolable for government of Gods Church,
taking that help by councels doctors and other learned means, which he may,
(and Gods providence will ever provide that he shall do) his rudenes also shall be
wisdom, his feeblenes fortitude, his infirmity virtue, in respect of his
place and dignity, and this did our ancient holy Fathers esteem the matter,
not by the talents or merit of the man as heretics babble but by his office,
place, and dignity.

As for example who knows not but that might exceed him in these points. Yet
do the said Emperors prefer him before all in directing men for their faith
and belief, as you have heard; S. Hierome also was far more learned then he
by studdy, as all men will confess, and himself also, for that he wrote often
to S. Hierome to require his opinion in points of learning, and yet when the
matter came to determyne points of faith S. Hierome subiecteth himself to
him, with that humility, as a child and scholar would unto his father and
Master, and much more, for that he says most absolutely in a most hard and
perilous controversy of that time not yet determined; to wit, whether one or
three hypostacies, or subsiste^ces were to beholden in the Trinity, The faith
and humility of saynst Hier. epist. ad Damas.
the most learned humble father I say writes thus to Pope Damasus out of
Syria, Obtestor Beatitudine^ tuam vt mihi Epistolis tuis sieve dicendarum sieve
tacendarum hypostas^on detur authoritas, I beseech your Hol. that you will give
me leave, and authority by your letter to hold or deny three hypostacies.

discredit their office and ordinances, what then may we say of these men but
that they are given over as S. Paul says in reprobum sensum to a reprobate
sense, and sin maliciously, and desperately to rail against their own
consciences, God amend them, and let all wise men take heed of them.

As for the last and lowdest^ ly, which this Whether Catholyke religion be full
of novelties and heresies.
to wit, that Catholic religion is full of new noueltyes, and old heresies,
this also is to be discussed in his foresaid challenge when it comes to be
answered, whereunto I might remit the matter, without saying any thing here, as
I mean to do, but only to premonish the reader of two points, that there I am
to handle, the first, that if this woodcock or any of his crew can show any one
novelty (as an article of faith in our religion which was not believed in the
Apostles time, and in all ages since by the professors of the Catholic faith,
either explicit or implicit (as divines term it) we shall yield in all the
rest, for that we hold the foresaid rule of faith delivered by the Apostles to
have been full and perfect, and that whatsoever point of faith has been
determined of since, by general councels, confirmed by Popes, has been no new
thing, but explication only of that which was before delivered by the Apostles,
albeit not so expreslie known to all.

In the second point also we hold that if O.E. or his mates, can show any one
heresy, taken for an heresy by the general Church since Christ's time unto
Luthers, or after, to be holden by us truly, and in the same sense wherein it
was condemned for an heresy, and holden by those heretykes: if this I say can
be truly showed and not as this vice comes in with fustian-apes for velvet
telling us a tale of the Coli^ridians that offered Sacrifice to the Virgin Mary,
and other like, from whom he cannot deny, but that we differ most manifestly
(though his forehead be never so hard) If this I say can be proved, that any
one heresy is truly among us and not the similitude only or shadow thereof,
then will we ask no further proof of any thing against us, for that we hold
absolutely that either all or none is true in our religion: but on the contrary
side, we shall show, and demonstrate most clearly, that they hold many old
condemned heresies, in the self same sense, words, and meaning, wherein they
were condemned by the universal Church, and held by those heretics. And this
is the true difference between us and them, to wit, that they object to us
shadows, and resemblances of heresies, but we convince them of true heresy in
deed.

IT IS FVRTHER showed by diverse clear examples, that O. E. and his fellows do
plainly despair of all certain mean or rule to try the truth among
themselves, or with us. CAP. XVII.
NOtwithstanding that sufficient has been Sup. cap 3.4. 5.15 16.
or for consent, or assurance therein, yet for so much as this is a most
principal point to be well understood, and deeply pondered by every man that
loves his eternal life, and salvation, I have thought good to treat one point
more in this chapter, which is the confession of our adversaries themselves in
this behalf, though not in plain words, yet in manifest deeds which are not
nor ought to be of less authority then words.

And first of all I will show this by their passing over without answer this
whole matter (being the most principal of all this first encounter) when the
warder urges them most earnestly in the point it self, and both of them (I
mean both the Knight. first, and the minister after him do answer directly no
one word unto the whole demonstration, which is a plain confession that they
cannot answer it, but yet to show it more evidently, and to convince them in
this place, I will repeat again what the warder said before.

I would ask S. F. (says he) or any such man as he is, Page 4.
that determines so resolutely that his only religion among so many others (as
are extant at this day) is true, and all others false; whereon does he ground
his certainty?

Two vvayes of trial proposed.
Two only means can S. F. have to guide himself in this case, first that he
has received this doctrine of such or such persons, preachers, ministers, or
doctors, whose learning and knowledge in this behalf he trusts absolutely:
and then is his whole faith builded upon the credit of man, as is evident, and
consequently is nothing worth, nor no faith at all. The other way is, that he
believes it, for that it is founded in Scripture; but this way to S. F. must
needs be as uncertain as the other, if not more, for that to be sure, that it
is soundly grounded upon Scripture, he must first read himself his whole
belief expressly in Scriptures, which is much for a man of S.F. occupation to
do, and then he must be able to judge of many other points, belonging to the
same, as namely that the book is surely Scr^pture, that he reads. And then
that the translation which he uses is truly made, out of the learned tongues
Hebrew, Greek and Lat^n: And lastly, he must be sure of the true sense and
exposition, which also are hard matters for a man of S. F. learning, and much
more for others that know less then he.

Yea and when all is done, if he had all these helps needful for such a matter
(as he has not) yet were it but a private man's opinion, and consequently his
faith should be grounded, but upon his own particular judgment, which makes
no faith at all, but opinion only as often has been said, for that faith must
have Gods express authority for her foundation.

So that to conclude, the first blessing which

And to make this more plain, how all A plain demonstration against sir F.
but only what their own fancy leads them unto, I ask S. F. (not of any
Catholyke Doctor, nor of any ancient Father, as S. Augustine, S. Ierom, or the
rest, whom easily he would contemn) but rather of his own Doctors, Martyn
Luther, John Calvin, Theodore B^za, and such others, whom he supposes to have
been servants of God, and endued with his holy spirit and all the world knows
that they were more learned then S. F. yet why should he believe his own
judgment more then theirs in points of faith? wherein they differ from him, as
Luther about the real presence, and the number, and form of Sacraments, and
many other points, Caluyn in matter of the Queens Supremacy which he denies.
Beza in the whole government of their Church. Or why should I believe S. F. or
his new masters of England, rather the^ these that were more learned then he or
his? or what reason, rule, or foundation, have any of these men to believe
their own opinion, more then others, but only self will and fancy?

and there he will be both master and Pilot, and boteswayne him-self, to
govern the bark at his p^easure, for he admits no judge, no interpreter, no
authority, no antiquity, nor any other manner of trial, which is the greatest
madness, and malediction that ever could happen among men of reason.

And the very same cause that moved the

And what do you think that the knight and his champion have replied to all
this plain and manifest demonstration? would not you think that both of them
for their credits sake should have buckled up themselves to join in this
issue with the warder, showing what certainty they have, or which of the two
ways they will take proposed by him, seeing he says there are no other, or
that they should the^-selues at least appoint some other way: but consider good
reader the force of evident truth they are so blanked, and their mouths so
shut up with this interrogation of the warder, as the Knight. thought it best to
pass it wholly over with silence, as before has been touched: The minister
with more shame then the Knight. has tatled somewhat, Idle tatling in a grau^
question.
telling us, that our religion is not Catholyke, that the universal Church
could not deliver it unto us quia actiones sunt suppositorum (as you have
heard) that Stapleto^ teaches that the Church has power to prove, tax, and
consigne the books of holy Scripture. And that universal tradition is the most
certain interpreter thereof. And finally that the faith of Papists is buylt
upon the Popes fancy and opinion, and it is full of novelties, and old
heresies, and the like, as before you have heard.

ne griquidem: he answers no one word at all, only to the later part, or
appendix of the discourse where the warder says that to make the matter more
plain, how protestants have no other rule of belief, he asks S. F. not of
any Catholyke Doctors, nor ancient Fathers, whom he esteems not, but of
their own new Doctors Luther, Caluyn, Beza, and the like authors of their own
sects, why English Protestants at this day should prefer their own judgments
before these also, (whom they grant to have had great store of the holy ghost)
in all matters, doctrines, and interpretation of Scripture, where they dissent
from them.



But says this Noddy: why should you believe more your own opinions then
Caluyn concerning the Q. supremacy, Luther concerning the Real presence, and
Beza in the Church government? I answer, first that these men's private
opinions concern not fundamental points of faith; Page 21. A most foolish
answer of O. E. about Luther Caluyn etc.
and therefore they are not to be brought forth for instance in this cause
where we talk of the foundations and reasons of Christian faith. Mark well his
answer (good reader) and judge who is the noddy, he says two things: the one,
that the judgments of Luther Calvin, and Beza be but private opinions among
them; the other that the points wherein they differ from them to wit, the real
presence in the Sacrament, her Maties. Supremacy ecclesiastical, and the whole
government of the Church are no fundamental points of their faith.

For the first I would gladly know what authority it was his body, and his
whole Church that ever so understood him unto this day) if the matter of
supremacy be no fundamental point of faith, What points are fundamental in
protestants doctrine.
whereby all their ecclesiastical hierarchy stands at this day in England as
their Bishops Deanes, Archdeacons, and other prelates, and parsons of the
Spiritualty, who otherwise must needs be plain intruders, and mere lay men.

If their whole government of their Church be not fundamental whereof depends
whether they have any true ministers, preachers and teachers lawfully allowed
or no and consequently whether their Sacraments be Sacraments and be
administered by them that have authority so to do; if all these points I say
be not fundamental in O.E. opinion, what are fundamental? And what Atheism
does this Martial minister and devils deane bring in upon us? But believe me
(good reader) these good fellows do only eat of the ministry, and believe
as please them; and this being a compagnion of many occupations, will live by
that which will yield him most, and according to that also shall be his doctrine
and belief.

Page ^1. O. E. his contemptious speech of Luther and Caluyn.
We suspend our opinion and give no approbation to Luthers opinion concerning
the carnal presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, for that we see the
doctrine to be new, and not taught by the Apostolyke Church, nay we find yt
to be repugnant to the Apostles doctrine delivered in Scriptures, etc. Mark
the arrogance of th^s petty chapla^n, we suspend, we see; we find; who are
those we I pray you? Oh that Doctor Martyn Luther were alive again to canuase
this arrogant barking bastardly whelp of his, he would prove him but a very
demi puppie. Of Caluyn he says: when Caluyn was better informed (about the
Supremacy) he changed his style and retracted his opinion, but where and when,
I pray you? why have you not noted the place and time; for Caluyn was to great
a man I trow to change style or retract opinions, were it never so false or
impious, and whether he changed in this, let his Elizeus that had his cloak and
spirit of wickedness double (I mean Theodor Beza) be witness, who is more to be
believed in this case then O. E. that is but a fugitive of Ca^uyns camp, going
about to betray his Captain.

Lastly about the government, of his English Page 22.
I say that in external government it is not necessary that all Churches
should concur and agree.

Lo his saying: and albeit he say madlie, yet I trust he will not say but that
in one and the self same Church agreeing all in one true doctrine of Jesus
Christ (as in the former leaf he affirms all sorts of protestants do) it is
necessary they agree in the substantial points at least of some government
among themselves, Page 18.
as for example, Atheistical Doctrine O.E.
of some one head and the chief members thereof, as whether the Prince be
supreeme head ecclesiastical, and may make Bishops, and whether the Bishops be
true Prelates, and may make ministers, and whether they be of Gods or the
devils making that are so made, which is the proper controversy between them
of England, and Beza at this day, and was with John Caluyn also while he lived.
To deny this I say, were a very mad new doctrine for soldier O.E. to teach
now under a ministers coat, to wit, that none of all these things are
necessary points of doctrine, but indifferent rather, and that in his Church
a minister, and a ministrel, a preacher, and a pyrate, a bishop and a
bytesheep, a deane, and a devil are all one.

The Survey of pretended holy discipline etc. printed by Io. Wolf. 159^. cap
2^. fol. ^54.
admitting or rejecting at their pleasures, it may appear by one of their
publyke books printed, and set forth against the puritanes where they have a
whole Chapter of accusations against the said puritanes for rejecting and
conte^ning new ghospelling writers of their own when they make against them
which yet you see practiced here by O. E. him-self though no Puritan, and that
even against the very chief heads and syres of both their religions, Luther,
Caluyn, Beza, yea some are of opinion that O.E. was the Author of that book
wherein the Puritanes are so eagerly argued for this fault of co^temning their
own writers when they make against them, though I cannot easily believe the
same, for that it seems les fondly written in that kind, then could be
expected of this man's shallow cacitie, that wrote this doltish answer to the
Wardword, but be it how it will you shall see the Puritanes taken up very sharply
by protestants in that book, for rejecting both their own authors, and
ancient Fathers, which yet you see this arrogant fool does practice here in
the one (I mean touching their own) and you shall hear afterward how
egregiously his fellows d^ the like in the other, that is to say, concerning
the ancient Fathers. But first let us see what is objected to the Puritanes in
the former point.

In a certain place Pelican, Bullinger, Bucer, Illyricus, Survey c. 28. Pap.
^54.
and Musculus (all great Doctors among the Lutherans) being brought in against
the Puritan doctrine, Cartwright answers them thus; Puritans co^te^pt of
their own Doctors.
If they were for one a hundred, they could not bear down the Apostle, to
wit, standing with him, as he presumes.

But after these is brought in Luther himself, interpreting a piece of
Scripture otherwise then they would have it, but they answer that his
exposition is out of season. T. Cartvv li. 2. Page 313. and 314.
Then is brought in Bishop Ridly, and brother Bucer great doers in K. Edwards
days in England, but the first is dismissed, thus: Bishop Ridley being a
party in this cause ought to be no witness, the second thus: Ibid. page 398.
Bucer has other gross absurdityes, sometimes Homer sleeps; his reasons are
ridiculous, etc. Jewel and Fox do follow, but Fox is shaken of with this saying:
that he took greater pain in his story to declare what is done, then how
justly or unjustly how conveniently or vnconuenie^tlie it was done. Jewel
received this iyrke, as a contumely engraven in his tomb as the Protestant
complayneth. B Jewel calls the doctrine of the ghospel wantonness. Ibi. Page
11^.


Finally they write thus of all the chief English protestants in K. Henry. K.
Edward. Q. Mary and in this Q. time before themselves: their knowledge was in
part; T. Catvv. li. 1. Page 196.
and being sent out in the morning or (...) the Sun of the ghospel was risen
so high, they might over see many things, which those which are not so sharp
of sight as they were, may see, for because that which they want in the
sharpnes of sight, they have by the benefit, and clearnes of the Sun and
light greater then in their days.

Lo here the growing and disagreeing protestant faith, and every man his new
light and lantern in his hand. Whosoever comes after presumes to see more
then his fellow that went before him. Where will this matter end? but mark their
wrangling spirits one within an other: the puritanes are sorely reprehended
for this contemptuous using their own authors; but are the puritanes more
arrogant or bolder in this point, then you have heard O.E. before, even with
the first parent of their profession?

Survey. Page 329.
the foresaid book of protestants, has also a special chapter of examples of
the Puritanes contempt against them, calling S. Ignatius scholar to S. John
the Evangelist, a counterfeit and vain man, S. Irenaeus is rejected, except
(says the Survey) he will frame his speech after the new cut, Sur. page ^3^.
Annot Bezae in act. ^4. and 1. Timoth. 5.
even according to Bezaes pleasure. Justinius Martyr being urged, that lived
presently after the Apostles, answer is made, that in the days of Iustine,
there began to peep out in the ministry some things, Th. Cartvv. li 2. Page
621.
which went from the simplicity of ^he ghospel. To S. Iustine is added S.
Hierome, whom they answer thus: Corruption grows in time, as the times are,
so are they that live in them, there is not such sincerity to be looked for at
Hieroms hands, as from others that went before him. T. Cartvv. lib 1. Page 103.
Clement Anacletus, Epiphanius, Anicetus, Zozemenus Volutianus Ambrose and
Augustine are cyted by Protestants against them; Contempt of old Doctors. Surv.
Page 337
whereto they answer, the bringing of those authorities (against us by
protestants) is the moving and summoning of hell, the times wherein these men
lived were not pure and vyrgynlyke, Clement* Anacletus, An^cetus, are
discharged for rogues, and men branded in the forhead, Epiphanius wrote
according to the time he lived in, Ambro^e holds other things corruptly,
Zozemenus, and Volutianus wrote not according to that which was, but according
to the custom and manner of the age wherein they wrote, Augustines sentence
(say they) if it should be admitted would make a wyndow to bring in all popery.
Lo these men's spirit.

Doctor Whitgift urges them with testimonies Martyr, D. vvi^g. page 344.
Pope Damasus, S. Hierome, Zozemenus, and Socrates, they answer; two of them
are counterfets: Damasus spoke in the Dragons voice, the best ground among men
bears thistles: those times were corrupt. Twelve other Doctors are alleged
together against them, but they answer, what then? if they were for one a
hundred, Surv. Ibid.
they cannot counteruaile, truth must not be measured by the crooked yeard of
men. Josephus Iudaeus is cyted with great commendation of Eusebius, Beza
answers, he is ridiculous and foolish. The exposition of 7. greek and latin
doctors is alleged upon certain words in the Epistle to the Romans, Cap.
12. verse. ^ qui distribuit, etc. T. Cartvv. li. 3. Page 8. and 9.
Cartwright contemns it and says that by strayning the text in steed of
milk they draw out blood.

The fathers (says he) in the first council of Nice vnderlayd the seat of the
harl^t. Page ^43.
And T. Cartwright Beza his scholar; The fathers imagined fondly of
Antichrist, they dealt like ignorant men: they were ouer-maistred of their own
affections: And then further of the Apostles time it self. Surv. Ibid.
Although (says he) the tower of this Antichristian buylding was not then set
up, yet the foundation thereof was secretly laid in the Apostles time, etc.

I might pass further in raking this chanel of desperate contemptuous speeches
of these new fantastical brethren against antiquity, but what? do these
protestant writers that gather these things against puritans amend the matters
themselves? No truly: but rather do worse then they, or as bad, whenever
occasion is offered, and that they are so pressed with the fathers Authorities
as they cannot shift them of with any slight or subtle interpretation, whereof
let the writings of Fulke, against D. Bristow, D. Allen, and others be
witnesses, as Whitakers also against D. Sanders, who has this general caveat,
VVhit^k cont. sand. Page 92.
if you argue (says he) from the witnesses of men, be they never so learned
and ancient, we yield no more to their words in cause of faith and religion,
We perceive.
then we perceive to be agreeable to Scripture, neither think your self to
have proved any thing though you bring against us the whole consent, and swarm
of Fathers, except that which they say be justified, not by the voice of men,
but by God himself.

Lo here (good reader) ponder this with the words of S. Paul to the Romans:
Romans 12.
that Scriptures must be expounded according to the analogy, proportion, and
rule of faith, whereby they confess if you mark, that Scriptures must be ruled
by faith, and not all faith by Scriptures, but what faith this is, which must
be the rule for interpreting Scriptures, this is not so easy to be agreed upon,
and for that each part has a different faith, and consequently also a
different rule of faith (which in heretykes and sectaries is their own brain,
in Catholykes the uniform consent of antiquity) hervpon follows that the
self same Scriptures are differentlie expounded by them and different
collections made upon them, each man according to his faith and belief, and so
this rule with heretykes is nothing else, but an endless laborinth, and
themselves do confess it, and prove it also by experience, as may appear by
that which is said before in the 4. and 5. chapters of this encounter about the
eue^t of their Councels, Synodes and other meetings, and by other testimonies
of their own Authors.

Rob Robertson Anabaptist his means for trial.
and printed his book in Holla^d, his name is Robert Robertson a teacher as it
seems among Anabaptists of that country, who complaining much that his people
and other of the same new ghospel who agree as he says in one against the Pope
and Papists, and all of them profess to follow only Scriptures, can never
notwithstanding agree about the meaning thereof, wher-vpon considering the great
inconvenience and hurt that of this does ensue, he has thought upon another
mean of agreement, which is to make suit unto the States to grant them leave
in some field or town to assemble themselves severally, and to pray to God,
first the one side, and then the other, to obtain some evident miracle for
decision of their controversies, and to know which side should yield to the
other. And to the end that the devil may not enter in or deceive them with a
false miracle, this man faith, that he has thought of one allowed and
testified in Scripture it self, and such as the devil cannot work, which is
to make the Sun to stand still for a while, and therefore would have both s^des
severally to pray for this miracle, and thereby end their controversy, nothing
doubting but that God (they being so special servants of his) will of his great
goodness condescend unto their petition in so just and necessary a demand.

Here (lo) is this man's opinion for the mean to try out truth among them
after long proof that Scripture alone will not do it, if O. E. and his
compagnions will accept of his offer to go and pray with them in the feilds of
Holland to stay the Sun, they may chance to agree together at the next new
moon, to whose wanes and changements I leave both them and the progress of
their religion, and mean only to say a few words more about the fruits of
good works and temporal benedictions, and so to end this first encounter,
wherein I have been over long already.

OF THE FRVITES OF virtue and good works praetended to have followed by change
of religion: as also of eight temporal inconveniences which may be called
curses, or maledictions insued by the same, and how O.E. behaueth him*selfe in
this controuersye. CAP. XVIII.
En. 1. cap. 10.
and holy woorks of Protestants above other men (for otherwise it could be no
special blessing of their ghospel) where I showed first that seeing this
blessing was testified only by themselves, and not by their neighbors that
lived with them, and ought to feel the effect^ of this blessing, it was vain
and rather to be esteemed a brag then a blessing, which I confirmed, for that
the warder coming to the immediates, and particulars, wherein, and b^ what
means good works might be tried, and discerned, whether protestants, or
Catholykes abound more in them, the Knight. slippeth a side, and lets pass the
whole declaration of the warder without so much as a beck or nod at it, for
which respect I have thought convenient to repeat the same again in this place
in the Warders own words (for that they are not many) and to see at least what
the Advocate minister supplyeth for his Clie^t the Knight. in this behalf, thus
then wrote the warder.

After assurance, stabilitie, and union in belief, Page 6. What effects of
virtue new religion has wrought.
are the good effects of virtue which it works in men's mynds and manners,
as it was foretold by Esaias the Prophet, that Christ's doctrine, should so alter
men's conditions and natures, that such as were most fearce, sauadge, and wicked
before should by this doctrine become most humble, Esa 11.
kind and gentle. The wolf (says he) shall dwell with the lamb, and the parde
shall lie with the goat, the calfe, lion, and sheep shall abide together: and a
little child shall be able to govern them all.

Well then: has the protestants doctryn wars of the cou^trymen against their
lords, Sledan.
for the controversy of religion: such humility obedience, and meekenes of
heart imprinted presently this new doctrine when it came.



Is pride in apparel, gluttony, drunkenness, lechery, swearing, and
forswearing, covetousness, cruelty, falsehood, deceit, theeuerie, lack of
conscience, oppressing of poor men, more or less now adays in ure or before,
when yet this change was not made? Let S. F. answer me to this, and not he
only but the whole country round about him, and then let him tell me with
witnesses, whether they be spiritual blessings or curses that have ensued upon
this change of religion, so much commended by him, and so I shall pass to weigh
his temporal benedictions, which perhaps he esteems far more the^ these
spiritual. Thus he.

To all this treaty of the fruits of virtue, and Page 23.
I answer (says he) that the doctrine of the ghospel has wrought good effect
in all true Christians, and albeit every one do not so square their lives
according to Gods law, as they should, yet compart our people with the
Papists, nay with the Priests, and Popes themselves, whom they call most holy,
For his office and not for his person.
I make no question but they do sarre excel them.

Lo here this fellow is quick, and resolute, Sup. cap 17. nu. 10.
though before he have condemned the same in diverse points as you have heard)
the manners of men have been generally better or worse, for that according to
the warders discours^ and Christ's own words true relig^on, and reformation,
brings ever with it better life, and behavior of men, this then is the true
state of the question whether protestants religion have done this or no, whereof
we have showed the negative part before out of their own writers, and the
meanest man, woman, or child that lives at this day, if they have heard of
things past, or can behold matters present with any judgment, will easily
discern. Yet this resolute Minister, (as you see,) makes no question to the
contrary, and so from this general assertion passes on to praise exceedingly
the clemency, and virtue of protestant Princes, and then turns he to the
contrary (which is his only plausible common place to dilate, and delight
himself) I mean against Rome and her Popes: But the whorish synagoge (says
he) of Rome you must not marvel of the speech (for that whores and knaves in
his ministry do often meet) she is red with the blood of saints, no tiger
was ever more fearce and cruel.

Onus Ecclesiae wherein many abuses in life and ma^ners by way of compassion are
complained on with desire of amendment, and with this does the minister think
that he has played the man, and proved sufficiently that the new ghospel has
brought in great reformation of life, and manners, and that now the world goes
better then before, for good works: wherein (as I said) the best judge may be
the common sense, feeling, and experience of men that live in the world, for
that descending to particulers, in so long a circuit as is the world, is both
infinite, uncertain and odious; yet if I would follow this foul mouthed
minister in ripping up unsavory matters, of his clergy as he fayneth, and
amplifyeth of ours I might go but to public records of his men punished by
public justice for their outrageous behavior in that behalf, I mean in that
very point of carnalitie, which they most object to ours in most false manner,
and for avoiding whereof in themselves each one of them have allowed his remedy
most desired, called by themselves his vessel of ease, though with no small
disease and disaster of the common wealth as before has been showed.

But to leave this point, and to come to the which being very weighty and of
great consideration the Knight. leapeth over the^ altogether, as before has been
signified, but the minister chattereth here and there after his fashon, but far
from answering any substantial point thereof, which thing to the end you may the
better perceive, I shall take pain to repeat again in this place the former
hurts received by change of religion mentioned by the warder in these words.

Page 7. and 8.
men are wont to bring into consideration two points. Temporal effects by
change of religion.
First what is likely to have been or fallen out if the change of religion had
not been made in her Maties. time, and then what has insued upon the change
made. To the first they say that if as her Matie. entered most happily and
joyfully into the crown of England by general consent of all and promoted
especially by the peculiar forces of Catholyks that were at that day most
potent without comparison, and that as her Matie. entered Catholikely that is to
say showing her self in all points of religion and behau^our a Catholyke
according as she had done also before in her sister Q. Maryes reign, and was
now crowned and anointed Catholikly by a Cath. Bishop at a Cath. mass and
other like circumstances, if she had continued that course still, and not
yielded to the persuasions of some new councelours against the judgment of all
her o^d (as indeed she was hardly brought ^o yield thereunto at the beginning,
for that she foresaw by her wisdom, diverse of the inconveniences that sithe^ce
have ensued,) then say these men if this had been so, both her Matie. and the
realm had been most happy at this day, and in particular they allege these
benefits following, which of all probability would have fallen upon us.

This is the Warders profer in this behalf, The vain chatte^^ng of O.E.
8. special considerations of moment to be wayed in this affayre, which after
we shall lay forth and examine in order. But now to consider the chattering of
our parrat minister for denial of all these things, I can noe ways make you
better apprehend yt then to tell you of a certain commedy which once I saw in
Venice (if well I remember) wherein the Vice of the play had taken for his
invention to contradict every thing that his fellow should say, and so when the
one said good morrow to the people, the other said good even, when one said it
was a fair day, the other it was a foul when the one said it was noone, the
other answered it was night, when the one affirmed that the Sun shyned
clearly the other would needs hold that it was the moon, and so he passed
forward in contradicting all that the other affirmed, until the people being
wearyed, cried out that the fool should be thrust down for he marred the play.

And this is our case now O.E. is set upon a new devise to drop denials with
his adversary, and to contradict whatsoever he says, or howsoever: you have
hard what the warder has written in this his preface, harken then how this
fellow co^tradicteth and with what, and how good reasons.

The Warder says that her Matie. entered most happily and joyfully to the
crown of England by general consent of all. A comparison of a vice in a play
The minister says it was not so, for that it grieved the Papists exceedingly.
The other said: she was promoted especially by the peculiar forces of Catholyks
that were at that day most potent without comparison, Page 2^.
this man denies it and gives this goodly reason: what needed force if all
were willing she should be crowned. The other says further that her Matie.
entered Catholikly, showing her self in all points a Catholyke. This fellow
denies yt with this reason: For if she had so done, why should the popish
prelates fear any alteration. The Warder furthermore says: she was crowned and
anointed Catholikely by a Catholyke Bishop, at a Cath. mass. O. E. denies
all, and says: she declared plainly, she would not mass: which how loud a ly
yt is, not only her Matie. can testify, but as many as yet live, and were
present at that act, and himself presently touched (as yt were) with some
shame of this asseueration, adds: But were yt true, yet his conjecture of
happiness is vain, etc. Whereunto I answer, that if it were true, then was O.E.
false in denying yt: and as for the vanity of the conjecture: that if mass and
old religion, had been continued in England, many inconveniences had been
avoided, we shall try the matters in the particulars that do ensue, but in the
mean space, consider the vanity of this vice for bringing in for instance to
the contrary Francis, Charles, and Henry Kings of France, the States of the low
countries and the people of Portugal, who have fallen into diverse troubles,
wars and disasters not-withstanding they continued the mass and were
Catholyks in religion. But I would ask O. E. whether these troubles came by
their change of religion or not? For if they did not, then are they
impertinent to our purpose, which is to show that by change of religion
commonly do ensue troubles, but not that only by this means disasters are
incurred, as though there were no other, for that Catholyke Princes and people
also may incur troubles by other means, then by change of religion, but they
avoid those which this change does bring with yt. Change of religion in France
and Flanders.
Wherefore this noddy is discovered to speak nothing to the purpose in bringing
in those five examples whereof four not-withstanding are wholly against
himself, for that all the troubles which he mentions to have happened to
Catholyke Princes and people in France and Flaunders have been occasioned by
change of religion enforced upon them by others, as the world knows, and not
by their own wills, and so having seen what ^his minister has answered to
the Warders ^reface of temporal hurts we may imagine ^ow substantially he will
satisfy afterward ^o the points themselves, whereof the first ^ower are those
that follow.

And first (says the warder) if religion had not been changed her Matie. at
this day had had a most f^orishing Kingdom, VVarnvvord Page 8.
united both to her and among themselves in religion, Strength and felicity
by union.
judgment, affection, fidelity and frend-^hip as other realms Cath. of the
world are seen to be, and as ours for above a thousand years together with
much honor and felicity is known to have remained. Security.
Heerof had ensued that none of these fears and terrors of conquests,
invasions, assaults, treasons, conspiraties and the like, which this VVach-man
endeauoreth to lay before us, had ever come in con^ideration for that England
united in yt self, has ever since it was a monarchy made other Kingdoms and
provinces round about yt to fear her forces (as by matters happened in France
Ireland, and Scotland for many ages is evident) and she never greatly feared
any.

Issue of her Majesty.
for that the principal cause of her graces not marrying is to be presumed to
have proceeded of the differen^ religion of forrayne princes, who desired the
same on the one side: and one the other the inequality of blood in her own
subjects for such advancement.

For to attribute this great resolution of he^ Matie. to the only love of sole
life and mayd^-head I doubt how yt can be justifiable, sein^ that among
Catholyks where such profesio^ is more praised and practiced, they use
sometimes to draw out even vowed nuns from their cloisters to marriage, for
so weighty a ^ause, as is the saving of succession in so great a ^rowne as
England is known to be. And among Protestants virginity is not of that
ne^essity or meryt, as for yt to incur so great ^^conueniences,
notwith-standing the base and servile flattery of this crouching Knight, ^ho
casts in now and then the memory of (...) maiden Queen without respecting
the ^eadly wound which his country receives ^^erby.

Foorthly of this had followed the sure esta^^ishment Establishme^t of
succession.
and of (...) l^ne of the noble K. Henry the 7. which ^ne being now to end with
her Matie. in the ^^rect descent is like to bring great dangers (...) the
realm. For albeyt there want not of ^^llateral branches, yet their causes are
other^ayes so implicated for diverse ^espects, but ^^ecially by difference of
religion (which had ^uer happened if the change had not been ^ade) as no man
can tell what will be the end, ^^d most men do fear extreme calamityes ^^erby:

Thus says he. Wher-vnto for the first two First and second inconvenience
fear and danger.
but that the VVarder mistaketh S. F. meaning, (...) think him to have spoken
any thing of fear, ey^^^ of forrayne invasions or domestical treasons: but
^^at is this to the purpose, had yt not been better, that all this had been
aduoyded? Bu^ hear him further. Page 30.
But suppose (says he) Poper^ had been continued, how could this noddy have
given (...) warrant, that we should have been neither oppug^e^ by enemies
abroad, nor by traitors at home? VVa^n^ Henry the 3. of France excommunicated
by the Pop^ oppugned by his subjects, and murdered by a Dominica^ friar,
notwith-standing his zeal in popery?



About Henry late K. of France.
for he was not troubled for changing of religion himself, b^ for being
presumed to favor them vnder-ha^^ that meant to change religion, and for the
dea^ of noble Princes as all the world knowet^ having (as diverse write) given
his oath, a^^ fidelity to the contrary, and received the S^crament for
confirmation thereof; and yet yt either presumption or ignorance in t^^
compagnion so bodly to affirm that the Po^^ did excommunicate the said King
for this fa^^ which excommunication no man ever y^ saw published.

Inconvenience lack of i^sue royal
this parasite pr^leth as if he were Jack daw, showing will (...) talk, but
lacking wit to say any thing to the ^urpose, telling us only, that if it had
pleased ^er Matie. to have married, she might as well ^aue married in protestant
religion, as in Ca^holyke, and that their women may have fair ^rincely
children, as well as ours, and that ^^uers Cath. Princes did seek her marriage,
and amongst others the K. of Spain. And that the french K. sister at this day
is married though she be a protestant, and that Q. Mary ^as married and yet had
no children, and di^ers other such trifling toys, which we deny ^ot but say
that they are impertinent, and ^o not touch the substance it self of the
^atter meant by the Warder, which is that (...) a Cath. state there would have
been other ^anner of instance made to her Matie. and other ^ounsel and
resolution of learned men laid before her for her obligation to marry in such
case for saving of a common wealth and for ^^ntinuance of royal issue in
the same then ^^otestants are wont to do, as by the examples ^^eadged by the
Warder is evident.

And to this the minister says nothing at Inconvenience Succession not
established.
as neither to the fourth about establish^ent of succession which he says
could not ^^ue been, but by allowance of the Pope, and ^^at this had been
dishonorable to her Matie. ^^d intolerable to the state, to bring so great a
(...) to submit her-selfe to so base a slave (mark ^^e impotent railing of an
abject parasite, Page 3^.
) (...) of him to receive her right to the crown. And ^^en he passes further
to the matter of state, saying: But let us suppose her Matie. should leave
(...) issue behynd her, is she the first that has been in (...) case? No, S.
Minister, nor will not be the last but what does this remedy the inconuenie^ce
Hear him further. Page Ibid.
And is there noe remedy eythe^ by laws already provided, or by wise men to be
deuis^^ but that we must needs fall by the ears together (about this matter of
succession) This is (...) supposition of their noddy our adversary, etc.

Who is the noddy.
but ho^ great a noddy you are in the mean space, (...) setting so light by
the matter and disputing (...) fondly as you do all men see. But when you ad
further to make your aduesar^ odious: Page 22.
that he percase desires some garboyle (...) England to gratify the Infanta,
and the Spaniard w^^ slave he is. Who are like to desire more garboyles in
England.
if he be the man whom yo^ would have us to ween, yt is very w^^ known, that
he sets less by the great ^^ benefit or promotion that England or Spai^
joined together, can give him, then you (...) by the least benefice of the
diocese wher^^ you dwell, and are a proling minister, a^^ much more slave were
your to you late (...) the Ea^le of Essex running up and down (...) by sea and
land after him to gain so^^ scrappes at his hands for your maintenanc^ and you
wife with her velvet hood, th^^ this man has showed himself to the great^^
Princes in Christendom, with whom (...) has dealt in furderance of Cath.
religion: a^^ which of you two has desired more ga^^boyles in England either
he by the lady Infanta or you by your Lord Essex, the events have showed, he
being a man that cannot grow by garboyles, and you a broken compagnion that
cannot well remedy your needs but by innouations, and with this I leave you, and
will pass to the other four inconveniences laid down by the warder.

Fifthly (says he) if religion in England Inconuenie^ce, union with Rome and
Sea Apostolyke.
we had had no breach with Rome, nor consequently had the excommunication
followed, whereof so great noise has been made in the world abroad, and so great
trouble at home. And what the union and friendship of the Bishop of Rome may
^mport, even as a temporal Prince, the effects ^hewed of late in France, where
especially ^y his endeavor and authority matters have ^yn compounded, that
seemed very hard and ^esperate before, not only between that King and his own
subjects but also be^wene that crown and Spain and the ^ates of Flaunders,
which without such an ^byter and vmpire would very hardly ever ^yn accomodated.

Sixthly England had continued in her old Ancient leagues.
and with their de^^ndants, and consequently had avoided all ^^ese long and
costly wars, which by that ^eache we have been enforced to main^^yne with
loss of so many worthy men ^^d expense of so great treasure, as easily may be
imagined, and the quarrel not yet ended.

VVarres abroad.
Seauenthly so great and bloody wars and tumults in Christian Kingdoms round
about us had never happened, as before in part has been declared, and every man
does impute the principal causes and motions thereof unto the diversity of
religion in England.

Damages received at home.
as the deprivation in one day of all the sacred order of Bishops in England
with their perpetual imprisonment, for that they would not subscribe to this
unfortunate change of religion wrong out in parliament, as al men know, by the
odds only of one or two voices of lay men. The disgracing and abusing of so
many noble houses with overthrow of others whereof let Norfolk, Arundel,
Northumberland, Oxford, Westmerland, and Dacres, give testimony^ for of the
rest I will not make mention, seeing perhaps themselves would be loath I should
all which had passed otherwise by probability if religion had not been altered.
The continual and intolerable affliction also of s^ many honorable and
worshipful gentlemen had never happened for perseuering in the^^ Fathers faith,
whereto our country was fir^^ converted from infidelity, without any other
offense objected, or to be proved again^ them, but only refusing to
acco^modate the^ selves to this change. The torturing, hangin^ and quatering of
above a hundred Priests f^^ the same cause; the most of them good gentlemen and
youths of rare wit, learning and other parts, which other common welthes would
highly have esteemed, and so would ours too in times past, and will again in
time to come, when these blasts shall once be ouerblowen. Thus far the Warder.

All which points O. E. answers with What more absurd the^ to object the
breach with Rome when we esteem that to be one of the greatest blessings that
ever happened to this land. To the other point mentioned by the Warder of the
late peace made in France between those Monarchs by the Popes mediation, the
minister says nothing for that came not to his purpose, yet he tells us
again here now, that Henry the third late K. of France and the late Duke of
Ferrara and other Princes of the Popes religion, were not-with-standing that,
troubled by the Pope. A wise argument, as though there were noe other cause for
which the Pope might fall out, with any Prince, or punish him, but only for
change of religion. But this is the manner of this man's arguing, and with
these manner of elenches,, ^aralogismes, and other deceytful shifts of
^ophistry, this fellow and his companions de^eaue the simple.

To the sixth about old ancient amity and Spain and Burgundy he answers ^^us:
Inconuenie^ce, breach of ancient leagues and amity.
As if yt were not more hurtful to the Spaniard ^ break with us, then for us to
break with the Spaniard. This (as you see) is answered more like a soldier
then a minister. ^g. 3^.
The last two points are in effect denied by him, to wit that either the
diversity of religion in England has been cause of the wars and tumults round
about us (which yet France, Flaunders and Scotland do testify how true or
false it is) or that any doleful alteratio^s have been made at home, which he
says is like that the warder ^eemeth to have been hired to speak in a
lamentable voice, and to shed some few tears for compassion of the domages
received both by clergy and nobility, and the deaths of so many Priests as
have been executed for religion: which he with a long idle discourse will needs
go about to prove, that they were truly traitors both by our common, civil,
and imperial laws.

the treasons so made be true, and properly treasons, and the offenders rightly
to be called traitors? And when he has answered me this, Whether our Priests
be traitors or martyrs.
and I shall have proved to him out of their own writers and chroniclers (as I
can) and by their own publyke records, that this is the state of our question
with them, and that many or most of our Priests have been executed only for
those articles of treason that were so made; then will yt be easy to judge and
discern what kind of traitors they are, who for those transgressions have been
put to death and executed. Then will all this vain fellows babbling out of
books of imperial and common laws about treasons of other kynds be quite cut
of, and proved childish and to no purpose.

Wherefore to draw at length to an end of

THE WARNING and admonition to Sir F. H. and his friends, as also to his
advocate and proctor O. E. upon the first Encounter of blessings. CHAP. XIX.


First the charge of notorious flattery in bragging Cap. 1^.
argues great weakness in his cause. The other shift also of excusing his
flattery by the flattery of Canonists (if it were true) is very vain and
ridiculous.

The new ten devised blessings are such and New devised blessings.
as noe man would have brought them in but he that either for lack of judgment,
decerneth not, what is for him, nor what is against him, or whom necessity
forces to expose himself to the laughter of all men. For who will, not laughed
to see unity brought in for a blessing among protestants that cold never yet
agree in the points of their religion, nor ever will, or can, and whose badge of
dissension and disagreement is so notorious above all other heretyks before
them? Vid. cap. 3.^. 5. and 6.
Who will not laugh also and bite his lip to see good woorks and abstayning from
persecution assigned for two other peculiar blessings, considering what passes
in England and what in other countries. I pass our the rest as false or
foolish or both, until I come to the tenth, that is copious generation of
children, which in respect of the marriage of their friars, monks and
ministers, we yield unto them, but deny it to be a blessing especially to those
parishes, that by force are constrained to maintain their copious brood and of
spring: and to this I call to witness the Churche-wardens and parishioners.

Variety of shifts.
which may be discovered by the variety of shifts noted in his whole discourse,
as namely that which was last recyted of passing over and dissembling all his
adversaries principal arguments, reasons, and allegations without mention at
all, or else mentioning them only in a word or two without further answer; in
like manner his not quoting places of books or chapters, of the authors which
he cyteth when he will deceive, is a new trick never used perhaps before by any
that has written of controversies, though the other of misalleadging,
corrupting, perverting and forcing them against their own express meaning
has (I grant) been used by diverse, and chiefly by the patrons and grandsyres of
English protestancy, Vid. cap. 9. and 10.
Jewel and Fox whom this man principally follows, but yet so as he out goes
his master (if it may be) in that art, as by the examples alleged before of
abusing S. Hierome S. Augustine, S. Bernard, and others has in part been seen
but will more appear in the other incounters following, especially the second
and seventh.

The other shifts also of repeating again Admonition and conclusion.
and other such like, all these points (I say) have been sufficiently laid open
before as they fell out, nor need they any new repetition here again, but
rather admonition, to wit that the Knight. would with some indiffere^cy consider of
these points, and enter into contemplation of a good conscience, remembering
rather his eternal good, the^ his temporal honor, and therwithal these words
of S. Augustine to Julian. Aug. cont. Iul. lib. 5.6.7.
Etst coram hominibus sit dura frons tua erubescat saltem coram Deo men's tua.
Albeyty our forehead be hard and blush ^ot before men yet let you mind at least
blush before God: which were noe less wholesome then holy counsel for him, if
he would follow yt.

And this was my exhortation and Warnword S. Augustine from him and bestow yt
upon the minister, but in the end I resolved to leave yt common to both, and to
the end you may consider how fitly the foresaid sentence as well of a shameless
mind as of a shameless forehead does fall upon the masked minister O. E. you
must remember how he has behaved himself in the former combat and how even
at his very first calling upon the stage he showed us a notorious cosening trik
about falsifying a place of S. Augustine, Vid. Cap. 3.
Stechus, Eugobinus in naming the Pope God, and at his next goying up, he
tells certain notorious lies, Cap. 13.
which all the world cannot excuse, adding thereunto a like falsification about
the counsel of Lateran, Cap. 15.
his impudency also, foolish inconstancy and contradiction to himself is to be
remembered in his third admission to tell his tale, and further his egregious
folly in setting down his English rule of faith whereby he would exclude the
Cap. 16. and in annot. upon hi^ epist. to the ^ead.
puritans: and no less folly is discovered in alleging Cath. Emperors
decrees quite against himself. And his gross ignorance is laid forth by
occasion of his argument, A^^iones sunt suppositoru^, thereby to prove that
Catholyks receive not their faith from the universal Church.

Cap 17.
Zwinglians, Caluinists and Puritanes, not to be any essential points in
matters of religion, but also by his co^temptible speches of the first Doctors
and fathers of his own religion, especially if any of those two books named by
me before, Cap 6 7.
and written against the Puritanes, ^ mean the Survey of disciplinar Doctrine,
and Dangerous positions, were written by him (as some will say) wherein the
whole story of the deformed Church of Geneua by Caluyn, Wickedness of Caluyn
Pharellus, Beza, and others.
Pharellus, Beza and others, and their actions, councels, drifts and attempts
about the same are so set down and printed by public authority in England,
that if a man would study to describe notorious wicked men and catylines of
their country without conscience, he could not set it down nor express it
more lively, the^ it is done in the foresaid books against the foresaid new
prophets, and their cheifest northen scholars, to wit, John Knocks and his
fellows in Scotland, and Goodman and his mates in England, which argues no
faith or conscience in any of them but only to say and do for the time and as
the time serves, and as their proper lucar, ease, ambition and sensuality
requires: and herby may be warned the discreet reader to look to his soul and
salvation, seeing these men for themselves do seem to make that the last and
least part of their care, or cogitations, feeding us with many fair words of
blessings, but filling us with myseryes.

The end of the first Encounter.
THE SECOND ENCOVNTER ABOUT FALSEHOOD AND LYING OBJECTED TO SIR F. AND OF
certain absurd grounds and principles feigned by him to be in Catholyke
doctrine. And how he discharges him-self thereof.
THE SVMME OF THAT which before was set down between the watchman and the
warder. CAP. I.
AS in the former first Encounter VVatchvvord and vanity thereof.
and height of heretical pride went about to persuade us, yea to lay before our
face the inestimable, and innumerable blessings which our country (for sooth)
had received by change of Catholyke religion into Protestancie, so for better
confirmation of this so lofty a dryft he took upon him in this second
Encounter to make declaration that in Queen Mary's raygne, and former times
under Catholyke English Princes, there was uothing else but darkness, clouds,
mistes, shadows, ignorance, blyndnes, want of learning, lack of light, and
other such calamities, and miserable obscurities: for proof whereof he sets
down as it were by way of preface or preparation to his designed treatise
certain preambles forged by him-self, as for example, that the only desire to
read upon the book of God the old or new testament was held for heinous heresy
in former times so far forth that for this only act or desire men were
brandled to the slaughter, and then passing further on to the depth of his
discourse he sets down four famous grounds or principles of Catholyke
doctrine all put in order by him, as most sure, and consequent the one of the
other which he calls general grounds of our religion. The first, that

Warder having made a compete^t declaration to show first how fond and
ridiculous a manner of proceeding this was, The VVarder his defense against the
Watchman the first part
and is in our Knight. after so much folly and flattery uttered in his former tale
of blessings throughout the first Encounter, to enter now into so shameless a
course of forging, falsifying, and lying for defacing of our doctryn and
doings, he shows first of all the small reason the Knight. had or has to contemn
so proudly as he does, the Clergy of Q. Mary's time, and of former ages for
darkness, ignorance, and blyndnes, declaring by diverse particulers, that they
were far more learned, then those that since have stepped up in their places,
and possessed their rooms. And from this he passes to show, that the foresaid
two prea^bles about reading scriptures, and the punishment of death thereunto
said to be assigned, are no ways true, in any plain meaning sense, or
interpretation, but feigned by the Knight. himself, and consequently can not
ever be proved, or defended, and by occasion of these preambles, About reading
of scriptures.
the warder enters into examination of the things the^-selues declaring how
far the reading of holy Scriptures in vulgar languages is permitted to all
men among Catholykes, and what restraynt is made thereof toward some, and for
what causes, and reasons, and upon what necessity, and what is the true state
of this controversy between us and Protestants, as also what hurt, profit,
damages, or commodities have or do ensue thereof, with alleging both reasons,
authorities, and experiences in that behalf.



The second part of the vvatchmans impugnation and vvarders defense.
After this comes the warder to handle the second part of this Encounter to
wit, about the foresaid four absurd positions, grounds, and maxims set down
by the Knight. for ours, which the warder proves to be neither Maxims nor
minimes of Catholyke Doctrine for that to prove them Maxims all Catholyke
writers must hold them, and to prove them minimes, some one at least must hold
the^, but that neither of these can be proved. And consequently that they are
no positions, or principles of Catholyke religion, but fictions rather of
heretykes, and false impositions of the Knight.

The first forged position.
for that the watchman brings no other proof but only that reading of
Scriptures was forbidden to the lay sort (at which distinction also of laytie,
and clergy he seems to jest) hervpon the Warder takes occasion first to
prove by many old testimonies the use and antiquity of this distinction,
wher-vnto the Knight. in this last reply returns not any one word of answer, and
after this again the warder declares largely that this position is neither
Maxim nor minime among Catholykes, and that ignorance is neither held for the
mother, daughter or kinse-woman of devotion, which he proves both by the
definition of devotion it self out S. Augustine, S. Thomas, and others, as also
by the effects, showing that devotion is grounded upon knowledge and not upon
ignorance though upon particular causes the learnedest men are not always the
most devout. All which discourse the Knight. thought good to pass over with
silence as well as the former, without taking any notice thereof in this his last
reply, and thereby you may see whether yt be more and more substantial that he
leaves unanswered then that which he answers.

About the second position imposed upon Catholykes, The second position.
that lay men must not meddle with matters of religion, as the untruth thereof is
more apparent then any of the rest, so was there less written in the
refutation, but that necessity enforced the warder to defend S. Thomas of
Ca^terburie, dishonored, and slaundered intollerably by the Knight. wher-vnto what
he answers in this Wast-woord now and how for defense of his former,
falsehoods he intangleth him-self in diverse new difficulties and inextricable
absurdityes shall be seen afterward in the particular discussion of matters
that ensue.

Pope or meanest Priest coming from him is to be obeyed under pain of
damnation though he command blasphemy, The third faygned position.
etc. The warder is more brief in like manner, for that the evident falsehood
thereof is apparent to all yet writes he so much as is needful for a manifest
brief confutation, and how little the Knight. has to answer for devising of this
position, and laying it so falsely to Catholykes charge, you shall afterward
see discussed.

The fourth false ground.
to wit that our chief remedy for sin though it were committed immediately
against God himself is, (to use the watchmans words) A pardon from his Hol.
and absolution from his holy Priests, but if the decrees or ordinances of
their Romish Synagoue were transgressed hardly any mercy was to be had etc.
which is ignorance, for that the later remitteth all sin, and the first not.
And thirdly that the transgressors of the decrees and ordinances of the Church
can hardly ever obtain mercy, and that they are more hardly pardoned, then
the grossest sins committed against God himse^f the warder shows to be a
most malicious fiction without any ground or color of truth. To all which
observations and deductions of the warder the Knight. answers nothing at all in
this last reply, but fills up paper with tales either devised by himself, or
taken out of Ihon Fox as for example of one ^esselius, a merchant of Pardons,
and of the absolution of one Simon a Monk, that is forged to have poisoned K.
Ihon, and other such stuff, which you shall hear discussed and refuted
afterward and thereby see and perceive how justly this last reply of S^.
Francis is called a Wast-word. And so we shall pass on to the particular
examination of matters point by point.

ABOUT THE GENERAL charge of false dealing, laid to sir Francis in this
Encounter, and how evil he auoydeth the same by committing new falshoodes, and
treacheries. CAP. II.
FIRST then the general charge laid to our Knight. throughout this whole second
Encounter concerns two points, to wit, falsitie, and falsifying, the later
whereof has this difference from the first, that it is both witting, and
willingly committed, and consequently much more reprehensible then the first,
(especially in a knight) and how (think you) does he deliver himself now from
this charge? Page 2^.
you shall hear presently by his own pen, for after a few words of some
compunction, and humility (as it might seem) wherein he wrote that he would
bear this charge of lying according to the council of an ancient Father, who
said that God suffers slanders to assault us, that pride may not surprise us
(as who would say, that his learned Wach-word had been so glorious a work, as yt
might have put him into some pride, and set him a loft, had not the warder, by
his answer taken him down again, and taught him to know himself. After this
I say he runs presently to a certain shifte before mentioned of laying the
like charge of lying to other men also of our side, as if that might excuse him
somewhat, to have some compagnions in that exercise, and as you have heard
before in the precedent Encounter, that being charged with flattery, he ra^ne
straight ways to Canonists; saying, that they flattered much more the Pope,
then he the Queen and state, so now being charged with lying, he leapeth in
like manner to lay the same charge upon friars, hear his narration.
Walsingham (says he) an ancient Chronicler writes of Friars in Richard the
second his time, Page 29.
that they were of long time so infamons for lying, that it was counted a good
argument both in matter and form. This is a friar, ergo a liar: And it should
seem, the Romanists keep still their old wont, by that famous ly which also of
late they have sent us over, not only in print, but in picture too, namely that
some of the mayntenours of their Catholyke Religion, have been by us here put
into bears skins, and so hayted to death with Maist^ues, a ly printed in the
English College at Rome 1584. with Gregory the 13. his privilege, so great a
ly as no place was fit to utter it, but only Rome.

Lo here thou may see (good reader) put peccantium mul^itudo non parit
errori patrocimu^. Hiero. epist. 66 ad Ruffinum.
The multitude or society of offenders does not protect, or give patronage to
the error. But much more in this case when many points be different: for I
would ask the Knight. what releef or discharge is this to him, if both these
examples were true (as after they will prove false) to wit, if fryar^ were such
liars in King Richard the 2. his time, why should ^nights be liars in Q.
Elizabeth's time ^ or if a printer or paynter in Rome, or both, or these that
set them a work living a thousand miles from England, should have ^rr^d in
^ome one particular fact wr^tten, or related from thence, what excuse may this
be to S. F. who writing in England is accused to have lied and fa^sified things
present, and such as all England does or may know to be false? furthermore he
cannot be so ignorant, but that he must know, that there is a great difference
between historical, and doctrinallyes and the first much more perdonable then
the second The rela^^t of the di^putation betvveene Plessy Mornay, and ^he B^^h
o^ Eur^ux before the K of F^aunce in May anno 1600.
and that one of our countrymen of late has offered to show an infinity of
doctrinal lies out of diverse principal protestant writers, and especially out
of Ihon Fox by name this man's master, and that within the compass of two
leaves, yet does he pardon him all mere historical lies, such as by evil
information he might be deceived in the relating of, Fox. act. and ^o^ 115.
as namely that of John Marbeck the singer of Windsore, and diverse others,
whom he sets do^ne for martyrs, and both printed^ and painted with fire
about them, and their bodies burned to ashes, whiles they were yet alive, and
me^r^e, when Fox printed his book.

purpose. And whereas he adds, that this report of the bears skin is
priuileged for truth by Pope Gregory the 13. it is a childish cauil, for that
Princes privileges do warrant only the printing, and not the truth of the book,
for if her Maties. privilege to Fox and Jewels books (for example sake) or to
this poor one of S.F. should be an obligation to her Matie. to defend all the
lies and falsehoods therein contained, it were a pitiful case, and dangerous also
to the authors and writers themselves, for then were her Matie. obliged in
honor to see the same punished when they are found out and at least to grant
the demand of the foresaid relator of Plessy Morney his disputation to have
our protestants falsehoods come to publyke trial before her person or counsel as
those of Plessis Mornayes impostures were examined, and convinced in presence
of the K. of France, which were a dangerous point in England, as matters now
stand, I mean daungerons to the credit of Protestants doctrine and dealing,
but otherwise profitable for the truth, and most honorable to her Matie. and
memorable for posterity.

But now let us examine the fact it self About the man bayted in the bears
skin.
and of the friars afterward) true it is, that at my being in Rome, I saw
among other pictures, on the English Church walls of old and new martyrs,
diverse representations, and of some cruel usage of Catholykes for their
conscience sake in our days, and among other this portrayture of one in a
bears skyn, bayted with dogs, and for that I had not heard, nor read of any
such matter publicly done in England I began to marvel how it came to be
painted there, yet considering on the other side (as every indifferent man
should) that they being grave and learned men that were in Rome at that time,
and gave the instructions to the paynter in that matter, and that it was nor
likly, they would be so wicked, or foolish, or so little respect their own
credits, as to invent, or feign any such matter of themselves, and set it
soorth so publicly to be seen, and red of all the world, I began to ymagin,
that either themselves knew it to be true, which I knew not, or else might
perhaps by letters be informed thereof out of England, from some friends who
might affirm it of their own knowledge, to have been done in some private
manner, and for that the said persons in Rome were now dead, I began to
inform, my self of others, and presently I fell upon a very sufficient
ge^tleman of Lincoln shyre, who told me that in the parish of Lowth it is
most certain that in K. Henry the eight his days a Catholyke man was so put
to death, being made odious first for the title of Supremacy, and then so
bayted in a bears skin, and that this was done, by certain vehement
heretykes at that time, but whether by public authority, or by particular
fury, he could not tell, but sure he was that the fame thereof is fresh yet in
Louth among all men as easily may be learned.

I found also an other gentleman of good

And this being the true state of our question, Friars brave liars, but for
bravery it agrees better to gilten spurs, then to gray hoods, and as for
lying we shall now examine the matter, wherein the reader shall find our Knight. to
have used a far worse, and more dishonorable shift, the^ the former, that being
but a slight, this a plain imposture, abusing the Author Walsingham by him
alleged quite contrary to his own sense, dryft, and meaning, as now we shall
declare.

t. F. alleges, that it was a common saying in K. Richard the 2. his time,
that friars were liars; but what friars were these trow you? for herein lies
the whole matter which the K^. very craftily concealeth, and yet might he
imagyn easily that it would be espied by his adversary; for that Walsingha^
being a Catholyke and religious man, cannot be thought to have condemned all
friars in general, and who then were those friars by him condemned? surely he
shows yt evidently that they were more of S.F. humor, Friars corrupted by
vvickclif in K. Rich the ^. his time.
then of S. Francis holiness, for they were such begging friars as Wicklif,
newly sprung up, had corrupted with his pestilent heresy and had set against
other religious orders that had possessions (for that was W^ckclifs first
cunning wickedness to set begg^ng friars against monks, and such as had riches)
and to make these monkss more odious to the people, these friars gave
themselves by Wickclifs good instructions to invent infinite lies of them,
whereby they made not so much their adversaries as themselves in famous for
lying, and Thomas Walsingham being one of the said Monks of S. Albans
monastery no maruayle though he complained of them.

the honest dealing of S. F. which point that you may the better understand,
you must know, that the said Thomas Walsingham does describe the most barbarous
rebellion of the common people under wat Tyler and Jack straw, VVat Tyler and
Jack Stravve^ rebellion anno. 1^^1.
and others in the 4. year of K. Richard the 2. (in which they spoiled London,
took the King, beheaded the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the L. Treasurer, and
meant to have slain all the Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical and religious men
of possessions within England, reserving only the begging friars.

And to the end we may understand that all this proceeded of W^ckcliffes
doctrine (as the Vide sup. Enc. 1 cap. ^.
1525. of Luthers) walsingham in the beginning of this lamentable story,
VValsing an. 1381. sub Rich 2. Page 256.
writes thus in latin: Anno Dominicae incarnationis 1381. etc. In the year of
the incarnation of our Savior a thousand three hundred fourscore and one, and
in the 4. year of the reign of K. Ric^ard the second after the conquest, That
true Hypocryte, the Angel of Satan, the forerunner of Antichrist, unworthy to
be named, I mean the heretyke John VVickclif, or rather weeckebeleefe
continuing his dreams, seemed that he would now drink up the river of Jordan,
and cast all good Christians into the dungeon of Hell, etc.

Thus begins Walsingham this year, happen upon the land, and says that
some did lay the fault upon the Bishops and Prelates of the Church for that
they had not looked better, Nobility and gentry corrupted by VVickclifs
Doctrine.
and more diligently to stop and punish Wickclifs heresy at the beginning, Cum
nouissent indigne agere filios suos, Ioannem VVickclif, and ^ius sequaces,
dagmatizando peru^rsam, and damnatam doctrinam, etc. Whereas they knew diverse of
their Children as John Wickcliffe, and his followers to live unworthily, and
to set abroad perverse and damned doctrine, etc. Others, he says, did
attribute this calamity to the sins of the gentry, and nobility, Quia
maiores pene Prouinciarum eorum se quebantur errorem. For that the principal
almost in every shire did follow these men's errors, and again, Quia in Deum
erant fictae fidei, nam quidam illorum credebant nullum esse Deum, nihil esse
sacramentu^ Altaris, nullam post mortem resurrectionem, etc. And for that they
were of a feigned faith toward God, some of them believing no God at all, and
that the Sacrament of the Altar was nothing, and that there was no resurrection
after death, but that man ends as does a beast, etc.

The commons corrupted.
No, for that their acts do show in this barbarous rebellion, wherein they made
profession to slay every one that was learned, VValsing. Ibid. Page 2^1.
or bare a pen, and ynkhorne at his gyrdle. And besyds, Walsingham says,
viuebant rixando, litigando, frauds, and falsitates iugiter meditando,
libidini dediti, adulteijs maculati, etc. Et super haec omnia in sidei
articulis plurimi claudicabaut. They lived in brawling, and contention,
devising falsehood, and deceyts day and night, giving themselves over to lusts
of the flesh, being spotted with adulteries, and besides all this, most of them
did hault in the articles of their faith.

And after this he comes to talk of religious Religious men also corrupted.
and principally of those that having no possessions lived by alms, and were
most corrupted, and set on by wicliffe, against those that had possessions, of
whom Walsingha^ says, suae professionis immem^res, etc. and possessionatis
inuidentes, etc. being vnmyndful of their profession, and envying such of other
religious orders as had possessions in tantum illam veritatis professionem suam
maculabant, vt in d^ebus illis, etc. They did spot so far forth their
profession of truth, as in those days yt was in every m^anes mouth, that this
is a Friar, ergo a liar.

This is the discourse of Walsingha^, wherein ghospel, Fox in Calend 2. lan.
which begane in England by VVicliffe, as Fox does testify, who makes this
first prophet of theirs a Saint, and calendar Martyr, Fox monument. Page 421.
though he died in his bed at his benefice in Lincolneshire, as Fox denies
not, yet such was his talent in making martyrs. And besides this he discovers
to the Reader to much false dealing in that among all the faults of Bishops,
nobility, comonaltie and religious orders touched severally (as you have
heard) by his author walsingham, he culled out only the lying of Friars, Sir F.
taken in false dealing.
and those not of ours, but of his friars, who were made liars not by their
own institution, or by our religion, but by the principles of Wiclifs Doctrine
which S.F. acknowledges (I think) for his. Consider then the man's wit in
alleging this example, and his truth in handling the same. And by this one
judge of the rest, though there will not want other occasions after to
co^template also the same much more.

performance whereof I shall set down some lines of the Warder which conteyne
the first controversy or charge. Thus then he wrote at that time.

But before S.F. comes to the matter, that VVardvvord. Page 1^.
to set down those absurd principles of ours he makes for his preface, a
certain poetical descr^ption of the dark, cloudy, and mistie state of things
in Queen Mary's time, in these words. It is not unknown: (says he) to many
yet living, neither can it be altogether hidden from the younger sort that ly^ed
with them, what a dark mistie cloud of ignorance (which brought in popish
Idolatry, Devised darkness.
and all manner of superstition) did over shade the whole land, etc. And again
after. In these dark and cloudy days, least the sunshine of knowledge should
disperse the mistes of ignorance, and give light to the dim of sight, etc.
Does it not seem that this grave ge^tleman describes the lake of Auernus in
Italy, or some foggie marsh in England, or some smokie kitchen, or woodhouse
of his own without a window, when he speaks of our famons country in sormer
times? for above a thousand years the state of England, and the Princes,
people, nobility, and learned men thereof had continued in that Egyptian, or
rather Cymerian darkness, which this gentleman describes under clouds, mistes
and shadows, until his new sunneshine doctors came to inlighten the same. And
it was accounted then, as wise, learned, holy, valiant, noble, and flourishing a
kingdom (as well for religion as otherwise) as France, Italy, Spain, and other
(...) reading the scriptures in English could not judge, whether matters of
doctrine and religion taught them by their Prelates, were true or no (as though
now they could do it by english reading) and that for this cause, and for lack
of Scriptures in English a number of lving miracles were believed, and in steed
of Christ's blood, the blood of a duck was worshipped, as the blood of Hales was
plainly proved to be* Sir Francis posed in dicerning a duckes blood from other.
and openly showed at Paul's cross in K. Hen. days (which yet I would ask
our K^. how a ducks blood could be discerned from other blood after so many
years.) All this I say and many other such manifest vanities, See afterward
cap. 6. what O. E vvryteth also of this matter.
and known untruths, as that Bishops in Q. Mary's time did not preach nor
others for them, except certain strawbery sermons of ^^otting friars, and the
like. These bold assertions I say, and contumelious irrisions being known to
be false as well by a^l that are yet living and saw those times, as by the books
of Homelies, and sermons yet extant* I mean not to stand upon the answering in
this place, but to pass over to matter of more substance, and to consider of
an example or two of ignorance in Q* Mary's time, and before. For this K^. for
a full and irrefragable proof that all was ignorance among Catholykes before the
light o^ Luthers Gospel began to shine, VVastvvord. Page 32. The story of D
Bassinet a ^ french Apostata Friar.
he brings us, the only exampl^ (as he says) of D. Bassinet ^ man of great
learning, and aut^oritie in France, wh^ confessed his own ignorance until he
fell to read the Scriptures, though he had been a Judge upon heretics before^

Look here (gentle reader) the important Fox edit. ver. Page 862.
but neither he nor Fox do allege any one Author where we may read the story
(for this is also Fox his shift among others when he means notorious
treachery) and if the whole narration of this Bassinet confessing himself to
be ignorant before he fell into the new ghospel, were true, what authority or
credit may the saying of an Apostata Friar fallen into heresy have against his
former state and condition? is it marvel if he say, that he was in ignorance
before, or is it strange that he should pretend to come to this new light by
reading Scriptures? what other pretense did ever ancient heretyke or new take
upon him? or what other excuse could this man make of running out of his
Cloister, or taking a sister to his Compagnion, or from a Judge of heretykes
(while he was a Dominican friar) to become an heretyke himself, as appears
plainly by Fox his whole discourse, though S. F. so tells the tale as he
could be content we thought him to be a great learned Catholyke, and for that
cause between Ihon Fox and him they have ^octored the poor friar, without ever
hea^ing him dispute much less do his act, only ^o give him more reputation and
reverence with the reader.

And on the other side they do bring in the (and calls him wicked Apostata)
to speak most absurdly (though he were known to be a most reverend, and
learned man) and among other words they make him say thus. This doctrine is
contrary to our holy Mother the Church, and to o^r holy Father the Pope, a
most undoubted and true God in earth. And did not those heinous words deserve
I pray you some quotation where they might be found? but neither the Knight. nor
the Fox vouchsafes us so much, but as though the matter were most certain
the Knight. braueth in a marginal note with these words, O blyndnes, O blasphemy:
But a man might more justly say. O cogging, O cosenage, that dare auouche so
horrible a slander, against so honorable a personage, without cyting the place
or Author for the justification. But we must pass over many of these
absurdities with patience, and so go on to other matter.

HOW LONG THE CAtholyke Romayn Religion has flourished in England: and of the
authority of Saint Bede and Arnobius abused by Sir F. together with a comparison
examined between our learned men, and those of the Protestants: and first of
Ihon Husse, bragged of by Sir Francis. CAP. III.
AFTER this the Knight. before he come to that above a thousand years the State of
En^land and the Princes, people, nobility and learned men thereof had cont^nued
in that Egyptian or rather Chimerian darcknes, VVast-vvord Page 34.
which he describes, under Clouds, Mystes and Shadows, until his new
Sunshine Doctors came in etc. Which words of mine he having corruptly alleged
(as often his fassion is) says two things, first that my bold assertion of a
thowsa^d years is vain for that yt is evident by Bedes plain testimony,
that in his time this Island had the Scriptures in their own language (as
though this only were suf^icient to make that age to be o^ Protestants Religion
though it had been so) and the second, that we do secretly yield the first 600.
years after Christ's to Protestants, seeing we challenge commonly but a thousand
for our selves.

Protestants religion in no age.
which no man can doubt of but if sir F. will go higher under the Britans, we
shall easily also show the like in that time. But in the mean space yt is but a
hungry trick of this needy knight to snatch that which is not given him, to wit
600. years together of the primitive Church; whereof our meaning is to give him
no one year, nor half one, wherein his Religion was extant or had any one that
professed the same in those days as he does now, Enc. 7. c. 4.5.6.7.8-9.
and this I shall largely prove and declare afterward, and this to the second
point.

Enc 1.8. and infra cap. 5.
and not to take hurt thereby, as before has been declared, and after shall be
showed more at large.

(as commonly his shift is; when he would not have matters exam^ned, or his
fraud found out) this place I say of Bid which he alleges is quite contrary
to him: for this says Bid. Beda lib. 1. hist Angl. cap. 1.
Haec in praesenti ^uxta numerum librorum quibus lex diuina scripta est,
quinque gentium linguis vnam eandemque summae veritatis and verae sublimitatis
scientiam seruatur and confitetur, Anglorum vz Britonum, Scotorum, Pictorum and
Latinorum, quae in meditatione Scripturarum caeteris omnibus est facta
communis, etc.

This Island at this present according to the number of the (five) Books,
wherein the law was written (by Moses) does in five tongues search out and
confess one and the self same knowledge of the highest truth, A notable abusing
of S. Bedes authority.
and of the true highness (which is the Religion of Christ Jesus) to wit the
tongue of the Angles (or Englishmen) of the Britans, of the Scots, of the
Pictes, and of the Latins (or relykes of the Romans) which Latin tougue is
now made common to all the rest in meditation of the Scriptures.

Thus says Bid wherein 3. things are to be of the Britans was different from
that which S. Augustine the Monk brought in from Rome to the English nation.
Fox monu. page 107.108. Ho^^n^h. des crip. Angl. Cap. 9.


permitted and appo^nted the same ^n a Synod ho^den at Oxford, Linvvod. l. 5.
de Magistris. How some vulgar translations of Scriptures was alvvayes
permitted.
and in all Catholyk times after that again were never forbidden all vu^gar
tran^^ations wholly, but to be used with such prudence and moderation among the
ignorant and rude people as might do good and no hurt.

Wherefore yt was not needful that Sir F. aduersus gentes (which title he
cu^ningly omitted, least it should discover his fraud, for that Arnobius
speaks against heathenish Idols and not Christian Images) he detesteth (says
our Knight.) Simulachra and Deos malleis fabricatos. Idols, Gods of Gentiles made
with hammers. Arnobius abused by Sir F. VVast-vvord Page 35.
But what is this to Christian Images which are no Idols? and what dealing is
this? what cosenage in a Knight. what violent laying of hands on Authors against
their own sense and meaning, and upon Gods servants contrary to their own
intentions, what author may may not be abused by this boldness? what writer may
not be wrested against himself? when that their words expressly uttered against
gentiles and Heathens be impudently urged against that Christian Religion which
themselves professed. But let us permit this shift to the Protestants poverty
and so go on.

England was accounted under those mists and clouds whereof Sir F. talks) for
as wise, learned, valiant, noble and flourishing a Kingdom, as France, Italy
Spain, and other Catholyke Kingdoms be at this day, where if any one of these
our enlightened and sunshined Ministers (which Sir F. braggeth much to have
enlightened the world) should appear, he would not dare to open his mowth in
Schools and matters of learning, etc.

that Rome also when yt was heathen was as wise, learned and valiant, and yet
was yt in darcknes of Religion. A mere cauil.
which I deny not, but yt was not as wise and learned in Christian religion,
nor in comparison of other Christian Kingdoms, as I compared England with
France, Spain and Italy and other such states in respect of darcknes mysts and
clouds which Sir F. would lay upon yt. So as both the matter, subject and
object being changed in the comparison, no marvel though yt hold not, and yt
is called among Logicians a fallacy or elenchus, and in English a cauil, and
this to the first shift used by him.

The second point which he answers is, that my vaunt of vnmachable learning
on our side (as he tea^meth it) is vain and childish, and that our divinity
is clowdy and owle-lyke divinity, if his Ministers can not understand yt, (as
I said in the wardword) they did not, and then for the proof of the great
learning on his side, he alleges the offers of disputation made by John Husse
at the council of Constance, and by Martyn Luther at Worms and Augusta and of
Simon Grinaeus at Spire, and of Beza with others at Poysie in France.

To the first point of which reply I answer,

Wherefore to the second point answered by ignorant) and this a new consequence
or kind o^ argument invented by our knight, A foolish consequence of the Knight.
that lack of ^earn^ng should be attributed rather to the obscurity o^ the
arts and sciences, then to the defect of such as want them.

The story of Ihon Husse and his disputation at the council of constance.
but considering on the other side his bo^d impudency in auouching things
plain opposite to the relation, of all Authors that wrote in those days, when
the things themselves fell out, I can not choose but shake him also here by
the sleue, to see whether he will blush or any friend of his for him at this
shamles dealing which I am to discover.

that John Hus came to the council of constance there to defend publikly his
assertions, VVastvvord. Page 37.
and that those grave Fathers did learnedly refute him by clapping him in
prison, loding him with chains and fetters, and condemned him not only not
being convicted, Tomo 4. council. Page 313. Aen. Sil. hist. Bohem. c. 36. Io.
Dub. li 24. John. Cochl. lib. 2.
but not so much as heard, etc. This I say is to to shamles, if we will believe
either the acts and records of the council yt self, yet exstant, or the grauest
Authors that have written since that time thereof, as Aeneas Syluius in the
history of the Bohemians, Ioha^nes Dubrauius B. of Olimutz, Ioha^nes Cochlaeus,
in his history of the Hussits and others.

For as for the acts and gests of the council The number that came to this
council. Arch and By^hops 346. Abbo^s and Doctors 564. Princes noblemen and
their tra^ne, 16000 Fox. P^g 5 9. Sessio 15. Page 314.
the Letanies also said, and (...) the Princes both Ecclesiastical and tem^oral
set in their order, (which in the begin^ing of the said Session are recounted
by ^ame) John Husse was brought into the ^ouncel upon a Saturday the 6. of July
anno ^omini 1415. who being placed ad medu^m ^oncily, vbi erat leua^us in vnum
altum scamnum, etc. ^n the mydest of the council, raised up, upon a ^igh
stool, to the end that all men might see ^im: there was a learned Sermon made
first ^y the B. of Laudium, upon these words: Des^ruatur co^pus peccati Romans
16. and that ^eing ended, there was first made by the council decretum
silen^ij, a decree that all men should hold t^eir peace, and after were read
the articles of John wicklief, under whom Husse had studied in England, to the
number of 60. or there about condemned before in a council at Rome, which John
Husse was accused after that comdemnation to have preached and defended in
Bohemia. And after this his own Articles to the number of 30. were read also
publykly and condemned: the last thereof was this. Nullus est Dominus ciuilis,
nullus est Praelatus, nullus est Episcopus, dum est in peccato mor^^, no man is
a civil Magistrate, A wicked article of John Husse.
nor Prelate, no Bishop so long as he is in mortal sin.

The manner of John Hus his answer.
flying thereb^ (as the council says) all ordinary Ecclesia^stical
jurisdiction as heretyks are wont t^ do, when they can not defend their
fancie^^

Ses. 15. Page 316.
And when after the comdemnation of these ar^ticles diverse Cardinals,
Archbyshops, Bishop^ and other men (which the records do name^ were appointed
by the council to confer^ with him again, and to persuade him t^ follow
reason, and not to stand only in hi^ own Judgment. Respondit, quod vellet
stare i^ eo quod scripsit manu sua in praesenti part: and fact^ hinc inde
suasionibus quod non vellet inhaerere su^^ opinion^, Sed potius stare cum tota
Ecclesia, etc. H^ answered that he would stand in that he ha^ written with his
own hand in the present affayre: and then diverse persuasions being mad^ to and
fro unto him that he would not so stick in his own opinion, but that he would
stand rather with the whole Church and with the learned men thereof in this
present council gathered together: Finally he stood ^^iffe in his own purpose
etc. Thus far the ^oords of the register.

And then again a little after: Reperto de^um Va^neglory held Husse from
co^uerting.
and di^^^e, quod propter homines quos docuit de opposito (...) velit ab^urare
etc. And finally finding that ^ohn Hus did persist in his peruersitie, saying
^^at in respect of these men whom he had ^aught the contrary he would not
abuire, ^r that yt would be scandalous etc. Heere^pon they proceeded to this
condemnation. and thus much of that point whereby ap^eareth (contrary to Sr.
Francis assertion) that ^e was both heard, disputed with, and cha^^tably
persuaded to return unto the truth.

But besides the former articles of doctrine, Stow Page 326.
that in a meeting of many Catholyke ^^^rned men against his Master Ihon
VVicliffe in ^. Paul's Church in London (which I guess to ^e that which John
Stow mentions in the and of K. Edward the 3. his life, Two famous heretical
untruths of Husse.
anno 1377. ^hen John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster upon ^ontention against the B.
of London, stood ^r wicliffe and defended him in S. Paul's ^hurche, Husse said
that such a Thunder, and ^^ghtening came from heaven upon the suddayne as ^^ke
up the doors, and so chased VViclifs enemies, (...) with much a do they escaped
into London. This ^as one notorious ly which is convinced also your histories.

that Husse had brought forged testimony of the university of Oxford,
aff^^^ming that John VVicliffe both lived and dyed Catholy^e man, which thing
was proved ^or^gerie by testimony of the same university which under their
Seal had gathered 26^ errors out of the books and writing, (...) W^cliffe, and
sent them to the said coun^^^ of constance, to be seen, judged, and
con^demned, as they were.



Co^^rarieties betwixt Husse, and Sir F. religion.
And finally why he should labor so much for the praise of this Ihon Husse or
brin^ him in for one of the learnedest and chiefe^^ champions of his Church, I
see no reason bu^ beggarie on their behalf, and penury o^ men to fill up their
Church. For that Huss^ confesses many things in his articles for (...)
against S. F. as the seven Sacraments, Art. 8 Page 318.
an^ diverse others points of Catholyke religion^ And on the other side has
many proposi^tions which S. F. will not dare to admit i^ England^ either for
shame or fear, as tha^ above mentioned of the civil magistrate Art. 30. Page
319.
Pa^tors and Prelates to lose their authoritie^ and that they are not to be
obeyed when s^ ever they fall into mortal sin, which were a very hard case for
both clergy, and laity this day in England.

And an other that begins thus: Quilibet Tyr^nnus potest and deb^^ licite,
and meritorie occid^ per quem^umque vassalum suum vel s^bditum, etc. Every
tyrant may lawfully, and meritoriouslie, yea ought to be slain by any vassal
or subject of his, whether yt be by force or flattery, or secret traynes,
notwithstanding any ^ormer oath of fidelity, or confederation made with him,
and this without expecting any sentence given against him, or the commandment
of any Judge whatsoever.

This was one article of Ihon Husse condemned Page 326^
as is to be seen, and the reason why the council condemned it so solemnly was
both the falsitie of the doctrine, Desperate and dangerous doctrine of Hus^e.
and the scandal which the Emperor, and other Princes there present took of yt.
And finally for that he reserved to his own censure and to those of his sect,
who was a Tyrant, and who was not, to wit, any Prince that should be contrary
to them, Enc. 1. cap. 6.
as before I have showed of our Puritan Caluenists.

And this being so, what gayneth S. F. by doctrine and from whom Luther in his
disputation with Ecchius at Lipsia in Saxony in the year 1519. Io. Cochl de
act Luth. an. 1519. Page 16.
did openly disclayme together with all his Sect in Bohemia, saying Numque
mihi placuit, nec in aeternum placebit. It never pleased me, nor ever shall yt
please me.

John Fox his mad treatise of Io. Husse.
true and false but all to his praise for 80. columns or pages together of his
vaste book (but with such confusion as no man can tell what to say or judge of
yt) at length he comes to repeat the absurd propositions before mentioned
namely about Prelates and Princes, that they leese their authority when they
fall into mortal sin, which Fox is so far of from misliking, or denying, as
he writes, that Husse defended the same, and said he would prove yt, not only
out of Scriptures (by example forsooth of Saul that was deposed and slain) but
by the authorities also of all old ancient doctors, Fox Page 564. 1. col number 5.
to wit, S. Augustine, Jerome, Chrysostom, Gregory, Cyprian, and Bernard, (a
most impudent brag of a shamels heretyke) and when Ihon Fox has told all this,
and much more, and made a long Catalogue or tre^tal of his worst articles, he
puts down his Judgment of him in those words.

These hrings (says he) thus declared, Fox Page 569. col. 1. nu. 5^^
a man may

Lo here the truth of Iho^ Fox, that Husse, was not so much as accused (much
less condemned) for holding any one opinion against any article of our
Christian faith. But let the reader see the articles in the council, and then
will he cry shame of Ihon Fox, and all his crooked cubbes though they have no
shame, especially in that they object to us so often the doctrine of our
school deuines for allowing the punishing of Tyra^ts in some cases with so
many limitations, conditions, and restrictions, as by us are set down therein.
And yet these me^, approve the wicked opinion of Husse in this place as also of
the Puritans before recited, that permits every one of their Sect to attempt
it at their own pleasure, and judgment, which all Catholykes do condemn as
does also this council of Constance, that condemns John Husse nominatim of
the same.

But let us pass on to the other famous Champions of their Religion before
mentioned. For of Ihon Husse, this is sufficient if not over much, he being so
contemptible an heretyke as by this story appears. Yet Ihon Fox sanctifies
and canonizeth him in his Calender as before has been said, and the Hussites in
Prage do keep for an honorable relyke of his sanctity an old pair of leather
breches in their publyke Church, and do show and kiss the same with great
reverence at certain times, which yet I think both Ihon Fox, and S. F. would
take scorn to do, and so do Catholykes also, and thus much of Husse which in
the Bohemiam tongue signifies a goose and the Knight. shows himself but little
better for bringing him in and giving him place in the forefrunt of his
champions.

OF THE LEARNING and glorious disputatio^s of Martyn Luther, Simon Grinaeus,
Peter Martyr, Beza, and other protestants boasted of by our Knight. CAP. IIII.
have gone to Augusta to the same before Cardinal Caetan the Popes Legate:
Cochl. Sursleid in their histories an. 1518. and 1521.
whereas in deed his going to Augusta was three years before his going ^o
Worms, to wit 1518. where the other was 1521. as both by Cochleus, Surius, and
Sleidan, and others both Catholyke and heretical writers is manifest. Secondly
the whole narration of S.F. is false touching the stout behavior of Luther to
the Cardinal legate, to wit, that he stood to justify his assertions, and
offered there or else where to defend them, VVast. Page 3^
sending a writing in defense to the Card* to justify his opinion by the
Scriptures, and that the Card. would hear no Scriptures, but wills him to
come no more to his presence, unless he would recant.

In all these words I say, though somewhat Luth. at Augusta 151^^
For albeit he had cited Luther to Rome before, upon relation of his new
opiuions, yet by intercession of Frederick Duke of Saxony desyring the Judges
might be appointed to hear the cause in^ ^ermany, he had committed the hearing
if the said cause unto the said Card. to whom Luther came by force and not of
free will, as our K^. fayneth, neither had he yet safe conduct of the Emperor,
but only the letters of his patron Duke Frederick in his commendation to the
said Card. Legate requesting that he might return safe.

The dissim^lation of Martyn Luther with Card. Ca^tan
gave him the fairest words in the world, and the first day being urged to
reca^t his opinions desired space only to deliberate: and the second day
coming to him again, and finding four of the Emperors counsel with him, to
dissemble the more gave up this protestation in writing, Ego frater Martinus,
Luthers first protestation. an. 1512.
etc. I Friar Martyn Luther of the order of S. Augustine do protest, that I do
reverence and follow the holy Roman Church in all my sayings and doings both
present past, and to come, and that if any thing has been said by me, or shall
be said contrary or otherwise then this, I do desire, that it should be
esteemed and holden as not spoken.

Cochl. and Sur ibid.
to revoke his errors perticularly, he desired that he might answer in writing,
flattering the Card. with many praises, and fair words, but yet so tempered he
his style in answering, as the Cardinal easily did see that he meant to proceed
in the said errors still, and signified so much unto him, whereupon he being
afraid, least the Card. would imprison him, he procured by his friends a publyke
safe conduct of the Emperors officers which as soon as ever he had, he appealed
from the Legate to the Pope, and put the appellation upon the walls of the
town, and so stole away, writing first notwithstanding very fair letters to
the Card* at his departure, but unto others very skoffingly, and
contemptuously of him, This is the sum of that which the two foresaid
Authors and others do write of the doings of Luther this year at Augusta let
the reader judge how worthelie S. F. does vaunt of his challenge and
disputation, and how many lies there be in his words before set down.

The second vaunt of Luthers disputation Luther at Worms 1521. before the
Emperor.
and his parliament there gathered together three years after, to wit, 1521. is
much more vain, and untrue. For whereas S.F. says, VVast. Page Ibid.
that before the Emperor himself, and the whole states of the Empire he
mayntayned his doctrine, answered the adversaries, and with the Emperors favor
departed in safety, though full sore against the mynds and wills of some
Papists. Yet the truth is this that ensues for which I allege my two Authors
aforesaid, one of them present at the act it self which he published soon
after in print S. F. alleging none at all for his vanities.

At the said diet or Parliament of Worms Ieronimus Aliander the Popes Nuntius
had propounded the great troubles and dissentions which had risen the last
three years since Luthers being at Augusta by continuance and increase of his
heresies, Cochl. in vita Lutheri. Sur. in hist anno 1521.
and had recyted out of one of his books, De captiuitate Babilonica lately come
forth above 40. places which tended all to sedition, and perturbation of the
common wealth, Fredericus Duke of Saxony his Patron being much astonished to
hear those things, requested that he might have safe conduct to be sent for,
and so he was by a Pursevaunt of the Emperors, named Sturmius: so that this
time also his coming was not of free will as S. F. will have yt, but of
necessity, nor came he to dispute but to answer for himself. And the
foresaid Authors do name his compagnions that came with him, Jonas Scurfus
Ambsdorfius.
the sumptuous and delicate manner of his journey the good chere, and music in
his Innes, Luthers behavior in his journey to the Emperor.
and how he himself being yet in a friars weed played openly on a Lute as he
rode in the Coache, and other such things as Cochlaeus being present did see
with his eyes; and I let pass to recount yt in particular for breuities sake.

Luthers answers and behavior the first day before the Emperor.
and to speak nothing that was not demanded: and then the Catalogue of his
books going in his name before recyted publykely, he was asked whether he
acknowledged them for his or no? which he saying that he could not deny but
they were his, and being asked again whether he would recall them or not? he
desired most humbly to have space of deliberation, which with much a do they
granted him until the next day at the same hour, His answer the second day.
which being come he appeared again, when not answering simply, but dividing
his books into three kynds, sought only to draw out the time, which they
perceiving, he was so pressed by the Emperor, and nobles present to say of or
on, that in the end he says he would do nothing against his conscience, nor
recall any book of his except he were convicted first by the testimony of the
Scripture, and then he concludes with these German words Got helf myr, Amen.
that is, God help me, Amen. showing thereby the fear that he was in.

Then follows the sentence of the Emperor The determination of Charles the
Emperor against Luther, after he had heard him.
he being not past 20. yeates of age makes such a Protestation of his
Catholyke faith according to the belief of all his Ancestors as may be an
example to all other Princes. And toward the end of the said Parliament he
published an Edict against Luther, and all his followers by consent of the
whole counsel, affirming, amongst other things, Lutherum non hominem sed
diabolum esse sub humana specie. That Luther was no man, but a devil under the
shape of a man, and this was the end of that combat of Luther.

Beatus venture qui te portauit. Luther in act. VVormat.
Blessed was the belly that bare thee, which yet other Authors do not testify.

But if it were so, yt was no less vanity, and arroga^cie in him to report yt
of himself, then madness in the other to make that comparison of him with
Christ, and yet it seems he was made thereby both more proud and obstinate.
For albeit he were dealt with all afterward by diverse sent unto him by the
Archb. of Triuers, and others of that counsel to reform himself, yet would he
not, but still remitted himself to the word of God: which the Emperor
understanding sent unto him his Secretary the chancellor of Austria commanding
him, that within one and twenty days he should depart, and put himself
within his own security again, upon his own peril. And this was the
Emperors favor of which S.F. so much braggeth that Luther departed from Worms
in safety, which was to much favor in deed considering either his merits, or
the publyke damages insued by him afterward to the world, and happy had yt
been for many thousand souls if he had been dealt withal as John Husse was.

is his third example, Fox Act. and men. page 1884. exco^ment. Melanch. in c.
10. Dan.
brought in to show the great learned men of his side, which he took out of
Ihon Fox (though for pride he will not confess yt) what does it prove to his
purpose though yt were in all respects as Fox alleges yt out of Mela^chton,
as good an author as him self, The vain brag of Symo^ Grynaeus his learning,
and disputation.
the story is this. Simon Grinaeus being at the town of Spire in the year
1529. when Ferdinandus K. of the Romans was present, and hearing Faber Bishop
of Vienna a famous learned man make a Catholyke Sermon, he went to him secretly
(as Melanchton reports) after the Sermon ended, warning him of certain
errors in his Sermon, as he termed them, being in deed points of Catholyke
doctrine, and offering to confer with him if he would about the same: But the
Bishop being called for at that present by the King told him he could not then,
but deferred the same until the next day, and in the mean space the Kings
officers being informed that Grynaeus a Lutheran was in the town, and seeking
to apprehend him, the Protestants hearing of yt, they attributed it unto the B.
procurement (which perhaps was false) and Grynaeus ra^ne away by night over the
River of Rheene, and so escaped.

This is the story of Grynaeus, as his best are as eager against S. F. with
all the learning they have as they are against us, Enc. 1. cap. 4. and 5.
as I have s^ewed at large by their words deeds and wrytings in the former
Encounter. And moreover the learning they had, they received from us among whom
they were brought up, and not from those of S.F. side. And consequently we may
better brag of them then he, if any thing were in them worth bragging at all as
in deed there was not when they fell from the Catholyke Church to wrangling and
heresy.

About the Colloquie at Poysie betvveene Catholykes, and protestants.
Beza, and other 12. ministers, whereof S. F. vaunteth as though the Catholykes
had received the worst in that meeting: but who shall be judge of this? S.F.
alleges no Author at all, but his own word, saying, that our Card* of
Loraine was in a pitiful taking there, and that I must needs yield, VVast. Page
39.
that either their men were more learned the^ ours there, or that (which he
more desires) that their cause was better. Wherefore I shall allege here the
sum of the matter out of the best authors that have written thereof as
Belleforest, Surius, Pegnillus B. of Mets, and Claudius de Sanctis who was
present, and then let the reader himself be Judge.

in Geneua the year before, Chro. geneb. page 457. and Sur. in just. an. 1561.
by Caluyn, Beza, Otoman, and others, as Genebrard and Surius do testify,
thought yt expedient (or at least-wayes his mother the Queen) to permit this
meeting, somewhat thereby to mitigate the heretykes that were in armor, though
it being amongst swords on every side the Catholykes did mislike thereof, and
some refused to come thither: others that came complained greatly, Complaint of
F Laynetz of the colloquie at Poisie
and among others Iacobus Laynets a Spaniard, and great learned man, General
afterward of the Jesuits, who spoke openly against it in the colloquie yt
self, showing that it was rather a betraying of religion, then defending yt, to
put it in dispusation with such disadvantage, when the Hugonots were in the
ruff, and had taken Newhauen, Roane, and most of the chief holds round
about, threatening also to ouer-ru^ne all France, as for the greatest part they
did the year following and so was this colloquy dissolved (says Genebrad)
without any fruit at all. Geneb. anno 1561.


Hereupon diverse bragging, and lying books Geneb. Page 464.
Impudentissimum est mendacium quod Lauaterus scribit, colloquutores Catholicos
consensisse cum ministris. Lauat. in hist. de re Sacrament^
It is a most impudently that Lauater (a Swinglian historiographer) does write,
that the speakers of the Catholyke party (in Poysie) did agree in opinion with
the Ministers. And then he adds that the sequel of this Colloquie or
conference was most bloody war that ensewed presently throughout all France,
and endured for 18. years together, and in the very next year after, he
says that France suffered more in that one year of Frenchmen themselves
enraged with heresy, then in all former ages by strangers. At what time also
England took Newhauen into their hands delivered by the Hugonots.

Claud. de Saints in resp ad Apol. Beze.
And to this colloquie for the Protestants came 12. ministers, whereof 8. or 9.
were Apostata Friars as the said Claudius (that was present) and Surius do
write, Sur. in hist. anno. 1561.
and testify whereof the chief and head of those that came from Geneua was
Beza, Theod. Beza. Peter Martyr and other Ministers.
but of the other that came from Germany the principal was Peter Martyr, who
disagreing from Beza almost in every one point to be disputed on (especially
about the Eucharist, and baptism, for that Peter was a plain Swinglian, and
no Caluenist) no one thing could be thoroughly concluded between them, which was
no small help to the Catholykes in that terrible time, who notwithstanding lost
not their courages, but stood to it and took their places as superiors and
Judges of heretykes (especially the Bishops, and other Prelates) next to the
King, and other Princes, and made the ministers that would have thrust
themselves in also, to stand a loof, with this reproach as Sanctius says, Apoc.
22.
foris autem canes, and yt was no little mortification to their high stomachs to
hear those words, and to be so contemptuously used, who came into France to
that meeting most proud, and magnificentlie provided and more like warlyke
triumphers, Resp. ad Apol. Beza.
then Apostolycal teachers, as the same author describes yt in a book
dedicated to Beza himself.

And first he shows how and in whose The pomp and dissolution of the
Caluinian ministers going to poi sie.
horslytters and other such furniture they were brought into France, how
sumptuously feasted, and entertained upon the way with concourse, and meetings
of noble men, but especially of noble women who received, cherished, and
banketted them most sumptuously, with some whereof he shows, that Bezas own
compagnions accused him to have been over familiar, and to have had sometime
four hours conference in great secresy, to wit, he and she in a Chamber
alone, and moreover he shows that Beza his creditors whom he had deceived at
his first flying out of France, were now upon his back again and called upon
him hotly for their money, but in vain for they had both favor of great
Princes, and good Hargubushes also to answer for them.

Wonderful delicateness of ^postolical Ministers.
and to lead them by the arm to their coaches or horselitters, as though they
had been very weary which earnest disputing for the Ghospel.



Saint in resp. ad Apol. Bez^a.
Do you remember (says he) when twelve of you ministers, were carried from S.
Germa^s town (by Paris) to Poysie, in noblemens coches, and horselitters
covered with silk, and accompagnied with great troops of Soldiers, going not
as Apostolical teachers, but Martial Ministers, at what time every one of you
had either some great man, and Governor of Provinces at your sides, when you
went out of the Monastery upon whose arm you must lean like delicate virgins,
or noble women great with child, and then going into the Inn of the sign of
the Ange^, you were richly banqueted all in silver and gold plate, good
exquisite wynes, pleasant Music, and great concourse of nobles to co^gratulate
you the victory against Catholykes: and then your bankets ended, your fashion
was (if you remember) to get you to coche again, and to run up and down
woods, and feildes for recreation, sou^ding out your Geneua psalms, and other
songs to refresh your spirits.

Oh what a sight was it to see 8. or 9. of your Company that were poor Monks
and Friars a little before, VVanton Monks and Pryars made new Gospellers.
and most of them of the poorest begging orders, who had scarce dry bread at
home to feed on, and were commonly the, refuses and worsser sort of their
Monasteries, now to be so pampered in silk apparel and with delicate fare, and
to have great part of the nobility of France to wayt upon them, and to lead
them up and down, leaning upon their arms and shoulders, as if they had been
Maiden Queens, or great noble women, and no less delicately then you Beza at
home in Geneua lead up and down your Candida. And this was the preface or
proeme of the new reformation, which these Apostolical men were to make in
France.

Thus far writes the learned Bishop Sanctius. And surely the pitiful
Tragedies that followed presently upon this proheeme before these fellows left
France are incredible, (yet much thereof may be seen in Belforest, Surius, and
others in their histories of the year 1562. to which I do remit the reader)
and only for our purpose of disputation I say, The good which came of the
Colloquie of Poysie
that albeit any great event could not be expected of this meeting for matters
of religion in such times of garboyles, and with such men: yet this good came
to the Catholyke cause thereby, that yt was easily perceived by discreet men,
what difference there was between the teachers of the one, and the other side,
both in life, and substance of doctrine. For as for life and manners diverse of
their own side were so scandalized with these twelve Champions behavior, as
they never after liked their sect, but returned by little and little to Catholyke
Religion again. And as for substance of doctrine this at the least was seen
of all, that the Catholykes agreed in one and showed their like agreement in
and by all former ages.

But the new ministers could not agree fully (as has been said) in any one
point. Dissension of the ministers of Poysie.
For about the Eucharist Peter martyr following Swinglius held yt for a figure
and trope only, and the bread but a bare sign. But Beza following Caluyn, had
a new devise: that yt was the very true real and natural body of Christ, but
yet spiritually, and with this word spiritually, he cutteth of all again that
he had yielded before, and yet would he not agree in any ^ase that yt was a
sign only with the Swinglians.

The like controversy was among them Pegnil. 1. de disen^. ministros in
Colloque Pois.
which the most part of those Ministers denied, as appears by the proper
letters of Beza and Tafinus head Minister of Mets, Sanct. in resp. ad Apol.
Bezae.
which Pegnillius Bishop of that city set forth in print, translated into
Latin out of French, as they were taken in Chalon of Champayne, and Sanctius
testifies to have seen the originals, and known the subscription of Beza his
own hand.

So as these fellows being at such war, and end of this matter, and of the
comparison which (as I said before) is hardly tried by words, and particular
examples, but yet whosoever will make but a general view of the schools and
learning in the world at this day, may easily guess, if he will judge
indifferently.

An addition about O. E. what be says touching the difference of learning on
both sides.
as saying nothing to this effect, steppeth in here, as hot as a tossed, showing
desire to have the matter tried by disputation, and saying that our learned men
being challenged by theirs to dispute in the beginning of this Q. utterly
refused it. Procure us (says he) the like liberty to dispute in Siuil, Paris,
or Millane, and see whether we will refuse to come or no.

But seeing we challenge them for so many years to dispute with them at home
with less trouble, peril, and charges, and they refuse hitherto, who will
believe this idle vaunt of going abroad? whereby the reader may see, that these
men talk not what they think or mean to do, but what may entertayne time, and
fill up paper. And so much of his brag for the present, afterward we shall examine
him more at large.

OF TWO NOTABLE untruths laid unto S. F. his charge for a preface by the
warder before he come to the four feigned positions, and how the K^. defends
himself therein. CAP. V.
ALL this hitherto that has been said in this Enconter, is but by the way of
Preamble unto the 4. false forged positio^s induced by the Knight. which is the
proper subject thereof: and yet one point is to be handled more, which is, that
before the warder enters to treat of the said positions and grounds which S.
F. affirms to be principles ^n Catholyke Doctrine, he charge him with ^wo
notorious untruths. For declaration whereof, I shall lay down his own words in
^his manner.

But let us see (says he) how our Knight. goes Page 12.
after he has told us of ^hese clouds, Manifest untruths.
mistes, and darkness, that then ^aigned, he adds these words. VVheru^to
(says ^e) was added, and where with was mixed all bloody and allage cruelty
against those that desired knowledge, and ^^re any way enlightened by Gods
grace, with a glim ^^ring, or small insight into true Religion. For though ^
were but only a desire to read upon the holy book of God, either the old or new
Testament, then heretic ^as his title, heresy was his fault, and for this was
he called before the Romish Clergy to receive ther^ censure. And such never
departed from their clouche^ til they had brandled them to the slaughter. This
is his narration, wherein first we must separat^ open and manifest lying from
fond and rud^ ignorance: for that the former is less sufferable (in a Knight. that
holds account of honor then the second, especially in matters of divinity.
And then again.

And here I must begin in this very plac^ says the warder to tell him, that
two manifes^ untruths properly called lies, (for that the^ are wilful) are
set down by him in the word^ alleged, and known to be such to very Children
and nouices in the Catholyke Religion. The first untruth.
The first that it is holden for heresy, or ever wa^ amongst us to read upon
the Bible, or boo^ of God (as his phrase is) in what languag^ soever. For ever
in vulgar tongues it is permitted to infinite lay people in all Catholyk^
countries by license of the ordinary as al^ men know and yt cannot be denied,
which would never have been permitted, if we had held yt for heresy.

The 2. untruth.
These I say are apparent fictions, let the Knight. defend his honor in auowing
them. This was my saying then, and how does S. F. think you defend his honor
now in avoiding them. He begins thus. Soft sir you shall find yt harder t^
convince me of one ly then to charge me with many.

To whom I do answer, that I shall willingly go as soft as he will have me to
hear his proofs: only I will ad this about the first untruth objected, that in
deed it is far greater and more absurd, if it be well considered, then the
warder before urged, for that S. F. not only said in his watch word, that we
hold the actual ^rading upon the holy book of God be it old or new Testament
for heresy, See more of this infra. ca. 6. number. 12.
but also the ^nly desire thereof to be no less, which is so ^arre from all
show or shadow of truth in ^eed, as the plain, contradiction thereof is ^u^de^t
to babes among us, to wit, that the Ca^^olyke Church does not condemn, or
punish ^utwardly any inward desire be it never so ^icked, and heinous, so it
break not forth ^o act, for that as the law says Deus solus in^^^ de
occult^s: God only does judge of inward ^^dden things, as desires are. But let
us ^^rdon the Knight. this ouerlashing, seeing he never ^ad (I suppose) what
Catholykes do hold in ^is behalf. Wherefore let us stand upon that ^nly which
was before objected about actual ^^ading of Scriptures, how does he prove now
^^at we do hold it for heresy? and much ^ore that we do brandle men to the
slaughter ^^ the same, which is his second untruth. Su^^^y except he prove it
substantially, he must ^^mayn convinced of two great calum^^tions.

For proof then of the first he alleges of Protestants but also of their
own men, 3. Reasons ^or S. F. his answer, and never a one concluding.
except the Bishop or Inquisitor give special license ergo we hold it for
heresy. Secondly that yt was objected to John Lambert for an^ heretical opinion
(which he alleges out of Fox though he name him not) that he held, Page 41.
Fox act. and monu. Page 1006. col. 1. number. 65.
That all heads and rulers are bound by necessity of Salvation to give the
holy Scriptures, to their people in their mother language. His third argument
is, for tha^ our Rhemists in their preface of the translation of the new
Testament say, They do not publis^ the Testament in English upon any erroneous
opinion of necessity, that the Scripture; should always be i^ our mother
tongue, or that they ought or were orda^ne^ by God to be read indifferently of
all. By which thre^ Reasons he thinks it sufficiently proved that we hold the
reading of Scriptures for heresy.

The 3. reasons of S. F. examined.
For to the first though Catholyke do forbid men to use their own vulgar
translations but with lice^se, yet do they not forbi^ yt as heresy for then (as
I said) they would grant yt to none: but they forbid it as a thin^ whereof
being abused heresy may follow, as a Father should forbid his children that a^^
weak, or indiscreet to drink strong wine without water, least they be droncke^,
or cat^^ an ague, he says not that the drinking it se^^ is drunkenness, or an
ague, but that being abu^sed it may cause the same.

And so to the second: the reading of Scri^ptures was not objected to Lambert
as heresy, but for that he was charged to hold it necessary under pain of
damnation to give the said Scriptures in vulgar languages to all people, which
was an heretical, and false assertion. The Rhemists also (which is the third
objection) do call the said opinion of Lambert about the necessity of reading
Scriptures in vulgar tongues by all sorts, erroneous, and not the reading of
Scriptures yt self.

Now then let us hear and examine S. F. argument made upon the words of our
Rhemists Page 47. The absurd, and vulearned manner of reasoning used by the
Knight.
Now (says he) if to think the Scriptures may be read indifferently of all he
in your judgment an heretical opinion: then for men to read them is in your
iud^ement, an heretical action. Mark (good Reader) ^. F. manner of argument
first he peruerteth the words alleged by himself our of our Rhemists. For they
say, It is erroneous to put necess^tie for all to read. But he says, they
affirm it heretical that all may read. Now between must and may erroneous,
and heretical, there is much difference. Then does not this second proposition
follow of his first, for though it be erroneous or heretical to hold necessity
of publishing the Scriptures in English to all (as Lambert did hold) yet
follows it not, that ^he reading it self is heretical: for a man may have
leave to read and so avoid all fault, and ^ Catholyke man upon curiosity may
chance ^o read without leave, and yet not believe he^etically, that it is
necessary to permit them ^o be read of all. And to the end (good reader) thou
may see the vanity of his former consequence, consider the same in an other
example. It is an erroneous and heretical opinion to say, that all men and
women may or must preach, teach and administer Sacraments without ordination or
license, ergo it is heresy, or at least ways an heretical action to teach,
preach, and administer Sacraments, who sees not the folly of this consequence.

The chief substance of the matter omitted by Sir F.
showing at large how and in what sense reading of Scriptures in vulgar tongues
is forbidden in the Catholyke Church, and upon what causes and how far, and
to what persons, and to what end, and with what limitations, and how falsely
heretykes do cauil, and slander them in this behalf and confirms the same by
many authorities, arguments, and evident reasons: as also that the right
understanding of Scriptures is a peculiar gift of God and not common to all,
and that experience both of our, and old times, have taught us the great evils,
and dangers which had ensued by schisms, heresies, and varieties of opinions
gathered out of Scriptures by evil interpretation, alleging also diverse
examples for the same.

passes over to the second untruth objected, that men are brandled to the
slaughter for only reading upon Gods book, leaving the first sticking on his
sleaue, as you see, and much more confirmed then removed by his answer. For
seeing he affirmed it so stoutly before that we held it heresy, even to think
or desire to read Scriptures in English; why had he not alleged some one
plain text, some Canon, some one sentence, some one Author of ours, some book,
scrip or scrolle, where we say so, and where we do pronounce that first for
heresy? why runs he to so blind and weak arguments, and conjectures as you
have heard? Heerby you may see what men of their word^ conscience, and verity
they be, and I may say of this Knight. as Tertullian said of Marcion the heretyke,
Tertul. lib. 5. ad Marc. cap. 14^ number. 231.
quantas foueas fecit aufe^endo quae voluit? how many great gappes has he made
in my book leaving out what he would, or could not answer?

But now to the second untruth whether About the second untruth, whether men
were put to death for only reading scriptures. VVastvvord. Page 43.
this depends of the first. For if it be evident that we hold not that the
only reading of Scriptures is heresy, as he affirms and we have showed the
contrary, then follows yt not to be likely, that we brandle men to death
with fire for this fact: which is a punishment due to heresy. Let us see then
what the K^. says here.

First of all he picketh a quarrel as though I had added somewhat to his words
saying* Page 43.
Before I proced to the justifying of my speech, Page 43.
give me leave to tell you that this word (only) by you thrust into my words is
one ly of your coining though not the only one lie.

For though it were but only a desire to read upon the holy book, etc.
heretic was his title, heresy was his fault, and for this he was called
before the Romish Clergy, brandled, etc. If you find only in his own worde^,
then do you lay this new only where you find yt, and there is an end of that
matter, for with so open impudency I will no further strive.

Page 43. S. Francis worthy to ly for the vvhetstone.
and ridiculously, where without cyting any author at all the Knight. says that an
old Doctor among the Sorbons protested that he had studied more then 50. years
ore he could tell what the new testament was, etc. Will any man believe him in
this? or is he not worthy to ly for the whetstone, that will auouche this in
print? And you must understand by the way that the Doctors of Sorbon are
Doctors of divinity, and have much exercise out of the Scriptures before they
can take degree, how the^ did this Doctor never so much as hear of the new
Testament in 50. years study? But hear yet another as improbable as this
without author also: An Italian Bishop (says he) told one Espeucaeus that his
contremen durst not read the Scriptures, least they should become heretics
thereby. A goodly tale. And what author is cited for this? none at all. You must
take it upon the K^s. credit, and what that is, or deserves to be his doings
declare.

But now to the principal point, how does that men were brandled to the
slaughter for only reading the old or new Testament? VVast-vvord Page 44.
he alleges diverse examples out of Ihon Fox in these words Our stories are
full of Examples out of your own registers that reading of Scriptures was
accounted heresy, and not to stand upon many: Fox act. and mom. Page 752. and
deinceps.
under Longland B. of Lincolue Agnes wells was conuented and examined whether
Thrustan did ever teach her the Epistle of S. James in English, Well proved
and Thomas Chase was charged for hearing the said Epistle read in English,
Agnes Ashford for teaching James Norden certain sentences of Scripture in
English, Robert Pope, Ihon Mordon and his wy^e that they recited the ten
commandments in English Ihon Fippes for that he was ripe in the Scriptures and
the like proceeding was used by other Bishops, as namely by Tonstal, then B. of
London, before whom many were conuented for that holy heresy of reading
Scriptures, etc.

Thus he says of whom a man may hardly second: The second about brandling to
death, for that these his own examples do show that none of them that were
accused were put to death for reading, but had some lighter punishment only for
their disobedience in that act, his first proposition he overthrows also,
which was, that reading of Scriptures was accounted heresy, for that the fault
of reading scriptures in this place is joined, and equalled with things which
no man will say that we hold for heresies, as the reciting of the 10.
commandments in English, and the cy^ing of certain places in our English
tongue out of the Scriptures. And consequeutly these examples if they be
granted to be true in fact (as the most of them are amplified by Ihon Fox) yet
prove they not, but directly rather do disprove that which the Knight. should prove.

Examples fondly alleged that make against him.
that the reading of Scriptures in vulgar language without license, and perhaps
heretical translations in times of heresies, and by such persons as can not be
presumed to profit thereby, may be a sufficient cause to the B. to convent,
apprehend, or examine them upon suspicion of heresy, as if a civil Magistrate
in time when many robberies are committed, shall call in question, apprehend or
examine certain men that spend much and have little of their own, go gay in
apparel and play at dice, and the like, by which they may be suspected of theft
though the very act of playing be not theft: and as yt should be slanderous
and ridiculous in that case if any man would cry out of that common wealth or
Magistrate, saying, it were tyrannical, that men should be imprisoned for
costly apparel, faring well, or playing at dice, as though those acts were
theft, or fellonie (which in deed are not, but only may induce to theft or give
suspicion thereof) even so in our case, it is as mere a calumniation to affirm
that we hold reading of Scriptures for heresies which is false though in
certain persons in whom yt may perhaps engender heresy, or give suspicion
thereof the same may be punished for disobedience and disposition to heresy. And
this is sufficient, or rather superfluous in so vain a matter against the
babbling of our fond kinght.

And by this is answered a long tale also that VVastvvord. Page 46.
And so exhorting the people to read the Scriptures, he was for this cause only
cruely put to death. By which he would have his reader understand, that only
for reading Scriptures, and exhorting men thereunto he was cruely put to death
which is plain cosenage. For in the story of Fox himself, which the Knight.
craftelie omitteth it is contained, that the bookseller upon examination was
found, an heretyke, and denied the authority of the Bishop and his office, and
other ecclesiastical Judges, saying: That they were rather the Priests of
Bacchus and venus then the true Pastors of the Church of Christ, Fox act and
mon. Page ^63. col. 2.
whereupon (says Fox) he was condemned, etc. So as S. F. corrupts also Fox,
and adds more lies to the most famous liar, that ever perhaps took pen in
hand, and with such men have we to do.

THE EXAMINATION of that which O. E. has written concerning the former points
handled in the precedent five chapters: and that it is far more impertine^t
and desperate, then that which the Knight him self has answered. CAP. VI.
there alone, wherein he might be heard, and all that he brings discussed,
which is commonly worse, and in worse order and method, and with less show of
truth or probability then thar which the Knight. and his ministers do allege.
But as for scurrilitie of speech, insolency of brags, malepartnes in scolding,
The exorbitant manner^ of vvriting of the minister O. E.
and impudency of lying he is far more exorbitant, not only then any Knight. or
known honest man hitherto heard of, but even then any other K^. whatsoever
has to this day (I suppose) uttered, or put in paper, which in part you shall
perceive by this my answer, albeit many things belonging to this point, I shall
be forced for very shamefastnes both here, and otherwhere to pass over with
silence. But now to the matter in hand.

Whereas before in the second Chapter of Cap. 2. nu. ^5. and deinceps.
whether the state of matters in Religion during the time of Q. Mary's reign,
and of other former English Catholyke Princes, was altogether in darkness,
clouds, shadows, mists, ignorance, and the like, as the watchman had affirmed:
The warder by many clear reasons and demonstrations shows the contrary, and
that among other points, there was not a more learned Clergy for many ages
in England then under Q. Mary's government. Whereunto what the Knight. has replied
again in this his answer, you have heard before, now shall you hear how this
his prating procter O. E. does iump in with him, aduertising you by the way (if
you have not observed yt before) of one notorious cogging trick which this
gamester has above all the rest that ever I knew of his occupatio^ (though I
have known few good, and many ba^ enough in this point) which is to interlace
every where almost his adversaries words in a different letter, A notorious
cogging trick.
but ever commonly with some corruption, either in the sense, phrase or words
themselves, putting down somewhat of his own oftentimes for his adversaries,
and so of this we shall note you examples now and then, as we shall be forced and
the matter urge us thereunto, though many times we shall let it pass, not to
spend time in brabling at every meeting.

First admit these men whom he names were great Doctors, Page 42.
yet it follows not thereof, but that the people lived in great error and
blindness. Sup. cap. 4.
Yea S. will you say so? and what (I pray you, does make the people intelligent,
and skilful, in that which they ought to believe, and do, but the learning and
skill of their Doctors, and teachers? Ibid.
But (says he) ^ewe of the people could say their Pater noster, and belief,
and of those that could by heart say them, not one among twenty understood
them. And how can O. E. prove this in particular? If he were in forrayne Cath.
countries at this day, and did hear the common people, yea children and babes
to answer in these, and like points of Christian doctrine set forth by the
Church, and exercised in a^^ places, not only particular Churches, houses,
colleges, and communities, but even in market places also upon all sondayes,
holy and festiual days, and other dedicated to this exerc^se: If our peart
minister (I say) did see this, and how far this diligence piety, and charity
of our Catholyke Clergy exceeds his for instructing youth, and common
people in the necessary points of Christian institution he would either be
ashamed of his ^ayne brag, and false exprobation, or with a brazen face deny
that which his own eyes, and ^ares should be witness of against him.

But now either not knowing this or not Ibid.
Like parrats (says he) they said Credo in Deum, but understood not what they
said. A lack poor men, and was there no creed in English for them that
understood not latin? and was ^here no man to teach them, what Credo in Deum
meant, before Martyn Luther came, who ^aught us among other points, Vid Enc. ^^
cap. 5.
that Zwinglia^s and Caluenists Masters of O. E. are wholly possessed and
guided by the devil as largely we have showed before. But let us hear him
further. Ridiculous reasoning of ^he minister.
They prayed likewise (says he) but understood not what they prayed. But I
would ask him, whether God understood them or not, to whom they prayed? or
whether themselves understood their own meaning, and intention, and what they
needed or desired most to obtain at Gods hands? And if neither of these points
can be doubted of, then is it foolish which follows immediately in the
minister: Now what avails it to pray with the lips, if the heart understand
nothing? This I say, is a foolish infere^ce, for that the heart of him that
prays understands his own affection, and God that knows all languages
understands in like manner the sound of his lips in what tongue soever.

Li^ewise they came to Church and heard Mattins, Page 42.
euensong, and mass in latin, but what were English people, that vnders^ood no
latin, the better? They were the better S^. for that they were pertakers of the
public prayer of the Church made for all, by those that understood latin, The
fruit of devotion by bring at public Catholic service though i^ be in Latin.
and besides this public merit of the whole Church (which in such deuou^
meetings is the greatest) they enjoyed the fruit also of their own private
devotions, petitions, prayers, and holy desires, which in time of the public
every man exercised, which is an other manner of fruit, and works far
different effects of piety, and good life then does the presence of the
protestant common people sitting down and looking about or talking and
bargayning one with an other, never kneling, praying, or attending lightly what
is said or song by the Minister, but so much as may concern their temporal
affairs, understanding commonly as little of the sense of that which is song or
said (though they understand the English words) as when it was in latin: and
this is seen by the bad fruits thereof which both England, and other nations
do daily feel.

And as for the public service, and Christian Mass, About the Latin Mass.
whereunto Catholyke people do resort withal reverence, to be present and
assist, for acknowledging their bound duty, and humble devotion toward
almighty God, by this public adoration appointed by him in his Church, it is
not necessary, that all particular people should understand all the words
therein used by the Priest and public minister in administration thereof: to
which effect read in the beginning of S. Lukes ghospel that Zacharias the
father of S. Ihon Baptist being a leuitical priest and coming to his turn to
do the public service for the whole people, Luc. 1.
the Scripture says of him. Sort oxijt vt incensum poneret, ingressus in
templum Domini, and omnis multitudo populi erat orans foris hora incensi. It
fell to him by lot that he should go into the temple of God to offer incense,
and all the multitude of people did pray without at the hour of incense.

Lo here the whole multitude of people A ponderation of the fact of Zachary
father to S. Ihon Baptist.
though they neither understood all of them the language, wherein it was made
(for it was in Hebrew, and their vulgar language was Syriack at that time)
neither yet if they had understood it, were they admitted so near, as they
could hear it, but standing a far of were content to pray alone, and to
join in heart and affection with the priest Zachary, and God we see was highly
pleased therewith, and sent an Angel to ta^k with him in that place, and to tell
him the good news of his son S. Ihon Baptist soon after to be conceived and
borne into the world, all which speech and conference the people heard not, but
wondered to see him come forth dome, but yet were they partakers also of his
blessing, for that the Child was to be borne no less for their good, then for
his.

Mass, mattins, and euen-song. etc. is partly false in the fact it self, and
wherein it may be true it concludes nothing to his purpose, yet he goes on in
his railing manner, Page 43.
saying; they were likewise taught to pray not only to Angels, Saints, and to
our Lady; but before stocks and stones, etc. But let this whipster tell us,
where they were taught to say o stock, or o stone help us, or pray for us etc.
As for our Lady, Saints and Angels, they living in glory, and enjoying the
perpetual presence, sight, and high favor of Almighty God, About praying to
our Lady, Angels, and Saints.
they may piouslie be prayed unto for their assistance to their Lord and
master, without any derogation of his divine honor, but rather with much
increase thereof, and so were they wont to be prayed unto in the ancient
Christian and Catholyke Church by better men, more learned and devout then
ever O. E. or any of his compagnions are, or mean to be; as namely S. Basil
hom. 20. in 40. Martyrs, praying to the said martyrs, S. Greg. Nazianzen orat.
^n laudem Ciprian^ Martiris, The practice of ancient f^thers in praying to
saints.
makes his prayer to the said S. Ciprian, as also unto S. Athanasius, and to
S. Basil, after they wear dead. orat. de laud Athan. and orat. funeb. in
laud. Basilij, S. Chrysostom also prayed to S. Peter. Ser. in adorat.
venerabiliu^ catena^u^ S. Apostoloru^ Principis Petri, in his sermon upon the
adoration of the venerable chains wherewith S. Peter Prince of the Apostles was
tied. S. Ambrose inuoketh also the same Apostle, comment. in cap. 22. Luc. S.
Hierome does the like to the holy widow S. Paula then dead, in Epitaph. Paulae
viduae. And S. Augustine to S. Cyprian and other saints lib. 7. de Bapt.
contra Donat. cap. 1. and else where. And the same might I show by infinite other
examples of those, and other times ensuing. And now if any man will be so mad,
as to prefer the scoffs and contemptuous words of a contemptible broken
soldier minister, co^temning both saints and sanctity, God and godliness,
before the facts and deeds of such, and so many worthy fathers, and most
notable pillars of Christ's Church, let him do it alone for me.

And with this would I shake of this barking whelp but that he runne^h after us
still crying that our forenamed Bishops and Prelates of Q. Mary's time showed
themselves unlearned, O. E. Page 4^.
for that when in the beginning of this Q. ^ayes, they were challenged to
dispute, they feeling their own weakness utterly refused. This for the most
part to be a notoriously, both Ihon Fox, and our common Chronicles do testify,
who write that they accepted of a certain conference at westminister, Stow.
an Eliz reg. 2 1559.
but if they were not willingly drawn thereunto, or that the fruit thereof was
like to be little, seeing the conditions both of the time, place, judges, and
order of disputation it self were nothing at all conform to equity and
reason, About the disputations betvveene Catholics, and Protestants in England.
the time being wholly bent to a change, the state against them, the place
inconuenie^t the Judges either adversaries, or Atheists, the manner only by way
of dialogue, or conference in writing without admitting of scholastical
argumen^, but so many offers of aequal disputations having been made since that
time by Catholyke Priests, both in word, writing, and books printed, and so
many earnest petitions given up about the same together with most indifferent,
and reasonable orders of trial appointed thereunto, and refused ever hitherto by
protestant ministers: All this (I say) being so, it well shows of what truth
or substance the brag of this little mounte-banck may bear, (which I mean for
his little learning judgment or honesty, though otherwise they report him to be
a compagnio^ gross enough) when he writes: Page 43.
Procure us the like liberty to disputti^ Siuil, Paris, or Millane, and see
whether we will r^fus^t^ dispute with these great Rabbis or no. And again a
little after, wherefore let this lunatical, and ex^a^u^ friar eyth^r forbear to
brag, or else procure us (...) to dispute.

great pity it is that the good man had not been of years and wit, when the
council of Trent was, who gave liberty to all Protestants to come thither, and
to dispute their fill, for then by his journey thither he might have both
satisfied himself, and saved the honors of his brethren the English Ministers
that durst not go, And as little means he to go to Siuil or Millane
whatsoever he talks in this lunatical, and extatical fervor of his to
entertayn time, and such simple people, as will believe him.

And now from this matter he leapeth to ^

He falls then upon the controversy before that though it were but only a
desire to read upon the holy book of God, either the old or new Testament, then
heretic was his name, and heresy was his fault, etc. Cap. 5. nu. 1.
But seeing him to to far over the shuwes in that exaggeratio^ of speech,
Whether ^atholiks hold reading of Scriptures in vulgar languages to (...)
heresy.
I dealt more mildly with him, to recall his words from desire to deed, and
fact of reading, showing against him that not only the inward desire, but
neither the external reading it self was held by us for heresy confirming
the same with diverse reasons, Ser. sup. ca. 5.
most evident, and manifest, as that it can never be found in catalogue of
heresies written by any of our side, neither that it can be contained in the
definition of heresy, given by us. And finally for that we do permit reading
of Scriptures in all languages, yea vulgar translations also with discretion,
and choice, and with license of the superior, which we would not or could not
permit, if it were heresy.

for that we forbid some vulgar translations, and diverse of the common people
to read them, that some have ^yn apprehended, and put in prison for reading
Scriptures, Cap 5 nu 4.5.6. etc.
and the like, which you may see discussed more largely in the foresaid
chapter. But now after all this said and do^ne, and the same both seen and
read by O. E. does this wise noddle, that every where calls his adversary
noddy, either hold his peace in this controversy, or bring matter of more
moment? no truly, for he can do neither, pride and lack of wit forcing him to
the former, and truth and learning say^ng him in the second. But let us hear
his own words (if you please) and mark that when I cite his words in a
different letter, it i^ ever with all sincerity, and exactnes of truth, but
he contrariwise, makes me speak oftentimes af^^r his phrase, and thereby
alters the whole sense. Page 4^.
For the first (says he) it is very e^id^ntly d^spr^ued (to wit) that we
account not r^ad^ng of the bible to be heresy) by diverse examinations in K
Henry the eight, and Q. Mary's days, where it is ob^ected to lay men, that
they read the Scriptures in Englis^, which should not have been done, unless by
that article they should have been con^^^nced of her^sie.

Lo here his whole argument, and all that The ministers fond behavior.
by alleging one of the three, and the worst of all, adding unto it a childish
consequence, that some men being examined in Catholic times upon suspicion of
heresy, for that contrary to their bishops, and Princes commandment, they were
found reading of pohibited vulgar translations of Scripture. Ergo the very
reading of scriptures it self is accounted by us for heresy. The ridiculous
fondnes of which inference is examined Sup. Enc. 1. cap. 8. and 9. E^c. 2. cap.
5.
before by diverse examples, as if playing at dice (for examples sake) should be
termed theft, for that sometimes it may induce suspicion of theft, and the
like. And this for the first point whether reading of Scriptures be heresy in
it self?

that we did bra^ale men to death for only reading Scriptures; This copesmate
is no less therein rash and ridiculous then in the former for thus he proves
it. Page 44.
In the b^ginning of King Henry the eight his reign (says he) certain were
condemned for reading the Epistle of S. Paul in English as appears by the
register of Lincoln, Dioces. Well, and what if it were so^ condemning and
burning are two things, a man may be condemned in other punishments then
burning, and yet here is ^o author cyted for this at all, except Ihon Fox tell
us this tale, as he does many other as fond and false as this. But it follows
in this good fellows narration. And B. Longland preaching at the burning^
said, Page Ibid.
that they were damned that moved their lips in reading those chapters of
Scriptures, etc. Yea^ and who testifyeth this, for here is no author cited,
and the tale is so improbable to them that knew how grave and learned a man B.
Longland was, as without an author, they will not believe it, though this
compagnion do weary his lips never so long in telling it.

of much less force, and with much more impudency then the other. Both these
points (says he) are proved by the prouincial constitution of Thomas Arundel
(Archbishop of Caunterberie) who says in a prouincial constitution; Constable.
Prou. C cap. Praeterea^ de haereticis.
statuin^us, vt nemo textum aliquem sacrae scripturae authoritate sua in
Linguam Anglicanam, seu aliam transerat, ^^c legatur aliquis huiusmodi liber
vel public, velocculte sub paena maioris exco^municationis. Qui vero contra
hoc fecerit, vt fautor haeresis, and er^^^s similiter pun^atur. We do ordain
that no man, upon his own head and authority do translate into the English or
other tongue, any part of the holy Scripture, nor that any such book, if it
should be translated, be read either publicly or privately under the pain of
the greater excommunication. And he that shall do contrary to this ordination
of ours, let him be punished as a favorer of error and heresy.

This ordained that Archbishop almost Cap. 3. Enc. 2. number. 6.
before, how the said Archbishop in his Synod holden at Oxford did appoint,
Linvvod. lib. 5. de Magistris.
that there should be a true English translation of the whole Bible permitted
(by approbation of the Bishop) to all such common people as should be thought
apt to profyt thereby, which being considered, and that here only he
ordayneth, that no particular man of his own authorytie should translate the
scriptures into English or publish the same to other men's reading without
lycens, I would know of O. E. why this constitution was alleged by him, seeing
it proves nether the one nor the other of the forsaid points (both which he
says are proved thereby) to wit that reading of Scripture was accounted
heresy, The Archb. constitution is against O. E who alleges it.
or punished by brandling, nay both these assertions are refuted by this: the
first for that translation and and reading of scripture in the English tongue
by lycens of the Bishop was permitted, ergo, it was not heresy, for that noe
Bishop can permit heresy: secondly for that the punishment of excommunication
is neither death nor burning: ergo for this they were not brandled. Now then
look you in the forehead of this brandled and masked Minister O.E. who
concludes his former discourse in these words: So it appears that the
challenger our adversary lies notoriously in both these poin^es. Page 45.
Thus he says whereof let the Reader be judge.

If he mean by the Cathol. Church the conuenticle of Trent, Page 45.
he is an absurd fellow, to think that skum and synke of priests and friars
which the^e gathered a council against Christ, to be the Cathol. Church. Let
any man judge of this unclean and uncircumcised tongue. About the Cath church
And for the thing it self I would ask him if the Council of Trent consisting
of the chief Bishops and Prelates of Christendom represented not the known
Cathol. Church at that day what other Catholic Church can he show us to have
been exta^t at that time, seeing as he says in his definition of Catholic
afterward in his challenge out of V^ncentius Lirinensis: We are to hold that
which always has been believed of all Christians, O. E. chaleng. 1. Page 2.

Vincent. Lirinen aduers. haeteses ca. 3.


for that is truly and properly Catholic. Which if it be true, let him show
us, that in the time of the council of Trent, there was any other Christian
faith always believed of all christians from Christ to that day but only the
Roman, and then we will say, that albeit for his scurrilytie of speech he be to
be accounted of as he deserves, yet that in the rest he has some reason: But
if he can not do this, then shows he himself shamles in both.

And this might be sufficient for so much 2. Cor. 3.
litera occidit, Spiritus autem viuificat. The letter kills but the spirit
gives life, thereby to prove that it is not sufficient to read only the words
of scripture except they be rightly also understood, and consequently that all
stands not in reading specially amongst the ignorant who oftentimes receive
more hurt then good thereby hereupon comes in the Minister very hotly, Page
47.
saying: He does shame^ully abuse the words of S. Paul to the condemning of
reading of Scriptures. But soft Sir, I neither abuse nor use the words of the
Apostle to the sense you falsely say, but to that sense which other holy
Fathers before me have used and alleged them, S. Hier. Ep. ad Nepot. in 3.
Reg. c. 1.
as namely S. Hierome, and S. Augustine cyted by me in the Ward-woord, and
passed over craftily by this companion, Aug. de Spiritu and littera c. 4 and 5.
and primo Retract c. 4.
as though he had never heard of them. And besides that which there I said I
will here adioyne an other place of his, lib. primo ad Simplician. q. 1. where
he says: Lex tantummodo lecta and non intellecta vel non impleta vtique
occidit, tunc enim appellatur littera. The law of God being read only and not
understood nor fulfilled does kill, for that it is called the letter, by the
Apostle.

Bellarmyne his companion may instruct him that none but the Swink feldians and
Originists by the letter that kills understand Scriptures as this Noddy does:
Examination of the words of S. Paul. littera occidit. 2. Cor. 3.
showing himself therein a plain heretic an^ enemy to the Scriptures. This I
say shows who is the Noddy, who is the heretic and who is the enemy to
Scriptures, if lying and cogging do put enemytie between the liar and the
Scriptures, which are truth it self. Bellarm. lib. 1 de verbo Dei. Cap. 3.
For Cardinal Bellarmyne does not ioyn^ Swinkfeldians and Originists together
in denying scriptures as this man does, but cyting only an interpretation of
Origin improueth the same in one sense, though in an other he admits it. The
Swinkfeldians indeed and Lybertines (Children of the new Gospel of Martine
Luther, and consequently our Ministers brethren) did deny the external letter
of the Scripture founding themselves upon this place of S. Paul, litera
occidit, which Bellarmyne denies to serve to that purpose. But this is nothing
to our sense who deny not nor condemn (as this Noddy slaundreth us) either the
external letter of Scriptures themselves or the reading thereof with discretion,
due reverence and order, but only rash and presumptuous reading and
interpreting the same, according to their own sense and understanding,
different from the meaning and interpretation of the ancient Fathers and
Catholic Church.

But yet let us hear somewhat more how Page 4^.
He tells us further (says this Minister) that the understanding of
scriptures is a particular gift of God reserved espetialy unto Christ, and by
him bestowed upon the Church which he proves by this place. Luc 24. Act. 8.
Tunc aperuit eis sensum vt intelligerent scripturas: then he opened to them
the sense whereby they might understand scriptures. And again by the example of
the Eunuche that without Philip the Apostles help could not understand the
prophecy of Isay. Thus says O. E. and how does he answer think you all
these reasons of mine? you shall hear in few words all he says. Page 4^.
If Christ be the best Interp^etor (says he) where should we better understand
what his interpretations are then in holy Scriptures? The ministers ridiculous
circuling.
Here is one circle hear an other. Is he has bestowed the gift of
interpreting scriptures on the Church, how should the people be better assured
of the excellency of the Churc^es interpretation then by seeing the same
confirmed by scriptures. This is the second circle more foolish then the
former. And mark here (good people) the assurance which these men do teach
you for your safty in reading scriptures, when you understand not the letter of
the Scripture, first (says he) you must go to Christ the best interpreter,
and when you understand not Christ's interpretation, you must return to the
letter of the Scriptures to know the excellency of Christ's interpretation, and
if you understand neither, then must you go to the interpretation of the
Church, and if you understand not that, then must you go back again to the
scriptures to assure your self (as he says) of the excellency of the Churches
interpretation. Intricat dealing of heretics about understanding of scriptures.
But in all this going and coming, turning and wynding, I would ask our
whirle-headed Minister who shall be judge? or where shall the stay be? or how can
simple people discern of these things which he prescribes? One will think he
has the letter with him, an^ other the sense and spirit, a third the
inspiracio^ of Christ, a fourth the interpretation of the Church, and then will
all four fall out, where and what and which is the Church, and must return
to the Scriptures again, and to their own fancies and interpretations about
this and all the rest. And this is the grave and sure direction which O. E.
delivers us.

To my other instance and example of the Iraeneus.
Christ by his Angel sent Philip to be his interpretor, this fellow answers
nothing but that it was not Philip the Apostle, but the Deacon who was sent:
But what of this, if it were so? Does this answer the argument? The gloss
upon that place of the Acts says, Nie. de Lyre in cap. ^. Act.
that diverse learned men were of different opinion about that matter, whether
it were Philip the Apostle or Philip the Deacon that was sent to the Eunuche.
And Tertullian more near to that time then our Minister by a thousand and
four hundred years, Tertul. lib. de Bapt. c. 1^.
and more learned then he by ten thousand and five hundred yardes does call
this Philip an Apostle twice within five lines. But what if it were Philip the
Deacon? what hurts it my argument? either of them is sufficient for our
purpose, to prove that this Eunuche being a principal cheef man, and a Proselyt
ore Jew by religion, and not unlearned in both their law and language, as
appears by his reading their scriptures, yet had he need of an external
interpreter to be sent to him by God. Whereof is inferred, that much more
unlearned and simple people reading scriptures translated into vulgar tongues
and for the most part corrupted by Sectaries to their hands have need to be
moderated and well directed in this matter; to the end they gain and not leese
thereby: which point the Warder proves by evident effects of infynit heresies
risen by rash and vnreuerent reading of the Scriptures, Luther.
in which respect Luther himself against other Sectaries ympugning him by show
of Scriptures calls it, Librum haereticorum, the proper book of heretics,
whence all of them by evil interpretacion do frame their heresies. We see
also within the space of these four score late years, since the Bible has
been laid open to all sorts of people in all vulgar languages, what a Sea of
monstrous sects and divisions have flowed upon us, whereof the Warder also
gives diverse particular examples in England it self, and those punished also
by Protestants, as of Ioane Burcher, William Hacket; William Ieffrey and others.

It is not reading of Scriptures which he styleth rash reading used by lay
people* Page 49.
but neglect of scriptures brings forth error and heresy. So that say what
you will and prove what you will, this fellow wipeth of all with a bare denial.
Yet whether neglect of Scriptures or rash or vnreuerent reading, which he does
here bring in as opposite may not in some sense be the self same, I leave to
discreet men to ponder, and thereby the wit of this writer. And where as he
says that heretics by Tertullian are called Lucifugae Scripturarum, Ibide^^.
the bars of scriptures, for that they fly from the true light of scriptures, I
would pray the reader by this one place to ponder well with himself of this the
fraudulent cogging companion, for he would have it seem (and to that end he
brin^eth it in) that Tertullian did assign it for peculiar property of
heretics to fly rea^ing of scriptures, whereof here we entreat, which is so
false as nothing can be more, and ^^at well knows the seared conscience of his
deceitful Minister, A notable abusing Tertullian.

Tertul. lib. de praescrip. aduers. haeret. cap. 15.


seeing that the whole ^earned discourse of Tertullian, De praescriptio^us
aduersus haereticos, that is of prescriptions ^prescribing against heretics is
principally (...) exclude them from trial by scriptures, ^herof they bragged,
and whereunto they ^ould seem to run, as ours do now adays, (...) this he
does from the 17. Chapter downwards: and before he enters into this
demon^^ration he uses this Preamble, Ipsi de Scriptu^agunt, de scripturis
suadent, scripturas obtendunt, ^c. and hac sua andacia statim quosdam mouent.
He^^tiks do treat of scripture^ do persuade out scripture, do pretend
scriptures, and with is their audacytie do move some peo^^e, etc.

And in the very book alleged by our Mi^^^ter De resurrectione caruis, shows
that heretics are great scripture ^n, but to pervert, and not to understand
them aright, and that without scr^pture no heresy^ can be founded, Tertul. lib
de carnts resurrect c. 40.
Haereses (says he) esse non possent, si non and perperam scripturae intelligi
possent. There could not be heresies, y^ the scr^ptures could not be evil
understood. And in the very particular place and controversy handled by him of
the resurrection of the flesh and body against heretics that denied the same
under pre^ence of scripture, he says to one of them. Ibid. c. 10.
Ten^s scripturas, utbus caro infuscatur? tene ettam quibus illustratur. Thou
do allege scriptures whereby the baseness and infirmytie of our flesh is set
forth, harcken also to those scr^ptures, by which the same is exalted and
g^orified. And then pass^ng over to an other point of proof, he alleges a
place out of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians 5. for resurrection of the flesh saying
thus: Age tam quod ad Thessalonicenses, vt ipsius solis radio putem scriptum,
Ibid c 47.
ita clare^, qualtter acciptant Luci fugae isti scripturarum. Go to then, how
will these scripture-bats (the heretics) understand this place of S. Paul to
the Thessalonians, though it be so clear as I may think it to be written with
the very beam of the Sun it self.

How heretics ^re scripture bats.
yet are the^^ so blind in the true light thereof (through their own pride and
malice) as they fly the true sense and interpretation he^d by the Catholic
church, as night-bats do the clear day light and shyn^ng of the Sun, which
Tertu^^^an in the forenamed book of praescription and else where does largely
declare: and it is our complaint also against Sectaries of our time who
swarm^ng over scriptures like blind bats in the darcknesse of their own
passions and imaginations, and flyeng the light of ancient doctors and
Churches interpretations do break their own heads and necks of entymes upon
scripture walls, in respect whereof thesayd Tertullian in this very book by
O.E. alleged concludes thus, and therein gives us good counsel saying.
^ecundum praetudicta tot authoritatum scripturas in^^lligi oportebit, Ibid. c.
18.
non secundum ingenia haere^^corum de ^^la incredulita^e vementiae. Scriptures
must be understood according to the fore established judgments of so many
authorities (as I have now alleged) and not according to the wits or wrangling
inclinations of heretics which proceed commonly of only incredulity which ^s
as much to say as that the natures of heretics being inclyned to incredulytie,
and not to believe what the authority of the Catholic Church has set down
before them, they seek to draw the interpretation of scriptures to their own
phansyes.

Thus writes he, and his reason is for that but to take and leave or like at
their pleasures commonly their wits guyded by human spirit inclyne to
incredulity, calling in question what others have held or believed before them,
and shaking of the foundations of all former belief by their new quarrelling:
and whether the Sectaries of our time have done this or no by their much
reading and tossing of scriptures, let experience teach us. And this shall
suffice for this place.

THE SECOND PART of this Encounter containing four absurd grounds of
Catholic religion feigned by Sir frauncis: and first whether ignorance be the
mother of devotion: as also about the controversy of fides explicita, and
implicita. CAP. VII.
that ignorance is the mother of devotion, which he utters in these words.
VVatch. p. 17

The first forged position.


In these darck and clowdy days (says he) least the Sunshine of knowledge
should disperse the mystes of ignorance, and give light to the dymme of sight,
this position was set down for their Maxim or rule infallible, that ignorance
is the mother of devotion, and that the sacred word of God which was given to
be a Lantern to all our feet and a light to our steps was forbidden to the lay
sort (for so they called them) as matter unfit for them to look into. To
which the warder begins his answer thus.

How manifest a falsehood it is that reading Ward p. 17.
for in any of the three learned tongues, any lay man or woman may read them at
their pleasure, and in vulgar translations also such as have lycens: and I
think Sir Frauncis will not deny that many of the laytie understand Latin. How
then and with what face complayneth he so piteously or rather hypocritically,
that the sacred word of God which was given to be a lantern to our f^ete, etc
was forbidden to the lay sort.

To this interrogatio^ of the warder Sir Frau^cis replieth now noe one syllable
more then before is said. Whether ignorance be the mother of devotion.
And further where as the warder charge him sorely with malepart ignorance
for scoffing at the word (laymen) and a^ the distinction between Laytie and
Clergy, and by this occasion shows the true meaning of those words, with
the ancient beginning use and practice of the primitive Church, out of Origin
Epiphanius Hierome and diverse other fathers, doctors and general Councils, the
patient knight dissembleth all this according to the first shift discovered in
the beginning, Sir. F. and O. E. do fly shamfully.
and says nothing at all to it neither does his Proctor O. E. help him out
herein with any one word, though words be very good cheap with him.

But we deny this Maxim or infallible rule to be ours, and do say that it is
your calumniation only, and not our position, and that among us it is neither
Maxim no^ Minime. And for you to prove it a Maxim, you must show that all
Catholykes or the most part do hold it: and to prove it a Minime, at least you
must show that some one does hold it: neither of which you can ever do, and so
you remain disgraced. Thus said he what answers Sir F. Thus: VVast. page 47.
A strange accusation and grievous slander (no doubt) to charge those men with
nourishing the people in ignorance whom all the world knows to have used
strange means to bring them to knowledge. For what meant they by the costly
setting up of many fair and well guylded Images in Churches? was it not that
they might be lay men's books, and by reading on them they might attain
knowledge?

Maxim and infallible rule among us, that ignorance is the mother of devotion,
why is not this proved, especially seeing Sr. F. is required in honor to do it?
Is the running to the controversy of Images a sufficient discharge for this?
Do not all men see, this kind of shifting? But let us say somewhat to his
instance of fair gilded Images, as though they made to his purpose. First
then I say that those fair Images of Christ and his Saints, against which he
enueigheth, if they be joined with other instruments of light and instruction
as are preaching, teaching and such other like, used among us, can not be a
hindera^ce to knowledge as the Knight. would seem to affirm, but rather a
furtherance; for that otherwise, why has Ihon Fox so many pictures and
payntings in his book, but to teach men thereby the contents of his writings.
But consider reader here (as before I have said) the substance of heretical
answering, which runs up and down and never comes to the purpose. Has
not the warder offered our watchman fair and friendly, that whereas he has
affirmed, written and published in print, that it is a Maxim among us and rule
infallible, that ignorance is the mother of devotion, we are content that he
prove it only a Minime? And where as for proof of the former he was bound to
show that all Catholic writers or the most part of them avouched it, we are
content to accept the word or testimony of any one Cath. author, learned or
unlearned that ever wrote or printed such a position?

And is not Sr. F. then with his whole presbytery Impertinent dealing of our
adversaries.
Can a more easy or indulgent satisfaction be required of so rigorous a
charge? well what then do they? After running hither and thither and telling us
a tale how P^us Quintus went on foot for edifying the people (as much
apperteyning to this matter as the steeple of Canterbury to the Churchyard of
Paul's) they come out at length with this proof. I say th^^ Doctor Fulke does
justly charge your Rhemists with this old impudent proposition, VVast. page 6^.
that ignorance of the scriptures is the mother of devotion: for what meant else
their so strickt forbidding to Laymen the reading of scriptures in the vulgar
tongue? Lo here a witness and a reason again repeated of this Maxim, To the
witness the answer is quickly made: Ask my fellow whether I be a thief. The
reason being ridiculous and refuted before brings a new forged assertion with
yt, that laymen are by name stricktly forbidden the reading of scriptures
(which is as shamles as the former if he mean it generally of all lay men as
the words do stand) and consequently noe less impossible for Sir Frauncis
to show out of any Cath. A new false position brought foor^h by the knight.
Author living or dead, then the former position of Ignorance to be the mother
or daughter of devotion. And besides it is apparently ridiculous to very
children, who see how many laymen are learned and read scriptures daily, and
some laymen have written also commentaries upon the scriptures: So as to be a
layman brings noe impediment in it self to read Scriptures.

Wherefore after this he runs to an impertinent Fides implicita and
explicita. Page 49.

The controversy about fides implicita and explicita.


Hence (says he) has grown your devise of fides implicita a faith wrapped
and foulded under the obedience of the Church, namely that it is sufficient,
though they know not distinctly what they oug^t to believe, but obediently
submit their vnderstauding to the Church, believing as the Church believes,
though what the Church believes they know not. This Carbonaria ^ides or
Colliars faith is highly commended by Card. Hosius, etc.

Thus writes the Knight. and as for the later part of this assertion concerning
Card. Hosius we shall handle yt a little after when we come to coople with the
Minister O. E. showing how egregriously he abuses both Card. Hosius and his
reader in this point. But for the former about the distinction it self of fides
explicita and implicita, we must handle a little here with our Knight. aduertising
first the reader, that by fides explicita we mean a clear, distinct and
particular faith or belief of any article, point or parcel of Christian
Religion: and by fides implicita we mean a more darck, secret or hidden faith,
implied as it were or wrapped (to use Sr. F. word) in the belief of an other
more general point, which includes this: As for example, in the article of
Christ's incarnation we do believe clearly and distinctly, not only that the
son of God was made flesh for us, but further also in particular that in two
distinct natures there was but one person, and yet not one will only, but two
distinst wills, and the like: and this is fides explicita.

per fidem implicitum, by an impl^ed faith: to wit, by be^eu^ng in general,
that the Son of God was ma^e flesh for our redemption: and moreover believing
whatsoever other points Gods holy Church teaches deduceth or believes in
this behalf, albeit they do not clerelie know them or understand them in
particular.

And this is so necessary a point of doctrine for the salvation of the common
sort of people, as if we take it away (as Sectaries do who understand it not)
it must needs follow, that thowsands yea millions of Christians must perish for
lack of faith, The necessytie of ^ides implicita for salvation of the common
sort of Christians.
seeing the whole first Council of Nice set down this dreadful foundation, as
appears in the creed of S. Athanasius: that it is necessary for him that ^il
be saved to hold the whole Cath. faith, which if any man do not, he must
perish eternally, whereof must needs be inferred, that for so much as the far
greater part of Christians do not know or understand the forsaid points of
faith and many more belonging to many mysteries of Christian Religion and
consequently can not believe them but only by fides implicita as has been
showed, it follows (I say) that if we take away the truth and use of fides
implicita which ever hitherto the Cath. Church has taught you must needs
teach desperation and damnation to the unlearned sort, that either for lack of
time, capacity, learning and other such lets, can not come to know and believe
all particulars belonging to a Christian set down in books or handled by
learned men, but content only with the clear and distinct belief of such
articles as are most needful and important, do believe the rest fide implicita,
that is, by the implied faith of the Church.

Wherefore how so ever this distinction of fides explicita and implicita may
trouble the unlearned Sectaries of our time, and give them occasion to jest at
that they understand not, as Sr. F. does here, yet the thing it self is most
evidently true and necessary and the same distinction in other words is set
down by S. Augustine, where he speaks of the differens of the faith of holy
men under the old testament, he not being able otherwise to defend the position
of S. Paul and other Apostles, affirming the old good Jews to have believed
also in Christ, and to have had the self same faith that we have in substance,
but only by this distinction, though set down in other words. For thus he
writes: Aug. lib. ^5. Cont. Faust. cap. 14.
Tunc occulta erat fides, nam cadem credebant, eademque sperabant omnes iust^
and Sancti temporum ill^rum, etc. Then (under the old testament) the faith of
Saints (whereby they believed Christ to come and all his mysteries) was hidden or
covered, for that all just and holy men of those times believed the self same
things that we do now, and did hope for the same, but now our faith is clear
and revealed.

2. Cor. 3.
as the Apostle terms it, and as it were in gross and general: in that they
believed whatsoever the Prophets and Patriarchs had fortold or believed of
Christ to come, and his doctrine and mysteries, as the more unlearned sort of
Christians do now, in believing whatsoever the Church holds, though in
particular they knew not every point which she holds but only the most
notorious and needful, as those general heads commonly called the Articles of
the Creed, and some other deduced thereof, and appointed to be taught and
explaned to every Christian more in particular, though not all, but so many as
are necessary to be known for their salvation. And this simplicity of belief
in the common sort which our scoffing knight calls the Colliars faith
(himself being more ignorant in diverse points of true faith then many Colliars
or Cobblers in the Catholic Church) the foresaid holy father and learned
doctor S. Augustine does so highly esteem as he dares auouche against as
stowt an heretic as our K^. or his Ministers, this sentence: Aug. 1. co^t^a
Ep. Fundam.
Turbam, non intelligendi viuacitas sed credend^ simplicitas tutissimam facit.
The vulgar sort of Christians are made most sure of their salvation by the
viuacity of their understanding, but by the simplicity of believing, etc.

Well then (good readers) all this that hitherto fides explicita and implicita,
they understanding nether the nature, vtility, or necessity thereof. For the
truth is, that Cath. religion does hold them both, and judges both most
necessary in all sorts of men, though they are more in some then in others. The
necessity of fides explicita in all men.
For as for fides explicita all Catholyke writers do agree that all sorts of
Christians whatsoever must have it in the principle articles of Christian
belief under pain of eternal damnation, that is to say, that all Christians
learned and unlearned of what sort so ever must be taught to believe
expressly, clearly, and distinctly, the principal mysteries of Christian
religion, as for example the mysteries of the Blessed trinity, and incarnation,
etc. This doctrine is so ordinary and universal among Catholics, D. Thom. 2. 2.
q 2. art. 6.7.8. etc.
as S. Thomas has diverse whole articles thereof and all other school divines
do agree about that matter, though our Knight. would gladly have men to think that
we do not teach this fides explicita as necessary to any almost of the simple
sort.

More things necessary to be believed by some than others.
but that the learneder sort are bound to know and believe by this faith more
things the^ the simple especially those that must teach others, as Curats,
Pastors, Preachers, and the like, and more then all the rest, Bishops and
Prelates, which S. Thomas declares in these words: Secu^da, 2. q. 2. art. 7.
in corp. artic.
post tempus gratiae reuelatae, etc. After the coming of Christ, as well
teachers as the people are bound to have fidem explicitam, clear and express
belief of the mysteries of Christian faith especially touching those points
that are solemnized in the Church, and are publicly proposed unto them, as
are the articles of the incarnation before treated: But as for more higher
considerations some are bound to believe more and some less according as the
state and office of each one requires, etc.

plura tenentur explicit credere maiores, Ibid. art. 6. ad primum.
qui habent officium alios instrue^di, quam alij: Those that be in
Ecclesiastical authority, or have obligation to teach others, are bound also to
believe more things expressly and distinctly then others. Thus teaches our
Church, and the discreet reader will easily judge, with how great reason, piety
and necessity, for the salvation of those that are committed to her charge.

our Knight (taking the same out of John Caluyn) do cauil at our doctrine herin;
Calvin Institut. l. 3. c. 2. ^. 2.
I shall make you see, and him also to confess, if he be not shameless, that
himself and his men do use and put in practice the very same distinction of
fides explicita and implicita, and are forced ther^nto, if in truth they will
confess to have any ^aith at all.

For I would ask him first, whether every The necessity of fides implicita
eue^ in heretics.
or at leastwayes, so ^uch as they have written and set down in ^^riptures?
And then would I ask again how ^any English protestants do know distinctly
(...) this day, all that is in the scriptures, touching ^hristian faith? And if
to the first there be no ^oubt, but that he will answer affirmatively, (...)
that to the second he must needs answer ^^gatiuely; than it follows, that
those pro^^stants who believe all things that are in ^^riptures, and yet do not
know expressly or ^^^tinctly what they are; in particular thease I (...) do
believe those points which they know (...), fide implicita, that is to say, by
an implied (...): in that they believe in general, whateuer is contained in the
scriptures.

Another like demand may be to the sim^^r Another demand to Sir Francis.
and perhaps to Sir F. ^^^self though he take not himself for such, ^^ich is
whether he believe to be false, all (...) errors and blasphemes which the
Jews, ^^cks, Mores, or ancient heretics have held against Christ, and the
Catholic faith, for the space of these fiftene hundred years together;
whereto (no doubt) but he will answer yea. And yet if I should ask him again
whether he understand or know distinctly and clearly all thesaid particular
errors, and blasphemies which these sects have set down: in their books against
Christ, and his faith? he would (I think) even for modestyes sake answer no,
or at least wise he would be easily forced thereunto, if he were well posed:
whereof it ensues, that this faith whereby he believes all those things to be
false must need^ be fides implicita an implied faith which here he so much
scorneth and impugneth; and consequently he both scorneth and impugneth
himself. And so much of this.

An impertinent jest in steed of answer.
how ignorance was not only the mo^ther, but a fruytful daughter also of
devotion by moving English Princes to buyld monaste^ryes, as though ignorance
had been the chief motyue to their woorks of charity. And the^ he alleges
half a tale and half a ly toge^^ther out of D. John Reynolds, D. Ram. de
ecclesia Romans lib. 2. cap. 5.
that Francisc^ Samson general of the Friars Franciscans should (...) that
Friars had first Conscientia, then leesing (...) first syllable, they remained
only with Scientia, (...) then leesing again an other first syllable there
rema^^ned only entia: a jest fit for John Reynol^ wit, with which kind of
devises he answ^^reth Card. Bellarmynes serious writing, (...) rather the little
piece thereof, which has held him occupied so many years with shame enough.
But why do not D. John or Sir. F. tell us the original, or cite some author
where we may read this goodly merry tale, which yet every man sees how little it
is to the purpose we have in hand: and yet notwithstanding as though he had
said something to the purpose, yea proved clerly the former propo^ition, that
we hold ignorance to be the mother ^f devotion he adioyneth immediately these
words:

To ad further proof in a case so manifest were (...) light a Candle at noone
day, Page 51.
yet this will I ad ex ^bundanti: if public prayer in the Cathol. Church (...)
congregation of the faithful be a cheef and a prin^^pal part of devotion? S. F.
lighted candle to ^ us see his own ignorance.
made you not ignorance the ^^ther of devotion, when as you would not allow
their public prayers in a tongue that the people vn^^stood? Surely Sir we are
much beholding (...) you for adding this abundant proof, and ^or lighting us
a candle to see and discover our ignorance thereby, who understanding or what
devotion is, though the Warder at ^^rge laid you down her defynition with
(...) causes and effects thereof both out of S. ^ugustine, What devotion is
A^g. ^. de Spirit. and li* cap 50. D. Tho. 2. q. 82. art. 20.
S. Thomas and others showing ^^rgelie, that devotion is a religious virtue
de^ending of the inward affection and will of ^an, devoted to Gods service,
which thing (...) knight and his Ministers either vndersta^^^ng not or caring
not for it, do come now ^^aine to affirm and put in print that public prayer
in the Church is the chief and principal part of devotion. Which if it were
true, then singers, readers organists and other that perform the said public
service should be ever most devout, whereof commonly notwithstanding the
contrary is found by experience. And it is a most absurd thing in the knight
and his Ministers to defyne an internal virtue by an external act, albeit
thesaid act of prayer may sometimes be an effect of devotion in good men,
though not always or of necessity, for that a man may be inwardly devout, and
yet not pray externallie: and again he may say many external prayers with the
lyppes without true internal devotion of the heart, as beggars are wont to do
for an alms, and ministers for their fee. And thus I am forced to leese time
in teaching this old knight very ordinary grounds and principles not only of
true divinity, but also of very moral philosophy.

ignorance to be the mother of devotion, for that these hitherto are found to
be none at all, but shifts and follies. Our contriman (says he) the Popes
Champion D. Stapleton confidently affirms, D. Stapl. against Ievvel, art. 3.
p. 75.
that denotion is not furthered but hindered by a tongue that is understood. Lo
here a goodly proof, and well to the purpose. But I answer you that he
affirms it not so confidentlie (Sir) as you guilfully relate him) corrupting
both his words and his meaning: For he says not absolutely as you would make
him, How a known tongue may let inward devotion more then an unknown.
that the act and exercise of a man's devotion is all ways hindered by a
known tongue, but that sometimes in some case it may be; as for example, if a
devout man understanding not Latin would exercise his private devotion and
contemplation a part in S. Paul's Church at London when your Ministers are
chaunting their English service: clear it is that the less he should
understand the words of the singers, the less distraction he should have from
his inward devotion and recollection of mind, so as in this case, a known
toug would hinder devotion more then an unknown, which is the case whereof
Doct. Stapleton and other Catholykes do speak, and in this sense it is most
true and evident to all that understand the nature of devotion, which Sir Fr.
and his Ministers seem not to do, either in the nature of her definition, or
in tenderness of affection and inward feeling, as the Warder tells him.

Well then we have heard his proofs hitherto In a word (says he) D. Cole
deane of Paule's in the disputation at Westminster did a^ow even in the
honorable assembly of the Council and Nobles, and frequent concourse of the
Commons with great vehemency this proposition in these words. I say,
ignorance is the mother of devotion. Lo, here what a goodly birth is brought
forth after so long traueling, no book, no writing, no one letter can be
alleged to prove this Maxim, but only the saying of one in vehemence of
disputation, and this also without any certain witnesses besides the adversary
himself. If Doct. Cole should have vttred any such word in that vehemency
which here is signified, A Cauil ^. ou^ D. Cole.
were this sufficient to make it a Maxim and infallible rule of belief among
all Catholykes? Or can this deliver Sr. F. from rashness and leuity to have
written and printed, that we all hold it so? Doctor Cole might say perhaps, or
any other, that the leardnest men are not always the most devout, and so does
the Warder also, setting down the reason thereof out of S. Thomas at large, for
that devotion depending more of the affections of our mind then of our
knowledge and understanding, is fownd more abundant oftentimes in the simplez
sort. And if Sr. F. understood the nature of virtues and were not obstinat in
respect of mayntayning his own heretical credit, he would see and acknowledge
so much also, and recall his former mad calumniation, that we hold Ignorance for
mother of devotion: Lib de (...).
but as Tertullian says: It is easier for Sectaries to a^ ten new errors then
to recall one. For which cause I will urge this matter no further against him.

THE MINISTER O. E. is called up, to help out his K. in defense of this first
forged position and how he performs the same. CAP. VIII.
ANd yet before we leave of this whole I say that it is most true that Sr. F.
does object viz, Page 42.
that Papists hold Ignorance to be the mother of devotion. Loehere a new
Pithagoras that will be believed at his word, I say (quoth he) And what are you
sir I pray you, that we must believe you after the Knight. and more then him, who
having said it, oftentimes before, has not hitherto been able to prove it? Let
us hear then how you will play your part, who came in so freshlie and auouche
so stoutly: Let us hear your proofs. Yt follows ymediatlie. Doctor Cole
(says he) in a certain disputation at vvest-minster did openly affirm it.
This is no more then was said before and not proved, and therefore foolishly
brought in now again by the supplier. But hear him out further for he has
yet more to say: Hosius (says he) affirms, Ibidem. An issue joined upon the
words ascribed to Hosius.
that ignorance is not only worthy pardon but reward also. And is it so Sir
and will you stand to it? well then let us join upon this issue, and see who
shall be cast, and let the reader first note that the false Minister sets
down these words ascribed to Hosius in a different letter, to make them more
markable, as if they were Hosius his own words indeed. And secondly let him
consider, that whose words so ever they be, yet do they not prove the former
proposition that Ignorance is the mother of devotion, but only that some kind
of ignorance or lack of some knowledge may not only be pardonable but
meritorious also, which is a different thing from auouching Ignorance to be the
mother of devotion.

having set down many other authorities of ancient fathers, to prove what a
great and singular benefyt we receive by the force of that article of our
Creed, A coosening trick.
Credo sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam, I believe the holy Catholic Church, and
all that she holds and teaches, he shows that among other commodityes
which we receive from thence, one is, that simple men understanding only the
principle and necessary points of their faith, and professing with S. Paul, 1.
Cor. 2.
that they believe Christ Jesus crucified (and therein all that belongs
thereunto) for other matters and mysteries of higher capacity, it is not
absolutely necessary for every particular man and woman to know and believe
them fide explicita, Supra cap. 7. Number. 6.
that is, by distinct and clear belief, as before has been showed, but that by
a more general and ymplied faith, whereby we profess to believe his holy
catholic Church, and all that she teaches and believes, we include also
these other points necessary to our salvation. To which purpose Hosius having
alleged the saying of S. Clemens Alexandrinus and other fathers more ancient
then S. Hillary he adds these words: Hosius, lib. de fide and Symbolo c. 14.
Et eos secutus Hilarious, habet (inquit) non tam veniam quam praemium ignorare
quod credas, quia maximum fidei stipendium est, sperarequae nescias. Hillar.
lib. 8. de Trin. inetio.
S. Hillary following the foresaid fathers says, that to be ignorant of that
thou beleuest is a matter worthy not so much of pardon as reward, for that
the greatest reward of faith is to hope for that which thou know not: These
are the words of that great and ancient Catholic doctor S. Hilary, whose
name our Minister durst not cite, but of purpose omitteth the same and affirms
most falsely that they are Hosius his words. And this is one cosenage, let us
examyne an other.

And in an other place (says he) Hosius affirms that, Two nototorious
Cosenages of O.E.
nihil scire ijs, Omnia scire, to know nothing is to know all things: and that
it is sufficient for a man to believe that which the Cathol. Church believes,
Page 42.
albeit he be not able to show what it believes. Here I say there is an other
false deceitful shift, no less fraudulent and shameless then the former: for
that these words are not the words of Hosius no more then the former, Hos.
Ibid.
but are only cited by him, by name, and expressly out of ^ertullian de
praescript. Where after a long and learned discourse about the rule of faith
instituted by Christ and his Apostles and left to the Church to be delivered
unto us and to be conserved from time to time, Tertullian says, that all good
Catholic men ought to be content and acquiet their minds with this rule and
sum of faith left unto us, and not to be over curious in examyning,
discussing or seeking further knowledge then is delivered to them in this rule
by their Catholic mother the Church. Haec regula (says he) a Christo
instituta nullas habet apud no^ quaestiones, nisi quas haereses inferunt,
Tertul. de praescript. cap. 14.
and quae hareticos faciunt. This rule of faith instituted by Christ and
delivered to his Church has no doubt or question among us Catholykes but such
as either heresies do bring in, or do make heretics: And then after a sharp
reprehension against curious men, Tertullians reprehension of curious heretics
that brag of skill.
and such as under pretense of seeking knowledge are always disputing in
matters of faith, he concludes thus. Nouissime ignorare melius est, Tertul.
Ibid.
ne quod non debeas, noris, quia quod debeas nosti, etc. Finally it is better
to be ignorant in many things least you should know that you ought not to know,
seeing you know already (by the rule of faith received) so much as you should
know. And then further. Ibid.
Cedat curiositas fidei, cedat gloria saluti, certe aut non obstrepant aut
quiescant aduersus regulam, nihil vltra scire, omnia scire est, etc. Let
curiosity of searching yield unto faith and believing: let the vain glory of
disputing yield unto the study of our salvation, and at leastwise either let
them not brabble at all, or let them be sylent against this rule of faith
receued, for to know nothing besides this, is to know all things.

Now let the sober reader judge what honesty, Illations against O.* E.
that cites these places out of Hosius, to prove his purpose that we hold
Ignorance to be the mother of devotion: for first they are not the sentences of
Hosius as now we have showed, but of S. Hillary and Tertullian: and secondly
they do make nothing to prove, that we hold ignorance to be the mother of
devotion, but rather that these fathers do hold it, if any such things be in
their sentences or tending that way, which is much against our Minister if you
mark it. But thirdly I say that all this is nothing to his purpose, but
altogether to ours, for that these sayings of the fathers and many other that
might be alleged to the same effect do tend principally to reprove the curious
searching disputing and wrangling of heretics that brag of singular knowledge
and do object ignorance and simplicity to Catholics, which ignorance
notwithstanding and simplicity with promptnes of obeying and believing what is
left unto them by the Church their mother, is preferred by the foresaid
fathers before all the curiosity and knowledge vawnted of by heretics, ^. Cor.
8.
which is truly called. Scientia inflans puffing science, by the Apostle.

The Conclusion of this chapter.
that we hold Ignorance for the mother of devotion; albeit to the very force
and substance of the Warders reply he has answered scarce any one point at
all to the purpose. For the Warder meaning to have the truth tried indeed
substantially and reallie whither ignorance or science were holden by
Catholykes to be needful to devotion, he took a sownd way and went roundly to
the matter, setting down the true definition of devotion out of Catholyke
Doctors, and namely out of S. Thomas in name of all the rest: which definition
being the true touchstone of the nature of each thing, seeing it excludes
ignorance expressly, and requires knowledge, does convince Sir F. his fiction of
forgery, and delivers all Catholykes from that fond imputation.

Moreover the Warder again showed at Thus you see (S^. F.) that we hold not
ignorance for the mother nor daughter nor kinswoman, of devotion but rather to
the contrary we hold that devotion is fownded and proceeds of knowledge,
whereof Catholyks have been ever and in all ages more studious and greater
enemies to ignorance then Protestants can with any reason presume to have been,
for the little time they have been in the world.

And by this means the said Warder takes an occasion to make a third
discourse, Principal points of the VVarders discourse untouched by the knight
and Minister.
and to show by many profes and examples that Catholyks have been ever more
greater furtherers of all kind of learning, science and knowledge belonging to
piety, then Protestants, and namely of that whereof every Sectarie of our time
does brag, to wit, of holy scriptures, which is evident, by conseruing the
same vncorrupt so many ages, whereby Sectaries of our time are come to have
the^, which otherwise they should not, and they are forced to take them upon
our credit. And more then this, the Bybles set forth in our times in Hebrew,
Greek Chaldy, Syriak and other learned tongues was done by our men, infinite
commentaries also published upon them, Universities and Lectures erected by
them for their study, School degrees and preferments appointed for those that
profit most in that study all which Catholyks would never have done, if they
had been enemies of knowledge and specially of Scriptures.

More means to Christian knovvleg in use amongst Catholyks then amongst
Protestants.
as the frequent use of festiual and holy days, wherein the Acts of Christ
and his Saints are recownted, repeated and imprinted to the peoples minds.

The use of Images, representations and many exterial ceremonies belonging to
the same end: all which do contain, renew and keep in memory the mysteries of
Christian faith amongst unlearned people (which can not read or study books)
more then any thing else, especially the Cath. expositions of their Pastors and
teachers being adjoined thereunto, as before has been showed to be ordained by
our Church: So as if all these things do tend to knowledge, yea a more certain,
sure and wholesome knowledge (containing the sense and true meaning of their
mother the universal Cath. Church) then every private man can pyke out of
scriptures by his own study or reading (though every man and woman could read
as they can not) or then they can take by the interpretation of any particular
Minister following likewise his own head, or of any particular country or
Province following their own devise, different from the whole body of
Christendom: This I say being so, and so many ways to knowledge used by us,
let every indifferent man judge, who may best brag of knowledge, or more object
ignorance to others, notwithstanding the Knight. and Ministers babble to the
contrary. And with this we end our speech of this first forged position
objected unto us.

OF THE SECOND forged principle, that laymen must not meddle in matters of
religion; wherein is handled again the matter of reading scriptures in
English, and why the Catholyke Church does forbid some books and purge
others. CAP. IX.
THE second ground or position attributed VVatchvvoord. Page 20.
When they had (says he) thus settled this blind course to keep the people
from knowledge, etc. Then they offer an other position, that it was not for
Laymen to meddle with matters of religion, The second fayued position.
for that belo^ged only and wholly as a privilege to Priests, thereby making
them secure and careless of God and all godlynes. This is the position;
whereunto the Warder answers in these words: In setting down of this forged
position by the knight there is some subteltie joined with impudency.
VVachvvord page 20.
For first in the former part, where he says we hold, that it is not for
laymen to meddle with religion, he subtelly leaves doubtful this word (meddle)
either to signify that laymen must not determyne or defyne matters of
religion, or else not to meddle or care for them at all. In the former sense we
grant, that in Synods and councels where controversies of faith are to be
treated Bishops and clergy men have only authority to defyne and determyne.
For that S. Paul says, Act. 20.
that they are appointed by the holy Ghost to govern the Church, though
before they do come to determyne, they do help themselves also in the search
of truth by the labors and learning of laymen, and take their judgment, when
they may give light, as in all Councels is seen. But in the second sense, it
is most impudent, that he infers, that hereby we would make laymen secure
and careless of God and all godliness.

in the first we strive not much) how and with what face ca^ the K^. auerre
again that laymen are so barred by us from meddling in matters of religion, as
thereby, we make them secure and careless of God and all godliness? what proofs
does he bring now (think you) for answering so notorious a charge? You shall
hear his own words. Page 52.
In the later sense (says he) I need not labor any more for proof, then that
before is set down, touching your breeding of Gods children in blyndnes and
ignorance, and withholding the key of knowledge from them. Very fond reasoning
of the K^.
Do you see what he brings? If the Knight. had talked of breeding young geese, he
could speak no more fondly then here he does. And what I pray you is his key of
knowledge withheld from the lay sort? forsooth the reading of the English
Bible from such as understand yt not. And how many apprentices and good wives
of London with others of other places have opened so many doors of later years
to disorders with this key, as neither their husbands nor Masters nor
Magistrate could or ca^ well remedy? let puritanes brownists louing-families and
other like be witnesses. And yet as though all stood in this point of reading
English Bybles, he asks us very earnestly in the next words following. Page
52.
And how will you have them (lay people) meddle with cr^are for that they know
not? And then again. How do you permit laymen thus to meddle with matters of
Religion, when as you take from them the use of scriptures? Did you ever hear
such demands? or did ever man deal with such adversaries? is there no care of
piety, God or godliness (for this is our question) but in such only as read
scriptures in English? What will you say to all those Protestants among you who
can not read nor have time to hear them red, will you say there is no godliness
or care of God in them? if you do, I say, and you can not deny it, that they
are the greatest part of your English protestant people.

who are much commended (says he) for searching the Scriptures, whether things
were so as the Apostles had delivered. The second out of S. John's Epistle
saying, Dearly beloved believe not every spirit, 1 Joan. 4. Examination of two
places of Scripture for vulgar reading thereof.
but t^ie spirits whether they be of God or not. Out of both which two places
he would have us take it for proved, that all kind of lay people, men and
women, learned and unlearned must search scriptures daily in the vulgar
tongues, to examine and judge whither their Pastors and teachers say truly or not? And thereby also try spirits: and that without this, there is no care of
God or godliness in the lay sort: every man, woman and damozel must have their
key of knowledge to open scriptures and try spirits.

first, of the men of Berraea (which every where is alleged and urged by
Protestants most impertinently to this effect) I would ask our Knight. how he can
prove their case to be like ours? to wit, first that they were unlearned and
vulgar Jews that searched those scriptures in Berraea, to see whether the
places of the Prophets alleged by Paul and Silas about Christ were so or no
and secondly that those scriptures which they searched were in the vulgar
Syriak tongue and not in the Hebrew, which the common people for the most part
understood not, and thirdly that this searching was a general promiscuous
reading of all scriptures translated into vulgar languages for all sorts ^f
people to read and examine thereby their Priests and Pastors doctrine and to
judge thereof, which three points the Knight. and his Minister will never be able to
prove, and so indeed do prove nothing in alleging this place most impertinent
to their purpose. For as for the case of the men of Berraea, it was a very
particular and different yea extraordinary case, for that S. Paul and Silas
were not the ordinary teachers and Pastors of those Jews of Berraea, but
taught rather a new and strange doctrine different in many substantial points
(as appeared) from the ancient Religion of the Jews and yet they alleged the
sayings and testimonies of the old Prophets and Patriarchs for the same: How
the Jews of Berraea did search the Scriptures.
so as the learned sort of Jews of Berraea had great reason to search
diligently those places of scriptures to see whether they were so as the
Apostles alleged and interpreted or no; and for that the controversy was not
so much about the words as the sense and interpretation, it is evident that
they were of their learned men that took this search in hand and not vulgar
people, whereof our controversy is, and so much do the precedent words of the
text clearly show: if S. F. after his fraudulent manner had not cut them of and
dissembled them, for thus says the text of S. Luke.

Fratres autem confestim etc. The brethren out of hand conuayed by night Paul
and Silas from the persecution of Thessalonica unto the town of Be^^^, Act 17.
where being arrived they entered into the Synagog of the Jews, and these were
the most noble of them that d^e in Thessalonia, who received the word with all
g^^^dines searching daily the Scriptures if these things alleged out of the
Prophets about Christ by Paul and Si^as) were so or not. This is the place^ Now
let the discreet reader weigh prudently whether S.F. have behaved himself
knightlik^ here or no: first in cutting of these word which most cleared the
doubt (to wit tha^ these were no unlearned Jews, but no bilio^es, ^ says the
text, that is the most principal among them) and then in making so impertinent
^illation, that for so much as these princip^^ learned Jews did in that
particular occas^^^ search some places of Scriptures, ther^^^^ must all our
lay peeple read of necessity, (...) make themselves judges of their ordina^^
teachers and Pastors.

To the second place of trying spirits whether About tr^eng af spi^its.
for if there be any other means, then it is absurd to tie the Apostles
counsel of trying spirits to every man's reading of scriptures, where the trial
being remitted to each man's own interpretation will ^al out so difficultas
no end can be expected. For I would ask our Knight. for examples sake when will two
women accusing one the other of a scolding spirit try out the truth of each
ones spirit by their own read^ng scriptures, especially if there he no Judge
nor the coocking stool at hand? Or to take some greater example when ^il any
two Sectaries as Brownistes and any other of our time contending about
heretical spirits try the same by scriptures, yea though ^hey be of the
learneder sort? does not this ^ppeare by experience daily? and how much ^esse
then ca^ unlearned people try their own ^r other men's spirits by reading
scriptures in ^ulgar languages?

And with this I would leave the Knight. in this S. Chrysostom notably abused the
Knight.
as I can not omit to dis^^uer it to the reader, whereby he may see ^ith what
consciences these men treat mat^^rs of religion, using legerdemain in every
^ing, and this not of error or ignorance, but of known and set malice to
deceive, which trick whenever (good reader) thou do discover plainly in
any writer though it were but once, yet ought thou never to trust him
again, but much more here in this our controversy, where so often I have
showed the same most evidently both in the Knight. and his Minister O. E. and the
rest. But now to the place it self.

S. Chrysostom (says he) thinks it an absurd thing that all men* should not
thus meddle with religion. Page 53.
Quomodo absurdum non est, etc. What an absurdity is that: for money we trust
not other men but count it and tell it after them, Chris. in 2. Cor. hom. 13.
but for more excellent things simply to follow other men's sayings, especially
fith we have the exactest rule and balance of all the testimony of the Law of
God, therefore I pray and beseech you that you will leave what this and that man
thinks, and enquire all things of the Scriptures.

he calls the Morality of that he had said before, S. Chrisosto^s whole
argument pe^uerted.
to wit, pauperem meliori esse condition quam diuitem, that the poor man is in
better stare then the rich: and he prefixeth these words for the title of the
Chapter which being a Christian Paradox as you see, he prosecuteth the same most
earnestly and piously through out the whole Chapter, showing the perils of the
rich, and security of the poor with many other differences, and that we must
not in this point follow the common opinion of wordly men that esteem riches
for great felicity but attend rather what the laws and rules of Christ do
teach us, and finally he concludes: Ibidem.
Quae cum ita fint vulgi opiniones ne circumferamus, Sed res ipsas expe^^amus.
An non enim absurdum and praeposterum fuerit nos cum de pecunijs agitar, alijs
fidem non habere, Sed numero and cal^ulo id co^^attere: cum autem de rebus
iudicandum est in al^o^um opiniones temere ac velut obtorto collo trahi, ^^que
cum exactam rerum omnium lancem and amussim ba^eamus nempe deuinarum legum
Sententiam? Quo^^^avos omnes, rogo atque obsec^o, vt quid hic au^ ille de^^^^
rebus sential, nihil morantes, Scripturas sacras ^de en consulatis, ac quae
verae sint opes cogn^scatis, which words truly englished do sound thus.

Which things (concerning true^riches and The true interpretation of S.
Chrisostomes words.
but let us examine things as they be in themselves, for were it not an ^bsurd
and preposterous thing, when we deal in money matters not to trust other men,
but to tell and count it, and when we are to judge of things themselves to
suffer us rashly and as it were with a wry neck to be draw into other me^nes
opinions, especially where as we have that exact balance, rule and square of
all things, which is the sentence or determination, of Gods laws? Wher^ore I
do pray and beseech you all, that in these things you will not stand upon, what
this or that man thinks, but that you take counsel rather of holy scriptures,
and learn by them which are true riches indeed.

The abuse offered by S. F. to 5. Chrysostom.
to make it sound somewhat to his purpose, albeit not much though it were as
he alleges it. But first of all he wresteth his whole meaning (as before I
have noted) which is the greatest sin in alleging any author that may be.
For S. Chrysostom. treats a far different question from ours, to wit, of true
and false riches, as in the title of the Chapter he professes, and having
handled it largely, he concludes in those first words by me alleged, and
gu^lfully cut of and left out by Sr. F. Quae cumita sint etc. which things
being so let not us follow the opinion of the vulgar sort (about true riches
and poverty) but let us consider things ^^ they be in themselves, etc. which
words do wholly overthrow Sr. F. principal illation, that unlearned people
should not follow other men's opinions, to wit, their Pastors in matters of
religion, but go and try it in scriptures, whereof S. Chrysostom never so much
as dreamed.

Secondly the first words alleged by the Quomodo absurdum non est, etc. are
praeposterum left out in his translation imports some fraud also, for that
this word shows the comparison not to be between reading of scriptures and
other men's testimonies, especially our ordinary Cath. Pastors as he would have
it seem. Fourthly those other words. ( But for more excellent things simply
to) are not in the text as you may see by comparing it, but are deceitfully
laid together to make men think that simple obedience or belief of our teachers
in Gods Church is here reprehe^ded by S. Chrysostom, and that every man and
woman is willed to go to the scriptures. And for this cause fifthly he
translateth those words diuinarum the testimony of the law of God: where as
the sentence or determination of these divine laws here spoken of by S.
Chrysostom, as they be contained partly in scriptures and partly in the
tradition of Gods Church, which was before scriptures were written, so is it
not necessary for every man and woman to be remitted to reading of scriptures
for learning them as here, is pretended.

Wherefore I pray and beseech you all, that in these things you will not stand
upon what this or that man thinks, etc. Which words Sr. F. translateth thus:
I pray and beseech you that you will leave what this or that man thinks, etc.
leaving out of purpose the words that make most to the matters de hijs rebus,
of these things, to wit, of true and false riches, which is the subject handled
by S. Chrysostom. And Sr. F. would have his reader^ think (though never so
unlearned) that he is prayed in all matters of Religion to leave what this or
that man thinks (though it be his Pastor or any other Cath. teacher) and
enquire all those things of the scriptures which is most absurd and furthest
from S. Chrysostom^ meaning: And in these very last words of the Knight. there be
two or three shift^s and manifest corruptions: for where as S. Scripturas
sacras de eis consulatis, he translateth it, and enquire all these things of
the scriptures, adding the word (all) of purpose to disguise the meaning of S.
Chrysostom, as though he would have all matters by every man and woman
imediatly searched out from the scriptures, and as though he had not handled a
particular argument, for which the scriptures were to be consulted against the
vain opinion of vulgar men about ac quae verae sint opes cognoscatis, and that
you may know which are true riches.

And thus I have been longer then I thought It is re^orded (says he) that some
of the learneder sort of your Clergy have used to say among their friends:
Page 54. Paralip. Abb. vrspergen. Page 448.
Sic dicerem in Scholis. Sed tamen (manet in^er nos, etc.) I would say so in
the Schools, but yet (let it be kept secret amongst our selves,) I think the
contrary.

These words I do not find in the Author by him alleged cited in the margyn,
and therefore God knows from what forge they come, perhaps by some Ministers
notebook, that either devised or corrupted them in cyting. But suppose they may
be found, and that some Schole readers in matters either of philosophy or
divinity (for he specifieth no science) not belonging to any article of faith
should say thus, Impertinent matter brought in.
that in the schools for not offending any part, he would follow the common
opinions of that university of schole, though in private for himself he were of
an other opinion, what does this prove? or to what end was this brought forth
by the Knight. to confirm his principal proposition, that we forbid layme^ to
meddle in matters of religion? do you see what direct proofs they bring.

The Fathers (says he) you have mangled and depraved where their testimonies
were pregnant against your errors, Page 54.
as for example; that plain place of Gregory Nissene, eam solummodo uaturam,
quae increata est, colere and venerari d^dicimus: we have learned to adore and
worship only that nature, which is uncreated: where your Spanish divines in
their Index expurgatorius set down this direction, deleatur dictio solummodo,
put out the word only; and sundry such places, as both, Of diverse Iudices
printed and pablished in sundry contries.
our learned men have discovered, and in your Indices are to be found out, etc.
If our Indices be extant (Sir) and that in print to show to the world what we
do in this behalf, then is not necessary the discovery of your learned men to
manifest the same, See Posseui^us in biblioth. select. lib.
and then is it both false and ridiculous which immediately you ad; that we
thought to have it remayn secret among our selves what we do in this behalf
concerning the ancient Fathers, etc. For who would publish books and
expurgatorie Indices in all countries of such corrections as we think needful,
if we would have the matter secret, but these men must needs say somewhat though
never so fond or repugnant to reason.

the Cath. Roman Church for repressing heretical books and purging others
corrupted by them, with infinite impostures, false translations, wicked
annotations, pernicious commentaries postiles, arguments, observations, and
other like most pestilent infections, I shall be forced in this place to stand
upon this matter somewhat, and to open to the reader the truth of things about
this point, and then shall we answer also this particular objection, of
deleaiur solummodo made here by Sr. Francis, and else where by many of his
co^parteners as though we meant to blot out, all that is against us in any sort
of authors whatsoever.

First then it is to be understood, that it has The custom of heretics to
corrupt books.
but to corrupt other me^nes wrytings also most audaciously, to make them seem
to be of their sect and faction, even as rebels are wont to do, who being but
few at the beginning, do give out notwithstanding for their better credit, that
they have many and great parteners in secret, and do oftentimes fayn letters to
testify the same.

Of this fraud of heretics, Origenes in epist. ad Alexandrinos. Tertul. lib.
contra Marcion. Eusebius. Caesar. in apol. sub. nomine Pamphy^^ martyris Ruffinus
in epist. ad Macarium.
and of their corrupting not only the scriptures when they can but also other
authors and writers, we have many ancient complaints among the Fathers of all
ages, which were ouerlong here to recite, the reader may see those that I have
noted in the margent, and thereby may he make a guess of the rest.

^uagr. lib. 3. ca. 31. Cassiodorus de Divine. lect. ca. 2. Leuitius de Sectis.
Act. 8. tom. 9. Byblioth. Sanct. 6. Synod. act. 15. tom. 2. council. etc.
whereby he would bring all things in doubt and consequently the Church of God
into confusion, the said Church in the strength of his holy spirit has
striuen and resisted ever with all diligence industry and longanimity,
accursing first both the heretics and all their heretical wrytings, and then
cleansing and purging the works of other authors from their pernicious
corruptions, No book of former heretyke has remained.
infections, and poisoned impostures, and this diligence of the Cath* Church
has peruayled so much and has been so grateful in the sight of God, as we see
and feel at this day the miraculous effects thereof which are, that of so many
heretical volumes, as have been written from age to age against the truth of
Catholyke religion, and were curiously read and highly esteemed in those days
by men that loved novelties; scarce any one remains to this day, in so much
that if we had not mention and memory of their said books and absurd positions
by the testimony of Cath. authors that wrote against the^, we should scarce
have had any knowledge that they had written such woorks.

Arrians, which did set a work all the Cath. Fathers and Doctors of diverse
ages to answer them? what is become of the many books of Pelagius our learned
(though wicked) Britain? of Faustus the great Manichie, of whose great parts
and labors S. Augustine himself that was, his greatest adversary does bear
witness? of Petilian, Crescentius, and other writing Donatists? What is become
of the 200. books or volumes of our Ihon VVicliffe or wicked-beleef as Thomas
Walsingham calls him? are they not all gone? So as if our other learned
contreyman Thomas Walden VVicliffes opposite, and some others did not make
mention thereof, and of that number, we should never have known that he had
written so many to his own confusion.

Well then these are the effects of this holy Martyn Luthers works at this day
in England (I mean of Protestants) though they were more perhaps in number
then those of S. Augustine, and much more esteemed for some years by his
fol^owers, Luthers books out of request.
he being accounted the Elias of our time, and Father of the new ghospel. And
the like I might ask of the books of Oecolampadius, Carolstadius, Zwinglius,
and other the first pillars of Protestants Religion? and if they be either in
contempt, or of declining estima^ion among their own offspring so soon, what
do we think that they are amongst Catholyks, and will be to their posterity when
this tempest shall be blowne-ouer, and the Church restored to a calmer season
again?

Alcaron it self, Macheuile and Bodin tending to Atheism, and baudy Boccace,
with the most pestilent English Palace of Pleasure (all forbidden among us
Catholyks) are read and studied by whom it lyketh them, whereby it must needs
ensue, that the peoples judgment and affections are pitifully infected with
poison in every kind where no prohibition is used to the contrary.

among them is to prohibit and keep out Catholyke books, No books prohibited
amongst protestants but Catholyke.
which only do contain indeed the true medicines for these maladies, and yet
is this a hard matter to do, considering the variety, vtility, and necessity of
such books, insomuch that if they exclude not all good sciences, and together
with them the ancient Fathers, Councels and Ecclesiastical histories
themselves, and more then this destroy not many monuments of their own, they
cannot exclude the arguments persuading people to the truth of Catholyke
religion.

And this being so let us se now a little what Diligence of the Catholyk Church
in prohibiting and purging books.
The late universal and Ecumenical Counsel of Trent preceyuing the infinite
multitude and variety of heretical wrytings that were come forth already and
came forth daily of all new sects as Lutherans, Zwinglians, Anabaptists,
Caluinists, Swinkefeldians, Libertines, Trinitarians, new Arrians; and others,
to infect the world withal, Index expurgar. Concili^^ Trident.
resolved according to the custom of other general Councels and Synods before
them, to take some effectual remedy for this disorder, and for that purpose
appointed an Index or catalogue of all prohibited books, and did set down 10.
rules at the beginning thereof for better direction of all Cath. men in that
affayre; whereof the first is; that all books and authors forbidden or condemned
before by any General Counsel or Bishops of Rome until the year of Christ
1515. (which was 2. years before Luther published his heresy) should be
understood also to be forbidden and condemned by them; by which we may see,
that one council in the Cath. Church has relation to another and confirms
the same, which heretyks use not to do in their assemblyes and meetings.

The second rule is; That all Archeretyks that have been Authors of several
sects since that time, as Luther, Zwing^ius, Caluyn, Balthazar, Pacimontanus
Swin^feldius, and other like are condemned by name with their books, as other
heretykes also whatsoever since that time in general. The third rule is; that
all translation of other men's works and wrytings made by heretyks, so they
conteyne no corrupt^on contrary to the Cathol. faith may be permitted.

The fourth rule is, how bybles in vulgar tongues, may be read, permitted, or
forbidden. The fifth rule is; that books which treat not of divinity but of
other matters set forth by heretyks may be permitted after they are cleansed,
and purged from heretical impostures; and the like of other books and woorks
with particular direction how they may be purged, and restored to their pure
integrity, the particulars whereof were ouerlong here to be discussed. Only I
will advertise that besides these rules, Instructions for expurging of books.
there are certain instructions also set forth in print in the same Index for
the execution of these rules, wherein having showed how they may proc^ed with
books of our age written either by heretics or Catholyks, if they conteyne
errors heresies, athesmes, scurrility, lasciviousness or the like. The fourth
instruction has these words: Index expu^gat. Conc. Triden^. de correct.. 4.
In libris autem Cath^licorum veterum nihil mutari fas sit nisi vbi aut fraud
haereticorum, aut typographi incuria manifes^us error irrepserit. It may not be
lawful (for them that correct books) to change any thing at all in the books of
the ancient Catholyks, except where any manifest error should appear to have
crept in either by the fraud of heretyks, or negligence of the printer, etc.

Behold here Catholyks delivered from Pius 4. and of all Popes after him, and
now again by Clemens Octauus as appears by their several Breues put before
it, neither would the Spanish Index expurgatorius have durst to gone against
this direction, Index expurgat. Hisp. impress. Madrit^ apud Alpho^s. Gomitium.
an. D^i 1584.
especially seeing that the Card. Gaspar Quiroga head of the Inquisition in
Spain in his preface to the said book says; that this expurgation was made
according to the meaning and direction of the council of Trent and that by the
cheifest men of all their universities, Two considerations in putting out any
thing of the ancient waters.
so as albeit they cannot stand to give a particular reason of every censure or
expurgation that is made; yet it is most certain, that in all they put out of
any author before our age, they follow one of two reasons before mentioned, to
wit that either they find it thrust in by heretics, or by error of the printer,
and that other more ancient and corrected coppyes had it not, and so might
they say also of the former sentence alleged by Sir F. deleatur dictio
solummodo, especially seeing they do censure the sentence, not as a sentence of
Gregory Nissene (as falsely and fraudule^tly Sir F. does set it down) but of a
far later greek author named Antonius Abbas of whom they say thus in their
Index: Index expurgat. Hisp. fol. 20.
Ex libris Antonij Abbatis qui inscribuntur milissae, sieve sermones and
ementi^o titulo ascribuntur Ant. Magno. Out of the books of Antony an Abbot,
which are entitled Melissae or certain sermons, which falsely are ascribed to
Anthony the great, etc.

Gregory Nissene (as Sr. F. alleges it) nor yet of any other author of great
antiquity, being indeed nothing else but a collection of sentences out of many
authors here and there without order or method, and alleged by Margarinus a
Doctor of Paris in the fifth to me of his Bibliotheca sanctorum Parrum; In
which woork as himself confesses, in a certain preface, many things were
hastily shuffled up, and passing by many several hands diverse impertinent notes
were made in the margent, upon one of which Sr. F. groundeth his argument; that
this sentence so censured was taken out of Gregorius Nassenus, which yet
neither is found in him, nor do the learned men of Spain censure him or speak
of him, but only of these sermons of Antonius Abbas, in which many other things
are found worthy reprehension as this Index does show, and Protestants
themselves will not deny, as for example, where they say: Sermon. 72. col. 73.
Sermon. 26. col. ^49.
Deleantur illa verba, non potest ammus iniquus iustificari. An unjust mind
cannot be justified. And again Deus non omnium Deus est. God is not God of all
men. And again: Largire pio, and peccatori ne succurras. Sermon 27.
Give unto a good man, but give nothing to a sinner. And yet further: Lib. 2.
Sermon. 10.
Est autem in Dei ma^u non qu^uis: Every man is not in the hand of God. And
finally: Deus non colitur ab homine malo. Sermon. 55.
God is not worshipped by an evil man, etc. In all which sentences, you se
there is need of some censure and examimation, according as this Index does
note; and albeit by marginal notes they are pretended to be taken out of
ancient Fathers, yet neither is it always so, nor do they co^teyne good
doctrine, as you see, and it appertains to the solicitude of the Cath.
church to give notice thereof, where need is, least simple people be deceived.

And thus you se that we have justified the in English, and then for that we
pervert (as he says) the ancient Fathers with the ce^sure of deleatur when any
sentence lyketh us not. Of which two proofs whether is most from the purpose
let the reader judge, who has heard them both discussed.

The calling in of O. E.
What the minister O. E. says about this controversy.
First you must imagine he had seen all both what the watchman and the Warder
had said before, and what Sir Francis also had replied, and yet he comes in
with a flat new assertion as though he had seen nothing hitherto. Page 5^.
Likewayes (says he) they teach that laymen may not meddle with, matters of
religion, that is, that Princes have no power to reform the Church nor make
Ecclesiastical laws. Yea (Sir Minister) will you run out at that hole? and is
that the meaning of the Knight. assertion? How then follows the second part; that
thereby we make all laymen careless of God and all godlynes? and how does the
Knight. himself go about to defend it by saying, that we bar ^ay-men from reading
scriptures in English? can this be understood only of Princes and their
authority to make ecclesiastical laws? Who ever saw such brazen faces, as not
to blush thus to disagree? But harken to his inference upon this bold assertion
and confess that he may bear the bell for impudency.

If the Papists (says he) do so remove laymen from government in
Eeclesiastical causes that they need not to care how God is served then are
they not wro^ged by Sr. Francis, etc. Who would loose time to dispute with this
compagnion, and much less to answer him in his ^rantick contumelious speech
against F. Persons, which all men knowing to be unjust and false and so to be
proved by infinite witnesses, and to proceed only from a slanderous and
ignominious tongue of a lewd malicious minister, is rather to be ^ontemned then
answered. And so this shall suffice for examination of this position.

ABOUT S. THOMAS of Canterbury whether he were a traitor or no as maliciously
he is called by sir Francis and O. E. and what notorious impostures both they
and Fox do devise to disgrace him, against the testimony of all ancient
writers. CAP. X.
But now we must come to a greater and thereby, (as he says) made careless of
God and all godlynes; how might it fall to his purpose (think you) to rail at
this blessed archbishop martyred so long ago, and reigning now in heaven for
so many hundred years; but that such prince-parasits as these, do think they
cannot grace themselves sufficiently with Kings and Queens now a days in
England, except they have a fling at this ho^y man who stood in the gappe and
lost his life for the defense of his Churches liberty.

that among Catholyks there was no more required at laymens hands to the
exercise of pie^y, but only to go devoutly to mass, and to confession once a
year, and then though he were to be taynted with the grossest sins, yet Rome
had a trick to hale them into the rabble of their saints and so to canonise
them. You se how liberal this gentleman is in canonizing, that requires no
more perfection, but once a year to go to mass and confession, and then he
adds: Of this we have example of Tho. Becket in K. Henry the 3. his time,
whose treason to the Prince was apparent and manifest, etc.

Thus says he in his Watchword, wherein the Warder took him up for diverse
untruths and absurdities as namely for saying that we hold it for sufficient
perfection of holiness, to hear mass and confess once a year, and that a man
may be a Saint* with us yea canonized though he be taynted with the grossest
sins that may be: That S. Tho. of Canterbury was such a one canonized in the
time of K. Henry the third, etc. which last point (to omit the rest) about the
time of the death, A gross error About the time of S Thomas his death.
and canonization of S. Thomas under K. Henry the third (as this man says) and
not the second, is showed not only to be false, but of gross ignorance also,
seeing that K. Henry the 3. nephew to the second was borne more then 30. years
after the death and canonization of S. Thomas, to which represension of error
in story I do not find that S. F. gives any reason of just excuse in this his
reply now, nor yet O. E. for him, but rather as though nothing had been said
against him for it turns to repeat again the same error under pretense of a
namelesse author, though in the manner of telling his tale he would covertly
seem somewhat to answer the objection, for thus he writes:

To examyne a little (says he) the State of this Page 55.
who was a traitor as I do affirm (and not I only but None ever except some
late heretics.
many before me) against king Henry the second, but (to use the words of my
author) taken up and shryned for a new saint made of an old rebel 50. years
after his death, which was in the fourth year of king Henry the third, etc.
But this being so notorious an untruth (if he mean of his canonization as by
his former words in the Watch word may appear) and he being reprehended for
it before (as you have heard) for modesties sake should at least have named his
author for some show or defense. For if it be John Fox, or some such other of
as light credit as himself, you see what cogging it is one of them to aleadge
another, especially seeing Fox also cites the same words, with the same
parenthesis (to use the words of my author) but neither the one or the other
cites any author at all. And most certain it is that never any author of
credit in the world said or wrote that S. Thomas either practiced treason or
was made a saint in K. Henry the 3. his time, as in the former words of his
watch our knight affirmed, for that his conten^ion was with K. Henry the 2.
grand father to K. Henry the 3. and his canonization was by Pope Alexander the
3. many years before K. Henry the 3. was borne, as all writers do agree. And
the poor shift which here the knight runs unto for saluing of his former
error (to wit that S. Thomas his body was translated, Se Math. Paris and Matthew
West. an. Dn^i 1220. Henr. reg. 3. an. 5 of the translation of S Tho. 6. July.
or as he terms it, shr^ned the 4. year of K. Henry the 3.) maintayneth not
his former assertion that Thomas Becket committed treason and was made a Saint
in K. Henry the 3. his time. For what if S. Thomas body was translated from one
shrine to another under K. Henry the 3. does this prove that he was not
canonized before? or that he comm^tted treason against this prince that was
scarsely borne 30. years after his death? Ward. page 2^.
We have an example (says he) of Thomas Becket in Henry the 3. his time,
whose treasons to the prince were apparent and manifest, etc. And is it not
hereby apparent and manifest, that he told us before that Tho. Becket committed
treasons under Henry the 3^ and can this be excused now with telling us that
his body was translated under Henry the 3? But these are the ordinary shifts
which our adversaries use when they are taken trip, to run to impertinent
matter, thereby to dazel the eyes of the reader.

Let them read but John Stow in the 25. The authentical authors of the story of
S. Tho. of Canterbury.
to wit: Herbert Hoscan afterward Cardinal, John Salisbury bishop of Charters,
Allen Abbot of Teukesbury, William and Edward monks of Canterbury, all which
lived with him, as did also Peter of Blois Archdeaco^ of Wels. And soon after
under K. Richard the first, son to K. Henry the second, wrote Roger Houeden
doctor and cheef reader of divinity in Oxford the whole life of S. Thomas, as
is extant in his story, and so did Nubergensis also handle the same at the same
time, and so consequently after these, Matthew Paris, Matthew of Westminster,
Thom. VValsingam, Polidor Virgil, and others downwards in their histories, all
which do agree in this point against Sir Francis. First that S. Thomas was
slain and canonized under Pope Alexander the 3. and K. Henry the second, and
not under Henry the 3. his nephew, and secondly that he was a most holy man of
life, even setting the privilege of his martyrdom a side, and neither taynted
with gross sins as these gross tongues do slander him nor committed ever
any point of treason against his king, but as primate and head of the English
Church stood for the Ecclesiastical libertyes thereof as in conscience he was
bound, and by the issue of this my reioynder shall appear.

What bastinados and broken heads are threatened to S. F.
and in his demerit also with God, if he esteem that any thing, as it is like
enough he does, but little. But for the first about discredit I do remit it to
the judgment of the indifferent reader, what men will or may think o^ the honor
of such a knight, as is not ashamed to come forth in print with so many op
probrious speeches, made out (as it seems) of his fingers ends against so
honorable a personage as S. Thomas of Canterbury was, whilst he lived, and so
highly praised and esteemed by all writers for 4. hundred years after his
death, and this without alleging any one author old or new, good or bad,
credible or without credit for proof of that which he writes: For so does S.
F. deal with, us in his railing narration against S. Thomas, setting down as
he pretends the whole substance of that whieh passed between him and the
King without cyting book or author, and quite contrary to all that (for the
most part) which all ancient writers that lived with him have left behind them
written of this affayre; and moreover has corrupted (which is far worse) and
falsified also witingly and willingly diverse things which he found in other
authors, False dealing of S. Francis.
thereby to make them seem somewhat to his purpose: all which you shall see
evidently proved in this examination of the two foresaid points, to wit of his
life and contention with the King.

And for the first about his life and conversation, whosoever has written of
him besides (notwithstanding they wrote under the foresaid K. Henry his enemy
or Richard the first his son) do give most high praises to this man for his
integrity of life according to those words of D. Houeden: D. Houeden annal.
part. 2. fol. 2^7.
Vita etus irreprehensibilis erat coram Deo and hominibus. His life was
irreprehensible before God and man, yea his very adversaries themselves as Ihon
Fox by name, after he has showed the greatest gaul against him, yet
confessing the helps of nature that were in him (to use his own words) he
adds: Fox act. and mon. page 1^6 col. 2. n. 4.
Besides this (says he) he was of a chaste and strickt life if the histories be
true.

if the histories be true) and why should he call in doubt ancient histories,
more in this point, then in others? But you must understand that this Fox
having a special spite against this blessed man, and being desirous by all
means possible to disgrace him and his actions in his false lying martyrologe,
and finding no authors in the world before Luthers heresy to serve his purpose
or to speak or write evil of him, but all rather highly in his commendation,
what course takes the miseriable man think you? truly a most desperate, which
is to use these authors against themselves and against both their own sayings
and meanings and so patcheth he up, as it were out of them a long treatese and
narration of above 40. pages of paper against S. Tho. pretending to take it out
of the foresaid authors, but yet spicing it with so many ^fs and ands, Fox his
egregiou^ fal^e dealing against S. Thomas.
and adjoining so many glosses, parentheses, notes, observations,
interpretations, commentaries and censures of his own both in the text and
margent, as he makes all those writers to tell a quite contrary story to that
they purposed, and for which they wrote their books, in such sort, as if a man
should set out the bible or new Testament it self with such corruption and
peruersion it would more disgrace Christian religion (for whose confirmation it
was written) the^ any other wicked book whatsoever, yea then the Turks Alcaron
it self.

And this is the dealing of John Fox in cyting John Fox discrediteth all old
vvryters.

Page 204. col. 1. n. 4.


Scarce any testimony is to be taken of that age, being all blinded and
corrupted with superstition. Thus he says and this is the cause why Sir F.
alleges no author, and Fox forces them to speak as he would have them. But
I would ask John Fox again, if no writer of the age it self wherein S. Tho.
lived be to be credited about his affairs, how shall we believe writers of
later ages that must needs take it from the former, if they write with
foundation and not devise matter of themselves? Again, I would ask whether it
be probable that so great a king as K. Henry the second was, could get no man
to write the Story indifferently for him in his age? How likely a fiction is
this of Fox? And this may be sufficient for the first point; for seeing all the
foresaid writers and their woorks are full of high praises of S. Thom. for his
sanctity and perfection of life, and for that cause are specialy discredited
here by John Fox it shall be sufficient to remit the reader in this behalf to
thesaid volumes and wrytings before mentioned.

Whether S. Thom. was a traitor.
is easy to be judged by him, that is not passionate, and will without flattery
of temporal Princes consider indifferently, the dignity, pre-eminence, duty,
and obligation of Ecclesiastical governors in this behalf, for defense of
their spiritual jurisdiction; To which purpose the Warder said as follows:

If in every contention or dissension, that a bishop, Ward. p. 22.
priest, or other spiritual subject or Ecclesiastical Prelate may have with his
temporal prince, That all spiritual men resisting temporal magistrates in
Ecclesiastical matters are not traitors. Marc. 18.
the subject shall presently be condemned of treason (according to this servile
ce^sure of our knight who for flattering princes does make them absolute lords
both of body and soul) then John Baptist also must be accounted a traitor that
dealt so peremptorily with his king Herod his liege lord in temporal affairs.
Or if you will have examples of christian princes, S. Ambrose must be a traitor,
first for resisting openly his lord and King, Theod. lib 4. ca. 6. and lib. 9.
cap. 17 and deinceps.
Valentinian the younger, and then for handling so hardly the elder Theod^sius
in Miliayn as he shut him out of the Church, and made him go home again with
shame and do penna^ce. Zozomenus lib. 8 fere pet totum.
S. Hilarious also and S. Athanasius shall be traitors for their contentions with
Constantius their lawful Emperor and temporal lord who banished them from their
bishoprics, and the former of the two wrote two vehement books and inuectiues
against thesaid Emperor, and yet no man ever accounted him a traitor for
the same, but rather a great Saint, for his christian liberty and constancy.

S. Chrysostom in like manner shall be condemned Arcadius and Honorius christian
Emperors, Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 16.
and with their wives Theodosia and Eudoxia then ever S. Thomas had with K.
Henry the second: Zozom lib. 8 cap. 17.
for he preached against them publicly with great vehemence and thundered out
excommunication against them, Niceph. li. 14. cap. 43.
and was twice banished and driven out of his bishopric by their disfavors,
and died in exile. And yet was he never called or accounted a traitor, but a
singular holy man: and Theodosius the younger, son of Arcadius, brought his
body with great solemnity honor and reverence into Constantinople, and wept
most bitterly for the sins of his parents in persecuting so blessed a man,
and (as the Story says) made prayer to him now dead for pardon of his fathers
sins; as did also often both our K. Henry the second himself and his son
for the offense of his father, Math. Parisien in vit. Henr.
who had been some cause of the death of this just man his pastor and spiritual
father.

Who (says he) but such a one as has sold himself to all impudency and
shameless gaynsaying the truth, Page 54.
would seek to cover Beckets rebellion by the facts of S. John Baptist,
Ambrose, Hilary, Athanasius, and Chrysostom, which have as much agreement with
the cause of Becket, as has light with darkness, good with evil, sweet with
sower. Here you se the knight in a great heat, but his minister O. E. answers
somewhat more temperately saying only, that These examples fit not Thomas
Becke^s cause. Well then of two points contained in this matter, the one we have
gotten that in some cases, spiritual prelates, though subjects in temporalityes
may reprehend and resist, yea chasten also by Ecclesiastical punishment their
liege lords and temporal princes without being traitors for the same. The
second whether the examples be like, we are to examine a little in this place.

The comparison of S. Thom with S. Ambrose, Hillary and other fathers.
as also his master that chafeth at them. what and where about were the
foresaid Saints contentions with their temporal Princes, were they not for the
defense of the laws of Christ and his Church, did not S. John Baptist
withstand Herod his temporal Lord to his face for breaking the laws of wedlock
and was not the strife of S. Ambrose with Valentinian his Emperor first for
that he would not deliver up a Catholic Church to the use of Arrians as he
and his mother had commanded, and secondly for that he would not give up the
treasure and vessels of his Church into the Emperors own hands as he
required. Hear his own testimony thereof. S. Ambr. in orat. in Auxo^. de
Basilicia traden.
Cum esset propositu^ (says he) vt ecclesiae vasa iam traderemus, etc. when
it was proposed unto us in the Emperors name that we should deliver him the
vessel of our church I gave this answer. If any thing of my own were
demanded, either land house gold or silver I would easily yield unto him any
thing that were belonging unto me. But from the Church of God I told him that
I could take nothing, for that I had received it not to deliver but to keep.
And that with this I had respect also of the Emperors salvation. For that it
was neither expedient for me to give, nor for him to receive. Accipiat ergo
vocem liberi sacerdotis, etc. Let his Majesty then receive the word of a free
priest if he will have care of his own salvation, let him cease to offer injury
to Christ.

Lo here the answer of an ecclesiastical sorce were used toward him his
flesh might be troubled but not his mind, and that he was ready if the
Emperor would use his kingly authority in offering violence to stuffer that
which belonged to a good Priest to bear. And what does this differ now from
the cause of S. Tho. of Canterbury who stood upon defense of his Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction against K. Henry his temporal Prince that usurped the same. Hear
the words of S. Thomas himself used to K. Henry in a Counsel at Chynon in
France as D. Houeden sets them down: Rog. Houe in vit. Henr. 2. page 285.
Non deberetis Episcopis praecipere absoluere aliquem vel excommunicare trahere
Clericos ad saecularia examina iudicare de decimis, de ecclesits interdicere
Episcopis ne tractent de ^ransgressione fidei vel Iuramenti, etc. You ought not
to take upon you to command Bishops to absolve or excomunicate any man neither
to draw clergy men to the examinatio^s of seculars, neither to judge of
tithes or of churches or to forbid Bishop^ to treat of transgressio^s against
faith, or against oaths broaken or the like, etc. Do not we seem to hear in
this place the voice of S. Ihon Baptist to his K. Herod. It is not lawful for
the to have the wife of thy brother. S. Marc. 1^.
Or is not this agreeable to the speech of S. Ambrose to Valentinian that he
could not force him to deliver any church or holy vessels thereof, and that he
would die in that quarrel against him.

The contention of S. Ambrose with Theodosius the Emperor.
to wit: Theodosius the great in Millain for that he would not do public
penance prescribed by this holy B. to him for the excess in punishing those
of Thessalonica, and had not this been rebellion and treason by Protestants
law for a priest to drive his king and Emperor (that by their divinity was
head of their church) to public penance and to go out of his Church as S.
Ambose did compel Theodosius to go out of the church of Millan. But let us go
forward and see the rest of examples before touched, Pallad. in vit. Chrysostom.
was not the contention of S. Chrysostom with Arcadius and Honorius his
Princes and Emperors and with their wives when he kept some of them by force
out of his church about ecclesiastical liberty and jurisdiction also. And that
also of S. Athanasius and Hilarious against Constantius their Emperor and
supreme head also according to the Protestants opinion in spiritual matters,
for that he favored Arrians, deposed Catholic Bishops and made himself vmpyre
in ecclesiastical affairs as Protestants Princes do now a days. Did S. Tho.
Primate of England say or write more to K. Henry at any time then S. Gregory
Nazianzen a particular Archbishop said unto his Emperor that was present and
angry with him. Nazian. orat. ad Ciues and Imper. ^rasce^tem.
Vos quoque potestati meae meisque subsellijs lex Christi subiecit, scio se
esse ouem mei gregis, sacri gregis, sacram ouem. You also (o Emperor) the law
of Christ has made subject unto my power, and to my tribunal. I know thee to
be a sheep of my flock, a sacred sheep of a holy flock. If Nazianzene had said
this to an English King or should do at this day, how would our Protestants
Prince-parasytes cry out and say that he were a proud Prelate as they say of S.
Thomas.

The articles upon which S. Tho. disagreed with the king.
as namely, that no Bishop might appeal to the Sea Apostolic without license
of the king that no servant or tenant holding of the king might be
excommunicated without his license, that no Bishop should be able to punish
any man for perjury or breaking his faith, that all clergy men might be
forced to secular judgments as all controuersyes also pert^yning to tithes and
other like cases. And now if these controuersyes should have fallen out as in
part they did between the ancient christian Emperors and the holy Bishops
before named would they not think you have stood in them with no less fervor
then S. Thomas did.

There was (as authors do affirm) in that time of Henry the second, Page 56.
more then a hundred murders besides other felonyes proved upon the clergy
which when the king would have punished according to the laws of the land, A
f^lse and sl^und^rous beginning of the (...).
Becket opposed himself and beardeth the king in this so just an action, under
title of standing for the libertyes of the Church and from this strange
ground these proceedings ensued. In which words of the knight there is to be
noted first that where he says: authors do affirm that more then a hundred
murders besides other ^ellonies were proved upon the clergy: no other author
is found to mention any such thing but only Nubergensis who yet does not say
that they were proved upon the clergy, but his words are: Nuberg hist. Angl.
l. 2 16.
that it was said to have been told the king at a certain time that above a
hundred murders had been committed within the kingdom of England since his
reign, by Clergy men.

In which words as you see Nuberge^sis does This proud prelate durst protect
fellons and murderers against the king and justice of the lan^) but the
controversy was only about the manner of punishing those that did offend, and by
what judges and jurisdiction they should be punished, to wit whether by
ecclesiastical or temporal power, for that the Archbishop affirmed that equity
required that clergy men offending should first be judged condemned and
degraded by ecclesiastical power according both to the cannon laws as also the
municipal laws of the land confirmed by all former Christian Kings from the
first conversion of England, and that they being thus condemned, should be
delivered to secular power for execut^on of the sentence, which is a case that
fa^leth out daily in Spayn, Italy, France and other Cath. contreys, where
Bishops do defend their Ecc^es. jurisdiction in punishing Eccles. persons,
taking them also by force of censures out of secular judges hands when occasion
is offered without all note of rebellion or treason. And no less was this law
of the realm of England confirmed by ancient parliaments and other antiquities
then were the secular laws, for which Sr. F. stands, and fondly calls the
defense of eccles. laws treason and rebellion.

Maud the Empress unto the Archbishop which she wrote at the instance of the
King her son, and upon the informatio^ of such courtyers as were contrary to
the Bishop and his cause. In which letters she charge him, that (to use S^.
F. own words) as much as in him lay, he went about to disinherit the King and
deprive him of his crown. Whereunto I answer, that truth it is, John Fox has
such a letter of thesaid Empress Maud without telling where, Page ^8.
or whence, or how he had it, or where we may read it, for in none of all the
authors above mentioned I do find it. Yet one thing I would have the reader to
note, S. F untrue dealing in cyting matters, against S. Thom.
which testifies the continuance of Sr. F. untrue dealing in this affayre,
that whereas in John Fox the whole charge of the empress against the Archbishop
is mitigated by this pare^thesius ( as the report is) which shows that these
were but suspicions only and reports of his enemies; Fox Page 201.
Sr. F. has left out the parenthesis (as the report is) as though she had
charged him upon her own knowledge, which is no true dealing or right meaning
as you see.

But let us hear further Sr. F. his words pretending Page 58.
But if the Empress (says he) might be thought to speak partialy on the K.
her sons behalf, yet the two Card. sent by the Pope to hear all this
controversy, out of question will not condemn him without just cause, and yet
in a letter sent from them to the Pope, they do condemn him, etc. If S. F.
prove himself a true K^. in verifying this one point which here he says, I am
to pardon much of that which has passed before: But if in this matter of so
great moment he be taken in like falsehood, who will then trust him hereafter?
Let us examine then the matter and I will have none other euide^ces or witnesses
but his own words: for presently after he sets down a part of the letter
of William and Otho. Card. sent by Pope Alexander to hear the cause between
the King and the Archbishop and having trauayled therein, the King being in
Normandy and the Archb. at Paris, they found the matter more hard then they
imagined to compou^d, False dealing of Sir Fraunces.
for that the Archbishop demanded restitution to his lyuings for himself and
for his friends, and reuocation of certain laws lately made, prejudicial to
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, before he could end the matter wherewith the-sayd
Card. being somewhat displeased, for that they desired to carry with them to the
Pope the glory of this accord made by them, and for that the King had much
gained their good will by liberallity toward the^; for these causes they wrote
to the Pope somewhat favorably in the Kings behalf, but yet nothing condemning
the Archbishop as untruly out K^. does auow, which now I shall show out of the
words of their own letter alleged here by S.F. which are these.

William and Otho Card. of the Church of Rome to Alexander the Pope, The
letter of the two Cardinals to the Pope.
and^. We coming to the land of the K. of England found the controversy
betwixt him and the Archbishop of Canterbury more sharp and vehement then we
would, for the King, and the greater part about him said, that the Archbishop
had s^y^red up the french King grievously against him, as also the Earl of
Flaunders his kinsman, (who was very loving and kind to him before) whom he
made his open adversary ready to wage war against him, as is by diverse
evidences most certain, etc. These are the words of the Card. by S. F.
relation, which supposing they were truly alleged, yet he that shall consider
and ponder them well, will see that out of them no more can be urged against the
Archbishop, but that the King and those about him did say, that the Archbishop
had styrred up the K. of France and the Earl of Flanders against them, and
that this was held by them for most certain upon diverse evidences. But what
these evidences were none of them do set down.

So that here is no condemnation at all Quadrileg. de vita B. Thom. lib. 5.
cap. venientes.
as is by diverse evidences most certain, whereas in latin after the first words:
Asserebat Rex and sucrum pars, etc. The king with the greater part of his
affirmed that the Archbishop had done this etc.) yt follows, Sicut sibi pro
ce^to constabat, and euid^ntibus apparebat indicijs, as to them it was held for
certain and appeared by evident signs. Out of which words S. F. of purpose
cutteth of both sibi and indicijs, False dealing of Sir Francis.
to them and signs: For that by the first yt was evident that this was spoken
in the name of the King and his friends and not of the Card. and by the second
appears that the evidence which the King and his had of this matter and
accusation was founded only in signs and conjectures: which being evident to
our K^. he did not only stryke out the said words, but makes also a severe
inference upon the rest, that are left mangled by him self, as you have seen:
his inference is this: Page Ibid.
Now (says he) for a subject to stir up foreign states to make war upon
his soueraygne, and country, was at all times high treason: but that Becket
did so by the Card confession, was by diverse evidences most certain. Therefore
Becket, not now his enemies, but his brethren the sons of his own mother
being judges, was a traitor.

Becket did so by the Card. confession, wh^ras the Card. confess no such
thing, but only say that the king and his people did affirm it; nether did the
Card. say as our Knight. falsely charge them, that the matter was certain to them
by diverse evidences, but only that the king said yt was certain or seemed so to
him by diverse evident signs and conjectures. Shamefully then has our Knight.
abused the authority of these Card. as he does commonly all authors that come
through his hands. And with this I end this controversy of S. Thomas his cause
with the King: which cause whatsoever the Knight. tatleth to the contrary yet was
yt never accou^pted treason or named so by any author that wrote in that time,
either friend or foe, nor shall S. F. be able to allege me any one instance to
the contrary before Luthers days.

to his desire touching Eccles. jurisdiction, yet never is it read that he ever
called or cou^pted him for a traitor, nor any forrayne Prince whatsoever. And
within 8. years after his death (as before I noted) both he, and Jews the K.
of France went in Pilgrimage to his tomb at Canterbury, which is lykely they
would not have done, nether the one nor the other, if they had reputed him for
a traitor. John Stow puts down the relation thus. The 27. of August both
the Kings came to Canterbury, Stow anno Domini 1179 reg Hent. 21. 25.
where they were with due honor received, etc. Jews K. of France offered upon
the tomb and to the shryne of Thomas Becket a rich cup of gold: he gave also
that renowned precious stone* that was called the regal of France, which K.
Henry the 8. put afterward in a ring, and wore yt on his thombe, etc.

Thus says Stow out of other authors. And wherein the cauillers show themselves
more vain, conscienslesse and malicious (if it may be) then in the former.

OF S. THOMAS HIS miracles, and what may be thought of them, and other such
like, with the malicious corruption and falsehood used by John Fox and S. F. to
discredit them. There is handled also the different manner of Canonising
saints in their and our Church. CAP. XI.
VVardword for the holiness of this Archbishop (to all which this VVastword
answers no one word at all) I said also that many miracles have been recorded
by grave authors and public testimony of the whole Island, (...) 3.
and of foreign writers to have been wrought by God at his sepulcher and
otherwise by his intercession in witness of his sanctity. Upon which words Sir
F. takes occasion (with his heretical spirit of incredulity) to jest and
blaspheme at all miracles of Popemade Saints (for that is his co^tumelious
term) but with what reason, truth, prudence or piety we shall somewhat here
examine by this occasion, noting first two points to this purpose.

The first, that the miracles of S. Thomas Two especial confiderations in the
miracles of S. Thom.
which greatly confirms their certainty, to wit, that they brought with them
the public reproof of one of the greatest kings that day in Christendom (if
not the greatest of all) which was king Henry the second, by whose fault he was
put to death and who labored with all his power for avoiding that infamy
either to suppress or improve the miracles that fell out. And who knows not
what the force and favor of such a Prince may do in such a cause, and yet was
the multitude and euidency of S. Thom. his miracles, such, as they brake
through all obstacles that the king could put against them, and so conquered
himself also as he finally yielded and went to his sepulcher, wept and did
penance, as by all authors is evident. This then is the first point of
consideration in this affayre.

The second is that this matter of miracles improbability increased commonly by
such lying circumstances as are added by the reporter, it serves to entertayne
and make merry the incredulous, ignorant or light of heart, and to bring them by
little aed little to trust or believe nothing that passes sense or excedeth the
reach of every particular man's reason.

VVastvvord. Page 58.
That many are worshipped for Saints in heaven, whose souls are burning in
hell. And for this in his margent he quoteth ex Auentino, Ex Auentino
but Auentinus his works and story being very great, why did he not quote the
book, chapter or place: For though, Auentinus be not of much credit with
Catholics in his history, yet might we have examined upon what occasion, and
in what sense he said it, for that in some sense it may be somewhat true, and
yet help nothing Sir F. his cause, nor the infidelity he endeavors by his
doctryn to establish. For suppose if that should fall out so, that some
christians were deceived about the particular holiness of some persons, who
being honored upon earth for Saints, were none in deed, but rather damned, as
it is reported by some that S. Ambrose by revelation discovered that two bodies
which had been honored by some simple people for martyrs, not to have been those
martyrs, but rather the bodies of two malefactors, which suppose it were true,
what hurted that the Church of God or what hindered that the merit and devotion
of those simple people, that being deceived honored those memories as of
special servants, and saints of Christ, and received (no doubt) the reward of
their devotion according to their meaning, and holy intention, and not
according to the external error happened in the material object, Material error
in honoring saints hu^^e^h not the devout.
as if when Christ's body was risen from the sepulcher, the Jews had put one of
the two thieves bodies there, that were crucified with him, and S. Mary
Magdalyn, and the rest had anointed that body thinking it to be Christ's, had
this think you diuinished their merit, or made their act superstitious, as
heretyks call it?

So as the^ this material error little imports The diligence of the primitive
Church about Martyrs and S.
and a subdeacon under every deacon, and a publyke Notarie under every
subdeacon were assigned to attend to this particular care. And in Rome (for
that it was so big, and divided into 7. regions) seven deacons, and seven
subdeacons with several notaries under them had this charge, as appears in
the Roman register ascribed to Damasus in the life of Clement, Damas.
Pontifical. in vit. Clement. Fab. etc.
Fabian, Anteros, Julius, and other Bishops of Rome. And the-same to have been
observed also in the Church of Millan testifies Paulinus the Notarie of S.
Ambrose Bishop of that city, who writing the life of thesayd saint, says:
he was under the charge of Castus deacon to gather such things together of
saints, Paul. in vita Ambros.
etc.

Pontius the deacon of S. Cyprian afirmeth that blessed Bishop and Martyr to
have been so sollicitious in gathering the gests of Martyrs, Pont. Diac in vita
Cypriani.
as he would have the very days exactly noted, in which each one suffered,
which S. Cyprian testifies also himself in his Epistle to the Priests and
Deacons of his Church of Carthage: Ep. Cyprian. ad presb. and Diacon.
and of other Bishops before him, Pont ibid.
thesayd Potius says, that they were so studious in this care, as not only of
all Baptized Christians, but also of Catecumeni, if they were martyred, order
was given to have their acts written, etc. And this we read also put in
practice by many other Churches of the world, as by that of Vienna in Austria
by Lions in France by Alexandria in Egypt, and the like, as appears by their
Epistles registered by Eusebius and other writers.

spirit has been continued by the Catholyke Church ever since, The process
needful to Canonizatio^ of saints.
not only in the acts and gests of martyrs, but of other holy men also, since
martyrdom in great part has ceased, as may appear by the long process, and
most diligent examination of hundrethes of witnesses by lawful and indifferent
judges appointed, when any man is to be Canonized or declared for holy in the
Church after his death, which thing for more certayntie and less partiality
is done by order, and authority of the highest judge, and Pastor in spiritual
causes, and it is not done but upon many years examination commonly, except
the cause be otherwise made evident to all.

This is the practice of the Cath. Church, and Fox-made-saincts not to be
compared to Pope-made-saincts
whereas among them every particular man (as Ihon Fox for example) makes
saints, and vnmaketh them at his pleasure, and putting them down in his
Calender in great red letters for martyrs, or confessors or in black lesser
letters for lesser saints as he thinks best without any other examination,
or approbration of superior authority, and that which is most ridiculous of all
he cares not of what faith or religion they were of among themselves so they
were contrary in any one part to the Catholykes, yea though they were
different and opposite one to another, A notorious rabble of martyrs.
as Barnes, Hierome, and Carret, burned in one fire; or that they held twice as
many opinions against him as with him, as Ihon Husse of whom I have spoken
before, and many others: or that they were not martyred at all but dyed in
their beds, as Fox himself confesses of Ihon wickliff; or that they denied his
religion at their death as is evident of Thomas Bilney: or that they denied, or
blasphemed Christ himself as Coubridge; or that they were mad in his judgment,
as Colyns burned with his dog, and the like, of all which I shall say a word or
two in order to the end that you may see the certayntie and good order which
these men have in canonising their saints.

Barnes, Herome and Gerat.
These three were full contrary one to another in matter of Religion especially
about the most important artycles of the real presence, Barnes being an earnest
Lutheran, and zealous defender of the real presence, as both Fox, act. and Mon.
p. 1097.
Fox and Ibid. p. 9^7. an. 1536.
Tindal do testify of him, and the other two no less vehement Zwinglia^s
against the same doctrine as their examination does testify set down by Fox
himself, and yet did they all three protest at the fyar that they never held
error or heresy in their lives: Fox. p. 1^93. col. 2. n. 86.
For thus Ihon Fox writes. Those 3. good saints of God the This is contrary
to him self in his calendar.
30. of July were brought together from the tower to Smythfeild, where they
preparing themselves for the fire, D. Barnes thus began. God I take to record I
never to my knowledge taught any erroneous doctrine, but only those things
which scripture led me unto, and that in my sermons I never maynteyned any
error etc. Barnes his protestation at the fire.
Thus writes Fox of him and allows well thereof: so that if this man did err
(as in the articles of the real presence Fox will not deny) then did the
scripture lead him thereunto, and yet will not he or Sir F. grant that he or any
man else can take hurt by reading of scriptures.

Well but what did the other two his opposite Fox, ibid. page 1094. col 2.
for thus writes Fox: The like confession made Hierome, and Gerrat professing
their belief as the time would suffer, whereby the people might understand, that
there was no cause, nor error in their faith, wherefore justly they ought to be
condemned protesting that they denied nothing that was either in the old or new
Testament set forth by their soueraygne Lord the King whom they prayed the
Lord long to continue, etc. Lo here a contrary protestation for their contrary
belief founded also in scriptures especially in the K. Bible. And how can Ihon
Fox now join these together, calling them those three good Saints of God,
and making them all three martyrs, but as Sampson joined his foxes tails.

yea I say further that if the king should command you any thing against Gods
law, Barnes ibid. apud Fox, page 1094. col. 2.
if it be in your power to resist him you may not do it. Lo what a spirit of a
good saint this is, that teaches kings to have power above God, but when he
saw that the pardon came not, he sent certain messages to the king by the
sheriff there present whereof the first was, that he and his new fellows the
new-gospellers had made his Majesty a whole king, whereas he was but half a
king before (being not head of the church nor of the clergy of his realm) a
thing (says he) that never any of his Majesty's ancestors had before.

Friar Peter Martyr written from Oxford to Sir John Cheke. How these new
preachers make whole kings and whole f^iars of half ones.
King Edwards schoolmaster, wherein the old man complayneth pitifully that his
woman the nun being dead whom he called his wife, he was but dimidiatus homo
half a man: so as Barnes and his companions giving wives to monks and friars,
and spiritual primacy to kings and princes by their new doctrine, they made
as well friars whole men of half as whole kings of half kings. And thus much of
these.

There follows John Husse, of whom I John Husse.
then with them, which is evident by the articles of his doctrine, yet extant,
and authors that have written of him, whereof we have spoken sufficiently before
in this Cap. 3.
encounter; and yet is he put in John Fox his calender for a solemn martyr in
red letters upon the second day of May.

And the like I might also show of the Waldensis, and many other base and
desperate heretics which John Fox in his protestation to the whole church of
England does allow for saints of his faith, Fox protest. page 10.
whereas notwithstanding they held many more things against him then with him,
and some so beastly, that they are not to be named.

As for John VVickcliff there needs no dispute John Wickliffe. Fox. page
411.412.413. etc.
For he confesses that he died in Lincolneshire in his own benefice and bed
and yet he puts him in his calender for a martyr the 2. day of January in
fair red letters saying thus: John VVickcliff preacher and martyr.

Thomas Bilney, Tho. Bilney.
Sir Tho. More in his preface before his confutation of Tyndales answer does
prove largely by many witnesses and evident demonstrations, that he having
recanted publicly certain heresies of Luther, Thom. More in p^aefat. ad Tyndal
page ^49.
which for a time he had held (which John Fox also confesses) and falling
again afterward into relapse was condemned and burned, but before his burning
he recanted again, and confirmed the same at the fire, was confessed; heard
mass devoutly, desired absolution upon his knees from the excommunication laid
upon him, and finally received the B. sacrament, as a true Catholic and so
died. About which later recantation albeit John Fox would seem to wrangle
somewhat, yet says he: Fox page 920 col. 2.
admit he did so, being a man of a timorous conscience not fully resolved
touching that matter of the Church, etc. And then again. It is not impossible
but that Bilney might both hear mass and receive the sacrament, for in that
matter it may be he was not resolved otherwise, etc. Neither do I find in all
the articles against him, that he was charged with any opinion against the
mass or sacrament, which makes me think that he was yet therein ignorant, etc.
Thus answers Fox about Thom. Bilney, granting him as you se not to have been
fully and in all points of his religion, yet he sets him down in his
calender for a special martyr of his Church in great red letters upon the
tenth day of March, saying Thomas Bilney martyr. Whereupon I would ask John Fox
how he defends the second verse of S. Athanasius his creed confirmed in the
first council of Nice, that except a man do keep the whole entyre Catholic
faith, In Symbol. S. Athanal.
he shall perish without all doubt eternally. Thomas Bilney did not hold all
Foxes relig^on by his own confession, and how then ^oth he put him in his
calender for a martyr of his Church.

As for William Coubridge, whom we gave Will. Coubridge.
his articles are extant which he confessed openly by public register under
the B. of Lincoln in the year of Christ 1539. as Fox counts them.
Blasphemous articles of Coubridg.
Of which articles the 7. is this, that Christ was not the redeemer but the
de^eyuer of the world; and the 8. I esteemed (says he) the word Christ, Apud
Alanu^ Capum dial. 6 p. 623.
as a filthy word, and therefore did blot it out of my books whersoeuer I found
it. And the tenth: I affirmed and wrote, that all those which bel^eued in the
name of Christ are damned to hell, etc.

Thus do relate the registers, but what Fox, p 1033. col. 1 n 79.
Coubridge (says he) being mad and besides his right senses was condemned by
Longland C. of Lincoln, and committed to the fire by him to be burnt at Oxford,
etc. So says Fox, but he concealeth one thing which is: that Coubridge his
cause was sent by the bishop to the L. Cromwell Vicegerent to the king at this
time in spiritual affairs, and that by his voice also he was condemned; as
Alanus Copus in the foresaid place does show. But how soever this was, if it be
true that William Coubridge was mad and besides his senses (as Fox here for
his excuse deuiseth) how happens it then that himself makes him a martyr of
his Church and does register him under that name and worthy title in his
ecclesiastical calender upon the 10. of October an. 1539. Is not this to make
mad and furious men pillars of his new Church?

Collyns, of whom Fox writes thus: Colyns and his dog. Fox. Ibid. 1033.
Colyns being besides his wits and seeing the priest holding up the host over
his head at mass, and showing it to the people he in like manner
counterfetting the priest took up a little dog by the legs, and held him over
his head showing him also to the people, for which he was brought to
examination and condemned to the fire, etc. This is the narratio^ of Fox
himself touching Colyns, whom notwithstanding this, he sets down for a
solemn martyr upon the foresaid 10. of October in the year of our Lord 1538.
So as here no man can deny, nor Fox himself does, but that he makes diverse
wicked blasphemous and distracted men to be of his martyrs and patro^s in
heaven; so with mad men I leave him among whom we may well account him, whether
we consider his wit or wrytings.



must needs have more authority then Fox-made-saints) and as for his profane
proposition (which he calls a proverb) to wit, that many be worshipped in
heaven for saints that are damned in hell: Page 59.
he would draw all men's hearts into mistrust and contempt of all saints, their
miracles and memories, I thought good to enlarge my self somewhat in this
behalf, to show the conformity of spirit between ancient christians and us,
for the care toward saints, and our equal proceeding conform to all reason
and piety in declaring the holiness of saints, and the contrary mad fantastical
dealing of heretics doing or undoing of their own heads what each man for the
time thinks best. For imagine you if the Lutherans in Germany should have the
vewing or correcting of John Fox his martyrologe, how many saints would they
strike out and cast to the dunghill which he has put in, and painted out in the
highest degree? And the like would Brownists and Puritans do. Nothing then is
certain among these goodfellowes, and so let us leave them, for this is the
devils drift by discrediting some to call all in question.

But now to return to the Archbishop S. Caesarius a monk, as he calls him;
Page 59.
That there was a question made in Paris after S. Thom. his death whether he
were damned or saved, Roger the Norman (who had been a special enemy to the
Archbishop) saying that he was damned, for that heresisted his King, and Peter
a Parisian, that was chaunter of that Church holding that he was a true
martyr. This story out of Caesarius is in part true, but yet powdered with so
many falsities and corruptions, partly by Sr. F. and partly by John Fox (from
whom he took it) as it is a world to see, and shows evidently that a man may
believe nothing they allege, further then he sees it with his eyes.

A notorious corruption of Caesarius by Fox and Sir F.
for he being a German and living about Colonia at the same time or soon after
the Archb. was murdered, he proves his great holiness among other things by his
great and many miracles, for that is the title of his book, Illustrum
miraculorum and historiarum memorabilium libri, 12. Twelve books of famous
miracles and histories happened in the world. And having spoken of other
countries and men, at length he comes to treat of S. Tho. of Canterbury in
these words: Beatus Thomas, etc. Blessed, Thomas Bishop of Canterbury who in
our time has fought for the liberty o^ the Church unto death did not shine by
any miracles during the time of his persecution, Caesar. Heisle^bac. lib. 2. c.
69. dialog.
and after his slaughter there has been much disputing, seem saying that he was
damned as a traitor of the Kingdom, and others that he was a martyr as
defendor of the Church. And the same question was disputed also in Paris among
the masters, for M. Roger swore that he was worthy of death albeit not such a
death as he had, judging the blessed man's constancy to be a contumacy. On the
other side M. Peter chantor affirmed upon his oath that he wus a worthy martyr
of God, and slain sor the liberty of his Church. These men's questions (or
controversies) Christ has now dissolved, having glorified him with many and
great miracles.

These are the true words of Caesarius translated Quaestio Paris^is inter
magistros rentilata suit virum damnatus an saluatus esset ille Thomas: Fox page
204. col. 2. nu. 40.
dixerat Roge^^us tunc Normannus fuisse illu^ morte ac damnatione dignum, quod
contumax esset in Dei ministrum Regem Pro^ulit contra Petrus Can^or
Parisiensis, quod signa saluationis and magnae sanctitatis essent eius
miracula, and quod martyrium probasset Eccles. causa, pro qua mortem subierat,
etc. Thus do Fox and Sr. F. allege his latin words which in English are
these: Fox does Falsely all^adg Cesarius.
There was a question moved among the masters or doctors of Paris, whether
that Thomas were saved or damned: Roger then a norman, said that he was worthy
death and damnation for that he was so obstinate against Gods minister the
King, Peter Cantor a Parisian came out to the contrary, saying that his
miracles were great signs and tokens of his salvation, and also of great
holiness, affirming moreover, that the cause of the Church did allow and
confirm his martyrdom, for the which he died. Thus far Fox.

And thus have you the judgment, and c^nsure of the school of Paris touching
this question for the taynting of Thom. Becket. And yet as you see it was but
the altercation of two men, the one a Norman (as Fox says) subject at that
time to the king of England, and the other a Parisian subject to the king of
France, who in reason may seem more indifferent for that he was not interessed
on any side. Yet with what face can Fox out of these words affirm, that here
was given the judgment and censure of all the University of Paris, seeing it was
but an altercation of two private men only. Who discovers not here the
impudent false humor of Fox in calling it the determination of the University
of Paris?

verbatim) the whole beginning and ending of the authors speech, Many
corruptions of Caesarius both in latin etc English.
which do comprehend the full purpose and meaning of his narration, with his
whole judgment of the controversy, which is such dishonest dealing as may be in
abusing any author. And after this Fox choosing to put down the text for more
credits sake in the latin tongue, first he should have put his very own words
as you know, which he has not done, but has added, altered, and taken away so
much as he thought good for his purpose, making his reader notwithstanding
believe, that they were the very words of the author, seeing he puts down
first the latin and then the English in a different letter. But yet he that
shall examine, and compare text with text, he shall find added first the whole
sentence, virum damnatus an saluatus esset ille Thomas, Then dixerat Rogerius
tunc Normannus; thirdly, quod contumax esset in Dei ministrum, reg^m. Fourthly
is added the word ( damnatione) which is not in Caesarius. Fifthly, quod signa
saluationis and magnae sanctitatis essent eius miracula, is not in the authors
text, sixthly also the words, quod martyrium probasset Ecclesiae causa.
Caesarius has them not.

All these words and sentences therefore are etsi non tali yet not of such a
death as he had, which words John Fox co^cealeth, as he does also the words
immediately following of Caesarius: beati viri consta^tiam, iudicans
contumaciam; judging the holy man's consta^cy to be contumacy. After this Fox
leaves out those words pro liberate Ecclesiae tru^idatum, that he was slain
for the liberty of his Church, but especially those that immediately follow
containing the authors conclusion of all, which are these: quorum quaestionem
Christus soluit, cum multis and magnis miraculis illum glorificauit, whose
question (or controversy) Christ has dissolved, in that he has glorified him
with many and great miracles.

Caesarius, soon after S. Thom. his martyrdom. And now by this one example of
plain forgery and cosenage, and by these few lines so corrupted perverted and
altered, the reader may imagine, what infinite falsehood is to be found in Fox
his huge volume according to this account. In which upon my conscience (and
some trial also) I do think there is scarce any one story truly related in all
parts in that monstrous huge book. And yet you must mark also that Sir F. does
not cite so much as John Fox for this allegation out of Caesarius neither any
author besides, False dealing in both hands between the Master and scholar.
least the falsehood should be found. And so much for this point.

Diverse vvayes deuise^ by haeretiks to disc edit miracles.
to make authors to speak some evil against this blessed Saint. Now when that
cannot stand, but that God testified his holiness with so many and famous
miracles, as Caesarius living in that time, and so many others before, eye
witnesses, do testify; consider whether the impiety of restless heretykes
does rush. They devise diverse ways how to delude or discredit all miracles,
and thereby also these of S. Thomas. And first John Fox deuiseth two, saying,
that you may answer, For page 204. col. 2. nu. 70.
that either they were not wrought at all, but devised and forged by friars and
monks: or if they were wrought in deed, it was not by the power of God, but of
the ^iuel and his deceauing spirit. Which later way he takes from the Jews,
who as you well remember not being able to deny the miracles wrought by Christ,
objected unto him that he did them by the power of Satan and cast out devils by
the hands not of God but of Belsebub. Math 24. Marc. 22.
And to these two ways of evasion Sir F. as a good scholar has added a
third, which is: that many of these miracles might be done by natural power and
means, though hidden to the ignorant.

And now tell me (gentle Reader) what miracles

Again I would have thee consider (good Which is the better spirit to believe
or discredit miracles.
which is the better spirit, more pious and more secure, either to scoff at
miracles, and extraordinary work^ done by God, and to seek reasons to discredit
them, as Protestants do, or to enclyne rather to believe them, or at least
ways quietly to let them pass with pious humility, thinking that God can do
these and greater matters to his glory, and has done for and by his servants.
And consequently whether they be true or false the matter not being apparent to
praise God for that which is reported of his works, rather then to scoff
thereat, which is the true spirit of Catholic men, who do not make every one of
these miracles matter of their belief, nor yet on the contrary side do run to
the proud or contentious spirit of condemning all, or calling every thing in
controversy with contempt, whereas in temporal matters also they believe many
things upon less authority and witnesses.

Credulity commended in scriptures.
then diffidence, distrust, or incredulity, and that also about miracles. Mar.
16. Joan. 12.
For why was S. Mary Magdalen so much commended before others but for that she
was more prone then the rest to believe the miracle of Christ's resurrection,
when it was told her? And why was S. Thomas so much reprehended by Christ, when
he said, noli esse incredulus, Joan. 20.
sed fidelis. Be not thou incredulous but faithful, but for that he would not
believe the miracle of Christ's apparition, and entrance when the doors were
shut, related unto him by others? And why was S. Peter reprehended by Christ
when he said, Math. 14.
modicae fid^i quare dubitasti? but for that he doubted in his miracle upon the
going (...) why did Christ generally (...) to all the Apostles together (...)
took his leave of them, but for that as t^^ Evangelist specifieth, they had not
given credit so easily to such as had reported the strange miracle of his
resurrection to them? Finally it is said of charity omnia credit, and of
incredulous people. 1. Cor. 1^.
Non fecit ibi virtutes multas propter incredulitatem little. Math. 1^.
Christ did not many miracles there, because of the peoples incredulity. And
again. Collos. ^.
Venit ira Dei super filios incredulitatis. The wrath of God, comes down
upon the children of incredulity, and many other such places to this purpos
which for brevity we pretermit.

Now whether Protestants or Catholics be A Story of lesting at miracles.
he told them pleasantly, that he had fallen of late upon a certain book of
ancient monks in the primative Church, wherein were many strange miracles
wrought, which he said he was in great doubt whether he might believe or no,
and desired to have there opinion; and they prayed him to recount some of them,
Strange ^^racles.
and so he did, saying: That the first was of a certain poor man, cutting
down (...) was near, and he (...) though it were of (...) from the bottom,
and swymne to ^^m again.





diseases comm^g (...) monks, and putting them(...) shadows, were presently
(...) diseases.

When all these things were told, much Explication of the former miracles.
which he had done to the end they should not presently discover him. And so he
declared that the first of his examples was taken out of the Kings, where is
recounted of the head of an hatchet made swymne by the prophet Elizeus the 4.
book of kings 6. Chapter.

The second of the dead man raised by touching Elizeus his bones, is in the
same book and Sarepta. The fourth, of the talk Balaam his ass, in the book of
Numbers 22. chapter. The fifth of Elias his fact, in the 4. book of Kings 2.
chapter. (...) by a fish, and gotten (...) in Jonas, chap. 2. The (...) from
sending a girdle to heal a to (...), is the fact of S. Paul, recounted by S.
Luke, Act. 19. And the last, of men cured by standing only in the shadow of
other men, is testified by the same Evangelist. Act. 5.



The ancient fathers seeling and sense about miracles of holy Saints.
and would hear good counsel, I would send them to a treatese or two of S.
Ambrose, as also of some other fathers about this incredulous humor of
heretics in scoffing at miracles wrought by Saints after their deaths, for
that S. Ambrose having found out by revelation from God the buried bodies of S.
Geruasius and (...), and showed them (...) due honor to be (...) miracles were
wrought (...) whereof S. Augustine also was an eye (...) as he testifies in
these words: Tantae gloriae man tyrum etiam ego testis fui, (...) and (...)
uita.
vbi Mediolani eran^ facta miracula noui, etc. Of this so great glory of these
martyrs, I was also a witness, and knew the miracles to be done when I was at
Millayne. Marcellina, Amb^e (...) ad Mar^^*
that was a nun saying: Cognouistis, imo vidistis ip^i, multos a daemonijs
purgatos, etc. Your selves have known nay rather you have seen many delivered
of devils (by the relics of these martyrs) great numbers also delivered from
their sickness, as soon as they had touched with their hands the Saints
apparel. You have seen the miracles of old times restored and very many made
hole, with the very shadow of these holy bodies, etc. Thus he says; and then
presently prosecuting the same about the devotion of the christian people of
those days he adds: Amb. ibid.
Quanta oraria iactitantur, etc. How many handkerchefes or napkyns were cast
upon these bodies? how many garments were made medicinable to heal others even
by their very touching of these most holy relics? All did desire to touch the
very uttermost parts, and whosoever touched was healed. We thank thee o lord
Jesus, that in this time thou have (...) of these holy martyrs, (...) most need
such helps.

(...) from holy Father and doctor to (...) ago, of the practice of true
Arrians, wherewith he was no less troubled, at that time, then we are at this
day with Lutherans, Caluenists and Arrians: Qui pertinacia quadam Iudaica atque
haeretica in tanta hominum ac etiam daemonum confessione negarent illos esse
martyrs, Ambr. sermon. 5. de Sanctis. Paulin. in vi^^ Ambrosij.
detraherent miraculis, seque calumniarentur, cuius art ea omnia composita
esse dicerent. Which Arrians by a certain Jewish and heretical obstinacy, in
so public confession both of men and devils, did still deny that they were
martyrs, detracting from their miracles, and calumniating himself ( S. Ambrose)
and affirming all these things to have been devised by his fraud.

S. Geruasius and Protasius, as ours do at this day with the same spirit
against those of S. Thom. of Canterbury: And it is to be marked, that Paulinus
in the life of S. Ambrose does note, that only devils and Arrians did
contradict the said miracles, but the Arrians more obstinately then the devils,
for that diverse devils did (...) holiness of S. (...) cyteth S. (...) But diverse
(...), some of the (...) invaded and (...) by the sa^^ devils. Which dreadful
examples being recorded, by so ancient and holy men ought to move our scoffers
and scorners at the works of God in his saints, to beware least for like
impiety, they incur not the like danger, at leastwise of being given over to
the possession of an inward devilish spirit much worse both for themselves and
others, then the corporal, possession by the wicked fiend; from which God
deliver them. And so we pass on to the third feigned position laid upon us by
Sir F. with whom we have dealt above in this matter of miracles, for that this
minister O. E. seeing perhaps his case to be desperate, thought best to leave
him in the lurche, and to say no one word for his help or defense.

(...) GORGED (...) are said (...), or any coming (...) though he comaund
(...) against God, and disloyalties against Princes. CAP. XII.
BUT now (says the Warder) let us see his third position, (...) position.
VVardvv. p. 23.
that he feigneth to be among us (Catholykes) as a ground of religion: These
two irreligious and profane grounds (says he) being laid (though you have
seen that the knight has laid them as fictions of his own and not
foundations or grounds of ours) they proceed to a third, and set it down for a
popish ground also, that it was a dangerous and deadly sin for any man to
disobey the Pope and his Clergy in any of their orders enjoined and commanded,
in such reverence and regard must he and his Clergy be had, that the meanest
maspriest coming with authority from him must be obeyed under pain of
damnation though he command that which is blasphemous before God in christians,
and disloyal to men in subjects. Impudent calumniatio^.


From which (says the Warder) if we separate a manifestly or two with some
fond exaggerations (for without this kind of leven the poor knight can make no
batch) as for example, that the Pope and his Clergy must be obeyed, though
they command blasphemies against God and disloyalty against princes, which is
a (...) disobedience (if (...) order enjoined by the (...) and the like. (...)
ouerlashings of the (...) obiecteth is rather (...) religion, then any reproach
at all. For in that he says, we obey the meanest priest as the highest, if he
come with authority of the highest, he shows thereby that we have among us
true obedience and subordination, and that for conscience sake, not respecting
so much the person that commands, as him for whom, and in whose name, and
authority he comandeth; and therein we fulfill the precept of S. Paul. Hebr. 1^.
Obedite praepositis vestris and subiacete eis; ipsi enim peruigilant, quasi
rationem pro animabus vestris reddituri. Obey your Prelates, and humble your
selves unto them (he distinguishes not between high and low) for they keep
diligent watch over your souls, as men that must render account thereof to God.
And in other places he says: that this obedience must be with such reverence,
Ephesians. ^.
humility and inward affection, as unto Christ himself, whose substitutes our
spiritual Superiors be, though never so mean or contemptible in man's sight.

Thus it was answered then by the warder The knight is urged to answer.
that he sets down, (...), when (...) almighty God. (...) upon him (...)
Now he should (...) substantially he (...) proof whereof (says he) that which
your own men have written of the infinite power of the Pope may abundantly
suffice, namely though all the world judge in any matter against him, yet we
ought to stand to the judgment of him, etc. And whosoever is not obedient to
the laws of the Church of Rome, must be denied an heretic, ^
etc. And though he draw infinite souls with him to hell, yet no man may
presume to say, why do you thus? etc.

that no man may say to the Pope, why do you thus, though he draw infinite
souls with him into hell (it being an ordinary common place, as well to all
writers and wranglers in their books, as preachers and praters against the Pope
in their pulpits) we shall examine the same afterward toward the end of this
Chapter against the minister O.E. for that he vouchsafes to cite some author
for the same, though falsely and fraudulently as you shall see. Now then let us
hear how our knigh^ (...) the premises. (...)

And your holy (...) to tell us in his (...) mory that Christ (...) Paul, but
him that (...) this divinity we must obey ^^^ Pope, whatsoever Pet^^ and Paul
teach us to the contrary. And this (I hope) is a sufficient justification of my
accusation, etc. Lo how roundly he riddeth himself. But yet note (good reader)
4. points of Sir F. divinity out of this one sentence with a preface convenient
thereunto. (...) kind of (...)
His preface consists in qualifying the wrytings of D. Harding and M. Jewel
calling the former an inuectiue, and the later of blessed memory, whereas all
learned men that have read the same with indifferency (and diverse great
protestants also converted by that reading) will and do testify the contrary,
to wit that D. Hardings writing against Jewel (especially his last book called,
D. Hardinges works against Iuel.
The return of untruths) was rather a co^uictiue then an inuectiue, leaving
M. Jewel with the commendation rather of a lying, then blessed memory. And so I
dare avouch that any man shall find him, who has time learning, store of books,
patience and indifferency to read and examine him.

Now then let us examine the four points (...) playing (...) justly suspect
(...) the proposition (...), which is (as (...) of us now, not ^^ (...) sits
in their chair: Which if it be to (...) S. Peter and S. Paul being now absent,
cannot personally determine all matters as when they were here in earth, but
have left their successors in their place to be obeyed as themselves. Why
should this proposition so much mislike our Knight? Sure I am that he dares not
deny the same or equiuale^t thereof in the magistrates of diverse cities, Princes
and temporal successors. And if a man for examples sake, should ask him
whether God do command English men at this day to obey the Queen that now
reigns in matters belonging to her government, or rather William Conqueror
first founder of this Monarchy, or K. Henry the 8. her Maties. Father? and so
in other Princes; as whether the present K. of France be to be obeyed and
respected or Hugo Capetus the first founder of his house? No man will doubt but
that present Princes and governors are to be obeyed.

and S. Paul (...) wills and (...) not known (...) expres writings (...) only
their epistles (...) world, nor were other (...) governors nor yet wrytings
needful: whi^^ yet is most absurd in all men's sights: for that all causes
incident are not determined in S. Peter and S. Paul their epistles, nor can all
men read and understand them, and consequently is needful the authority of a
present governor s^tting in their chair, and having the same authority that
they had, which we believe to be in the Pope for necessary government of the
Church.

Thirdly then consider the heretical cauillation Ergo he bids us to obey the
Pope though he teach contrary to S. Peter and S. Paul. This Doctor Harding
says not, nor is it necessary, nor does it follow of the premises, but only
is a wrangling of a contentious heretical spirit, as every man may see, and
ought diligently to mark for their instruction how to believe, and give credit
to those men's arguments and illations: Wherefore after all these note the fourth
point which is his substantial conclusion: And this (I hope) (says he) is a
sufficient His accusation was as before has been heard, that the Pope is to be
obeyed, though he command blasphemies against (...) to h^l, and the (...)
justified by (...) at the present (...) chair (...), and not only (...) man
judge how (...) justified himself, and his accu^a^^on.

But yet to the end he may seem to say something to prove that Popes comaund
somtymes both blasphemies and disloyalty, he alleges for the first (about
blasphemy) certain pieces of prayers out of Portiphorium used upon the
festiual day of S. Thomas of Canterbury Tuper Thoma sanguinem, (...) our
prayers.
etc. which the Knight. to show himself a good versifier puts down in a poem
thus: By the blood of Thomas which he for thee did spend.
Make us (o Christ) to climb whither Tho. did ascend.


And then again: opem nobis o Thoma porrige, etc. O Thomas lend us thy help,
etc. Out of which words, where there is not a spirit of wrangling and
calumniation no evil sense can be gathered: For in the former, there is no more
blasphemy contained, then when the holy prophets did mention the name, faith
and merits of Abraham Isaac and Jacob, Psalm. 131. Daniel. 13.
and other their holy fathers, thereby the sooner to move God to respect them.

to stir up his (...) second where (...) unto to lend us (...) that he shall
do (...) for us, which (...) ^n heretical and (...) hatred to Gods Saint (...)
it, being a thing most (...) Fathers, and other pious men of all antiquity to
use like invocation to Saints gone to heaven before them, as ^
before I haue^ showed by many examples, and might do here much more, if I
would stand therein. Nor dares Sr. Francis, ^
or any heretyke in the world to join issue upon this point of all holy
fathers practice in this behalf, but only are forced to say of them as they do
of us, that it was ignorance, blasphemy or simplicity in them.

And now after this sharp encounter against Canterbury, the knights choler and
pride mounteth up to the assault, of a far higher Saint, which is the mother
of God her self, whose sacred conception he takes heynously, that it should be
honored with a several feast and holy day by Pope Sixtus Quartus: for thus he
writes.

Sixtus the fourth takes up the controversy betwixt the Franciscans and
Dominicks about the conception of the blessed virgin, Page 6^.
and against manifest scripture, plain te^^imony of fathers, and the stream
of his own doctors, decrees her conception, to have been without original
sin (so taking from Christ his prerogative) (...) the feast of her (...) them
for (...) And granting to (...) from the first (...) of the same, as many (...)
4. and Pope Martyn (...) the service of Corpus Christi (...), etc.

Thus writes our knight wherein if you find him more true and sincere then in
his former narrations and assertions it is maruayle, for though somethings be
true which here he relates, as namely first that Sixtus the fourth took up the
controversy between the Religious of S. Francis and S. Dominiks order about
the conception of the blessed virgin, (which is the benefit of having one
supreme head, a thing not to be found among sectaries) and

First untruth
for albeit himself being of S. Francis order before he was Pope, did hold that
opinion for more probable that she was conceived pure from original sin, yet
did he never decree the same, but left it ^ree for every (...) he would theri^
(...) trouble or (...) appears by (...) Sixtus, extant in (...) an. 1466. and
(...)

The same (...) of Pope (...) Quintus, (...) super specula, wherein referring
himself to the former constitution of Sixtus Quartus, and to the council of
Trent. Ses. 5. in the decree of original sin, the last paragraphe, (where the
said constitution of Sixtus is also mentioned and approved. ^.
) This constitution of Pius 5. has these words: Liberam cuique facul^atem
relinquentes opinandi huius controuersiae quamlibet partem, prout vel magis
piam, ^el magis probabilem esse indicauerit. Leaving to every man's freedom
to hold in this co^trouersy what opinion he thinks more godly or more
probable. This ordained Pius 5. withal indifferency though he were of S.
Dominiks order, and nothing different from that which Sixtus 4. of S. Francis
order had ordained before him. So as hereby is seen the first foul untruth of
our knight, auouching that Pope Sixtus 4. had decreed the question on the other
side.

And of this first follows the second untruth ^. Untruth.
if yt may be, where he says. That Pope Sixtus excommunicateth and condemns
them for heretyks, that were of the other opinion. The plain opposite and
contrary whereof, is set down in Sixtus his (...) simili poena (...) asserrere
(...) gloriosam (...) to fuisse conceptam (...) mortale; cum (...) sede
decisum: We (...) and censure, all t^ose (...) to affirm that those who hold
the contrary opinion, ^
to wit that the glorious virgin Mary was conceived in Original sin, to
incur heresy or mortal sin thereby, ^
seeing that the matter is not yet decided by the Roman Church and Sea
Apostolyke.



The 3. and 4. untruths.
but remit him to the authors that write thereof. First that Pope Sixtus decreed
this controversy against manifest scripture, plain testimonies of Fathers, and
the stream of his own Doctors. And secondly, that he tooks: (...) etc. Let
the is est (...) of two (...) the one (...) other to (...) Zuares upon: (...)
27. and he shall (...) fathers, and Doctorie^ ^ere are brought for both sides,
which I do avoid to allege of purpose in this place in regard of the
constitution of Pius quintus, forbidding all writing of this matter in vulgar
tongues to the unlearned sort, ^
who are not capable of this disputation, amongst which I account S. Francis
for one, howsoever he accou^teth of himself, nether does he only show himself
unlearned but malignant also, who goes about to calumniate Pope Sixtus for
this fact of great prudence and piety, in decreeing as he did, and not as the
false Knight relates.

And this may be sufficient for this matter, Pope Sixtus defined the question
affirmatively for our B. Ladies conception out of original sin or that he
excommunicated all that held the contrary opinion; it must needs follow, that
all the inconveniences and objected blasphemies builded by him therein as
castles in the air, must fall and he under them: and so we leave him for the
present, and will pass over to his minister, and se what he brings, or has
to say also in this affayre.

(...) by the subjects? and how falsely the minister does behave himself in all
these points. CAP. XIII.


Page 53.
That albeit the Pope and his clergy comaund blasphemies, etc. yet must he be
obeyed upon pain of damnation; he adds presently: and his meaning is most
true: not so much defending the words as the meaning of the writer, as though
he had had conference with the knight about it. For justifying of which
meaning, he brings in this substa^tial proof: James (...) K. Henry the (...)
the popish (...) this, (...) the proof (...) he) in the (...) detestable (...)
example of Gods (...) most excellent mysteries of Christ's (...) etc. and then
he quoteth in the (...), the oration of Sixtus Quintus; and la sulmanante, etc.

But first if all this were true which is most A vain ri^^culous kind of
proving.
and that Sixtus Quintus had said, that it was (...) case, and a dreadful
example of (...), for that kings evil behavior, and m^rder of the Duke of
Guise and his brother the Cardinal after his faith given to them to the
contrary a little before, receiving thereon the blessed Sacrament: how does this
prove, that we hold the man, that so disorderly killed him, for a martyr? But
now the rest which he says: that Sixtus Quintus in the consistory of Cardinals
should so much commend that act and compare it to the most excellent mysteries,
of Christ's incarnation, and resurrection, etc. is a most shameless and
heretical fiction, without all truth or probability: For what similitude or
likeness, has the killing of the King of France to the misteryes of Christ's
incarnation and resurrection? or what man is there living this day in Rome or
(...) (which was hitherto seen (...) of) to this effect. And if by la
fulmina^^^ our minister do mean the excommunication against the king of
Navarre that then was, the ly is evident, for so much as that excommunication
was set fourth four years at least before the other king was slain. And by
thi^ you see how the ministers triumphant demand is answered; who after the
former i^^pertinent and forged stuff set down asks: And what has either
Parsons the Jesuit or this personate Noddy to object against us in this point?
Page Ibid.
You have hard what is objected: and it seems the personate Noddy has said,
and is like to say so much ere he end this combat, as the ministers nodle
will be much troubled in answering him, and prove himself no personate, but a
personal and real noddy.

though he command blasphemies against God, About disloyalty to Princes.
and disloyalties against Princes. And for the second about princes it is not a
matter to be much discussed here, for that it depends of the examination of
many causes, and circumstances, (...) by which (...) when the (...) to the
(...) not. And on (...) as have been made (...) our days in France, Germany,
(...) Scotland for setting forward of their new ghospel against the wills and
commandments of lawful princes; Our minister I am sure will hardly confess
them to be disloyaltyes, though we think they be. And so seeing that Protestants
do allow well of such disloyalties, when they are in favor of their own
faction and that we have showed in our former Encounter very largely out of
their own words and wrytings, Enc. 1. cap. 6.
that no rule of obedience or subjection holds them, when they mislike the
magistrate or his doings, it is malepart sauciness in this prating minister to
keep such a do about disloyaltyes so much defended and practiced by
themselves, and no ways approved by us, but where lawful authority just causes
and other circumstances do make them loyaltyes.

There remains then the first points About Blasphemies.
And how (think you) does this minister prove that we hold our selves bound to
obey the Pope or any priest coming from him, though they should command
blasphemies? Hear his arguments as they ly, his first (...) obedience (...)
this, he (...), to (...) called an (...) subjection to (...). But to the (...)
profess obedience (...) Vicar and substitute (...) it follow thereby that
either the Pope will command them blasphemies or if he would or could, that they
must needs obey him therein, seeing their obedience to him is in respect of
Christ and for Christ and blasphemies are against Christ, and this folly is no
less ridiculous then if one should say (for examples sake) to the Neapolita^s
at this day, you profess obedience unto your Viceroy, as to the king of Spain
himself, ergo if he should command you treasons against the king you would obey
him; were not this a wise argument trow you, but now the second is as wise as
this. Boniface the eight (says he) makes subjection to the Pope to be a
matter of Salvation. Suppose he do, seeing that to obey or disobey our Superiors
is a matter of salvation or da^natio^ by S. Paul's express words. Romans 13.
But what is this to blasphemies? But hear his third argument: Bellarmine
(says he) makes it an essential point of a Catholic, to be under the Pope.
This also we grant. But what inference can be made of this? It follows
further: And such trust have Papists in his judgment, concerning matters of
faith, that they think he cannot be deceived. This also we (...) it of error
(...) that it (...) power (...) his Church (...) assistance of (...) seeing
Christ (...) able to preforme it, we (...) is this also to blasphemy?

He adds further: Cap. 17. Page 54.
Nay if he once (...) or determine any thing, they count it no better then
sacrilege to dispute of his doings. This is exaggerated, for we call it not
sacrilege, but pride rather, disobedience, malepartnesse, and other like sins
for inferiors lightly to dispute or examine the doyngs of their Superiors;
which among Protestants perhaps is held for a commendation and quickness of
wit; for so this minister determines the matter presently after, Ibid.
saying: We are not to believe every thing our Pastors teach, but as far as
they teach the doctrine of Christ Jesus, nor are we absolutely to obey, but
when they command according to the law. But who shall here be judge? or who
sees not that this is a most absurd circle opening the way to all wra^gling
dispute and disobedience, An absurd proposition about obedience.
nothing being attributed here more to the judgment and authority of Superiors,
then to the most unquiet spirits and dissentious heads of any inferior
whatsoever.

And finally wholly to disgrace our obedience (...) all his (...) Pope should
(...) an must say (...) why do you (...) the Pope (...) for proof of (...)
marge^t out of (...) si Papa distinct, 40. which (...) have heard omitted to
quote (...) and so had this man done more wisely in my opinion if he had
followed the other example, (...) any Popes doings.
and not shamed them both by noting the place, where their false shifting might
be discovered, as now it is like to be.

D^cret. Part. 1. did. 40. c. 6.
si Papa suae and fraternae salutis negligens deprehenditur, etc. if the Pope
be found negligent of his own salvation, and of the salvation of his brethren,
etc. The sentence of S. Boniface an English man.
This whole chapter or Canon (I say) is taken out of the words (and so it is
noted in he decretal it self) of S. Boniface an Englishman (before called
Winfrid) first Archbishop in times past of Moguntia, Apostle of Germany: and
finally a most holy Martyr, who lived under Ethelbald King of the Mercians, to
whom his most Christian wrytings are extant, about the year of Christ 720. Se
John Stow in his Chron. Page ^5. an. 718.
And the whole purpose of this Chapter or Canon tends to show the imminent
danger of everlasting damnation to Popes above other men, if they live not
carefully according to their State and degree, and this shows (...) which is
this: (...) fraternae salutis est ne (...) that neglects (...). And then
(...) is set down in (...) biles populos caterua^ (...) gehennae, cum ipso
(...) For that an evil Pope does (...) immunerable people by multitudes, (...)
with himself the cheifest bondslane of her^ there to be punished with him
everlastingly with many strypes.

Behold here the Pope nothing at all flattered Plain speech of S. Boniface to
all Popes.
which Protestants do cite for most high flattery toward him. And if all
Canonists or Popes themselves did love flattery so much as this minister, and
his mates do make them, they would never have suffered this plain speech to
have been registered for a Canon of Ecclesiastical decrees, to be seen and read
by all the world to all posterity. As neither would they permit the books of
S. Bernard, de Consideratione ad Eugenium Papam, wherein he puts both that
and all other Popes in due considerations of their own defects which are
willingly read by Protestants. But yet together with this playnesse; does this
holy martyr S. Boniface, as also the other devout Father S. Bernard,
acknowledge the Popes prerogative also of not being subject to any mortal
man's judgment in this world, except in matter of apostasy from (...) culpas
^stic (...) llus quta cunctos ipse (...) dus nisi deprehendatur (...) may
presume to (...) opes faults in this (...) to err in faith for (...) judge all
other me^ (...) no man but by God (...)

^
and this is all that here is said of this matter, which doctrine about the
Popes immunity from judgment in this life, cannot in reason mislike
Protestants, seeing many of them and other their fre^des in their books do grant
the same privilege to every temporal prince in his own dominion making him so
absolute both in temporal and spiritual affairs, See two books of Bellay
named Apologies in ^rench.
as he may not be judged by any mortal man but only by God himself. And albeit
our adversaries do bestirre themselves to infer further upon us here then
this, partly by the word redarguere, used by S boniface, partly by the sentence
foysted in by themselves, that no man may say, why do you so? wher-vpon they do
infer, that we make the Pope not only free from being judged or condemned,
but also from being so much as reprehended by any in this life: Yet this is
manifestly showed to be false as well by the grievous reprehension used here to
all evil Popes by S. Boniface himself, calling them the cheef bondsla^es of
hell, and by the many like reproves used to the same effect by the fornamed holy
man S. Bernard in his books of (...) of the ordinary (...) these:

Bonifacius martyr (...) possit iudicars, si mu (...) operibus suis, cum (...)
and similiter multos (...) non, cum debeat omn (...) prehendatur, pro cuius
(...) cum ipse (...) post Deum, vniuersitas fidelium instantius ore^. (...)
niface the martyr was demanded whether t^^ Pope might be called to judgment by
any man, if he were found negligent and remiss in his office, seeing that such
a one not only did hurt himself alone, but all his subjects in like manner, and
did draw many with him to perdition: What is to be don to evil Popes.
Whereunto the martyr answered, no, for that he has to judge all others, except
he should be found to be an heretic, so as the whole community of Christendom
has to pray for him, and his salvation as head of the Church under God.

And this is the answer of S. Boniface about the danger of Popes that live
evil, and attend not to their office as also for their privilege and exemption
from man's judgment in this life, except in case of heresy. And finally that
faithful people in steed of calling them to judgment should pray for them, as
Supreme magistrates of Christ Church.

And thus much is in this Canon si Papa, cyted (...), that albeit (...) souls
to hell, yet no (...) do you so? This our (...) and show where (...) an
objection (...) and pulpit every (...) later part is not in (...) else to the
sense (...) it. For though in another (...) far different, ^
of the Canon law, I ^o find some such words in the gloss, that in some cases
no man may exact a reason of the Popes doyngs, when they depend only of his will
and arbitrament, yet are they not spoken to such purpose as here they are
alleged, nor annexed with the former words of drawing infinite souls with
him to hell; but appertayning only to a particular case, as namely of free
disposing or transferring of Church goods from one Church to another without
obligation to yield reasons for the same, but only his judgment and will. The
words of the gloss talking of this particular case are these:

Licet inferiores iura vnius Ecclesiae in aliam sin^ certa solennitate
transfer non possunt. Gloss. in e^trau. Apost. Joan. 2. ^. tit. 5. c. 2.
conti^et^^.
Papa tamen gaudet plenitudine potestatis, and hoc facere potest, nec est qui
audeat dicere, Domine cur ita facis? cum in ijs quae de iure positiuo sunt,
possit pro libito super his dispensare. Albeit inferior Prelates cannot
transfer the rights of one particular Church to another, but by a certain
prescript form of solemnity appointed by law, yet the Pope (being general h^
Enc. (...) fullness of his (...) man, that may be so (...) he does so? seein^
(...) are only of (...) uine law) he may (...). This is the speech and (...)
^ohn de Fan^, in his gloss (...) a certain canon, the (...) good to examine
more at large (...) that by some few examples our country (...) may be taught
to take heed of these false deceauing companions who speak truth in no one
point they treat: And mark I pray you how many sleights and falsehoods they have
used in this one allegation.

For first of all they pervert the whole meaning S. Boniface speech in the
Canon s^ Papa turning that to flattery, which he writes for dreadful
admonition and reprehension of evil Popes, as you have hard. Then whereas he
says, that evil Popes do draw many to perdition with them; these fellows do
corrupt the whole sense, saying: that if he should draw infinite, yet no man
must say to him, why do you s^? thirdly they join falsely together these two
sentences as uttered in one place, and to the self same purpose, which are
found in two distinct volumes of the Canon law, written upon different
occasions and grounds, and in different matter, and neither of them to the
sense or meaning for which here they are alleged. And this could not be
hidden or unknown to (...) their error (...) of authors is (...) dealing
unchristian, (...) God to give (...)

(...) HE FOVRTH (...) whereby Catholics are said ^^^se Pardons for their
cheifest remedy against all sins, wherein the truth of Catholic doctrine is
declared, and the manifold falsifications of our heretics are detected. CAP.
XIIII.
The fourth ^ayned position.
for that it is a common pulpit matter among our ministers, wherein they chiefly
abuse the simple people, and was the first ground and occasion of their new
gospel by Martyn Luther, and for that by the shifting and shuffling reply of
Sir Francis to that which before was answered by the Wardword it may easily be
descryed how little in substance they have to say in this point of pardons and
indulgences, besides lying, cauilling and calumniation, I mean to stand a
little upon this point. And first to begin with the former answer and
explanation of the warder, which was as follows.

There (...) ground or (...) would needs (...) this he sets (...) wing: And
having thus (...) out stop to the mark and (...) so hemmed men in, as they
(...) escape danger but by them (...) them, they propounded unto them a (...)
from all dangers (even when they sinned immediately against God) which is a
pardon from his Hol. and absolution from his holy priests. But if the decrees
or or^inances of the Romish Sinagoge, were transgressed, ^ardly any mercy could
be had.

Thus writes our knight (says the Warder) Many caui^^ and falshood^.
First and foremost, who sees not how egregious a cauil it is to say, that
Catholics by teaching men to obey their Superiors simply, and for conscience
sake, and under pain of sin, (as you have heird also S. Paul to teach) that
thereby they bring men into snares, Romans ^^.
or hem them in (as this ma^s phrase is:) by which argument he may prove also,
that God himself, when he gave the law to the Jews, did hem them in to snares
of sin, (...) hemently (...) of his Epistle to (...) a notorious (...) we
prescribe of (...) of sin, is (...) greater and more^ (...) he adds by a
(...) immediately against God (...) (...) doctrine is clear (...) point, that
the Popes and Churches (...), (...)
avail not to remove mortal sin^^^ but only are given, where all such sin is
already pardoned by contrition and confession and virtue of the Sacrament, and
that the remains only some temporal punishment, in this or the next life to
be remitted Neither can the Pope pardon the guilt of syn it self by
indulgences, or by any other way then by the means of the Sacrament of
confession and absolution (which Sacrament has his force of the blood of
Christ) as every ordinary priest authorized to hear confessions may do the
like.

And so thirdly it is great ignorance in our knight, if not malice, or both, to
join together as he does the Popes pardon, and the absolution of his Holy
Priests, which have great difference in this matter for that the pardon
stretches not to remit syn it self (as has been said) but only the temporal
pains due unto syn; after it is remitted. But Priests absolution in the
sacrament of confession is sufficient to remit any syn, if the penitent be
contrite, according to commission (...) ^um remiseritis peccata (...)
^inueritis retenta sunt. who (...) shall be forgiven, and who (...) ^ayne, shall be
retained. (...) is a different matter (...) pardon.

Fourthly that the (...) decrees and ordinances of the Catholyke Church (which
wickedly he names the Romish Synagogue) be more hardly forgiven among us, then
greater sins, and those namely that be immediately committed against God
himself, is a shameless slander, and never taught by any Catholyke man in the
world, and so unworthy to be further refuted.

Thus far the Warder in examination and Cath. do^trine about indulgences.
and for perspicuous declaration of ^ath, doctrine about indulgences, which
consists in this, 2. Reg. 12. 13. 14.
that seeing after the guilt of mortal sin remitted (as for example the murder
and adultery of King David remitted by God and signified by the voice of Nathan
the prophet) there remains ofte^tymes some temporal satisfaction and pains
to be borne by him that sinned, for better satisfaction of Gods most exquisite
justice, as we read that the death of David's son begotten of that adultery,
as also the insurrection of his son Absalon with other afflictions following
thereof assigned by God for this satisfaction, after the guilt of the forsaid
sin was pardoned, (...) our Savior Christ in his (...) which for the dignity
of (...) finite valor, be^ides the (...) he did merit unto us, (...) of our
sins as also grace (...) works were infinitely (...) that they were penal,
and (...) nothing to satisfy for his own person, he left in his Church an
infinite treasure of these satisfactory works, to be applied to satisfy for
them, that cannot satisfy for themselves; to which treasures do also
appertain (though in a lower degree) the satisfactory works of his saints done
by his grace and virtue more then for their own persons, they had obligation
to do or suffer. Out of which publyke treasure of Christ's Church, The treasure
of satisfactory works remaining in Christ's Church.
Catholyks do hold, that the Bishops, Pastors and gouernoures thereof
(especially the cheef and supreme Pastor of all) may upon just causes and to
persons penitent, and otherwise well disposed, and not so well able to satisfy
for themselves in these temporal pains, dispense and distribut spiritual
helps to the assistance and supply of there wants and infirmities.

an indulgence or pardon when any thing is remitted or released that was dew to
be paid of our part, in which sense also Esaias the Prophet uses the word
Indulge^ce (though in a more general signification) when talking of Christ he
says, Esaias. 61.
that he should be sent praedicare cap^iuis ^dulgentiam, to preach Indulgence
to them that were in captivity, (...) uses in his gospel, (...) sentence (...)
Esaias he (...) praedicare captiuis remission (...) to them that are (...) places
though they (...) of all sins, as well (...) nishment thereunto belong (...) by
Christ, yet has the (...) word indulgence, and applied the same also by use to
this remission or mitigation only of temporal punishment, remaining after the
^ternal guilt of mortal sin is forgiven by the Sacrament of penance.

So that heerby we se, that neither indulge^ces To whom indulgence^ a^
auailabl^.
nor are they auayleable to all sorts of men, but to such only as are not in
mortal sin, and otherwise so piously disposed by devotion in Gods service, as
they are capable of this Indulgence, remission and favor in Gods Church.

And thus having briefly explaned what Catholyks do truly hold about this point
(which heretyks will never suffer their readers sincerely to understand) we shall
come to examine what Sr. F. replyeth to the discovery of all those cauils and
falsehoods, wherein the Warder took him trip (they were four, if you remember,
or will vouchsafe to look back upon them) to all which he answers no one word
in particular, but only this in general: What say I more in my accusation
(about (...) knows to be true, (...) a general answer it (...) he means I
know not, (...) he had a world of (...) he might have alleged (...) ours in
all this world, (...) one of these four, (...), which in this place are (...)
his charge by the Warder, and so have saved his honor in this behalf, but
having produced none after so much bragging in his VVatchword, and so much
battery in the VVardword, now to come and cry again, that he has a world with
him, when the time had been to have brought some forth; is a pitiful plight for
so honorable a knight to see him self in.

that the whole world knows his assertions to be true? Yes: Ibid. Page 69.
for thus it follows in the same place: The Cath. doctrine is (as our
champion says) that the Popes and Churches indulgences avail not to remove
mortal sins, etc. neither does the pardon remove the guilt of sin, etc.
But Sir whatsoever your doctrine is in this point your practice is quite
con^ary, etc. Mark here (gentle Reader) whereas hitherto the knight has charged
our doctrine, now being put to the proof, he says: Whatsoever our doctrine
be, yet our practice is to the contrary, as though he had said that howsoever
it be false and slanderous which hitherto he has affirmed of our (...) he
show that we (...) kind of argument if a (...) use against a Christian, (...)
doctrine for teaching (...) being driven from it by (...) and by showing that
(...) teach the contrary if (...) (as Sr. Francis does) from (...) and say as
he says; that whatsoever your (...) be, yet is your practice contrary, and
many wicked men are among you, ergo your religion is naught: would any man call
this other then plain cauilling?

But what does our knight prove any one About abuses of Indulgences.
in the use of indulgences also as there want not evil liners among Christians)
does he bring forth (I say) any one example of any one publyke practice to the
contrary? No truly, but only says in general, Page 70.
that the Counsels of La^eran, Vienna, and Trent have made provision ^or
reformation of abuses about Indulgenc^^, which makes for us rather then for
him, for that it shows we desire that abuses or contrary practice should not
be, or if it has been it was not permitted by Cath. doctrine or publyke
authority no more then wicked life is in Christian religion, though much be
practiced, as to our greef, we see.

From this he passes to allege certain Ke^nitius, as true a writer (...) as
he says) in a stone in a (...) the Bituriges in Aquitany; (...) nothing at all
(...) only exhorting men to (...), in respect of the (...) by God, and (...) of
scripture themselves (...) our knight lacking other (...) them in against
(...). Some of them I shall allege hear for examples sake.

(...). Page 69.
Hic des deuote, caelestibus associate.
Mentes aegrotae per munera sunt tibi lotae;
Ergo veni tote gentes a sede remotae:
Qui datis estote certi de diuite dote.
Hic si large des in caelo sit tua seeds.
Qui serit hic parce parce comprendit in arce.
Sir Francis his translation.
Give freely here in heaven a place prepare,
Your sickly souls by gifts clean purged are.
Come people then which dwell far from this place.
Ye that do give, rest sure of mickle grace.
If thou give freely here, heaven is thy hyre.
He that gives little, shall little there acquire.
scripture. For in the (...) Day and dabitur vobis, etc. (...) given unto you.
In (...) words of our Savior. (...) omnia vobis munda sunt, (...) all is
clean and purged (...) the rest, ending with the (...) in the last verse: Qui
parce semini^ (...) he that sows little shall reap (...) expressly of alms.
And with what folly the^ are these things brought in by way of scoff against
pardons and indulgences, which nothing appertain unto them? and are sentences
taken out of the scripture it self.

He adds to this purpose a complaint of Norenberg, Page 71. Malicious
concealing of circumstances to deceive the reader.
but he tells not in what year this was, nor what manner of counsel, nor that
these Princes were new protestants, nor that Luther did endite this complaint,
for if he had told any one of these circumstances it would have infringed the
credit of his tale, Ibid. Page 72*
as that which he tells of one Tecelius the Popes pardon merchant as he
terms him of whom he writes a jest how he was deceived and cosened in
selling of pardons, but for that he cites neither author book time nor place,
I give it the credit as such pulpit tales of Sir Francis ministers do require.

That old objection also of Card. Como his Parry wherein he is affirmed to say:
(...) pardon of all your sins as (...) answered. For first it is (...) in his
letter to Pope (...) from Paris when he (...) 1583. discovered no (...) any
particular enterprice (...) only in general, that he (...) great matters for
the (...) Cath. religion, for recompense of the ^urts which he had done diverse
years before by spiery for the state of England. And this appears as well by
the letter yet extant as for that he uttering his whole plot to her Ma^ie and
her counsel at his first coming in was notwithstanding favorably handled for a
great space, until falling into coffeehouse through want, he practiced with
him that discovered his teachery: Secondly the Popes grant of Indulgence unto
him was meant only with due circumstances, if he were contrite and confessed of
his sins, which is wont to be added commonly in all indulgences, or is
necessary to be understood. For which cause, this objection is to no purpose at
all.

Durandus, page 70.
before I end my speech. As for the authority (says he) wher-vpon your
indulgences are grounded, your own men confess as namely (among the rest)
Durandus: De indulgentijs pauca dici possunt per certitudinem qui (...) ijs
loquitur; sancti etiam (...) Hieronymus, Augustinus, mit (...) gentijs, etc.
Little can be (...) indulgences because (...) speaks expressly of the (...)
Fathers Ambrose, Hilary, (...) make no mention of them. (...) confess, that
you have neither warrant (...) nor of the ancient fathers for your popish
(...) go they current, etc.

Howsoever they go current (Sir knight)

For the first, though he name Durandus, yet The first shift.
where you may find it, which for the most part (as before we have noted)
implies lightly some deceyt or subtle trick in the allegation, which he would
not have discovered, as now by experience we have learned, and the third point
shall declare.

For the second about the illation he makes out of the words of Durand, The
second shift.
if they were all in all respects truly alleged, it is false and cauillous.
For if any Arrian or Anabaptist in the days of S. Ambrose Hilary, and Jerome,
whom (...) have made like (...), and said (as they (...) of Homousion, (...),
as also the baptism (...) to be found in (...) such and such ancient (...)
Justinius and others of that (...) thing of it; ergo you hold (...) neither have
warrant in (...) of ancient Fathers.

Trinity and baptism of children, were not expressly contained in scripture,
yet were they sufficiently deduced thereof. And albeit those former fathers as
Justinius, Irenaeus and others had not occasion expressly to handle or treat of
these controuersyes being occupied in other matters yet never taught they the
contrary and other fathers following after them did teach and testify that
doctrine to be Catholic which was sufficient. And the very like may be answered
by us in this behalf, as by the third point of Sir Francis paltry dealing shall
appear.

Durand, The 3. shift.
leaving out some, which are greatly to the purpose, and do plainly insinuate
the answer that now I have given. For first after Durand had said that the
scripture did not (...) indulgences, he alleaget^ (...) scripture as Tibi dabo
claues (...) 16. etc. Quodcunque ligaueris, (...) of which textes he says: Non
(...) collatione indulgentiarum debeant (...) clear than these places of (...)
understood of giving (...) words being added to the word (...) the former
clause, do evidently signify (...) albeit Durand did not think that the
doctrine of indulgences, was clearly and expressly contained in scripture, yet
that it might be deduced out of scripture, for which cause Sir Francis cut them
out. This is one trick, let us see another.

Immediately after the words in Durand, and follows Gregorius tamen loquitur,
but S. Gregory speaks of them. This Sir Frauncis dasheth out, which was a
principal verb in this matter. For a man might answer that albeit the
particular use of indulgences were not so treated of, by S. Ambrose, S.
Augustine, and other former doctors occupied in other affairs and stryfes with
other heretics, yet soon after in S. Gregory the great his time, which was a
thousand years ago, the use and exercise thereof was common in the Church,
seeing Durand in this very place affirms not only that S. Gregory speaks of
them, but also that he is said to have ordained (...) public Stations, who
(...) to have begone this (...) or to have taught and (...) contrary to
antiquity in (...) Christ. All which for Sir (...) dissembled, and of purpose
(...) a bad conscience both in him (...) they strive not for truth, but (...)
faction and falsehood (...) by what means so ever, which shall appear also, by
that which ensues in the sequent Chapter, if first we take a short view of that
which his Minister O. E. brings in to assist him, which is such stuff as is
commonly uttered by such broken marchaunts. Let us hear what he says:

What O. E. says of indulgences.

It is most true (says he) which Sir Francis affirms, O.E. Page 54.
that the Papists, when they have committed most abominable offenses, and
lived in all filthynes, are notwithstanding taught, that the Pope has power to
pardon them, and absolve them, etc. Mark here two words subtily joined
together of pardoning and absoluing as though they were one, whereas indeed
they import far different things, as before has been showed, for that
absoluing implies that it must be done by virtue of the sacrament of penance
and absolution, and so reaches to all sins never so grievous, but pardoning
is proper to indulgences, and stretches no further but to the release of
temporal punishment, as before has but declared.

And thus the minister (...) of purpose to have some (...) he is pressed, but
all men (...) here only of the former, to (...) that it is an abominable life
(...) science, to affirm as he does (...) are taught, that all filthynes and
(...) senses are remitted by the Popes pardon (...) his life be so licentious
and filthy (...) of him (and his courses of (...) do well agree thereunto) (...)
come to be of our religion, he would ^ind other remedies applyable to him
besides pardons, that would stick near his skin albeit in le^itate spiritus for
saving of his soul.

But how does he prove (think you) that Bellarm^ de indul. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Bellarmyne says that indulgences are profitable to all manner of persons. Well,
what of this? will you infer hereof that all sins may be forgiven by
indulgences? Cardinal Bellarmyne in the place cyted, goes about to refute
Luther, who affirmed Indulgentias non esse vtiles nisi publicis and
scelestissimis peccatoribus, Luth. in assert. art. 1^.
that indulgences are not profitable but only to publyke and most wicked
sinners, which Card. Bellarmine does refute, and show that they profit also to
good men, so that this minister would infer the quite contrary to the authors
meaning and (...) out fraudulently how (...) the third chapter after (...)
large what manner of (...) them, that must be (...) to wit that they be out of
(...) consequently it is not most (...) rather and false, which this (...), all
filthiness and most (...) to be pardoned among (...) indulgences, yet hear what
he appear also second proof deduced from pract^^e.

For money (says he) they pardon Murder of children, of men, O.E. Page 55.
of women, of wives, of near ki^red, fornication adultery, incest, and all
unnatural abominations, etc. To this is answered before, that Cath. doctrine
neither teaches nor allows any such matter and if any bad fellow or under
officer has gone about by corruption at any time to commit such abuses he was
as honest a man as O. E. and should do it as lawfully as he and other such like
ruffianly and ravenous companions do possess, buy and sell Cath. benesices
instituted for Priests and honest men.

Taxa Poenitentiariae noted in the margent, pro licentia erigendi de nouo
publicam synagogam Taxa est suron. 60. Ducat. 15. is a thing no way to be found
by me that have sought for it in the paenitentiaria it self and their registers
and can find no such matter ever in use, and yet if in countries, where Jews
are permitted, some tribute were imposed (...) to the help of poor (...) great
matter, or were this to (...) as this companion would (...) diverse protestant
States of (...) Jews also to dwell among them (...) we leave this poor
companion (...) almighty his indulgence, and (...) the Reader, seeing he has
not (...) against Catholyk indulgences, (...) is not worth the recital, as you
(...)

OF TWO OTHER examples of Pardons abused by Catholyks as Sir Francis
alleges, but both of them false, with a notorious imposture about the
poisoning of King John. CAP. XV.
THE knight having fled from the point he VVastvvord. Page 74.
in these words: Sundry Chronicles do make mention of Simon the monk of
Swinsted, who poisoned King John, that before the fact he confessed his purpose
to his Abbot, who highly commended his zeal, (...) beforehand for the
committing (...) I might join the (...) who murdered the K. of France, (...)
hand confessed and absolue^ of (...)

(...) two examples, as they are both (...), so I answer first to the last
(...) that Sr. Frauncis ought to be (...), to avouch so weighty a (...) by wh^^
as this, without naming some appear also ^ bad, except he esteem (...) no
other then ^atling or telling of news upon every man's speech or fond
imagination, as men are wont to in barbers shoppes, and seeing he will vouchsafe
us no one author for his affirmative, I shall allege him most authentical
testimonies, About James Clement that slew the K. of France.
to wit 4. books, for the negative, written and printed in Lions, presently
upon the fact it self entitled, De iusta Henrici 3. abdication^: where in the
4. book and 23. Chapter all the particularities of this Iacobus Clemens and his
fact are set down and evidently showed, that he conferred with no man living
thereof before it was done, and much less either confessed or received
absolution before hand for the fact; and if he had so done, yet had it ben
nothing auayleable to him, for how could any man give absolution to him for a
fact to come? Sure I am that no Catholyke doctrine or authority can allow
thereof; and the reason is, for that the party that should propose such a matter
to be done either holds it for lawful or unlawful. If he hold it for lawful
then (...) absolution, if he hold it for (...) means to do it, then is he
(...) sition to receive either (...) gence, seeing he is not sorry for (...)
intention, which is necessarily (...) often before has been noted in (...)
either indulgence or absolution (...) auayleable, and this is sufficient for
(...) fiction of Sir Francis.

The other example also of (...) monk of Swynsted, which our knight, (...) that
sundry authors do mention to have (...) John, Sir F.F. dulent (...).
and to have received absolution before hand (...) his Abbot, is no less
gross and absurd then (...) former: and our knight in good and play (...)
dealing, for saving his honor and honest (...) should have named those sundry
authors, (...) some of them at least, and not like Hickscorne^ cast out the
contumely, For. ^t
and run behind th^^ door, when the proof is asked. But the read^^ must
understand that he had this tale (as the most of all the rest here alleged)
out of Io^^ Fox as true a legender, as himself is an alleage^ Fox or he be the
truer man in relating Stories, or whether both be not of one, and the same sise
in misreporting. John Fox has not only a long tale^ but also a full pagent
printed and painted to this: to wit of the poisoning of K. John b^ this monk;
of the monks death, and other (...) for him; of the Abbots (...) he did it; of
other monks (...) his soul, of Symons (...) and of his giving it to the King
(...), VVassa^ my liege, and other (...), which are expressed in six (...), and
different poeses put under (...) for the reader to see and consider the (...)
And when all this pastime is ended, (...) himself confesses that authors (...)
about the death of K. Ihon. For being (...) that afraid to be taken trip (as he
saw it (...) that he should) and so be confounded by (...) ^ent of all ancient
writers against this no^^^ion, he says thus:

Many opinions are among Chroniclers of the death of (...) John: some of them
do write, that he died of sorrow (...) heauynes of heart as Poli^ore: some of
surfeiting in (...) night as Radulphus Niger; some of the bloody flux (...)
Roger Houeden; some of a burning ague; some of a (...) sweat; some of eating
apples; some of eating (...), peaches, plummes, etc. And thus you see what
(...) is among writers concerning the death of this king (...): of which
writers though the most agree in this (...) he was poisoned by the monk above
named, yet Matthew Paris something differing from the other writers, writes
that he died of an ague by surfeiting, etc.

Mark here now (good reader) and by this one example among ten thousand
consider (...) malicious falsehood of John Fox in setting ^owne his fantastical
historyes to deceive the people, ^or after that he has with a long ^iscourse
and narration of the kings pitiful poisoning by a monk, and (...) foul
circumstances thereof, (...) number of monks, one dressin^ (...) cutting him in
pieces, another (...) host over his head, as in the (...) hearing his
confession, absoluing (...) rer before hand and putting down (...) also, Ego
absoluote, etc. another on his (...) ceauing the same, and then (...) crying,
VVassal my liege as before is said (...) be seen in the pictures themselves;
and (...) to move more compassion toward the (...) and hatred to monks and
their religion, (...) said king is brought forth in a pagent dead, (...) a
grave minister painted with a long bear^ to morn over him with this sentence
printe^ under: king John lies here dead of poison.

After all this (I say) which Fox has pu^ down, partly in print and partly in
painting, he comes out at last with that blind confession, which before you
have heard, that ancient authors do not agree about the death of king John, an^
^o all this ado is brought in question by h^^ own confession, which should
have been told at the beginning in upright dealing, to the ell^ that the reader
should have stayed his iudg^ment in all this revel, that Fox makes about this
matter. And this of his malicious fraud, now hear his impudency.

Of which writers (says he) the most agree i^ this, that he was poisoned by
the monk above n^^med, etc. To which I answer that this is s^^^melesse
impudency, for that not only all (...) (...) by him named, do not agree (...)
poisoning, but no one of them (...) much as once mention or (...) rather do
expressly deny it, by (...) manner of death happened to (...) then by
poisoning of the mo^k, and (...) Fox himself confess in the (...) (if you mark
them) for he says, (...) affirms, that he died of heauynes (...) Radulphus
Niger of surfeiting, Roger (...) bloody Flux, and some of a burning ague, cold
(...) eating of apples, pears, peaches, pl^mmes, etc. (...) how then do the
most of these authors (...) in this, that king John was poisoned by ^^^e monk
seeing they never so much as name ^^ther poison or monk, but do recite other
^^uses of his death? Here John Fox is taken (...) though he be a Fox) with his
own trap as ^ow see.

Again John Stow that printed his Annals ^^^^ce Fox published his book of
Acts and mo^^ments to wit anno 1592. writing the ^hole Story and death of king
John tells it (...) contrary to that which Fox sets ^^wne, according to
the ancient historiogra^^ers above mentioned naming neither monk nor poison,
and in the end of his nar^ation adds this. Thus I have set down the life
though much abridged) and death of king John after (...) writing of Roger
VVindouer, Roger Houeden, Rad. (...), Rad. Cogshal Canon of Barnwel and Matthew
(...) is and others, who all lived when the K. reigned, (...) wrote for that
time what they saw or hard credibly reported. This is the (...) Stow which
conuinceth Fox (...) pudency in that thesaid, Fox (...) most part of the
aforesaid (...) to agree about the poisoning of (...) whereas no one of them
holds it, (...) contrary as you have hard.

But how then comes in this (...) call story so much urged, and diligen^t the
forth by John Fox in his lying acts and (...) You may read in John Stow (...)
the place alleged, the first author thereof, for it was an author without a
name, which wrote about a hundred and seuentene years ago, and took upon him
to continue the fabulous story of Geffrey of Monmouth, and among infinite other
fables tells also this of King John's poisoning, as he received it by some
vulgar report; The book was caused to be printed at the charges of one William
Caxton, and so commonly called Caxtons chronicle, and, in the prologue he
writes thus:

In the year of our lord 1483. in the 22. year of the reign of K. Edward the
4. at S. Albons; so that all m^n may know the acts of our noble Kings of
England are compiled in this book, etc. This went in the prologue, and then in
the end again he says thus: Here ends this present chronicle of England
with the fruit of times, compiled in a book and also printed by one, sometime
scholmaister of S. Albons, upon whose soul God have mercy Amen. And newly
imprinted in Fleetstreet at the sign of the Sun by me VVi^ken de word. In
the year of our Lord God. 1515.

(...) how this book was (...) withal, and many hundreds (...) in the book,
set down after the (...) wives tales naming no author (...) he had it, for he
lived almost 300. (...) the fact, and all the former authors (...) that lived
with King John or (...) to this man's time, excepting only (...) ^onicon that
me^tioneth it, as a vulgar tale, (...) polidore after him with like reiection,
all ^^ners (I say) former writers which best should know the truth, not only
made no mention thereof, but set down expressly other manner and causes of K.
Ihons death, as you have heard, and yet would Fox of mere malice, and against
his own conscience, believe this author against all the rest, and set it forth
in print, pagents and paintings, as before has been said and all other English
heretyks since have followed him in the same impudency, both in books, sermons
and common speeches, which shows that they do not follow reason, nor seek
truth, but only to hold the reader in error by any means of slight or
^alshood whatsoever, which ought to warn every true Christian man, who seeks
sincerely to know the verity of matters in controversy and the salvation of his
own soul, not to believe so easily these cosening people but to enter into
better consideration of their doings, especially of John Fox the most
fraudulent and perfidious writer that ever put pen to paper in our language, if
I be not greatly deceived, who have taken pains (...) many others to examine
the (...) wilful falsehood of diverse of his (...)

But to return again to Sir (...) Reader note one trick more of his, (...)
wing this story of K. John, to be as I (...) was not only content to use Fox
his frau^^^^ deceive his Reader, but would needs ad some what of his own
devise also: For albeit the former Chronicle of Cax^on (if so it may be called)
do recount the sum of the matter most fondly, as to the Reader may appear,
yet does he not tell, that the monks name was Simon, as S. Francis calls him,
nor that his Abbot highly commended him for his zeal, as Sir Francis adds
out of Fox his invention, who forgeth also, that the monk alleged for himself
the prophesy of Cayphas John. 11. saying? It is better, that one die then all
the people perish; and moreover: I am well contented to loose my life, and so
become a martyr, that I may utterly destroy this tyrant, and then with that the
Abbot did weep for gladness, and much commended his fervent zeal, etc.

All these speches and circumstances (I say) Caxto^) but rather the contrary,
that both the monk and the abbot were very sorrowful. And last of all it is
most false (which is the principal part of this Story and for which it was
brought in by Sir Francis) that the Abbot gave him absolution before hand, for
the committing of this (...) it had been committed; for (...) such matter at all
in the story, but (...) he asked to be shriuen and assoyled (...) of his
sins, but not that the (...) yield thereunto, and much less, (...) was any
mention on either part of (...)olution for the sin to come, but rather ^r his
sins past, as men are wont to do, when they go to war, or to like
attempts, where many sins are ordinarily committed, for which no man asks
absolution before hand, as our two masters here will needs have the monk to
have done, though in deed Sir Francis is the more impudent of the two; for that
John Fox durst not to avouch this manifestly of absoluing aforehand for sins
to come; yet our knight blusheth not to affirm yt^ without all warrant or
witness in the world, and so becomes the disciple worse then his master.

(...) and Fox (...) riue (...)hal (...) most ^^dulently.
to wit. The monk being absolved of his Abbot (a forehand) went, etc. where you
see that he puts down the word a forehand with a parenthesis as added of
himself, if any would urge him of falsehood: But Sr. Francis takes quite a way
the parenthesis and affirms the matter absolutely, saying: He highly
commended his zeal and gave him absolution a forehand for committing of this
wicked act. etc.

And by this let the reader judge of them both Master and scholar, doctor and
disciple; and I have been the longer in diciphering their cosenage in this one
example to the end that their malice and lack of conscience being fully seen
in few points, may be held suspected in the rest: For that most true it is,
that they who in matters of religion do falsify and lie of purpose, cannot
possibly be thought to be true or religious in any thing, nor to seek religion
for religion, but faction and self will under the name of religion, let them say
what they will.

And this shall suffice for this chapter, where is nothing to be added about our
minister O.E. for that he passes over with utter silence all that the knight
has handled in this place, about the poisoning of king John, so as all the
blame must light upon himself, his champio^ not presuming to make any defense
at all for him. Now then let us pass to that which ensues.

THE SPEECH OF THE warder is defended where he calls the way of salvation by
only faith, the common Cart way of protestants, the truth of which doctrine is
examined. CAP. XVI.
AND thus have I followed Sir Francis step, as you have seen, leesing much
time in answering many impertinent points that might have been ouerslipt and
contemned, but that I would omit nothing in these two first Encounters, and now
with the like patience will we harken also to his conclusion of this second
Encounter uttered by the Warder thus:

Now then the knight having set down these four absurd grounds of religion in
our name, VVardvvord Page 26.
feigned by himself, and acompanyed with so many other lies and falsehoods as
you have heard, you shall see how he makes his conclusion and triumphs as
though he had done somewhat of importance, these are his words:

A fond conclusion.
Thus have you (says he) the blind course they sought to breed us in, by
debarring us the clear light of the holy written word of God, and the
carelessness they sought to setle in us of all religion, by making it a thing
impertinent to us, as though we had no souls to care for, etc. Thus says the
knight in his watchword whervuto the Warder answers in these words.

This conclusion to him that has read the former foolish positions, with their
confutations, may serve for some disport and recreation, to behold how this
seely knight bestirreth himself upon castles builded in the air, by false
imaginations and sottish apprehensions of his own, especially in a long
ridiculous discourse that he makes immediately upon these words in his book,
where immagining that all goes by pardons with us, and that pardons may be had
for money he infers that all rich men may easily be saved in our religion,
without any difficulty, and yet says he, Christ taught us, that it was as easy
for a Camel to pass through a needles eye, as for a rich man to go to heaven,
and so he maruayleth how these things can stand together.

To which I might answer, that it seems The knight understands not
divinity.
as to learn Sir Francis to be a good deuyne, and that I would more easily
take upon me to make a camel to go through a nedles eye (in that sense that
Christ spoke it) or any rich man in the world to enter into heaven (if he would
follow my counsel) then to frame Sir Francis old head to understand the depth
of Catholic religion.

And therefore amidst his ridiculous doubts I leave him to his Ministers to
resolve him, except he will determine to be a Catholic, repent, go to
confession, and do satisfaction, for then his ghostly father by the penance he
may chance to inioyne him, will let him see and feel, that all goes not by
pardons, nor yet by money among us; And that there is another strayter needles
eye for him to enter (though he be rich) then the buying of pardons, if he will
go to heaven after the Catholic manner, to wit by the 3. parts of penance
before touched, contrition, confession, and satissaction, unto which course
toward heaven God enclyne our knight, for otherwise he will never come
thither, seeing that the open and easy cartway of his only faith is far
different from the needles eye, and narrow path, that Christ speaks of (in
the ghospel) as necessary to salvation.

The controversy of justification by only faith.
until the very last words, of the open and easy Cartway of only faith,
whereunto he makes an assault as follows: VVast. Pa. 75.
As for that which you blasphemously call (says he) the open Cartway of only
faith, you shall find a strayter and narrower passage, then you would bear the
world in hand, if you conceive not an historical faith, which may be dead, but
a true, lively and justifying faith, for though we be justified by faith only,
apprehending Christ his obedience and merits, etc. Yet are we not justified by
an only faith, such as is void and destitute of good works but in the person
of them that are justified faith and good works are united and coopled
together, though in the act of justifying they are severed, it being the
proper duty of faith alone, as a hand to apprehend and take hold of Christ, etc.

Jack is John, Faith only and only faith.
yet must you not think that John is Jack. Though we be justified (says he) by
faith only; yet are we not justified by an only, faith. But I would ask you
(Sir) what does sola fides signify* which are the very words of your sollemne
assertion, both out of Luther and Caluyn against Cath. doctrine sola fides
iust^ficat, faith alone justifies: does not sola fides in the latin tongue
signify rather faith alone, or an only faith, then faith only, which in the
Latin is expressed rather by the aduerbe fides folum vel solummodo^ And if this
be true (as all gramers and lexicons will teach you that it is) then is your
distinction (whereby you say that we are justified by says only and not by an
only says) not only vain, but absurd also and against your self, ^
who hold that sola fides iustificat faith alone or an only faith justifies.
And thus much for the contradiction in your own words.

But now if we go to the substance it self The disagreeing of Lutherans and
Caluenists about this controversy.
that whereas Luther the first founder of the proposition only faith justifies,
so defends the same, as he not only excludes but detesteth and abhors
both the concurrance and presence of any good works toward a man's salvation:
some later Protestants (especially Caluinists) being ashamed of the absurdity
of the doctrine, and desyring withal to disgrace Luther, and his fellows in
this point as in many others, have taken upon them to mittigate the matter, and
to say, that albeyt good works can help nothing indeed in the act of
justification (and consequently also neither to salvation) yet they are
necessary as fruits, and so necessary; as that no salvation can be without
them, wherein though, in words they would seem to say somewhat, yet is it but a
mere shift and evasion, and first contradicts Luther and Lutherans plainly,
whom they would make show to expound and enterpret, and then it is evidently
false also in it self as breefly I shall declare.

^l^^c. Illyr. praefat. ad Romans Page 634.6^5. N^^^^pistae.
and their elder brethren the Lutherans; hear the matter set down clearly by
Flaccus Illyricus himself their cheifest Centuriator; thus he says.

Now I come to the doctrine of the new Papists (so he calls Sir Francis and
his fellows that will bring in any necessity of works whatsoever) which is as
pernicious as the old. They say that the Apostle means to exclude good works
from justification non simpliciter sed ratione debiti, not simply but as due,
but only as meritorious and causes efficient, whereupon these doctors or rather
seducers, do diverse ways elude that proposition of S. Paul, we are justified
by faith gratis without works, each one according to his own ^ead, and as his
private spirit suggesteth to him, and most of them covet diligently to mingle
works, as a certay^e harmful leven, with justification and the lamb of God,
etc.

And then again.

But the true sense of Paul's words is, that without all merit, condition or
necessity of our works by only faith in Christ, we are justified before
Christ, and saved; so as our salvation does in no sort depend of our works
neither be they any way necessary to salvation, etc. Scripture, Luther, and all
doctors of sound Judgment think thus:

Lo here Sir Francis you are called a new simpliciter, simply and every way.
You are called an eluder of the proposition of S. Paul interpreting it by your
private spirit other ways then he meant it, and different from the sense of
Martyn Luther and all doc^ors of sound judgment. You are accused for coveting
so diligently to mingle good woorks ^^ a certain harmeful leven with
justification and the lamb of God, defend your self if you can from these
arrows of your own men, and to the end you may do it better, and more
properly to the purpose, harke^ what the same writer says of you and yours in
the begin^ing of this very controversy.

Some there are, who drowsily weyghing the matter, Flac. Illyr. praef ad To.
Page 636.
whether good works justify, or be the ^erit and cause efficient of justice
and life, and not whether they be in any respect necessary to Salvation, etc.
Lo Sir Francis you are one of these drowsy ^^llowes that understand not
properly the co^^^ouersy according to Illyricus his judgment, for ^ow say that
works are in some respects ne^essary to salvation, to wit as necessary fruits
and ^^^nesses, and that Salvation cannot be without them though not as any
cause meritorious or efficient of Justice.

And thus much for the controversy it self, which S. Francis understands not.
But if I would stand upon alleging the infinite sentences of other protestants
quite opposite and contradictory to that flattery of good works which Sr.
Francis here and in other places of his Wastword uses for deluding the people,
I should never make an end, for in this they are as contrary one to another as
in any other point.

Martyn Luther that was the founder of this opinion and laid it for the
foundation of all his new ghospel: Lutheran speches against good works joined
with faith.
says Caueamus a peccatis, sed multo magis a legibu^ and operibus bonis. Let
us take heed of sin, but much more of laws and good works. Luther. sermon. de
nouo testam. sieve de missa.
And according to this doctrine his scholars in a certain counsel say thus:
adeo non esse necessari^ opera bona, In colloq. Altemb. vid. Canis l. 1. de
corrupt. verb. Dei. Cap. 10.
vt etiam ad salutem incommodent, sint^ perniciosa. Good woorks are so far of
from being necessary to salvation, as that they rathe^ hinder, and are
pernicious. And again in the same. Ibid.
Precari nos oportet, vt in fide sine operib^ omnibus bonis, vsque in finem
perseueremus: we mu^^ pray that we may persevere in faith without all good works
unto the end.

Colloq. Altemberq. col. 4 fol. 75. and 76.
let us hear their conclu^sion which is in these words: After all this (...)
conclude with that worthy saying of Luther in his fi^ Tome, printed at
Wittenberg: If works be necessary salvation then salvation cannot be without
works, and then we are not saved by only faith. This conclus^on we see, is
plain contradictory to Sir Frauncis, which holds works needful in some
respect, as before has been showed, which contradiction Luther himself urges
yet much more, Luth. tom. 1. prop^sil. 3.
when he says: Fides nisi sit sine vllis etiam minimis operibus non
iustificat, imo non est fides. Faith if it be not without all good works, even
the least that may be, it justifies not, yea it is no faith. So as when Sir
Francis annecteth good works to his Protestant faith, as a hand-mayd, without
which faith is no faith; Luther on the contrary says, that if this ^^nd-mayd
be there she kills the maistresse. And so enough of this contradiction which
was the first absurdity of this Caluinian shift, to cover the nakedness of
their bare faith, which Luther toyleth to discover as fast, and will not have
her covered, or as he says: defiled with the ^ttenragges of any good works.

To the second point of this Caluinian shift, The second point of Caluinia^
imposture about only faith.
but yet must not ^elp or cooperat any thing at all to our salua^^on, but only
attend upon faith as a hand ^ayd so as faith only must save, but not faith
^lone, albeit that which I said in the begin^^ng of the idleness of this devise
and mathe^atical illusion be sufficient to overthrow it, and the reasons of
Luther and his Lutherans (...) evident against it; yet may the vanity thereof
(...) seen also by this: that when a protestant has the faith, that either
Luther or Caluyn could teach him, and as vehement and fervent as both of them
together if he should l^ue naughtely he can not by Sir Francis doctrine be
saved, for that faith only saves nor, Luther says he has the more faith for
that, how do these two stand together?

with the Lord in his glory, which faith and assurance the ministers standing
by with the rest do approve and highely comend:

Here now I would ask is this faith a goo^ and saving faith or no, which these
theeue and murderers have, or only historical, as Sy^ Francis calls it, for
that it lacks work^ No protestant I suppose will deny it to be ^ good and
lively faith, and consequently a ^ a justifying and saving faith, for that
other ways those good saints that are thus ha^^ged should be deceived, or in
doubt of the supper, which they are taught in no case ^ do, but to rest most
assured thereof, throu^^ the merit of this faith, and yet can no m^ say, that
this their faith had fruits, or was a^^compained with good works. And
con^^quently that either faith alone, and only faith, as well as faith only does
save these men after the manner that such good fellow Protestants are saved,
or else they are not saved at all, seeing works they had none.

And this being so, that all malefactors The com^^^ cartvvay of Protestants
only faith.
as well as these that live well and have good works, yea much better, and more
surely: (if we believe Doctor Luther) let the reader judge whether I rightly
called it, an open easy cart-way or no. And so much of this controversy, whereof
the minister also O.E. keeps silence, and says not a word in defense of his
knight and master. And so shall we end this second whole Encounter.

THE WARNING AND admonition about this second Encounter, first to Sir Francis
Hastings, and then to O. E. his Chaplayn and champion. CAP. XVII.
TO continue my former purpose and promise am now by way (as it were) of some
short recapitulation to refresh your memory in that behalf, and thereby also to
make matters more clear in the sight of our diligent and attentive reader.

E^c. 1. cap. 2.
you did run presently to charge, Canonistes and Roman courteours with
flattering also the Pope, so have I now the same complaint in the beginning of
this second Encounter, that you being charged with diverse notorious untruths
uttered in your VVatchword about the doctrine of Catholics, auouching them to
hold that which they hold not; you do use the very same shift by running to
accuse friars, and telling us that in king Richard the 2. his time according to
Tho. Walsingham, A common stift of S. Francis to accuse others for excusing
himself.
Friars were brave liars, etc. which as if it were in all respects true, as you
allege the story, it would be no just defense or excuse for your defaults in
that kind, so the whole narratio^ thereof being perverted in your allegation (as
before we have declared) it must greatly diminish your credit, Cap. 2. number.
^.7.13. etc.
for all the rest that was or is to ensue after from you.

preface or preparation to your poor defense of those untruths which are
objected against you, wherein also you discredit your self not a little by
bringing in other impertinent and forged matters to fill up paper and help out
withal, and among other of certain devised chalenges of disputation said to be
made on your side by John Husse in the council of Constance, and by Martin
Luther at Worms and Augusta, and by Simon Grinae^^ at Spire, Protestant
disputers.
and by Peter Martyr and Theodore Beza at the conference of Pa^sy in France,
etc. In all which examples, there being discovered many untruths, as well in
the narration it self, as in the application, and further declared, Cap. 3. and
4.
that none of all these five disputing champions alleged by you for founders,
pillars, and defenders of your religion, church, and doctrine, were truly
indeed of your religion in all points, and consequently also neither of your
church, you wi^ easily see, what credit you have gained by bringing them in.

But when you come to your defense it Cap. 5.
by the Warder, to wit, that we hold, reading of scriptures in any vulgar
tongue, whatsoever for heresy, and that for this cause only we bra^dle men to
the slaughter, how do you stand (Sir Francis) in this defense? do you bring any
one sufficient proof at all, for any one of these two absurdityes? The warder
sets down a plain and sensible discourse, how and in what languages,
scriptures are permitted to al, as also why and upon what causes, reasons,
arguments or utility, of what hurt or necessity our Church has, or ought to
make restraint or limitation thereof to some who are not to profit thereby?
^eaping over the adversaries cheef matter.
which considerations (containing indeed the substance and very sinews of this
whole controversy) you (Sir knight) like a good Encounterer, do leap over
without answering any one word, urging only against us for the second point of
this controversy, that some of your people have been examined sometimes or
called in question for suspicion of heresy, for that against order and
commandment of their superiors, and without license they have taken upon them
to read and interpret the sacred scriptures in vulgar languages and that hereof
follows (say you) that we hold the very act it self of reading scriptures to
be heresy, which how fond a sequel it is, every man of mean understanding
conceyueth, and you are made ridiculous for this fond inference by diverse
examples alleged in other things more clear to all men.

that for only reading of scriptures men were brandled to the slaughter) he
made one ly of his own while he sought to prove the same against you the said
one ly is redoubled upon your self, by showing that, only is fond in your own
words, and consequently, that this word only has not proved one ly against the
warder, but two or three lies against your self.

And all this (as I said) is handled in your Forged maxims obtruded by the
knight.
the bulk and corpse whereof consists (as you know) in the verifying of four
other false propositions forged by your self, and assigned for grounds rules,
and Maxims of our Religion, which are nothing so, to wit that we hold
ignorance to be the mother of devotion and that lay men must not meddle with
matters of religion, and that the Pope or any Priest coming from him, is to be
obayed though he teach blasphemies: and finally that our cheef remedy against
all sins consists in buying of pardons, etc. In defense of which obtruded
positions how you behave your self, and what your carriage is, both by flying
every where from the true state of the question, cogging and dissembling and
bringing in other odd matters little or nothing concerning the controversy it
self, and by other such sleights and fhifts, See cap. 7.9.12.14. etc.
I may not here stand to repeat again but do remit the Reader, to that which
is written in every chapter of this affayre, yet cannot I but put you in mind,
and the Reader also, that all defaults may better be borne and digested, then
wilful corruptions and falsifications of authors, whom you allege, I mean
either in words you cite, or in sense when you alleadg them quite contrary to
their own meaning, purpose and drift, as you are often showed to have done in
sundry places, and upon fundry occasions, whereof some we shall take the pain to
repeat breefly in this place, for better establishing the readers memory about
your manner of proceeding.

Diverse autho^s abused.
First then you are showed in the second Chapter of this Encounter to have
greatly abused the story of The. Walsingham, Cap. 2. nu. 7.8. etc.
in alleading him fraudulently about the lying of corrupted friars in K.
Richard the 2. his time concealing craftily both the time and occasion of his
writing and the men corrupted by VVicliffe, Cap. 3. n^. 3.4. and 5. etc.
of whom he wrote. And then immediately in the very next chapter, you are
proved to offer no less injury to the authority of S. Bid, as though he
should allow and testify the promiscuous reading of holy scriptures in vulgar
la^guages in his days, the truth being nothing so, but rather the quite
contrary appearing by his words, and no less violence are you declared to use
in the same place to Arnobius an anci^ent author, Ibid. 9. nu 7.
as though he had reproved the pious use of Christian Images, whereas indeed he
speaks only and expressly of idols made Gods among Gentiles, the title also
of his book concealed by you, being Aduersus gentes.

Cap. 9. nu. 1^.
not only by perverting his whole sense and meaning in the matter, for which
you allege him, but by cutting of also and mangling his very words and
sentences alleged; about which point, the Warder notes no fewer, then 8.
several abuses and falsifications in that place, and not unlike injury is
showed to be offered also to Index expurgatorius Hispanicus in the same place,
concerning the note objected by you in your answer, Cap. 9. nu. 15.
deleatur dictio solumodo in Gregory Nissen his sentence, where you both
conceal the reason alleged by the Index of that deletion or putting out, to
wit, for that it was an error in the copy and wholly from the authors argument,
drift and meaning in that place, as also for that you father that sentence upon
Gregory Nissene, which is none of his as there is showed.

But of all other your dishonorable dealing Cap. 10.
that does most exceed, which you do use in the 10. Chapter against that holy
renowned man S. Tho. of Canterbury, Falsificatio^s against S. Tho. of
Canterbury.
where you join perfidiously with John Fox your master (the most shamlesse
corrupter of authors that ever perhaps took pen in hand) to disgrace that
worthy Saint and Prelate, both in his person and cause with the king; and for
that you are often taken and attaynted of this trick throughout the whole said
tenth chapter and in the other that ensues (especially where you are showed to
falsify most egregiously Caesarius Heislerbacius about S. Thom. his miracles)
I shall not need to set down here more particulars, Cap. 11. nu. 12.13. etc.
but rather will end, putting you in mind only thereby to move you a scruple (if
it might be) of these many and notorious corruptions and falsifications used by
you, and your said scholmaister John Fox concerning the feigned poisoning of
king John by a monk, and the absolution for the fact before hand, in which
narration there are so many shameless impostures used by you two combyned
companions in lying, About the poisoning of K. John sup. Cap. 15.
as I persuade my self the reuewing thereof will make you blush, or at leastwayes
your modest reader for you: and if he love his soul he will take heed of you
and yours for the time to come. And so for breuities sake I will pass no
further in this recital, but only use a word or two of advise to your procter
O.E. and so an end.

About the minister O. E.
for that this admonition would grow ouerlong, and I am full wearied already
with repeating so much dross of corrupted minds, that have no conscience what
they say or affirm: but yet assure your self that this minister is far worse
then the knight in shameless manner of proceeding, though somewhat more wary in
citations, and he that will know him or take a scantling of his turbulent spirit
in writing, let him read, the sixth, eight, and thirteen Chapters of this
encounter, where he is dealt withal alone, and singled into his Ierkin (to use
his own phrase) and many of his tricks discovered and laid open, and if by
this examen and by the rest of the former Encounter and the Epistles going
before, the man come not to be sufficiently known, A new match for O. E. in
hand.
then shall I remit me to that which after also is to ensue, especially in the
several answer to his new chalenges, which I understand some friend of mine,
seeing my present lettes and occupations is like enough to take in hand, and to
buccle with him alone singulari certamine; which if my friend do perform, as
O.E. himself desires and craves I dare fortel (having considered well the
subject which they are to discuss) that O. E. will be left in a very poor
pickle, and made a ridiculous companion, as one that understands neither
himself nor his adversary, nor the true state of the question he handles, and
if this prove not so (the match going forward) then let me be condemned both
of temerity and vanity for making that prophesy so long before hand.

And so to the proof I remit me, beseeching is behooful for thee to do, for
saving of thy own soul, not leaving it upon the waves of uncertain disputes
and altercations of men, but staying it upon the sure rock of Christ's Catholic
and visible Church, which is left and appointed as an infallible stay, for all
men, whereunto I implore his heavenly grace and deuyne assistance.

AN ADDITION BY the publisher of this book; wherein he shows first a reason
why these two Encounters are set forth alone: then the difference he finds in
the writers and their wrytings: thirdly how a man may use this which here is
said to the decision of any Controversy of our time. CAP. XVIII.
Hastings and N. D. should have appeared) we now set forth only two of the
first. The cause and reason of this is easily declared, for it was ^s follows.

More then a full year has now passed The cause of delay.
and sent to be put in print: but then was ^here received a new advise, that
another answer was in print also to the watch word, whose author was figured
by the two letters ^.E. And albeit the work was said to be of such quality as
it merited not a several an^were (and much less the man) yet for that was not
expedient, to let it pass without ^ome check of examination, the Warder N. ^.
resolved to defer the publishing of his ^ormer work, until he might have a
view of ^his book also, which being more hardly ^rocured and longer expected
then at the be^inning was presumed, caused also the stay of ^his edition.

But when at lenght it came to sight, and The reason why these ^ Encounters
are set forth alone.
then fell there new difficultyes and ^nterruptions, as namely diverse months
^^cknesse and diverse other lets and impedi^ents of unexpected business to the
author, ^^d besides this the corpse of these two En^^unters grew to so great a
bulk, as of themselves they seemed to be sufficient for one book, especially
considering the many difficulties that we have in printing greater volumes in
these days, and all commodity of our own country prints, printers and other
helps being debarred us.



The 2. point of this addition.
which is about the difference of the writers and wrytings of these
Encounterers, for so much as I do not mean to stand upon all differences
observed by me in reading over their books, but to note some few only,
referring me also in these to that which before has been set down in the
Encounters themselves, especially in the several admonissions and warnings
ensuing upon every Encounter, and containing as it were a breef recapitulation
of the whole, only then I will say that two notorious differences me thinks I
have observed in co^ferring these books and writers together.

The first is touching truth and falsehood, The first difference about true
dealing and falsehood.
discovered almost in every leaf of the former Encou^ters, which is a
diffe^ence of so much quality, as whersoeuer it is found on the worser part it
ought greatly to move, and make deep impression in the Reader, that is careful
of his own salvation, for that the matters in controversy concerning true
faith, being of the highest importance that may be to our soul and everlasting
good or hurt, every man ought to be attent, and whersoeuer he finds falsehood
or deceyt to be wilfully and purposely intended, and that it cannot be excused
by error or ignorance or heat of speech or other like infirmities there he
ought to stay his foot and stand fast and not to pass further without firm
resolution never to believe him again.

And for that in all the reply both of Sr.F. VVarder is so much as charged to
my remembrance and much less convinced of any one such wilful falsification as
before I have alleged, and that both the knight and minister are accused
almost in every leaf of this crime, and that with such manifest proofs and
demonstrations as I see not how possibly they can quite themselves: here hence
I do infer that it imports exceedingly every wise and discreet Reader to
remember well this difference.

Another difference also there is not a little wrytings, The 2. difference, idle
or profitable matter handled.
concerning the profit, or loss of time which the reader may reap by perusing
them over, for that Sr.F. and O.E. if you look attentively into their books, do
treat nothing either methodically or substantially throughout their replies but
following the Warder up and down, do wra^gle here and iangle there, taking
exceptio^s against these or those words, without handling any one point
learnedly or with substance throughout all their whole discourses, neither
co^futing soundly their adversaries, nor confirming well their own parts, so as
when a man has red over their whole books, he remains, with more doubts and
darkness, then before, feeling only his spirit of incredulity and contradiction
more increased by this reading, but his brains more weakened and wearied, and
his understanding less clear then before; and I appeal to the indifferent
Readers testimony, whether it be so or no, whereof yet we that are Catholykes
ought not to complain but rather in a certain manner to rejoice at these
effects as less hurtful, for so much as it must needs drive many from reading
their books and weary others, before they be half way in them, having neither
order nor substance, and those that persevere to the end remain as wise as
before, proving the proverb to be true concerning these books: Ex stultis
insanos.

which the watchman Sir F. made at the first under the name of a VVatch-word
wherein there was neither head nor heel, S.F. vvachvvord without order or
substance.
top nor toe order nor coherence, but only a certain loose inuectiue against
all sort of Catholyke men and their religion, the Warder brought it into a good
method of 8. several Encounters containing so many principal heads and branches
of the dispersed points therein touched which the said knight and his Minister
O. E. though they be drawn to follow in their replies, yet do they return
again to thesayd vagrancy or inanity rather in the matters they handle,
treating no one thing substantially as before has been said, whereas the Warder
by a contrary spirit draws all things to some profitable and serious m^tter
for the reader to make his gain thereof, The substantial dealing of the VVarder.
by which industry of his are come to be handled so many weighty and important
points of controversies as above in the table prefixed before these Encounters
are to be seen, and albeit the breuity of this reioynder would not permit to
handle every one of them so largely as they might, yet is there sufficiently
said thereof for framing any intelligent man's judgment therein or in any other
points of co^trouersy, as presently more at large shall be declared.

And further for a special proof of this point A treatese o^ of 3. conuersions
of England.
religion by the special help of the Roman Sea and Bishops thereof, which
treatese containing some 9. or 10. chapters was framed by the Warder in his
reioynder to the 7. Encounter against S.F. and his fellows, who deny or
diminish by all means possible this singular benefit received from Rome, and
for that this treatese (though but a parcel of the answer to that Encounter)
lyked me exceeding well, and seemed a thing worthy to be printed a part without
expecting his place or turn, when the said 7. Encounter shall be published, I
had thought with license of the author to have joined it to this woork but
being dissuaded afterward, and considering the treatese to be of ^ufficient
bigness to go by it self alone I have so caused it to be printed, which I wish
thee (gentle Reader) to procure and read with attention for that I doubt not
but the variety of the matter therein handled will delight thee, and the clear
deduction of Cath. faith from the beginning within this Island will greatly
instruct thee, especially being conferred and compared, as it is, with John Fox
his new Church brought down by leapes from one broken heretic to another,
though never so different in time, place, function and other circumstances, yea
though they were contrary to him and among themselves, in most points of their
faith and belief.

himself thoroughly in all matters that ly in controversy between us and
Protestants at this day, The 3. point of this addition how to determine.
a point no doubt of very great importance if it be well considered, and greatly
to be wished by all those that love their own salvation and do not read books
as some are wont to do for curiosity, or passing only the time, but to profit
thereby, and once to be resolved in that which is only truth and absolutely
necessary to their eternal good, whereof so long as they remain doubtful,
irresolute, wavering, and seeking only, they have no benefit, and consequently
if they should die in that state their case no doubt were most dangerous and
lamentable, they being in the number of them of whom S. Paul says: 2. Tim. ^.
semper discentes, and nunquam ad scientiam veritatis peruenientes, always
learning, but never attayning to the knowledge of the truth.

Moreover it is to be considered, that all men The dangerous estat^ of many in
England at his day.
and if they had, yet have not all such leisure or learning to read or discuss
all, nor capacity or understanding to discern or judge: so as if their
everlasting salvation must depend of reading over all co^trouersyes, and making
resolution upon the same, it must needs be impossible to many thousands both
men and women in our country at this day to be saved, who have not either time
or other fit means and abilityes for the same as before we have said, and yet
is it true, and most true which holy Athanasius in his creed authorized by the
first council of Nice above a 1200. years ago, says and pr^nounceth, and
protestants do repeat the ^ame in their English Churches every sunday
throughout the year: Athan. in Symbol Qu^cunque vult, etc. verse. 1. and 2.
that whosoever will be saved, it is necessary for him before all other things to
hold the Catholic faith, which faith except every man do keep wholly and
inuiolate without all doubt he shall perish everlastingly. Thus says that creed
showing us the dreadful danger of him that erreth, or doubts of any one
article of the Cathol. faith, which infinite people of England must needs do at
this day, who have no other guide, direction, or certainty to bring the^ to
resolve in matters of co^trouersy, but either their own reading, or to believe
some other as uncertain as their own judgment in this behalf.

^
nor capacity to judge thereof, and yet (according to S. Athanasius and the
council of Nice) cannot be saved, except they believe all and every part and
parcel of the Catholic faith, they have taught them another more short and
sooner way left by Christ and his Apostles, for avoiding this gulf of
damnation, which way is to know and believe fide explicita, that is, ^ E^c. 2.
ca. 7.
clearly and distinctly (as before is declared) the cheef points of Cathol.
faith, and all the rest fide implicit^, by an employed faith, in that they
believe the holy Catholic Church, and all that she believes, which implies
so much as is necessary to any man's salvation. And how sure and safe a way
this is, you hane heard out of S. Augustine Ibid. cap. 7.
before that simplicity of believing makes the common people most safe.

Wherefore according to this selfsame way The short and sure way of Cath.
belief.
the said Catholic doctors do teach us how that in these troublesome and
contentious times of disputes and controuersyes, a man that is in errors or
doubts may come to be a perfect Catholic in resolving himself upon the truth
of very few particular questions and controuersyes, believing the rest in
gene^al terms, and being ready to accept and admit whatsoever the Catholic
Church does ^each albeit he be not yet instructed in the particulars, nor
knows the arguments that be on both sides, nor be able to solue them, but
desires to be instructed as time and occasion shall be offered thereunto.

To this resolution when any man ariueth, S. Paul, 2. Cor. 10.
which is to captiuate his understanding to the obedience of Christ and his
faith, taught in the Catholic Church, he is now at a good stay, and may be
held for a sound Catholic though in many particular points, he know not the
reasons to and fro, but may afterward inform himself as time and ability, and
other occasions shall permit him: standing fast and firm in this principle that
he will not guide his faith by his own judgment knowledge or persuasio^, nor of
any other particular man, but only by the received sentence, and determination
of that visible Catholic Church, Matthew. 16. Ioh. 14. Marc vlt. 1. Tim. 3. 1.
Ioh. 2.
to whom only Christ has promised the assurance of his holy spirit, and in
which Church though his promise of divine help were not, yet are there so many
humane helps of true knowledge also, considering their number, universality,
continuance, descent, and consent, as every wise man would rather cast himself
upon them, then upon any particular sect of new vpstarts that want all these
helps, and agree neither with themselves nor others.

S. Augustine and other holy Fathers, that one only were sufficient if a man
hold it perfectly, Aug. lib. 2. ca. 25. cont. Ep. G^^dentij Ecl. 3. c. 64.
contra Cres.
which is to renounce his own fancy, and to believe the visible and universal
christian Church, and all that she believes and teaches us to believe, as
before we have declared, and for that between us and protestants the question
is moved (though with little or no probability at all on their side) which and
where is the Catholic christian Church at this day, I may refer the reader
to diverse substantial treateses handled in this book before, whereby he may
easily resolve himself in that matter.

As for example the Treatese before set Cap. 2.
Encounter, who are properly Catholics, and who are heretics by the old laws of
ancient Catholic Emperors made expressly against heretics. And if it so fall
out, Who are Catholykes.
that all points set down in those laws do agree fully to protestants and
nothing at all to us that are called Catholics at this day, but rather that we
agree fully with those that then were called Catholics, and distinguished by
that name and nature, then is it evident where the Catholic Church stands,
seeing that the body of Catholic people makes the true Catholic Church.

In like manner, there is another treatese in About the rule of faith.
The rule of faith whereby men ought to be guided in all contro^ersyes,
doctrines and disputations, Enc. 1. ca. 15. and 16.
yea as S. Paul says in the exposition of scriptures themselves, Romans 12.
which rule being nothing else but the very corpse or body of christian belief,
left by Christ and his Apostles, and carefully defended from age to age by the
Fathers and doctors of all times unto ours; if this rule be proved to be only
among us Roman Catholics, as it is, and that the protestants of our days have
neither this nor any other certain rule at all of agreement in faith, beside
the particular decrees of several countries where this or that sect does bear
sway: then is it evident, that where this certain rule i^ found, there is the
true Catholic Church, (...) no where else, for that unto her only this rul^^
was delivered to be kept inviolate unto the worlds end, for it is the
depositum, pawn, o^ pledge, 2. Tim. 6.
so carefully commended by S. Paul t^ Timothy, and by him to all Catholic
bishop^ for ever.

Enc. 1. c. 3.4. and 5.
without disagreeing in any one articl^ of faith once defined; Union and
Succession.
and that the Protestant have not been able to hold this unity of one and the
selfsame doctrine among their of^spring forlesse than 50. years together, bu^
that maugre their Masters teeth their successors divided themselves into
different opposite sects of Lutherans, Anabaptists, Swinglian^ Caluinists
Brownists, and the like (a thing proper to all heresies, as holy Fathers do
note most evident it may be, on which part the Catholic Church stands, and
God with her^ who is God of unity and not of division.

False and true dealing.
the principal point handled throughout all the second Encounter, touching
falsityes, falsehoods, falsifications, fictions and other notorious wilful
corruptions used by these two protestant wry^ers, the knight and his minister,
in defense of their bad cause, do easily testify of what Church they be, and
any one of these things well considered and maturely pondered is sufficient to
make any man resolve himself that has discretion to discern, or care to
procure his own salvation.

FINIS.
The end of the second Encounter.
THE THIRD TABLE OF CERTAIN NOTORIOVS SHIFTS, SLIEGHTES, DECEITS and
impostures used by Sir F. and O. E. in their answers and replies.
MANY and sundry are the devises, sleights and shifts which the poverty and
necessity of the protestant cause does force he^^ def^nders to seek out and use
for some show of probable defense when they are pressed, as throughout this
whole book you will find noted and observed. Here only we shall make a certain
breef Catalogue of the most ordinary and known shifts, that do every where
occur, and by them you may guess of the rest, and of our protestants whole
manner of writing and answering our books.

The first is to pass over and dissemble with silence

The second shift is, when the whole matter cannot

A third shift is, when they are charged with any fault accuse others of the
like fault on out side, as though this did clear them, as for example when Sir
F. in the first Encounter is argued for absurd flattering her Majesty and the
State, he tells us again, for his excuse, that Canonists in Rome, do much
more flatter the Pope. And again in the second Encounter, when he is accused
to avouch many lies, he obiecteth to us again, that Friars were brave liars in
king Richard the 2. his days, and other such like.









The 8. shift, or deceit, or rather imposture is, not

The nynth shift is a kind of bold impude^cy in

The tenth shift is impertinent and ridiculous

The eleue^th shift is, to allege rather matter expressly that it never
pleased any good man in the Church, that heretics should be put to death, yet
he alleges S. Augustine to the contrary, as praising the punishing of
heretics by the Imperial laws; and such other like.

The tweluth and last shift (for I will go no further) this upon every occasion:
whereof there are so many offered, and the kynds and forms are so diverse, as it
were ouerlong to allege particular examples for every one, yet by those few
that do ensue, the reader may make a guess of the rest, especially if they
should be taken out of all the eight Encounters, as those that follow are out
of two only.

Examples of false dealing.
Dominus noster Deus Papa, etc.

S. Hierome, the other of S. Augustine to prove thereby public service in
vulgar languages, which neither of them ever meant.

Thom. Walsingham against his own meaning, and deceyueth therewith his reader
deceitfully, accusing friars to be liars, not telling that they were corrupted
by Wickliffe.

Augustinus Stenchus to have written against the donation of Constanryne, and
therein to have adored the Pope as God, both points being notorious lies.

S. Bid and Arnobius by alleging them both against their own meaning: the
first for service in the vulgar tongue, the second against images.

S. Hilary for the words of Hosius, thereby to make them less esteemed.

Hosius to the same fraudulent end.

Encount. 2. cap. 9. n. 8.9.10, etc. Sir F. peruerteth maliciously S.
Chrysostom about reading scriptures in vulgar languages.

Enc. 2. cap. 10.11.17.18.19. and deinceps, Intolerable false

Enc. 2. cap. 13. n. 18. A notable cosenage of O. E. in citing Domine cur ita
facis? Lord why do you so?

Enc. 2. cap. 14. n. 24. O. E. abuses egregiously Cardinal and others, in
citing them about pardons.

Enc. 2. cap. 11. n. 14.15.16. A shamful corruption used Caesarius, against the
miracles of S. Thomas of Canterbury.

Encount. 2. cap. 12. number. 12. Sir F. convinced of a notorious

Encount. 2. cap. 14. number. 23.24, etc. Sir F. abuses Dura^d

Enc. 2. cap. 15. n. 3.4, etc. A notorious imposture of King John by a monk.

THE FOVRTH TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL PARTICVLAR MATters contained in this book.
A.
ANGELS whether they may be prayed unto. Enc. 2. cap. 6. number. 8. Archbishop of
Aix, a most learned prelate greatly abused by S. F. and John Fox. Enc. 2. cap.
2. number. 21. Arnobius abused by S. Francis, as though he spoke against Christian
Images. Enc. 2. cap. 3. number. 17. Augustinus Stenchus falsified by O. E. the
minister. Enc. 1. cap. 3. number. 10. and 11. S. Augustine abused greatly by S.
Francis. Enc. 1. cap. 8.
B.
BAssinet a French Apostata friar made Doctor by Fox and S. Francis. Enc. 2.
cap. 2. number. 20. S. Bernard his judgment of the Popes titles of honor. Enc. 1.
cap. 3. number. 15. S. Bernard his sentence touching man's merits and Gods grace.
Enc 1. cap. 10. number. 8. and 9. About a Cath. man beyted in a Bears skyn. Enc.
2. cap. 2. number. 4. S. Bid his testimony notably abused by S. Francis. Enc. 2.
cap. 3. number. 4. Blessings of England by the new ghospel, are not present but
past according to S. F. Enc. 1. cap. 2. number. 15. Blessings of Protestants
religion of 2. sorts and neither of them true. Enc. 1. cap. 4. number. 4.
Blessings of unity among protestants. Enc. 1. cap. 4. per totum. Item the
blessings of Reading service in English. Enc. 1. cap. 8. per totum. Item the 4.
and 5. blessings: abundance of good works, and freedom from persecution.
Enc. 1. cap. 10. per totum. Five other blessings. Ibid. cap. 11. and 12.
Bookeseller of Auinion put to death for heresy. Enc. 2. cap. 5. number. 5. No
books of old heretyks have remained to posterity and why? Enc. 2. cap. 9. number.
19. Buccanan the Scottish Caluinist, what desperate doc^rine he teaches about
deposition of Princes. Enc. 1. cap. 6. number. 3. and 4.
C.
CAyetan Card. beguiled by Luthers flattery at Augusta. Enc. 2. cap. 4. number. 3.
Caluyn, how he rayleth against Lutherans. Enc. 1. cap. 5. n. 5. What himself is
called by Hesshusius, ibid. n. 7. and by Ochinus and VVestphalus, ibid. Who are
true Catholics at this day according to the decrees of Ancient christian
Emperors, obseruat. n. 17. 18.19, etc. Catholic faith manifestly deduced and
demonstrated against new Sectaryes by the decrees of ancient Emperors,
obseruat. n. 27.28.29. etc. Charles the Emperor his decree and determination
about Luther after he had heard him. Enc. 2. cap. 4. nu. 8. Chemnitius his
censure of English religion. Enc. 1. c. 5. n. 9.10, etc. S. Chrysostom his
testimony of priests authority. Enc. 1. cap. 3. n. 13. Communion-book of
English protestants, how it is esteemed by the Puritans. Enc. 1. cap. 6. n. 9.
Commons and nobility miserably corrupted by Wicliffes doctrine. Enc. 2. cap. 2.
n. 10.11, etc. Clanmer and Cromwels actions against Q. Anne Bullen. Enc. 1.
cap. 3. n. 7. Cu^sings brought in by the new ghospellers in steed of blessings.
Enc. 1. cap. 12. per totum. Eight temporal curses or maledictions ensued by the
change of Religion in England. Enc. 1. cap. 18. per totum.
D.
Darkness devised by S. F. and pitifully described to be in the Cath.
Church. Enc. 2. cap. 2. number. 15. Devotion whether she be the daughter of
ignorance or no? Euc. 2. cap. 7. number. 3.4. etc. What true devotion is, ibid.
number. 17. How devotion may be hindered more by a known, then an unknown tongue
Encount. 2. cap. 7. number. 18.
E.
Earl of Essex pitifully seduced by Purita^s. Notes upon the epist. of S. F.
number. 5. and 6. Item of the same obseruat. number. 5. The hope of his followers and
of O. E. the minister in particular. Enc. 1. cap. 13. number. 13. Emperors
Christian their laws and decrees against heretyks, do touch protestants and
not Catholyks, obseru. number. 10. English Religion what it is according to
Chemnitius. Euc. ^. cap. 5. number. 10. English service, no blessing to the common
people, but rather unprofitable and hurtful to devotion. Enc. 1. cap. ^. number.
7. Erasmus what he says of the protestants good lives in his time. Euc. 1.
cap. 10. number. 1.2.3. etc.
F.
FIdes explicitae and implicita, how necessary the disjunction thereof is to be
known. Enc. 2. cap. 7. number. 7.3. etc. More things needful to be believed by
some men, then by others. ibid. number. 10. Fox taken in plain calumniation. Enc.
1. cap. 11. number. 4. Fox defends the most dangerous doctrine of John Husse
about deposing of Princes. Enc. 2. cap. 3. number. 24. Friars how deceytfully they
are proved to be liars in K. Richard the 2. his time. Euc. 2. cap. 2. number. 3.
S. Francis Hastings.
His Puritanical presbytery at Cadbury, and their ilfa^ored names. In the
answer entitled, certain notes number 4. He will not tell plainly whether he be
a puritan or no. ibid. nu. 7. and Enc. 1. cap. 12. nu. 7. He flies the true
combat in the first Encounter. Enc. 1. cap. 1. number. 6. He deuiseth 10. new
fresh blessings of his ghospel. Enc. 1. cap. 1. number. 4. He agrees not in his
blessings with O. E. the minister and his Champion, but ridiculously differs
from him. ibid. number. 8. He is contrary to himself. Enc. 1. cap. 2. number. 14. He
leapeth over four parts of five of his adversaries argument. Enc. 1. cap. 12.
number. 1. And when he speaks he says nothing of the points of most importance.
Ibid. number. 6. Et Enc. 2. cap. 8. number. 6. He denies division or difference
between puritans and protestants. ibid. number. 6.7. etc. He excuses his own
lying by the lying of friars in K. Rich. the 2. his time. Enc. 2. cap. 2. number.
6.7.8. etc. He abuses the testimony of Walsingham notoriously in the former
place. He doctoreth Bassanet an Apostata friar and disableth the Archb. of Aix.
Ibid. number. 20.21. etc. He is taken with falsehood, in that he alleges of John
Husse his condemnation in Constance. Enc. 2. cap. 3. as also about Luthers
disputation in Augusta, and Worms. ibid. cap. 4. He is worthy to ly for the
whetstone. Enc. 2. cap. 5. n. 11. He peruerteth S. Chrysostom notoriously
about reading scriptures in vulgar tongues. Enc. 2. cap. 9. nu. 8.9. etc.
G.
D. Gifford deane of Lisle defended. Enc. 1. cap. 3. number. 16.
H.
HEshufius, a German Lutheran calls Caluyn and Beza Epicures of Geneua. Enc.
1. cap. 5. number. 7. Heretyks, who are at this day according to the sentence of
Ancient Christian Emperors, obseruat. number. ^8. Heretical writers, their
confusion and vanity in writing discovered. Enc. 1. cap. 1. number. 8.9. etc. S.
Hierome his words much abused by S. F. Enc. 1. c. 9. n. 2. His great humility
in subiecting his judgment to Pope Damasus. Enc. 1. cap. 16. number. 18. S. Hilary
his judgment of the Popes heavenly authority. Enc. 1. cap. 3. number. 14. Hosius
egregiously abused and falsified. Enc. 2. c. 8. n. 2.3. etc. Host^ensis abused
by S. Francis. Enc. 1. cap. 2. number. 7. Husse and his whole cause examined in
the council of Constance. Enc. 2. cap. 3. number. 15.16.17. etc. His dangerous
doctrine, that, No man is a Prince, prelate or Magistrate while he is in
mortal sin. Ibid. number. 17. Two famous heretical lies proved there against
him. ibid. number. 20. Husse contrary to S. F. in doctrine E^c. 2. cap. 3. nu. 21.
Husse his doctrine rejected by Luther for ever and ever. ibid. number. 22. Husse
his leather breeches kept at this day for relics among the Huss^ts in Prage.
ibid. number. 24.
I.
IDolatry and Idolatrors agreeing only to heretics in the Christian Church,
obseruat. n^ 1^.12; etc. Ignorance, whether she be the mother of devotion. Enc.
2. cap. 7. n. 3.4, etc. Index Expurgatorius, why and how it is to be made* Enc.
2. cap. 9. n. 21.22, etc. Justification, how greatly Lutherans and Caluinists
do disagree about the same, whether it be by works or faith only. Enc. 2. cap.
16. n. 8.9.10, etc.
K.
KIng John feigned by protestants to have been poisoned by a monk, against the
testimony of all antiquity. Enc. 2. cap. 15. n. 3.4.5, etc. Knockes founder of
Caluinisme in Scotland. His wicked and dangerous doctrine about the deposition
of Princes^ Enc. 1. cap. 6. nu. 3.4.5. etc.
L.
LAteran Counsel falsified by the minister O. E. Enc. 1. cap. 13. number. 10.
Laymen, whether they be forbidden by Catholyks to meddle in matters of
religion. Enc. 2. cap. 7. And more largely cap. 9. per totum. Lies historical
and doctrinal how they differ. Enc. 2. ^ap. 2. number. 3. Lutherans and
Sacramentaries, their war one against the other. Enc. 1. cap. 5.4. etc. per
totum. Luther his judgment and sentence of the Sacramentaries. ibid. cap. 5.
number. 1. and 2. Luther what manner of man he was according to the judgment of
Zuinglia^s and Caluinists. Enc. 1. cap. 5. number. 5. Luther Canonized by John
Fox. ibid. number. 4. Luthers prophesy of the destruction of protestants
especially, Caluinists, by division amongst themselves. Enc. 1. cap 7. number. 4.
Luther his going to Angusta and Worms and dealing there. Enc. 2. cap. 1. number.
8. Luther his condemnation by the Emperor and his council, wherein he was said,
to be a devil and not a man. Ibid. n. 8. Luther writes of himself, that one
cried to him: Beatusventer, qui te portauit, etc. Ibid. n. 9.
M.
MArtyrs tombs frequented with great devotion by christians in Rome in S.
Hieromes time. Enc. 1. c. 9. n. 3.4. etc. what diligence was used in old time
in registring the lives of martyrs and the days of that suffefering. Enc. 2.
cap. 11. n. 5. What manner of martyrs Fox sets down of his Church, the one
contrary to the other in belief. Enc. 2. cap. 11. n. 8.9.10.11. etc. Mass and
the sacrifice thereof confessed by antiquity. Enc. 1. cap. 13. n. 12. Mass in
the latin tongue and fruit of the hearing thereof, though it be not understood
by the people. Enc. 2. cap. ^ n. 6.7, etc. Merits of good works, what they are,
and how they may stand with Gods grace and Christ's merits. Enc. 1. cap. 10.
number. 6.7. etc. Miracles of S. Thomas of Canterbury and the authentical proof
thereof. Enc. 2. cap. 11. Miracles how fondly and heathen-like they are iested
at by protestants. Enc. 2. cap. 11. number. 20. Miracles defended by S. Ambrose
and S. Augustine. Enc. 2. cap. 11. number. 26.27. etc.
N.
NObility and commons corrupted pitifully by Wickliffe his doctrine. Enc. 2.
cap. 2. number. 10.11. etc.
.O.
OBedience spiritual to the Pope may stand with temporal to the Prince.
obseruat. number. 5. Ochinus that taught in England in K. Edward his days his
sentence of Caluyn and Beza. Enc. 1. cap. 5.
O. E. Minister.
His extreme pride malice and folly: In the answer to his epistle. He is
proved a noddy, by spelling the word Noddy. ibid. He is described what fellow
he is. ibid. He is a bloody fellow, poor and needy, and hops for scraps by
other men's ruin, obseruat. number. 1.2. etc. He is proved to be a notorious
firebrand of sedition. obseruat. number. 7. He excuses his railing, by confessing
it to be weakness in him. obseru. number. 37. The manner of his writing is laid
open, as impertine^t; impudent and impotent. Enc. 1. cap. 1. number. 7. He is
showed to be a most shameless and impudent flatterer. Enc. 1. cap. 3. number.
23.24. etc. He is proved also to be a true Oedipus and hungry parasite ibid.
number. 6. He is desperate in denying when he is pressed, saying among other
things, that there is no division at all among Protestants. Enc. 1. He damneth
his ancestors that were Catholyks, as having only the bare name of Christians.
Enc. 1. cap. 13. n. 6. His contemptuous speeches of Luther and Caluyn together
with plain Atheism. Enc. 1. cap. 17. number. 10. 11.12. etc. He braggeth that he
will go to Syuil or Paris to dispute with Catholyks, if he may have leave. Enc.
2. cap. 4. n. 22.
P.
PAnormit^^ and Hostiensis two learned Canonists greatly abused by S. F. Enc.
1. cap. 2. number. 17. Parliament what it may do in matters of Religion, and did
both in Q. Mary and K. Edwards times. Enc. 1. cap. 16. number. 8.9. etc. Pardons,
and for what sins they are used by Cath. doctrine. Enc. 2. cap. 14. number. 6.7.
etc. and to whom they are auayleable, ibid. F. Pa^sons defended against the
raging malice of the minister O.E. Books and treateses written by him. In
Epist. to O.E. Persecution against Catholyks. Enc. 1. cap. 10. number. vlt.
Ples^is Mornay his lies discovered before the K. of France. Enc. 2. cap. 2.
number. 3. Poysy colloquy or conference between Catholyks and protestant
ministers. Enc. 2. cap. 4. number. 12. The dissolution of the Protestant ministers
in that meeting ibid. n^m. 16. Their dissension in points of Religion ibid.
nnm. 19. The good that came by that disorderly meeting and conference, ibid.
Popes their most honorable titles taken out of aunc^nt Doctors. Enc. 1. cap. 3.
number. 13.14. etc. Prayer to Saints. Enc. 2. cap. 6. number. 8. Priests authority in
absoluing sins according to Chrysostom. Enc. 1. cap. 3. number. 13. Protestants
and Puritans how they agree in Christ crucified, and what comfort they take one
of the other. Notes upon the epist, of S. F. number. 8.9.10. etc. Protestants more
divided then before by their synods and councels. Enc. 1. cap. 4. number. 12.
Protestants books and wrytings one against the other in general Enc. 1. cap. 5
and 6. per totum. Protestants shall perish finally by division among themselves
according to Luthers prophesy. Enc. 1. cap. 7. nu. 4. Protestants of how good
life commonly they be according both to Erasmus and Luther. Enc. 1. cap. 10.
number. 1.2.3. etc. Protestant clergy, poor and miserable. Enc. 1. cap. 11.
number. 3. Puritans fear greatly toleration of Cath. Religion, and why? notes
upon the Epist. of S. F. number. 8.9.10. etc. Puritans books and judgments against
English Protestants. Enc. 1. cap. 6. per totum. Puritans do complain
grievously of protestants for persecution. Enc. 1. cap. 10. Puritans and
Protestants contempt of their own Doctors, when they make against them. Enc.
1. cap. 17. nu. 13.14. etc.
R.
ROman faith and the practice thereof in visiting martyrs sepulchers in S.
Hieromes time. Enc. 1. cap. 9. nu. 3.4. etc. Religious men corrupted by
Wickliffe. Enc. 2. cap. 2. number. 10.11. etc. Rule of faith what it is among
Catholyks, and that protestants have none at all, whereby to have any certainty.
Enc. 1. cap. 14. per totum. What Rule of faith O. E. does appoint by the
parliament of England, and what authority the Parliament has or may have in that
case. Enc. 1. cap. 15. per totum, and cap. 16. number 8.
S.
SAcrifice of the mass acknowledged by ancient Fathers, by the Magdeburgians
own confession. Enc. 1. cap. 13. number. 13. Saints, what process is needful in
the Cath. Church for their Canonization. Enc. 2. cap. 11. number. 15.16.17. etc
Fox-made Saints not comparable to Pope-made Saints. Ibid. Saints blood and
merit, how it may be named in our prayers to God. Enc. 2. cap. 12. number. 9.
Scriptures expounded diversely by protestants and Puritans one contrary to the
other. Enc. 1. cap. 6. number. 11. Scripture Reading in vulgar tongues has been
occasion of ruin to many of the simpler sort. Enc. 1. cap. ^. number. 2.3. etc.
Scriptures in the vulgar tongue permitted in England with moderation and
license in former ages. Enc. 2. cap. 3. number. 7. See the same handled more
largely. ibid. cap. 6. nu. 14.15. Et cap 9. per totum. Intricate dealing of
heretics about understanding of Scripture. ibid. cap. 6. number. 22. who are
properly Lucifugi scripturarum, heretics or Catholyks? ibid. number. 25. How
Scriptures must be interpreted. ibid. nu. 26. How the Jews of Berrea did read
the Scriptures act. 17. Enc. 2. cap. 9. number. 4. Sectaries sprung up from
Luther; and their divisions among themselves. Enc. 1. cap. 4. number. 7.8. etc.
Sectaries burned by Protestants when they are against them, though they
condemn burning by the Catholyks. Enc. 1. cap. 8. number. 3.4. etc. Stankarus a
Polonian Sectary. His contumelious words against Peter Martyr, Bullinger and
others. Enc. 1. cap. 5. number. 6. Synods and Councels held by Protestants with
more disagreement then before. Enc. 1. cap. 4. number. 11. and 12. etc.
T.
S. Thomas of Canterbury, how egregiously he is abused by S. F. and John Fox.
Enc. 2. cap. 10. nu. 17.18.19.20.21. etc. S. Thomas his constancy much like to
that of S. Ambrose and Nazianzen and other Bishops with their Princes. Ibid.
number. 13.14. etc. S. Thomas his Miracles and how authentical they are pro^ed.
Enc. 2. cap. 11. per totum.
V.
Virtue, what effects thereof has new religion brought into England. Enc. 1.
cap. 18. n. 2. Unity between Protestants and Puritans what? note^ upon the ep.
of S. F. n. 9.10. etc. Union of doctrine among Protestants what it is, and how
falsely affirmed by Sir F. Enc. 1. cap. 4. n. 3.4.5.6, etc. No means of union
among Protestants, ibid. n. 10. Unity in Catholic Religion in S. Bedes time
among different and opposite nations, that were in war with themselves: A
great argument for the truth of that religion. Enc. 2. cap. 3. n. 5.6. etc.
W.
War of Protestants among themselves in matter of doctrine. Enc. 1. cap. 5.
per totum. VVestphalus, what he says against Caluyn and Caluynists, Ibid. n.
5. Good works are not only not profitable but pernicious also to salvation and
justification, as Luther holds. Enc. 1. cap. 10. n. 3. About good works what
is the Catholic doctrine, ibid. n. 6. and Enc. 2. cap. 16. n. 11.12, etc.
Wickliffe his doctrine, what horrible stir it made in England at the very
beginning. Enc. 2. n. 10.11.12, etc. Wickliffe, not only made a saint by John
Fox but a martyr also, though he died in his bed. Encont. 2. cap. number. 13.
THE FIRST TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST ENCOVNTER.
A Brief Summarie of all that before has Cap. 1. Of the first charge of
flattering the Cap. 2. Procter O. E. is called up the stage to tell his tale,
and Cap. 3. Of ten new devised blessings brought in by Sir. F. as unity, in
verity, And how false and vain this is. Cap. 4. ^he same matter is
prosecuted, and the disunion of Cap. 5. The continuation of the same narration
about unity Cap 6. An answer to three fond objections or interrogatio^s Cap.
7. Cap. 8. Cap. 9. Cap. 10. Cap. 11. Cap. 12. Cap. 13. Cap. 14. Cap. 15. Cap.
16. O. E. and his fellows do plainly despair of all certain mean of rule to
try the truth among themselves, or with us. Cap. 17. Of the fruits, virtue,
and good works by change of Cap. 18. The Warning or admonition to Sir F. H.
and his, Cap. 19.
THE SECOND TABLE OF THE CHIEF CONTROVERSIES HANDLED in this book.
The first Encounter.
WHo are properly Catholics, and who 1. cap. 2. number. 2. and an^it. upon the
Epistle of O. E. to the reader. How Catholics and heretics may be easelie,
and evidently 1. cap. 15. Whether the Englis^ Parliament rule set down by 1.
cap. 16. and 17. Whether Canonists do call the Pope God, or no? and how false
Sir F. and his Chaplayne O. E. are found in this point. Enc. 1. cap. 2. and 3.
1. cap. 15. 1. cap. 4. number. 10. Item cap. 5.6.14.15.16.17. 1. cap. 3.4. and 5.
1. cap. 6. and cap. 10. number. 8. and.cap. 12.^^m. 6. 1. cap. 8. and Enc. 2. 1.
cap. 8. nu. 7. and cap. 9. at large. 1. cap. 10. number. 2.3.4.5. and cap. 17. and
18. 1. c. 10. 1. cap. ^1. Whether the sacrifice of the Mass be a new
invention 7. Sacraments were not agreed on before the late council of Trent, as
O.E. affirms. Enc. 1. cap. 13. number. 7.8.9.10.11.12. etc. How far Catholic
men do depend of the Pope for 1. cap. 16. number. 17.18.19. Whether there be any
one new or old heresy can be 1. cap. 16. number. 20. How contemptuously the
protestants do speak not 1. cap. 17. What manner of trial Robertson the
Anabaptist 1. cap. 17. number. 17. Whether temporal blessings entered into
England, 1. cap. 12. and 13.14. and 18. How many and how great inconveniences
in matter 8. his departure from the union of the Roman Church. Encount. 1.
^ap. 17. and 18.
FINIS.

