A RELATION OF THE TRIAL Made before the King of France, upon the year 1600.
betvveene the Bishop of Eureux, and the L. Plessis Mornay.

ABOUT Certain points of corrupting and falsifying authors, whereof the said
Plessis was openly convicted.

Newly reuewed, and set forth again, with a defense thereof, against the
impugnations both of the L. Plessis in France, and of O. E. in England.

By N. D.

Tertullian. lib. de praescript. aduers. haereses.

Vinci possunt, persuaderi non possunt.

Heretics may be vanquished, and yet not persuaded:

Imprinted with license. Anno M. DC. IIII.

THE GENERAL CONTENTS of this book.
IN THE RELATION.
1. The preface and aduertisment to the Reader, containing the occasion and
sum of all. Chap. 1. 2. The first Challenge made by the L. Plessis to the B.
of Eureux for justifying of his books, with the Bishopps acceptance. Chap. 2.
3. 3. The reply of the L. Plessis, with the agreement of the trial. Chap. 4.
4. Diverse letters both of the King, and others, about the success, and issue
of the trial. Chap. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 5. Certain observations of the
Relator, upon the former relation, together with a petition, that the like
trial might be made in England. Chap. 11.
IN THE DEFENSE.
1. The preface shewinge the authority of the Acts and Gests set forth of this
conference in French since the first edition of this relation. 2. What is
contained more in these Acts. then was set down in my former relation. Chap.
1. 3. The examen of nine places chosen by the L. Plessis, for his
Justification, in all which he was proved to have falsified. Chap. 2. 4. How
the conference was broken up. and what ensued afterward, and of a defense set
forth by the L. Plessis after his retyring from the combatt, without a name,
more dishonorable then the combat it self. Chap. 3. An examen of that defense
in French, as also of the answer of O. E. in English. Chap. 4. and 5. The
Conclusion with certain considerations upon the whole. Chap. 6.
TO THE READER. Concerning the causes of the new Edition of this Relation;
with a defense thereof against diverse Impugners.
THREE or four causes (good reader) have induced me to renew this Relation,
and to set yt forth again, after three years space, that it was first
written, and printed, which was in the year of Iubiley 1600. The first reason
is, for that of three Conuersions of England, diverse points here promised
concerning the unfolding of sundry falsifications, used as well by John Fox,
as by some other English writers of our time; I thought good to lay down the
ground of my obligation and promise made in this relation, to the end yt may be
seen, whether I do satisfy the same or no. Paris at that time; now I having
perused the whole acts and gests of that cofere^ce, between the B. of Eureux,
and Plessis Morney, authentically published by authority, and by the approbatio
of the deputies themselves that were judges in the cause; I have come to know
many particulars which then I knew not, and consequently, I am desirous, that
the reader should be partaker thereof in like manner for that they may import
him not a little, being of the subject they are.

Relation two adversary wrytings, published against the same, or at least wise,
against some principal points thereof, the one in French, written (as is
thought) by the L. Plessis himself or by some other at his directio, after the
flight from the combat, the other in English by O. E. otherwise interpreted
Matthew Sutcliffe. who has taken upon him to be his procter and advocate: both
which wrytings I thought good in this place, breefely to look over, and by
occasion of printing again this Relation, to let the reader see, what truth
or substance there is in them; but yet with such moderation of speech as we may
imitate therein (so near as may be) the courteous proceeding used by the
adversary parties in this Trial in France, as a little after you shall here,
and in deed is convenient to the subject handled, (which is Religion) and to
the persons that treat the same.

And albeit according to the information which men give here of the nature
and condition of O. E. little hope is conceived of any good correspondence from
him in this point, as not so powerable over his own passions, as to perform
it: yet will I hope the contrary for this time, presuminge that his so
exorbitant excess in former wrytings, proceeding of the confidence of a
visard, whereby he thought perhaps to pass unknown; but now the mask being
taken away, and every child being able to read and interprett what the words
O. E. do signify, to wit, a person, that professes Ecclesiastical life and
dignity; I shall expect somewhat from him agreeable to that profession, vvherin
I promise again all due correspondence on my behalf, to the end, that matters
of Religion may be handled in the style they ought to be. But if I be deceived,
and that he will needs follow his old veigne still; I am like enough to leave
him in that kind and give him over to others; that will pay him perhaps his
dew, according to that of the gospel, Matt. 18
tradatur tortoribus, quousque persouerit vltimum quadrantem, for there want
neither men, nor matter to perform yt. And so much of this.

For these reasons then, and some other, I have been moved to set forth this
Relation again, together with a defense thereof, increased, as you will see,
and confirmed out of the authentical acts set forth by public authority. I
do think the reading, and pervsing heerof, will turn thee (good Reader) to
singular commodity, if it be done with indifferency and attention. To Gods
everlasting glory be all referred, whole ever preserve thee. This first of
December 1603.

THE OCCASION, ARGUMENT, AND SVBSTANCE of the ensuinge trial.
CHAP. 1.
NOtwithstanding (gentle reader) I may justly presume, that the report of the
late combat, and conference had in France, between two noble and famous
learned men, concerning a trial of fidelity and falsehood in alleaginge
authorityes for controversies in Religion, has come into England before this
day, being a matter of so notorious memory and done in the presence of so great
a King, and of so many Princes, and so near to our country, and upon so
markable preambles and premises, as here are declared: Causes of this
Translation.
yet was I moved by diverse reasons, and considerations, to lay the same
together in these few sheets of paper, and to send them unto thee to read,
and behold, and (as the importance of the thing it self requires) to be
considered with some attention, and leisure. For first I weighed with my self,
that albeit the chalenges which hereafter do follow, be extant in the French
tongue, and consequently like also to be in England before this day: yet for
that every man understands not that language, nor is it so probable that many
men will take the pains to translate and diuulge the same, to such as may have
need or desire to read it; I judged the labor not unprofitable to perform
the same from hence.

But besides there is another reason of more moment, and more peculiar to this
place, to wit, that albeit the former printed chalenges, might come to
Englishmens hands by other means: yet the combat it self, with the true issue
thereof, together with the manner of the trial, and particulars occurred
therein, which have been written hither by most authentical parties (as unto the
place, where account of such affairs concerning Religion is wont to be given)
could not, or would not perhapps so fully, and sincerely be related in England,
as the truth of the whole action requires, the reason whereof each man will
easily consider.

These then being the causes that moved me to take this little pain, founded
(as you see) in the zeal of truth and fidelity, I have thought good to deliver
faithfully unto you such letters, as have come to my hands, about this affayre,
though not all. For that diverse letters written out of France, by diverse other
parties reportinge the self same thing, I thought not needful for me to print,
nor to multiply relations without necessity, but to content my self only (for
breuityes sake) with the letter of the K. Majesty himself, and with one other
of the Bishop (that was an actor in the cause) written to the Kings Ambassador
in this place, and to some other Cardinals besides, by them to be exhibited
unto his Holiness, Why the B. of Eureux his relation in this matter is of much
creditt.
to whom the Bishopp well knew, that the self same thing would be written by
others also les^e interessed in the matter then himself; and more then this,
that his said letters and report would be returned to France again, where all
advantage would be taken against him by the adversary, if in any one point he
should exceed the bare truth in his narration; which consideration may assure
us, that he would have great care to relate all points both truly and modestly,
as in his letter that ensues may be seen, that he does, and the same may be
gathered also plainly by the K. letter it self to the Duke of Espernon, which
after we shall relate.

But yet besides these two letters, there was another written, two days after
the said Bishops letter, by the Popes Nuntio in Paris unto Cardinal
Aldobrandino, and by him to be delivered to his holiness, wherein is related and
verified (though in very few words) the very same All this is now confirmed by
the public Acts printed that after do ensue.
narration, which the Bishop writes, as by the extract thereof hereafter set
down appears. And this now were sufficient for a preface only to this
matter, were yt not, that I have thought expedient also to touch breifely two
other points. First, what these two persons are, which had the combat, and then
the brief sum of that which passed between them therein.

For first the L. Plessis Morney L. Plessis Morney.
his name and person is well known in England; for that above 20. years past
I saw my self a book of his entitled: Of the Church, and notes thereof,
translated into English, and much esteemed by protestants of that time, for
that he writes more cunningly and covertly, and is more plausible in show both
of scriptures and Fathers, then commonly other writers of his Religion then
were. And for that he is a noble man borne, and of the laity and not unlearned
in diverse languages, and in great creditt for many years with this King of
France (whose Ambassador he was in England, whilst he was yet a protestant,
and his Majesty King only of Navarre) and now since his coming to the
kingdom of France much trusted also, and used by him in his civil affairs,
and in government of the town and country of Saumur. For these causes (I say)
and for that he has written many books, he is accounted every where for one
of the cheeife champions and head pillars of Protestant Religion in France,
whereby this his disgrace so notoriously received in that thing, wherein he made
public profession to be exact, to wit, in true, and plain dealinge: must
needs open the eyes of such, as are discreet, and desirous in deed to follow
truth and decline from falsehood, and so it did us after you see.

The B. of Eureux on the other side, named Monsieur Person, L. Bishop of Eureux.
is a person no less eminent and markable, both for that his parents being
great Protestants, and himself also for many years, he being a man also of
great wyet, and extraordinary memory, and by reason of his state of life more
occupied in studyes (as is probable) then the other, coming afterward by
readinge, and by Gods especial grace to be a Catholic, he became so zealous
earnest, and ardent therein (as none do more when they are full informed) that
his greatest endeavors since his conversion, have been to convert also others,
and to impart that light, which God has bestowed upon him, to as many as
possibly he can. In which respect the K. Majesty of France having loved him
much, and esteemed also before, when he was a Protestant, and no less since
that he has been a zealous Catholic, and knowinge him to be both learned
faithful and sincere; made choice of him for his especially Ambassador in
Rome in the year 1595. to treat his great affayre for his reconciliation to
the Catholic Church, which has come to that happy issue, which ^ll the world
sees both for the good of his ^arson, people, and crown.

And thus much of these 2. persons, who being both of them so grateful and
well liked of the King, as I have showed, his Majesty's indifferency in
judgment also between them both, (the truth of the cause only excepted) must
needs be void of all suspicion, and consequently his sentence afterward
prononced on the one side (as by his letter appears) must in reason be
thought to have proceeded of the manifest difference of the said cause, and
force of truth it self, which he discovered upon that trial. Now then to
speak a word or two of the action as it passed, you must understand, that
about Christmasse last, there came forth a book in Paris of the aforsaid
Monsieur Plessis against the Mass; A brief relation of the whole action.
which book making show (as the fashion is) of great abundance and
ostentation of Fathers, Counsels, Doctors and stories for his purpose, great
admiration seemed to be conceived thereof, and the Protestants every where began
to triumph of so famous a work, published in their behalf, Whereupon diverse
Catholic learned men took occasion presently to examine the said book, and
finding many most egregious deceyts, shifts, and falsifications therein, diverse
books were written against it, and one in particular by a French P Fronto
Duceus Burdeg.
Jesuit, discovering at least a thousand falsehoods of his part.

All the preachers of Paris in like manner, the whole lent followinge, were
occupied for the most part in refutinge, and shewinge the falsehood of this
book: duringe which time, many Protestants of accounte were either converted
or greatly moved here with, Monsieur Sainct-Mary converted.
and among other one Monsieur Sainct-Mary du Monte a principal noble man o^,
Normandy, who frequenting the preaching of one F. Angelus a Capuchin friar,
borne a great noble man, and named before his entrance into Religion Monsieur
du Bouchage brother to the late Duke of Ioyeus, whose state he had of late
inherited (his said brother being dead) but left the same for that other
vocation of a poor, and humble servant of God. Monsieur Bouchage leaue^h a
Dukedom to be a ^riar.
And albeit afterward upon necessity of the said temporal state which he had
left, he was forced for some years, to take a secular life upon him again,
and to mennage arms, as he did, by license of the Supreme Pastor of Gods
Church, yet after public affairs once accommodated, he retired himself back
to his Religious habitt, and habitation again, where he lives now a most
virtuous life, and preaches with great zeal, and singular edification of all
sorts of men, and well shows that his mind is superior to all wordly wealth
and promotion. And these are examples that are not found lightly among
Protestants, but are reserved as peculiar to Christ's Catholic Church, where
the dew of heavenly grace, continually falling, works often such
extraordinary effects. And thus much of him.

By this godly man's sermons then was Monsieur Sainct-Mary at length converted
(the experience of this trial not a little helping thereunto, as after shall
appear) and made a good Catholic with no small edification of all men, in
respect of the great humility, and zeal he used in his return to Gods Church,
and with much comfort of the K. himself, to whom first before all other he
uttered his resolution. And heervpon as well his Majesty, as also the noble
men that were Protestants, and namely the Duke of Bouillon, Monsieur Rosny,
Monsieur Digiers, and other began to call upon this trial of Monsieur Plessis
his book, for that it seemed to touch all their honors, and of their
Religion, especially, when the B. of Eureux had protested upon his honor in
the pulpit, that he could show more then 500. falsifications in the same book
for his part. The issue of the chale^ges.
Upon which offers made as well by him as others, there ensued the chalengs
hereafter following. The issue whereof was this; that when upon the 4. of May
the K. being at his palace of Fountaynebleau, had commanded both parties
aforesaid to be present, and their books to be brought with them for this
trial, to be made in his own presence: Monsieur Plessis seemed to shrink,
and to seek all delays possible, either to avoid the same, or to bring it to
some longer examination, by going over all his books and works leaf by leaf,
and line by line, as you shall hear him demand presently: but this being
denied by the B. and cut of by the K. express commandment, he appeared at
last upon the day aforsaid with some 4. or 5. Ministers on his side.

But the day All these things are more particularly set down in the defense
follovvinge cap. 1.
precedent before this, the B. to deal more plainly, and show frendshipp, sent
unto him threescore places taken out of his book, upon which he mea^t to
press him, and (as his words are) to begin the play: wishinge him to come well
provided in the same. Of which threescore Monsieur Plessis, chose out nynteene,
that seemed to him most defensible, and upon which he said he would join the
combat, adding moreover, that he would leese his life, if he were convinced
therein. But the next day the trial being begone upon the first place, and that
found false, he would have passed to the second, but the B. refused so to do,
except the deputyes and judges there present, would first subscribe, and
testify, that this first place was falsified, which at length they did, as
well in this, as in the rest there examined; and Monsieur Plessis remained in
that pitiful plight, which afterward you shall hear by the B. and other men's
letters, unto which I remitt you: beseechinge almighty Cod, that this so
notorious an accident, may work that consideration with you, as the moment and
importance of the marter requires. And so to his holy providence I commit you
from Rome the 10. of June 1600.

THE CHALLENGE OR PROVOCATION MADE BY THE L. Plessis Mornay, unto the L. Peron
Bishopp of Eureux, the 20. of March. 1600.
CHAP. II.
THE L. of Plessis does demand and require, that my L. Bishop of Eureux, and
all other, that blame or accuse him, to have used in his books set forth, any
false citations, will vouchsafe to join with him, for subscribinge and
presenting a most humble request unto the K. Majesty, to entreat him most
humbly to ordain and name such and so many, as shall please his Majesty,
being men of sufficient learning and virtue, before whom the said L Plessis
may verify from leaf to leaf, and from line to line, all authorityes, which
he has cited in his said books. And that this trial be made by such copyes
and books, as have been printed in those places, and in those universities,
which they of the Roman Church hold not for suspected. In witness whereof I
the aforesaid Plessis Mornay have here put to my hand and seal. At Paris the
20. of March in the year one thousand six hundred.

THE ANSWER OF THE B. OF EVREVX to the former Challenge the 25. of March 1600.
CHAP. III.
HAVING received (good Reader) this Challenge, whereof not only the report and
brute, but the copyes also themselves and already spread abroad, written and
subscribed by the L. of Plessis: and consideringe that this is not a challenge
of one private man to another, but rather of one party or side against the
other; it seemed that the interest of the common cause of Gods Church, did not
permit either to let it pass without answer, or to answer it secretly. For
as the end of this his offer is, in case it be refused, by such refusal and
silence of Catholics, to gain a public justification of his books and
wrytinges: so is it convenient, that may answer to the same be also public,
and that the enemies of Gods Church do not get that advantage, as to publish
one thing and conceal the other. And therefore to the end that both heaven and
earth may see, and behold how I do proceed in this matter; Acceptance of the
offer by the B.
I make yt known by this my hand writing both to him, and to all other, that
shall read the same; that I do accept of his offer, and challenge, and do
require of him again to cause the same to be put in execution, and not to end
only in words:

And for my part, that all hinderance thereof may be removed, I protest that I
am presently ready, and do desire out of hand to come to the very point of
shewinge the falshoodes, without byndinge my self to that large and wearisome
methood of examining his late book against the Mass, leaf by leaf, and line
by line, as he requires. Which demand of his; Diverse shifts discovered.
if we should yield thereunto, would under a fair protext of trial, make his
offer equivalent to a flatt refusal. For besides that there will hardly be
found out any deputyes of such patience to try the matter, but they will be
wearied before they have examined in this manner, the tenth part of this his
work: There will be found also in every leaf some allegations not so clearly
false as the rest, the which if we should This is seen afterward by his
dealinge in the defense follovving cap. 2.
pass over, then would he take them, as admitted by us for true, and so take
witness thereof to the prejudice of the Catholic Church. And if we stay and
strive about them, he would then of purpose settle the whole disputation upon
the first of those, which he should think might longest be continued, to
hinder thereby the examininge of the rest.

For these causes then, as also for that yt appertains notto him, who is
accused of falsifications, to choose out the points upon the which he is to be
examined, but to them rather, which do accuse him, to propose the articles,
which they are to object against him: For these causes (I say) see here (good
reader) the protestation I make before God and man: I protest that I do bynd my
self to show him in any place furnished of books, and in such company of
capable men, as it may please the K. Majesty to ordain, yea in the presence
of his Majesty (if it may please the same to take contentment to be present at
some part thereof) five hundred enormous, A new offer and challenge to Plessis
for 500. places corrupted by him.
and open falsifications, without any amplification or exaggeration, and all
these contained in his only late book against the Mass. The which five
hundred falsifications, I will choose our amongst a far greater number, to
the end I may avoid tediousness, and I will choose them all so plain and
manifest, as there shall be no need of any further disputation to prove and
convince them, then the only openinge of the books which himself does allege.

And more over I say, that if after this our conference ended, he will take
upon him for his part, to choose amongst all the citations of his book, or of
his books (because^ he speaks in general) any such authorityes, as he
thinks most sure, and to make most for his advantage, and most against us: I
do bynd my self for conclusion of all to refute the whole choice, Plessis his
books named and showed to be corrupt.
that he shall have made thereof, and to show that neither in his said book
against the Mass, nor in his Treatise of the Church, nor in his, Commonwealth
of Traditions, is there to be found so much as any one place among them all,
which is not either falsely cyted, or impertinent to the matter, or
unprofitably alleged. And this will I show by the very texts of Greek and
Latin copies, of the authors themselves printed at Geneua, Basil, Heydelberge,
and other towns of Protestants.

All which notwithstanding I desire should be understood, as not spoken
against the honor in particular of the L. Plessis, whom in all other things,
which concern not the interest of Religion, I esteem according to his
qualityes and meritts. Neither do I heerby pretend to blame him for any other
thing, then that he has been over credulous in believing the false relations
and collections of others, that have endeavored to abuse the industry and
authority of his pen. And whereas he demands instantly, that I should join
with him to present a supplication unto the K. Majesty for trial aforesaid: I
declare again by this my wrytinge, that I do wholly agree thereunto, and join
with him therein, Courteous ^^eaty with Plessis.
and do make account for this present time to have subscribed thereunto, yea (if
need were) with my own proper blood, conceauing infinite gladness, that after
so many admirable victoryes, which his Majesty has gotten both of his enemies
by his valor, and of himself by his clemency, the good Angel of France does
now again open to his Majesty the way, to obtain another victory no less
glorious then the former, whereby he may as another Constantine, after peace and
tranquillity restored to his temporal estate, restore also the like peace and
tranqui^lity to the state of God, which is his holy Church. For that this
disputation shall not be like to the others of former times, wherein were
examined matters of doctrine, and the truth thereof, as also of the true
interpretations of holy scriptures, The quality of this disputation or
conference.
and other such like: In examination whereof, the shifts and sleights of the
disputers, and other disguisinge of the matters, might make the truth
uncertain to the hearers. But here all questions in this disputation, shall
only be questions of fact, whether places be truly alleged, or no; For trial
whereof, yt shall only be needful to bring eyes for judges to behold, whether
the citations which we do accuse of falsehood, be so indeed in the authors, as
Plessis has alleged in his book. And yet of the overthrow of these so many
falsifications gathered together, ensues the overthrow and dishonor of the
cause which is defended by such weapons.

And consequently we are much bound to the holy providence of almighty God,
that he has permitted in this last assault of heretics, The importance of
this combatt.
the ministers of France to have placed all the heads of their false impostures
and deceytfull dealings upon one body, to the end they may be all cut of at
one blow. And that the simple people by them abused, seeing discovered the false
and unfaithful dealings of those, upon whose fidelity they grounded their
faith; may forsake them hereafter, and return to that faith, which is the
pillar and sure ground of all truth.

Wherefore to the end, that this happy success may be brought to effect without
delay, not only I do subscribe most willingly together with the L. of Plessis,
to present his request to his Majesty, but also do further promise him in the
execution thereof, to use all sweetness, modesty, and loving proceeding toward
his person; Bitter speeches in conference about religion reprehensible.
for that I esteem yt a thing most conformable to reason, that combatts which
proceed of charity, should be tried with charity; and that as in old time in
the matrimonial sacrificos that were ordained for peace, and concord betwixt
man and wife, the gauls of beasts offered up were taken out: even so in the
disputations, which are undertaken for the peace and union of the spouse of God
(which is his Church) the gaul and bitterness of hatred and evil will be taken
away.

Made and subscribed by me in the Castle of Condie being the house of the B. of
Eureux the 25. of March in the year one thousand six hundred. By me James. B.
of Eureux.


This is the answer and acceptance of the Bishopp, full of considence, wit,
and medesty, as to the reader must needs appear: now let us see the reply of
Plessis Mornay no less captious and subtle, them this is plain, simple, and
sincere.

THE REPLY OF THE L. PLESSIS TO THE FORMER answer, published by the B. of
Eureux upon the Challenge made unto him by the said Plessis.
CHAP. IV.
WHEN I had understood (gentle Reader) the L. B. of Eureux gave forth, that the
places of the fathers quoted by me in my books, were falsely cited: I sent him
a certain Challenge written, and subscribed by my own hand of the date of the
20. of March 1600. The which since that time, the said B. has caused to be
printed and published, though I sent the same to him privately by the way of
his own brother. Heerevpon notwithstanding, my L. Bishopp has caused to be
printed a certain aduertisment to the Reader, of the date of the 25. of March,
the which is now cried about the streets in this city; and this in steed of
sendinge me his private answer by the same way I sent to him. The first cavil
of Plessis upon nothing.
Judge (Reader) whether in matter of provocation (for so he calls my
challenge) this manner of proceeding be to be received, and not rather subject
unto sinister interpretation. Yet notwithstanding the event perhaps will make
men judge better of his intention, whereunto willingly I reserve my self.

And of this my private challenge to him, as of one particular man to another,
he makes by and by a public defiance of one part to another; as they which in
an army do make their private quarrels, to be the public cause of the whole
nation. Judge here again (Reader) of this manner of proceeding in a
conference of Religion, 2. Cavil contrary to the B. his own words.
the which should tend to reniute, and join together men's mynds, and not to
disunite their affections. Consequently he flies the examination, unto the
which I do submitt my books before the K. deputyes from leaf to leaf and from
line to line, and fayneth that he fears the weariness of the deputyes. 3.
Cavil, for that the Bishopps, way offered is more easy and short.
Judge here again (Reader) if this trial may be made with more comodity or
less labor, then I have offered. Wherefore to this again I answer, that we
will hold heerin so easy, and short method of trial, that I dare bragg, that
this other pain shall be turned into pleasure most gretefull. But that which
greueth him (neither can he dissemble yt) is, that he fears (as he says)
that of some false citations, whose falsehood is less evident: (if he pass
them over) I will take witness, as though they granted them to the prejudice of
the Catholic Church: But the truth is, that he doubts least by his flyinge
of my manifest verityes, I will make a prejudice against his cauillations and
calumniations. For seeing this difference between us may be decyded by only
true See this afterward co^tradicted by himself.
readinge of that which is written; what means shall I have in this trial to
deceive the judgment or rather the sight of the deputyes.

He skyrmisheth finally, Defense. cap. 2.
saying, that he will show me 500. false citations by number, but men will not
easily believe him, who know that such bragging without effect, has continued
already 20. years and more. And therefore hereunto I have but one word to
answer, which is, that when we meet, we shall see Now it is seen by the
trial.
what he can do. And therefore not to make many words which serve for nothing,
but to put of the things themselves, I will (notwithstanding all this) take
mine offer, as accepted by him. And even now to this intent, I have entreated
my L. Mareshall of Bouillon, who goes to take his leave of the K. at his
palace of Boys de Vincens, to present unto his Majesty my most humble request
to this effect, by the which I do beseech this Majesty, that it will please
him to ordain some deputyes to the end above mentioned. Which petition if it
please God to prosper and bless, I hope it will prove a good preamble for some
greater designment, worthy the magnanimity of our King, toward some holy
reformation of the Church in his Kingdom, by the means whereof, we shall see
in this our one only King, Heretical flattery.
three most great Emperors, and their virtues represented, to wit a Caesar in
conqueringe; an Augustus in pacifyinge of his estate; and one that flies
higher then any Constantine in restoringe the whole Church of Christendom by
the example of his own reformed Kingdom.

This our request recommended by me to the said L. Mareshall, Great
dissimulation: as will appear after by the event.
was yesterday the last of March so earnestly by him presented to his Majesty,
as by his answer he gives me no small hope, that very soon he will give us
means to effectuate our desires: And the more to hasten the matter, I have
again this morninge entreated most humbly his Majesty by my letters; so as
now there remains nothing but to beseech the same of God, as I do withal my
heart, for his glory, and for the instruction of his people. And so hereafter an
end of al words about this matter. Written at Paris the first of April. 1600.
Plessis.

HItherto are the chalenges, answers and replies of these two parties: which
the K. Majesty having perused, and seeing so great show and confidence to be
in both for entering the combatt, he gave very nobly and Christianly, his royal
assent thereunto, as by the ensuing letters of the whole fact and circumstances
thereof does appear. And finding presently some relenting and drawing back in
the one party (as by the said letters you shall see) he further laid his full
commandment upon them both, for performance of their offers, and consequently
the trial was made at Fontayne-blea^ some four or five days after, in the
presence of his Majesty and Princes of blood, with many of the greatest
nobility, with those particularityes, which the said ensuing letters will
represent unto you. But yet before all, I have thought good to set down the
K. own letter, though short, and brief, yet very substantial and pithy,
relatinge very prudently in few words the success of that trial, with the
good effect, that might be hoped thereof for conversion of many Protestants,
that are not perverse and wilful. It was written at Fontayne-bleau where the
meeting was, the very day of the trial: and for the worthiness thereof and due
respect to so great a personage, yt shall go both in French and English, for
them that understand both languages.

COPPIE DES LETTRES DV ROY A MONSIEUR D' ESPERNON.
CHAP. V.
Mon amy.
LEdiocese d' Eureux agaigne celuy de Saumur, and la doulceur, don't on^y a
proced^, oste ^occasion a quelque Huguenot, que cesoit, de dire que rien y eut
force que la verite. Ce porteur y ostoit, qui vous contera comme i'y ay faict
merueilles. Certes c' est un des plus grands coups pour l' Eglise de Dieu, qui
s' est faict ily long temps, suyuant l' eclarcissement de cest erreur. Nous
rammeinerons plus de separez de l' Eglise en un an, que par toute autre voy en
cinquante. Il y a un long discourse d'vn chascun, qui seroit trop long a
discourir par escript. Il vous dira la facon, que ie suis d'auis que mes
seruiteurs tiennent, pour tirer fruict de ce saint oeuure. Bon soir mon amy.
Sachant le plaisir que vous en aurez: Vous estes seul a qui l'on le mande. Le
5. de May. 1600.

Henry.


Au dessus de la lettre. A mon Cousin le Duc d' Espernon.

THE COPY OF THE K. OF FRANCE HIS FORMER LETTER TO the Duke of Espernon,
concerning the late trial, had between the B. of Eureux, and the Lord
Plessis, translated into English.
CHAP. VI.
MY Friend. The Diocese of Eureux has overcome the Diocese of For that
Plessis is governor of Saumur.
Saumur, and the sweet manner of proceedinge that has been used, has taken
away all occasion to any Hugenot whatsoever he be, to say, that any force has
been used, beside the only force of truth: The bearer heerof was present at the
combatt, who will inform you what maruayles I have done therein. Certanily it
is one of the greatest blows, that has been given for the Church of God this
long while, for the manifestation of this error. By would god these means
were used in England.
this means we shall reduce more in one year of them, that are separated from
the Church, then by any other way in 50. years. There were a large discourse
to be made of each of their actions, but the same were to long to write. The
bearer shall tell you the manner, which I would have all my servants to observe
for reapinge fruit of this holy work. Good night my friend. And for that I
know what pleasure you will take heerof, you are the only man to whom I have
written yt. This 5. of May. 1600.

Henry.


The superscription. To my Cosyn the Duke of Espernon.

EXTRICT DV POSTSCRIPTVM DE LA LETTRE DE CELVY QVI enuoy a ceste Coppie dela
lettre du Roy a Rome.
CHAP. VII.
Monsieur.
I^ vous enuoye la coppie de la lettre du Roy, qu'il a enuoye a Monsieur
d'Espernon sur la dispute de l'Euesque d'Eureux, contre du Plessi-Mornay pour
verifier son liver, qui s'est de tout trouue faulx, and s'en est all cacher
comme un regnard. Dieu conduise tout a bonne fin a sa gloire, and salut des
ames.


An extract of the Postscript of the letter of him that sent this copy of the
forsaid K. letter, to the French Ambassador in Rome.
My Lord. I do send you here, the copy of the Kings letter written to the
Duke of Espernon, about the disputation of the B. of Eureux against Plessis
Mornay, for iustifyinge of his book, found altogether false, and he is gone
to hide him self like a Fox. God conduct all to a good end for his glory, and
salvation of men's souls.


Thus much do write the King and his secretary, the one to the Duke of
Espernon, the other to Monsieur Sylary Ambassador in Rome, and both of them
present at the conference. The Kings letter as you see, is very substantial:
and yt seems his Majesty was greatly moved himself by the seeing and
hearing of this combatt. For so much as he affirms so resolutely, that yt was
one of the greatest blows, that had been given for the Church of God a long
while, and for discovering the erroneous proceedings of Protestants. The
secretary also avouches as you see, the falsehood found in Mornayes book, and
that for shame thereof he was gone to hide himself like a Fox. Now shall you
hear three other letters, relating more particularly the circumstances of this
conference, with the Acts and success thereof, though all very breifely in
respect of the Acts themselves.

THE COPY OF THE LETTER OF MONSIEUR PERON B. OF EVREVX, to the L. Silary
Ambassador for the K. of France in Rome, the 10. of May 1600.
CHAP. VIII.
My Lord.
AT length the victory of the combat betwixt the L. Plessis and me remains to
the Catholic Church, and after many tergiuersations, which he used for the
space of 5. or 6. days at Fontayne-bleau, I sent him on wednesday the third of
May, threescore falsifications taken out of his book, to begin the play
withal, for him to prepare himself to answer the next day. Of them he chose
out 19. the which he went and told the King the next day, that he had chosen
forth, examined, and found true, and that he would loose his life, if any one
of them were proved to be falsely cited. After dynner the same day in the same
place, he came forth in the presence of his Majesty, and of 7. or 8. Princes,
States present at the combatt.
and of the L. Chancelour of France, and other officers of the crown, and
Counselors of State. Where first his Majesty declared both by himself, and
by the L. Chancelour, that he would not in any wise, that in this conference
should be handled any point of Catholic Religion, whereof he doubted nothing,
and knew also that the judgment thereof pertained unto the Sea Apostolic, but
only of the particular busynes of the L. of Plessis, whether he had falsified
the texts of the Fathers or no? I added that when Hunnericus K. of the Vandal^s
would have had the Catholics dispute with the Arrians, Eugenius Archbishopp of
Carthage (as Victor of Vtica rehearses) answered, Vict. l. 2. de persecut^
Vandalica.
that he could not do yt, without the consentment of other Bishopps, and
chiefly of the Church of Rome, which is head of all others: and that this my
entering into the present conference, was not for that I bare less respect unto
the Seat Apostolic, then that holy Bishop did.

But because there was no questions of Religion here to be discussed, The only
point to be handled.
but only to show the falsifications of the L. Plessis, about the which I was
well content to have the judgment of the assistants, for as much as appertained
to the knowledge of Grammar, to wit, whether the L. Plessis had corrupted the
words of the authors or no, but not as touching points of divinity, the which
the K. Majesty had already very wisely forbidden us to treat, for that he will
not heerin follow the example of K. of Judah, which usurped the incensour, and
the function of priesthood, but rather of Constantyne and Theodose, and other
religious Emperors in remittinge the decision of Ecclesiastical matters unto
the Church. The manner of the combatt.
This done we began to dispute, and I began to object unto him those places,
which himself had chosen out amongst threescore, sent to him by me the day
before, following therein the same order that he had taken in choosing them out,
the which all were convinced of falsehood, in order as they were proposed, and
sentence was pronounced against him upon every place by the heretics
themselves, which assisted him there, and all with one voice condemned him.

The King in this conference has showed himself so wise, The K. justly
praised.
so intelligent, so affectionate, and so zealous, taking up the argument
against him at every occasion, and pressing him by disputation, and so
conuincing him of diverse falsehoods; as he has showed manifestly his wit, and
affection toward the Catholic Religion, admirable to all France, which now
does shed tears for joy, to see their King to excel, as much all others in
piety, devotion, and zeal toward the advancement of Gods Church, as he has
surpassed them in valor and victory. This first conference ended, Plessis fell
sick of grief
the L. Plessis goinge from the combatt pale, astonished, and maruelously
confounded fell into great conuulsions, vomitinge, and tremblinge of his body
for the rest of that day; and for all the day followinge was possessed with a
strange universal tremblinge of all the members of his body, and ever since
has remained sick, and has not been able, nor durst show himself. I pray God
this may serve not so much to his confusion, as to his conversion: whom I
beseech also to grant you my L. a good and a happy life. From paris this 10.
of may 1600.

Your humble and affectionated servant. James B. of Eureux.


Postscript.
This letter which I write unto your honor, is a copy of that which I write,
to Cardinal Aldebrandino, and to the Cardinal of Aux, because the bearer,
urged by the post, has not given me leisure to do otherwise.

The superscription.
To my Lord.
The L. Silary, the K. Counselour of his Counsel of State, Ambassador for his
Majesty at Rome.

AN EXTRACT OF ANOTHER LETTER WRITTEN BY THE Popes Claudius Ragonius episc.
Rhegiensis.
Nuntio, resident in Paris, unto Cardinal Aldobrandino the Popes Nephew in
Rome: the 12. of May 1600.
CHAP. IX.
I HAVE freshly received news from Fountaine-bleau of the prosperous success
of the conference between the B. of Eureux, and the L. Plessis Mornay. The
Bishopp has convinced manifestly by the judgment and sentence of all the
assistants, the falsehoods, as he had before promised. Wherefore the said Plessis
was so ashtonished, and troubled, that he fell presently sick of an Ague. The
King himself in this conference has showed great understanding, and no less
zeal to the Catholic Religion. The whole redoundeth much to the confusion of
the Hugonotts, here, who held Plessis for their S. Augustine, etc. Paris the
12. of May 1600.

THE WORDS OF ANOTHER LETTER WRITTEN FROM PARIS the 10. of May, about the same
matter by a gentleman of accoumpt.
CHAP. X.
HERE has been some 4. days past a great conference at Fontayne bleau 15.
leagues hence, between Monsieur Peron B. of Eureux, and Monsieur Plessis Mornay
Counselour to his Majesty Governor of Saumur, and general of the Hugonotts.
The K. with other Princes were present, and judges chosen and appointed for
both parties. In the end Plessis Mornay was utterly disproued and confounded by
a general consent of both sides, and shamed, in so much as the K. The Kings
oath.
rose up from his place and swore Ventre S. Gry, he had heard and seen enough
of Plessyes falsityes, and that by Act of Parliament he would cause his books
to be burned, saying that himself had all his youth time ben abused, and
carried away with their corruptions. He presently sent word unto the Duke of
Espernon, saying that the B. of Eureux had gotten the government of Saumur,
and willed that the Doctors and Preachers in Paris should be advertised thereof
to publish yt, and so yt is in pulpitts with great joy and thanks to God.

The Hugonotts are stricken more dead, with with this accident, Hugonotes much
moved with the success.
then if they had lost a battle of 40. thousand men, and Plessis Mornay
himself is fallen sick upon yt, vomitts blood, and looks like himself.
There was present of Plessis side a great Hugonot of accoumpt among other,
called Monsieur du Gramond, who seeing the event of that conference, said, that
he never in his life durst follow Monsieur Plessis for a Captain, but now he
would less follow him for a divine. It is hoped that the said Gramond will
become a Catholic upon yt, and Monsieur du Rosney also; and heresy was never
so likely to go to wrack in France, as at this present, etc. Paris this 10. of
May 1600.

An addition of the translatour.
HITHERTO are the letters which I have thought good to translate out of French,
and to set down in this place concerning the event of this trial and combat,
as also of the great and high honor, which the most Christian King of France
has gained, by being present and furthering the same in his royal person.
Which act will be unto him (besides the benedictio^ of almighty God t^erby
gained as we hope) an everlasting praise with all posterity. And if yt might
please the same mighty hand of our Savior, by his holy grace to inspire the
heart of her This petition may better be made now to his royal Majesty as
more intellige^t in such affairs, and better enclyned to hear truth.
Majesty of England by the example of so famous a fact of her neighbor and
colleague, and dear Cosyn the K. of France, to take the same course in
England, and to hear and permit the like trial between such Catholics, as
would offer to prove, and convince the like falsehoods and falsifications; (and
greater also perhaps) in the chief protestant writers of our nation, as
Jewel, Fox, Fulke, and the like: and that some of the learned, and zealous of
the other side, might be entreated or commanded toe defend the same; or if
they refuse this, then at least some competent number of equal judges, might
be assigned on both sides to hear the matter, with the same laws and
conditions as the matter passed in France, to wit, that no point of
controversy or disputation be admitted to be disputed of, but only matter of
fact discussed: As for example, whether such and such places and authorityes as
are cyted and quoted in their wrytings, out of Fathers, Doctors, Counsels, and
stories, and are avouched by Catholics to be falsified, be so or no? If this (I
say) might be obtained (seeing larger trial and disputation, so often and
earnestly by us demanded, cannot be had) and that by the wisdom and authority
of her Majesty and her honorable Council, this at last might be brought to
pass; yt would be an infinite comfort to all sincere, and true meaning men of
all sides, which desire indeed to know the truth.

And as for the trial it self, yt would be more easy, brief and pleasant
unto her Majesty and other assistants, whosoever they should be; For that as
the B. of Eureux well notes before, yt will be sufficient for this trial, to
bring only eyes, and to open the books, whence the authorityes are cyted. And
to the end that some taste before hand may be taken of the matter, which would
break forth in such a trial, concerning the Protestants part; I have thought
good to add these few observations that do ensue, which are of a person that
would willingly offer himself in this service, or at least to send, and
represent some part of those observations, which to this effect he has
gathered.

CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS UPON THE FORMER NARRATION.
CHAP. XI.
THOUGH yt be hard for any man to reflect, and make observations unto himself,
of what may best be noted, by the precedent story and relation; yet to help the
Readers memory, and to stir up somewhat more his understanding, and discourse
about the premises, I have not thought amiss to resent in part by this
postscript, what occurreth unto me in this behalf. Act. 1.
And first of all is the wonderful providence of almighty God in conservation,
and continuation of the old ancient, Catholic, Apostolic, and universal
faith left at the assension of our Savior, unto his followers and visible
Church that then was, and spread by them miraculously in very short space over
all the world, The primitive Cath. Church.
and continued ever since by tradition, and succession of one age to another
until our time, under the protection and mighty powerable defense of the same
Lord and Savior, and under the government of his only espouse the said
Catholic Church. 1. Tim. 4.
Against which Church and descent of faith therein, 2. Tim. 3.
though many new fantasyes and devises of particular men (which holy scriptures
call heresies) have spronge up in every age with fresh and glisteringe titles,
3. Pet. 2.
of pure gospel, of new reueyled truth, of godly reformation, and other like
pretenses; and that God for more trial and exercise of his said Church, Causes
of heresies and their ends.
and for the speedier redress perhaps of some abuses, and corrupt manners
crept into some part thereof, has permitted the said new inventions to
prevail, grow, and ruffle for a time (as by experience of all ages we have
seen) yet ever in the end he brings the same to confusion, and shame,
according to those words of the Psalm. Psalm. 76
Percussit inimicos suos in posteriora, opprobrium sempiternum dedit eis. He
strikes his enemies in the hinder parts (that is toward the end of their
ruffle) and confounds them with everlasting shame. Which prophesy of the
Psalmist is principally to be understood of heretical enemies, Tert. l de
praes rip^. aduers. haereses. Ep phan. cont. haer.
as Tertullian, Epiphanius and other ancient Fathers writing against them, do
interpret, and the experience of like end in all heresies past does make yt
plain.

And this shame and confusion of heresies and heretics, Four confusio^s of
heresies.
(which Gods providence does here fortell, and in time also brings to pass
so manifestly, as the whole world may be witness thereof) consists
principally in four points, 1. Division among themselves
as holy Fathers do note. First that every new sect, divides it self quickly
into many others sects and heresies, which S. Augustine shows largely of the
Arrians, Aug. lib. ^. cont epist. Parm. c. 4. and l. 1 de bapt. cont. Donat. c.
6.
and Donatists, and Staphilus, Lyndanus, and other writers of our time do show
the same of Luthers sect, divided into so many sects and branches in so few
years, as all the world sees. And Stanislaus Rescius, a learned man of
Polonia^ in his late book of the Atheisine, of haeretiks, shows out of the
wrytings of protestants themselves, that in the year 1596. when he wrote his
book (which was but 4. years past) that there were now extant in the world
270. different sects, all risen out of Luthers, from the year 1517. wherein
Luther began. All which he declares at length; and the reason of this so great
multiplication is given by Tertullian in his book Of prescription against
heretics above 1400. Tertull. ibid.
years past, saying: That for so much as every scholar of a sectary knows,
that his master invented his opinions of his own head, he will invent also
something himself, thereby to show that his wit is not inferior to that of
his Masters. And heerby they come to such confusion in the end that one
destroys the other. Whereof Luther himself is a good witness, when he
writes these words: Luth. Comme^t^in Psa. 5.
Truly God does not fight by any other means with heretics, then by
permittinge among them a certain seditious spirit of dissension, by which
their overthrow also and perdition does ensue. So he: who is a witness in
this cause without exception as you know.

The second reproach followinge sectaryes is Contradiction to themselves, 2.
Contradictio^ of the Sects.
in their own wrytings and sayings, and shamfull inconstancy in their
doctrine. The reason whereof is, for that the said doctrine consystinge only in
the invention, judgment, and memory of the sectarye himself, that invented
yt, or chose to follow yt, though invented by another, (for whatsoever they
allege of scripture or other antiquity, must depend of their own new invented
interpretation) of necessity it must follow, that as their talents, and wits,
discourse or memory, do alter, change, or fail in time; so must the doctrine
also thereof dependinge, be altered: And so either forgetting what they said in
one time or place, or matter; or having altered their judgment or opinion upon
some further reason, which then they saw not, they must needs come to say
contrary to that they did before. In which kind of contradiction, some
thousands have been noted by learned men in Luther himself; In varijs lib. de
antilog. Lutheri.
and no maruayle seeing he was the first of that sect, that invented new
opinion^ daily. And the same is observed in Caluyns wrytings by VVestphalus
Hesshusius, and other Lutheran Protestants, that wrote against him.

The third confusion that follows commonly upon heresy, 3. Dissolution and
Atheism following upon heresy.
is coldness and doubtfulnesse in Religion, and at length also plain atheism
and contempt; and thereupon dissolution of life, neglect of conscience, and
other suitable effects, which therefore among heretics principally do ensue. For
that heresy calling into question, and shaking the very pillars and strongest
means, whereby men remained assured before of their faith, to wit, the number,
quality, and right understanding of holy scriptures, tradition of the Church,
from whom we received them, the verity of Ecclesiastical stories, Christian
miracles, authority of general Counsels, creditt of ancient Fathers, and the
like: and breakinge down besides the hedges and walls, that were wont to be
bulwarks to good life, as Confession, Restitution, Satisfaction, fasting,
vowinge, and other helps of that quality: this (I say) being once done (which
is the proper work of heresy) a man runs naturally into doubt and contempt
of all; and consequently leesing by little and little both fear and shame,
gives himself over easily to all licentious liberty, and sensuality of life,
which the Apostle calls Desperation. Romans 1.


And thus much of the cause of this third reproach; For as for the effect yt
self, to wit, that these fruits have followed in the world, since heresies
came in, much more then ever before, I could allege both Luther himself, Se,
the story in both their lives the 17. of Febr. and 26. December.
and Erasmus Roterodauius, and other authors of most creditt with Protestants
testifyinge of their days: and as for England yt self, the present knowledge
and experience of thousands will bear me witness. Wherefore I mean to
prosecute no further these first 3. reproaches followinge heresies and
heretics, to witt^ division among themselves, contradiction to themselves, and
dissolution of life, or propension to Atheism; though for the Readers fuller
instruction therein (if he understand the Latin tongue) I must needs give him
notice of two famous books written of late of that argument, Two famous ^ookes.
by two excellent learned men of our time, and taken out of the works
themselves of all the Sectaryes of this age. The one is of our contreyman
Master William Reynolds, M. Reynolds Caluino^turcismus.
once fellow of new-colledg in Oxford, and a Protestant Preacher, entitled
Caluino^ turcismus: that is of Caluyns Religion leading to Turcisme, or a
comparison of Turkish Religion with Caluinisme. The other is of the aforesaid
Polonian gentleman Stanislaus Rescius, Ambassador and Treasorer for his King
in the Kingdom of Naples^, where his said work was printed 4. years past as
has been said, to wit in the year 1596. and yt is divided into two books,
the title whereof is this: De Atheismis and Phalerismis Euangelicorum nostri
temporis, libri duo: quorum prior de fide, Stanislaus Rescius de Atheismis.
posterior tractat de operibus eorum. Which in English is thus: Two books of
the Atheismes, and Phalerismes (or crueltyes) of the ghospellers of our times,
whereof the first treats of their faith, the second of their works. This is
the title, and I do assure the Reader, if he pervse them with attention and
indifferency, he will remain informed by their readinge, and not a little
astonished, to behold what is there alleged out of the wrytings of
Protestants themselves, and other authentical witnesses in this behalf.

Of the other work of Master William Reynolds prouinge that Caluyns Religion
is worse in condition, and less probable in reason, then that of the Turk,
and has less ground and substance therein, then the other: (for all this, and
much more he declares in this work) I shall not need to treat here, nor yet
give notice of the book, for that it was written, and printed very lately in
Flanders; and is (no doubt) or may be easily in England before this day; only I
will add this of the judgment of strangers, to wit, that by testimony and
asseueration of diverse very learned men of other nations, there was never
written a thing in that kind, and of such an argument more excellent in
respect of the infinite variety of heretical books, which he shows to have
read, and well pondered, and for the many invincible reasons and demonstrations
which he alleges for his purpose. And so much of this.

And now I will speak somewhat larger of the fourth reproach and shame
accompanyinge commonly heretics and sectaryes, The 4. reproach of heretics, or
open lyinge.
and especially the heads and chief thereof that write books, which is
counterfaytinge, deceytfull dealinge, falsifyinge, and open lyinge; but
principally in alleaginge antiquity for their purpose, whereof I have occasion
by this present story of Plessis Mornay to say somewhat; and the accusation of
ancient Fathers, Heretics called falsarij by ancient fathers.
that call heretics Falsarij, that is falsifiars, and corrupters of antiquity,
occurreth every where in their books. So as the spirit of old heretics agrees
with this of our new, in this point, as well as in many others; and if we will
consider the cause and necessityes of this reproach in like manner, we shall
find them no less evident or forcible then the former, for that sectaryes
pretendinge antiquity in their doctrine (for that otherwise yt would have no
credit), and findinge all antiquity wholly against them (except only^ the
antiquity of heretics and sectaryes, which they dare not allege openly,
(though they follow them) they are forced to feign and forge somewhat of their
own; as for example some of the ancient Fathers to be with them, or else should
they remain without all show or color of honest pretense. In which point
notwithstanding, they do not agree among themselves: Luther and other
sectaryes denied al fathers at the beginning.
For that first Martyn Luther their great Father forseeinge this difficulty,
and not willinge at the beginning to cast himself into these two troublesome
labyrinthes; first of shiftinge of by divised interpretations those manifold
authorityes of Fathers, that were to be brought against him, and then in
finding out other Fathers in his own behalf; he took a more brief, and
compendious way, which was to deny and contemn them all, for so he does in
very many places of his works, protesting at the very beginning almost of all
his heresies, (to wit in the year 1521.) in an epistle written to a German
knight, Luth. in epist ad equitem Germ. an. 1521.
that he was tied by the authority of no Father, though never so holy, if he
were not approved by the authority of holy scriptures: whereof you must imagine
himself world be judge. and adds in the same place, that the fathers
wrytings were full of errors, contrary often to themselves, and disagreeing the
one from the other, wrestinge scriptures; and the like.

The same also he says of Counsels in the same place, and in the next year
after this, wrytinge against K. Henry the 8. he says: Luth. co^t. Henr. Angl.
Reg. an. 1522.
I do oppose against all the testimonies of fathers, of men never so holy, of
Angels, and of devils, etc. Whereby we may see, what accoumpt he made of
Fathers and Counsels, when they were against him. And the same did Zuinglius,
Caluyn, and others after him for a time, when Fathers authorityes plainly were
against them, and could not be shifted of, by sleight interpretation, as in
their works appears: and Rescius declares it notably and largely, by
manifold examples, and places in his tenth Chapter, and first book aforesaid.

But when this audacity grew in time to be very reproachful, some later
followers of theirs blushinge thereat, and desiringe to exercise their wits in
a higher kind of subtility, A new divise of later protestants about the fathers.
they betook themselves to a more plausible, but yet more shameful, and
desperate course then these their masters, which was to say, that indeed the
Fathers, and ancient writers were wholly for them, and not for us, as the
philosopher, that would defend, that swow was black, and not white. And this
course took first of all Peter martyr in the ^yeare 1549. and third of the
reign of K. Edward the 6. as appears by Fox in the last edition of his page
1549.
Acts and Monuments. And this perhaps Peter martyr was forced to do at that
time, by commandment of B. Cranmer and others of the privy Counsel, who
appointed his disputation for more authorizing of their new decree in Religion,
scarce two months before agreed upon, and would perforce have the Fathers to
be of their side. Peter Martyrs disputation in Oxford an. 1549.
But what success Peter martyr had in this attempt, yt may appear
su^^iciently by the places themselves, which Fox alleges for him out of ten
or twelve several Fathers, whereof the Reader will scarce find one (though the
said texts be breefely alleged) truly cyted, in all respects; but that either
the words next going before^ or immediately following, or both (making wholly
against them) are purposely left out, and others put in or mistranslated.

And let any man who lists examine the same, and confer them with the
authors books themselves, he shall find this to be true. See these places
examined part. 3. c. 19. and 20. and 21. of the Treatise of 3. counersions of
England.
For I have examined them with some diligence my self, as upon some other
occasion herafter may chance appear, but now yt were to long to allege them
in this place; I mean the manifest falsifications therein used. But if any
Protestant in defense of Peter martyr, and John Fox h^s honor, will take upon
him to verify the same, and their quotations to be good, and without fraud;
let him write a little pamphlet thereof (as easily he may, they being contained
in less then one page) and he shall presently be answered: albeit if he do but
set down the whole places themselves as they ly in the Fathers books, whence
they are cut, they will need no answer, but will answer themselves, and
confute the alleager, and show the shamlesse dealinge either of Peter martyr or
John Fox, or of both, in cytinge them.

The like deceytfull dealinge was used by Nicolas Ridley B. B. Ridley and
Bucers disputation in ca^bridge an. 1549.
then of Rochester and after of London, the next month following in the
Cambridge disputation, about the same controversy of the real presence, whereof
he being president ( Martyn Bucer refusinge utterly to deal in that
controversy) he affirmed to the whole university, Fox page 1261.
that he had five sure grounds for the opinion of Zuinglius, whereof the first
was (to use his words) the authority, Majesty, and verity of holy scriptures;
the second, the most certain testimonies of the ancient Catholic Fathers,
etc. Whereas the truth is, that both these foundations are most evidently
against him, as much the one as the other, which Bucer well k^ew, and therefore
would not take part with him in that matter, though soon after, to remedy this
breach, he putt up three other impertine^t questions to be disputed against
Catholics; but in this other article, he know that Ridley lied shamfully
against his own conscience, for that all Farthers are against him most
evidently; and so do the Magdeburgians their chief Protestant Chroniclers show
and declare in every age, The Magdeburgians refute Ridleyes vaunt of fathers.
or century of their Ecclesiastical history. And yt shall be sufficient for the
reader to cast his eye over the 4. Chapters only of every century, entitled of
doctrine. And thus much for K. Edwards days, when Zuinglian Religion first
peeped up in our country.

After this man, stepped to Paul's Cross in the beginning of this Queens
days about the year 1559. and 1560. B. Jewels hypocritical challenge at
Paul's Cross an. 1560.
Master John Jewel, otherwise called B. of Salisbury, and he proceeded yet
further in this bragg or fiction; For he protested there, even with feigned
tears, that if any one authority, place, sentence, or asseueration of any one
Father, Doctor, Council, or authentical history, within the first 600. years
after Christ, could be brought forth by any man living for any one of those
points of Catholic Religion which he there recyted to be in controversy, that
then plainly and sincerely he would subscribe. Against which vain and
shamlesse bragg, when Doctor Harding, and diverse other learned men of our side,
began to write from Louayne, and to bring forth authorityes of all Fathers,
Doctors, Counsels, and historyes in great abundance, the first effect of this
challenge, that appeared to the world, was a severe proclamation, that no such
books written in English by the Catholic party should be received or read in
England, under great punishments, by which provision Master Jewel thinking
himself meetly well de^enced, he plied the pulpitt often, and renewed his
chalenges many times, and perceauing notwithstanding that Doctor Hardings
confutation was come into England, The meaning of M. Jewels cha^^lge.
he answered the same with a long volume of Rhetorical words, and stuffed the
margents thereof with the show of infinite authors, as though the whole world
had been for him and none for the other side; and with this he deceived the
people then, and does to this day, such I mean as have not commodity or
learning, or other means to examine those places, and to find out the
manifold lies and falsifications therein contained. And this was the gain by
all likely hood that Master Jewel pretended to his cause by that work,
knowing full well, that this sort of men is far the greater, which would be
gained and settled in his doctrine before the learneder sort (who are but few in
comparison of the other) could have time, books, and commodity to discover and
refute him, and when they should do yt, they should hardly be believed.

And in this conceate he was not deceived, if we respect that present time, and
many years after, as also yt is probable the L. Plessis Mornay had the like
designment, in stuffing up his books with the like authorityes of Fathers, but
if we consider the continuance of time (whereof truth is said to be the
daughter) yt has succeeded unto him, as you have heard, and will do more and
more daily, as to such shifts is wont to happen, that is to say (according to
King David's saying before recorded) ^ppr^brium sempiternum dedit eis, Men
converted by M. Jewels book to be Catholics.
God lays everlasting shame upon them. For how many learned men lightly of
our nation have taken upon seriously, to go over that book of Master Jewels,
and to examine yt by the authors themselves with any indifferency of mind; have
for the most part been thereby converted to Catholic Religion, though never so
great Protestants before: of which sort I have heard relation of many, but of
some I can testify my self, for that I have heard it from their own mouths,
who of earnest Protestants were made most zealous Catholics by that means
principally; of which number I think yt not inconvenient to name h^^re some 2.
or 3. omitting others which for just respects may not to be named.

The first of them is Sir Thomas Copley, The L. Coplcy and his conversion from
protestancy.
made Lord afterward in his banishment by the K. of France, who often times
has related unto me, with much comfort of his soul, how that being a zealous
Protestant and very familiar to the late Earl of Licester in the beginning of
this Q. days, when Master Jewels book was newly come forth, he being also
learned himself in the Latin tongue, took pains to examine certain leaves
thereof, and findinge many falsehoods therein, which were in excusable (as they
seemed to him) he conferred the same with the said Earl, who willed him that
the next time Master Jewel dyned at his table, he should take occasion after
dynner to propose the same, which he did soon after; and receiving certain
triflinge answers from Master Jewel, he waxed more hoate, and urged the
matter more earnestly: which Jewel perceauinge, M. Jewels answer to the L.
Copley.
told him in effect; That Papists were Papists, and so they were to be dealt
withal, and other answer he could not get; which thing made the good
Gentleman to make a new resolution with himself, and to take that happy course
which he did to leave his country, and many great commodityes, which he
enjoyed therein, to enjoy the liberty of conscience, for salvation of his soul:
and so he both lived and died in voluntary banishment for confession of that
truth, which his Savior by occasion of Master Jewels falsehood, had reueyled
unto him.

The second example, which I remember of my own knowledge, M. Doctors Steuens.
is Master Doctor Steuens, a learned man yet alive, who being Secretary or
Chaplyn to Master Jewel (for I remember not well whether) and a forward man
in Protestant Religion at that time, espied certain false allegations in his
Masters book, whilst yt was yet under the print in London, whereof
aduertisinge him by letters (for that he supposed yt might be by oversight) the
other commanded notwithstanding the print to go forward, and passed it over
as it was, which this man seeing, that had a conscience, and sought the truth
indeed, resolved to take another way of findinge yt out: and having found yt
in the Catholic Church where only it was to be found, he resolved also to
follow yt, and so he did, and went voluntarily into banishment for the same,
where yet he lives unto this day in France, with good reputation both of
learning and godlynes.

The third example that I call to mind, is the worthy man before named Master
William Reynolds, M. William Reynolds.
who being first an earnest professor, and Preacher of Protestant Religion in
England, and much engaged among the Puritans in Northamptonshire (as he was
wont to tell) he fell in the end to read over Masters Jewels book, and did
translate some part thereof into Latin: but before he had passed half over, he
found such stuff, as made him greatly mislike of the whole Religion, and so he
leaving his hopes, and commodityes in England went over the sea into these
parts, and the last year of Iubiley, to wit, 1575. he came to Rome, and
brought that book with him, M. Jewels book pretented to the tribunal of
Inquisition in Rome.
and presented both himself and yt, to the Tribunal of Inquisition of his
own free motion and accord, where I guess the book remains still, if yt be
not burned: and himself after absolution received from his former errors
(which he with great humility and zeal required, and my self also at that
time spoke with him in that place) he returned into France, and Flanders, and
there lived many years with singular edification for his rare virtue and
learning; and how heartily indeed he was converted, may well appear by his
zealous wrytinge both in Latin and English in defense of Catholic Religion,
and in confutation of Protestant errors, which himself before had held for
verityes. And thus much of the falsehood of Master Jewels wrytyngs, whereof, he
that will see more, let him read Master Hardings return of untruths, but
especially yt would import him that has learning, leisure and commodity, to
examine the quotations themselves by a good library: but in this kind of false
dealinge, I can give Master Jewel a compagnion as good as himself, if not
exceedinge him, which is John Fox, who above all that ever wrote perhaps, may
be recorded for notorious in this behalf.

I have had occasion these This may appear by the Treatise of 3. conuersions
of England. set ^orth in three Tomes.
months past to peruse a great part of his last edition of Acts and
Monuments, printed the fifth time in the year 1596. and do find it so stuffed
with all kind of falsehood, and deceytfull manner of telling tales, as I could
never (truly) have believed yt, if I had not found yt by my own experience.
And I do persuade my self fully (notwithstanding all his hypocritical words
and protestations, which are more, and oftener repeated by him, then in all the
writers together, that I have read in my life) that there is scarce one whole
story in that huge volume, told by himself, except when he relates other men's
words out of records, and thereby is bound to the formality thereof, John Fox his
f^lsifyinge.
but that it is falsified, and perverted one way or other, either in the
beginning, middle, or end, by adding, cutting of, concealing, false
translating, wrong cyting, or cunning iugling and falsification, which I do not
speak for any tooth against the man, that is dead, and whom I never knew, but
in respect of truth only, and of so many deceived souls, as are in danger to
perish by his deludinge them. Nor when I speak of Master Fox his falsehoods,
do I make account of any errors or ouersights (though never so gross) that are
found in him, as to reckon some for Martyrs that were alive at the making of
his book: (for this he excuses in his later edition, in that he was deceived
by false informations) nor do I urge that others are made Calendar-martyrs by
him, whom he cannot gainsay, but that they were malefactors, and some of them
either See the story of Collyns and Co^bridge 10 and 11. Octobris part. 1.
mad or denied Christ himself, and yet places he them in his Calendar, for
Saints: These escaped (I say) are not here to be urged by me now, but rather
in another place. The points that I for the present accuse him of, are wilful
corruptions, and falsifications that cannot be excused: as among other things
(and for examples sake) when he recyteth any point in controversy of the
Catholics doctrine, he puts yt down commonly in plain contrary words and
sense, to that which he must needs know that they hold and teach, for so much
as their public books are extant in every man's hands to testify the same.

Of this kind, 30. ^falsifications of Fox in two leaves.
a certain learned student of divinity, brought to me of late 30. places taken
out of two only leaves of Fox his book, to wit, from the 12. to the 14. which
I looking upon found them all most evident by conference of the Catholic
authors alleged by the said student: and moreover, besides these thirty, I did
discover so many other plain falsehoods, and manifest wilful lies, in those
only two leaves, as might well Now they are found to be quadruple to wit
above ^20. Se part. 3. cap. 22. of the Treatise of 3. co^uersio^s of England.
double the former number; and I do offer to prove them one by one, if any
friend of John Fox will join issue with me upon this point. And then if by
Arithmetique a man will multiply these lies and falsifications of two leaves
only, with a thousand and more, which Fox has in this last volume, and will
add afterward to every two leaves so many falsehoods; the number will rise to
so huge an accoumpt, as were a shame to set down; and would much surpass
John Sley^ans Story in this kind (though he be the Protestants Protochronicler)
out of which an eleven thousand lies were only gathered by the Catholic
writers of Germany. Sleida^ a great liar.
And this is so much as for the present seems needful to be said about this
matter.

The end of the relation; there follows the defense.
A DEFENSE OF THE PRECEDENT RELATION against the shifts, calumniations, and
tergiuersations, as well of the L. Plessis himself, and some of his Hugonotes
in France; as of their Proctor O. E. in England.
The Preface, concerning the authority of the Acts set forth in France.
THE former relation being set down wholly and entirely as yt was printed in
the year 1600. (though somwhere more explaned, and toward the end made
s^orter) I am first to yield a reason in this place, why the passages or points
accused of falsehood that were handled in the conference ensue not here, as
they did in the former edition: whereof the cause is, for that those passages
indeed, were never seen or viewed by the relator himself, but added only by a
friend (as in the preface thereof is signified) according to his written copy
received from Paris; which copy, though it agree in truth and substance, with
the public Acts themselves, of that conference which afterward have been
authentically (...) sorth, yet for that the points are not so clearly laid
open, as some men perhaps would require, I have thought good to relate the same
again in this my defense, out of the said Acts themselves.

Concerning which Acts, you are to consider, that about some two or three
months after the said conference at Fountayne-bleau, The occasion of
publishinge the Acts.
that is to say in the month of August whereas this conference was made upon
the fourth of May in the same year 1600. the Catholics remayninge quiett and
content with the victory of truth, that had fallen out in their favor,
Monsieur Plessis and his Hugonote Ministers, having departed and broken up the
said conference, in the manner and sort which a little after you shall hear,
and findinge themselves extreemely gauled, with so dishonorable an event;
resolved for some remedy, to set forth a certain discourse in French without
name of the Author, the Title heerof was. A true discourse of the conference
held at Fountayne-bleau, Discourse veritab^e. etc. Acts fol. 10^.
etc. In which discourse they endeavored to handle three things, First
touching the history of matters passed therein, carpinge bitterly here and
theere both at the King, and Chancelour and other Assistants and Judges, as
disfauourable and partial in many points against them and their cause, which
is refuted by the defender (to wit and B. of Eureux himself) by the public
Acts and records of the conference and be the depositions of 200. persons as
presently you shall hear him affirm.

Secondly they divised, See Athanas. in his Apologyes^ and S. Aug^ (...)
Breuiculo.
upon better deliberation, new defenses for the points wherein they had been
condemned in the conference, as both the Arrians did after the Council of
Nice, wherein they were condemned, and the Donatists after their conference with
the Catholics at Carthage, and as every man condemned at our English bars
would do, if they might have replies allowed them, after their condemnations.
The third point of evasion used by them is, recrimination, that is to say, to
show that others also do falsify besides them, and have used fraud in their
quotations, which though yt were true (as in the particulars objected, is
showed by the defender that they are all false) yet were it no honorable
defense as each man will confess. And this is the sum of that discourse, and
the confutation thereof.

Now then for so much as Plessis, and his friends had published this false
discourse; yt was thought good by the K. and his Council upon request of the
Catholics, that the authentical Acts of the said conference, and all
particularityes passed therein, and taken fourth by several public notaryes
appointed for that purpose before hand, and one of them of the new religion,
should be examined anew, upon the depositions as well of the said notaryes, as
also of 200. more, and so published to the world, which was done, and the whole
presented to the K. by the B. of Eureux upon the 29. of August in the same
year 1600. which epistle, for that it is short and very substantial, I have
thought good to relate here for a foundation of all that is to ^ollow, and for
creditt of the Acts themselves. Thus then he writes to the King himself that
was present, and an eyewitness of all.

To the King.
Sire.
I would never have believed, The letters of the B of Eureux to the K. of
France 29. Aug. an. 1600.
that so public and renowned an action, as that of the conference at
Fountayne-bleau, represented in one of the most illustrious Theaters of the
world, and adorned with the presence of your Majesty, of so many Princes and
officers of the crown, Counselors of Estate, and other Lords and nobles of
great mark; could have bin called in question, or that any man could have been
found, that will dare to take upon him to pervert, or disguise the known
verity thereof, for which cause I have abstayned hitherto to write any thing of
that matter, least by publishinge my private testimony thereof, I should seem
to enfeeble the depositions of 200. persons of more authentical creditt then
mine own: but yet seeing now that Monsieur du Plessis contrary to the says
and witness of so many eyes and ears, as were there present, and contrary to
the testimony both of the mouth and pen of your Majesty, has cast forth into
the field a certain new discourse, wherein by his eloquence of Pe^icles, he
will needs go about to persuade those that were present at the Conference,
contrary to that which they saw, and those that were absent contrary to that
which so credibly they have heard: I have thought convenient by your Majesty's
permission, to lend him the pains of a few days labor for settinge forth the
true description of the fact it self, as yt passed, and thereby to dissolve all
his cunninge illusions, and inchauntments.

Wherefore, Sovereign Lord, I do offer heer^ unto your Majesty the simple
verity of the history as she lies in the Acts in her natural white habyt,
without colors or paintings, most humbly beseechinge your highness, that you
will vouchsafe to see the same, or cause yt to be seen and examined by such,
of whose wisdom and gravity your Majesty stands most assured; and if it
shall be found to be such, as here I do qualify yt, that then permission may be
given to publish the same for a faithful image and representation to
posterity, of that which there fell out. And if Monsieur du Plessis do hold
himself content with that which passed in this conference, he has in his
hands other 52. articles to be examined as the remnant of those 60. which were
agreed upon for the first Conference, from which he departed without bidding
any man fare well, and has had time enough since that to study better upon
them: I for my part am ready to give him the same exercise upon the said
articles, as I did upon the other 9. handled at Fountain bleau, and after
these ended to come to the other that do remain of the 500. falsifications,
which I have bound my self to prove against him; and so much the more
willingly would I pass to the examination of those other articles; by how much
more grave the authors are, and the matters more important, and his
deprauations more enormous then those we have handled as chosen out by
himself, and in the mean space I shall lift up my hands to heaven, and pray
almighty God to continue his grace toward your Majesty from better to better,
and to establish his Kingdom together with yours, etc. At Condie this 29. of
August. 1600.


This was the letter and request of the B. of Eureux for examination and
publishinge of the Acts; whereunto the K. agreeing, committed the reuew thereof
unto certain of his Counselle, which had been present at the said conference,
and findinge the same to be sincere, and true in all respects, as his Majesty
testifies, gave order for the publication thereof by his letters patents,
signed at Lions in France the 22. of December 1600.

Wherefore out of these acts, as most true and authentical, I shall frame this
my defense, though very breifely, against the extrauagant ouerlashings of O. E.
in his answer, who says and denies at his pleasure without authority,
wyttnesse, reason, or probability, as after shall appear by that which ensues.

WHAT IS CONTAINED MORE IN PRINT ABOUT THE fact it self of the Conference had
at Fountayne-bleau, then is comprehended in my former Relation,
CHAP. I.
FOR that my brief narration before recited, was founded only upon certain
letters sent from Paris to Rome presently after the conference had, as by
pervsing thereof you have seen, and my purpose also was to be very brief; I
could not set down so many particularityes, as these acts do now represent:
yet do I find that whatsoever I related before, is now confirmed again by
these acts, and diverse things added, whereof some principal I shall here touch
in few words, cytinge the leaf of the said Acts, wherein they may be read more
largely. The title of the said Acts is this: Acts de la conference tenue, etc.
Acts of the conference held between the L. Bishop of Eureux, and the L.
Plessis in presence of the King at Fountayne-bleau, the fourth of May 1600.
published by the permission and authority of his Majesty, etc. the same year
1600. And thus much of the title, now to the contents.

The first occasion of this combatt, The first occasion of the co^fere^ce Act.
fol. 1.
set down in these Acts is, that upon the 20. day of March anno 1600. a great
noble man of Normandy named, Lord Sainct-Mary du Mont, a Protestant at that
time, but soon after converted, meetinge with Monsiear Plessis at the lodginge
of the Lady Princess of Orange in Paris, told him how he was cried out of
every where about the falsifications found in his book lately printed against
the Mass, and that himself had seen some showed unto him by the B. of Eureux
which he could not solue. Heervpon Monsieur Plessis thinkinge himself touched
greatly in honor, did judge yt the best way to make a public Challenge to the
said B. of Eureux, which he wrote and gave abroad the very same day, and the L.
Sainct-Mary sent one of them presently to the B. whereunto he made answer,
acceptinge of his Challenge, upon the 25. of March, which letters before I Supra
cap. 3.
have alleged; and soon after the said Bishopp thinking yt convenient to
print and publish the same, did so, and sent a copy thereof to the King,
together with a letter of his own hand of the 28. of March, wherein amongst
other words he says thus: I do send unto your Majesty a Challenge of Monsieur
Plessis made about the examen of his allegations in his book against the
Mass, The B. of Eureux letter to the king. Act. fol. 5.
together with my answer to the same. I should be unworthy to serve so great
and noble a King, and of so high courage at your Majesty is, if I should
refuse such a Challenge, especially in a quarrel that may be ended without
blood, and tend much to the glory of almighty God, and to the salvation os him
that shall be overcome, and therefore I do most humbly beseech your Majesty to
permit this trial, etc.

Heervpon Monsieur Plessis understanding that the B. had written to the King,
he wrote also another to his Majesty to the same effect, and returned
likewayes an Supra cap. 4.
answer to the Bishop, shewinge himself willinge to go forward in the said
trial, but with diverse exceptions and diuersions, as in the said letter
appears, which we have related before. The King having received these
letters from both parties, and conferred the same with his Counsel, resolved
to permit the trial demanded, as also to be present theratt himself, and so
gave order to the L. Chancelour of France upon the second of April, to warn
the parties to prepare themselves, and to be ready for the beginning of the
next month with all provision necessary for that Trial.

In the mean space the Popes Nuntius that lay in Paris hearing of an
appointment for trial of matters in Religion, began to make some difficulty to
permit any such public act, appertayning to the universal cause of
Christendom, without license and approbation of the Sea Apostolic, and proof
of the persons that must dispute, alleaginge that it was a thing inconvenient
to lay the creditt of so great and general a cause of Religion upon the
learning of any particular man whatsoever, No general dispute of Religion to
be permitted without approbation of the supreme Pastors^ Acts fol. 8. 9. 10.
without necessity. But when he was answered by the B. and after by the K.
himself, and others, that their meaning was not to dispute of controversies,
but only to examine places cited by Monsieur Plessis whether they were truly
and faithfully calleaged or no? and that this should be set down and observed
as the first law of this conference, the Nuntius was satisfied, and so the day
was appointed, his Majesty commandinge expressly, that the conference should
be made with all sweetness and courtesy, etc.

So in the mean space diverse things were set in order necessary for that
conference, as namely for choosinge the judges on both sides, and principal
assistance without all partiality, to wit, learned, wise and grave men, to the
end that all might pass with indifferency, love, and charity, as much as might
be; and namely for the Catholics, was chosen the president of Tou, a great
learned man, upright and constant, and a near kinsman and friend to Monsieur
Plessis. The judges and deputyes chosen for ^oth sides.
The second was Monsieur Pitheu, advocate in the Court of Parliament of Paris a
man both grave and generally well learned, and a ^amiliar friend also to
Monsieur Plessis. The third was Monsieur le Feure Master of the Prince of
Condie. And on the other side were named the President Calignon, Chauncelour of
Navarre, and the Lord de Fresne Canaye president of the Chamber of Parliament
appointed for them of the new Religion in Languidoc, and Monsieur Cazaubon
Reader of his Majesty in Paris, all earnest, learned and iuditious Protestants.

The K. departed from Paris the 21. of April to Fountain bleau to hold there
the confere^nce, leaving order with the L. Chancelour, that the next week
followinge, he with the rest of the judges and deputyes should follow, and
bring the B. of Eureux with them; and so they did, arriving at Fountayne-bleau
the 27. of April, and the next day arrived also Monsieur Plessis, A new
Memorial of Plessis conteyninge 4. points for new delays.
but brought no books with him, saying that he had not been warned to do so,
and so the next day after that again, he presented a new petition to the King
in wrytinge by the Chancelour askinge 4. things, which his Majesty caused
presently to be conferred with the B. and to take his answer thereunto. The
first was Against the Mass, and thereby infamed the same, that yt might be
examined page by page, Act. page 13. 14. 15. 16.
and leaf by leaf, as before he had demanded, but the B. refused this for
the same reasons which he had alleged before in his Supra cap. 3.
letter to Monsieur Plessis, principally for that yt was but a refuge to draw
out time, he well knowinge that yt would never be ended.

page by page, and line by line as Plessis desired.

him 50. places the day before to provide himself for the first day, and so
50. the next day, for the second conference, and so forth for 10. days
together, until all the 500. were examined.

The fourth demand was, that the same Plessis commonly had handled only light
points in the first part of his book, whereon it was no reason to stand and
leese time, but rather as an accuser he might begin where he would, and that
Plessis was bound to answer him: yet for the last vpshott and to end all, he
offered the King, to give the whole 500. places presently into his Majesty's
hands in writing, and so to take them from him every day by 50. at once, to be
examined in ten days, as is before said, and after this he said, he would bynd
himself to remain a whole month with him in Paris or else where he should
think best, to examine the rest of the 4000.

After this upon the second day of May all the judges and comissaryes being now
arrived (except the President Calignon, that remained sick in Paris) Monsieur
Plessis gave up another Memorial to the King, requyring yet once again, that
the Bishop would give him in wrytinge the 500. places gathered against him, or
at least ways deliver them up into the hands of the Judges, Another delay
sought by petition of Monsieur Plessis to the king.
with commission that if this conference were broken of, they should deliver
them into the hands of the said Plessis, and that duringe the conference, they
should deliver him only 50. a day. Whereupon the King calling the Bishop into
his great gallery in the presence of the Chancelour, and of Monsieur Rosny
president of the finances, as also of the president of Tou, Cazaubon, and
others, asked him why he would not yield to this demand; whereunto he answered
as before, saying that this was but a new delay, thereby to get into his hands
the whole 500. places, and then to seek to answer them rather by wrytinge,
then by present conference, which he might break of by diverse occasions, Acts
fol. 21.
if once he were sure to have thereby the places into this hands, and therefore
he desired his Majesty to admit no further delays now, but that the
appointed trial might go forward, which being once ended, he promised most
faithfully, that he would stay to examine the whole book, as long as his
Majesty should appoint, or Plessis desire.

Whereupon the Lords present as well Protestants as Catholics said, that the
Bishopp had good reason in his answers to Plessis his demands, and thereupon
the Chancelour was commanded by the King to go and pronounce this arrest unto
the said L. Plessis, and that if he would not go forward, Monsieur Plessis
threatened by the king.
as he had promised, his Majesty would take another course, and proceed to the
examination of his book in his absence, Acts fol. 17. 18.
which message the Chancelour having done, Plessis answered, that he could not
accept of yt; whereat the Chancelour told him, that he should look well to his
creditt, for that if he should be found to be a falsifier in matters of
divinity, and his book condemned in his absence, yt would be a great shame
unto him, whereunto the other replayed, that he had rather yt should be
condemned unjustly in his absence, then in his presence, which answer being
carried to the K. by the Chancelour, his Majesty commanded that the examine
should begin that very afternoon, Acts fol. 22.
at three of the clock; but after upon other business that fell out, it was
deferred until the next day at 7. of the clock in the morning, which
determination of the K. being known, there was great dealing with his Majesty
by diverse of the pretended Religion, that the matter should not go forward, and
new articles and demands were proposed in the behalf of Monsieur Plessis; and
namely two noble men Protestants named Castelnau and Chambaret, as also the
president Fresne Canay chief deputy of their side, took in hand to deal
between the King, Plessis and the Bishop, and after many goings and commings,
messages, answers and replies, A new agreement about the conference.
it was agreed, that the B. should give him presently 60. places in writing of
the 500. promised, to prepare himself for the next day, which the Bishop did,
and out of those 60. Plessis chose 19. which seemed to him most defencible,
with which he went to the King, protesting as follows: Sir, of the 60. Acts
fol. 26.
passages sent me by the Bishop of Eureux, I have had time only to examine and
verify 19. and of these I will leese my honor, An hipocriticall protestation.
and life, if he find one false. I shall prove my self this day before your
Majesty, to be another manner of man, then he esteems me. These were his
words. Which being heard, the King sent presently for the Bishop, and gave him
the list of the 19. places, which Plessis had chosen to defend, which list when
the Bishopp had read, he told the King and the deputyes, that stood present
with him that he found deceatfull dealinge in every point, for that these 60.
places being gathered in have and tumultuously, A new shift of Plessis in
choosing out 19. places.
as his Majesty knew himself, in less then half an hours space by his
commandment, out of certain loose papers, where above 800. corruptions were
noted of Monsieur Plessis, and put together as they lay in order, he had
chosen to defend them, not as they stood in the Catalogue, but by particular
election, to wit the 27. 39. 44. 50. 53. 56. etc. And whereas there were most
of the ancient fathers named in this list as corrupted by him, and only two
schoolmen among the rest for example sake, to wit Scotus and Durandus, he had
gui^fully placed them in the first rank of his 19. placed to begin withal, as
captains of the rest thereby to disauthorize the whole conference, and to weary
the hearers, as though the chief moment of the trial had been about Scotus and
Durandus. The K. great moderation.
The K. answered that it should be good to give contentment to Plessis, and
those of his party, wherein it might be; for which cause he said further, as
before, that he desired this conference might pass with all quietness
possible, and that the Bishop should abstain as much as he could from using
the word false or falsification, and other such like, as might be offensive,
for that his intent was to pacify, and gain men by this trial, and not to
exasperate. And the same he said also unto the Lords deputyes there present,
requiring them, that if they should see any man wax into bitterness and
choler, they should restrain him, and seek to end all with good words and
substantial matter.

After dynner about one of the clock, the said conference was begone in
presence of his Majesty, and of a great number of the chief nobles of France,
which were long to name; for before the K. The K. and nobles how they sat in
the co^fere^ce.
satte the L. Chancelour and the deputyes of both parties before named; and at
his right hand satt the Archbishopp of Lions and sundry other Bishopps, and on
his left hand the 4. secretaryes of State, and behind the King sat the
Princes, namely the Dukes of Vaudemont, Nemeurs, Mercury, Dumayne, Niuers,
Elbeuse, Aignilon, Ianuile, and others, and after them again the officers of
the crown, Counselors of State. and others of the nobility, and about 200.
other hearers within the chamber, and above 500. in a gallery and garden
without, expecting the resolution from passage to passage, whereof there were
many Protestants and diverse Ministers of the new Keligion.

All being set, the L. Chancelour made first a brief speech, confirmed
afterward by the King himself, that the meaning of this meeting was to try out
the truth of certain allegations, that were called in controversy in the L.
Plessis book, and not to dispute of any article of Religion at all; to which
effect also the Bishop had a brief speech, alleging the example of Eugenius
Archbishop of Carthage, Vict. de Vtic. lib. 2. de Persetut. Vand.
who being required by Hunnericus King of the Vandalls in Africa, to dispute
with the Arrians, he refused the same without consent of other Bishopps, and
especially, of the B. of Rome as head of all. Monsieur Plessis also, made a
very short preface, saying that as he had written his books with intent to do
God service for the reformation of his Church, and would think himself happy,
L. Plessis speech and protestation.
if he could help any thing therein: so was he so far of from all intention of
wilful falsifyinge, that if he knew his right hand to have done yt, he should
be the first to burn the same. He made mention again, and showed grief,
Acts fol. 31.
that 4. thousand places should be noted, as falsified by him in his book, and
finally protested, that howsoever it succeeded with him, his cause was
particular, and touched not the reformed Churches in France, which were before
him, and would be after him, etc.

The B. repeated again the matter of 4000. places corrupted, and offered to
stand unto yt, and to verify them as well, as those 500. new agreed upon, and
repeated again breifely the whole story of this action, and how guilfully
Plessis had proceeded in cullinge out 19. places only of 60. offered him, and
of these had put in the first rank Scotus and Durand two schoolmen, about the
controversy of the Sacrament, The Bishopps real dealinge.
leaving out other places of S. Cyprian, S. Cyrill, S. Chrysostom, and other
ancient Fathers, objected to have bin corrupted by him in the very same
controversy of the real presence amongst the number of these three score:
which fraud, to the end the judges and deputyes might see and behold, he laid
down upon the table that stood before them the whole Catalogue of the said 60.
places sent the day before to Plessis: which being done, the King commanded the
four secretaryes of the crown, to write only the conclusions and judgments
that should be given, and not the whole speeches, for yt would be ouerlonge.
and so the conference began, the B. saying at the opening of the first book
Domine labi^ mea aperies. and os meum annunciabit laudem tuam. Monsieur Plessis
also prayed briefly with his hatt before his face, etc.

OF NINE PLACES EXAMINED IN THIS FIRST DAYS conference, and how they were all
judged by sentence of the deputyes to have been corrupted by Monsieur Plessis.
CHAP. II.
IN this first days conference, which endured 6. hours, there could be
examined only 9. places of the 19. which Plessis had chosen to defend, of which
nine also the first two by his art and fraud, (as in the former Chapter has
been seen) were of 2. schoolmen, or scholasticall writers, Scotus, and
Durandus, which being only named for example sake by the B. of Eureux in his
catalogue of 60. places, (but yet after many more important then they of the
ancient Fathers) which Plessis thought good to thrust back, How Scotus and
Durandus came to be the first in ^^iall.
all the said ancient Fathers and namely S. Cyprian, S. Cyrill of Jerusalem, S.
John Christostome and others cited in the same controversy, and many more in
other questions, and to advance forward to the first and second places of
trial the said Scotus and Durandus, thinking thereby partly to weary his
Majesty and the audience, and to make the conference loathsome and contemptible,
by so base a beginning; partly also presuming, that he might more easily trifle
out the time in wranglinge about these, as he did a whole hour about the first
place only of Scotus, and would have done the whole day, if he might have been
permitted, but the Bishop discovering this fraud unto the auditorye, showed
withal, that his deceyt and false dealing was all one in corrupting mean
authors as the best, and greatest, and therefore that it was not so much to be
considered by the judges what the writer was that was falsified, but how much,
and with how great fraud he is falsified. And with this they passed to the
particulars.

The first place examined out of Scotus about the real presence.
This preamble being made, the B. began to read out of Plessis book page 869.
according to his forsaid edition in 4. printed at Rochell by Hierome Hautin,
these words out of Scotus, about the Sacrament of the Altar. Act. fol. 34.
John Duns (says he) called Scot, almost 100. years after the Council of
Lateran, was not afraid to call in question, if the body of Christ be really
contained under the species, or accidents (of bread) and he disputes that it
is not, and his arguments are, for that the quantity does not permit yt, nor
yet the locality and circumscription annexed to the nature of a true body, such
a one as Christ had, etc. Thus he. And then for proof he quoteth in the
margent. Scotus upon the 4. book of Sentences did. 10. quaest. 1.

Out of which place the B. did infer two wilful and malicious deceyts of
Plessis, Two impostures.
the first that he would make his Reader believe, that Scotus, and the rest of
the Schoolmen when they propose any matter to be disputed to and fro, do doubt
of the truth thereof, which is a most absurd imposture, for so he might say
also, that they doubt whether God be God, or whether God can create any thing,
for that they putt this question. Scot. 2. sent. did. 1. q. 2.
Vtrum sit possibile Deum aliquid creare? whether it be possible for God to
create any thing of nothing? and presently yt ensues by way of objection:
Videtur quod non: yt seems that yt cannot be: But after all arguments ended,
they resolve that yt is so, to wit, that there is a God, and can create things
of nothing, and do solue all the arguments alleged by themselves to the
contrary. And so does Scotus in this matter settinge down his full
determination in these words: Dic^ quod corpus Christi esse ibi vere, realiter,
Scot. in 4. sent. did. 10. q. 1.
est simpliciter de substantia fidei: I do say that it is simply a substantial
article of our faith, to believe that Christ's body, is truly and really there,
under these accidents. And he proves the same by two places of scripture, to
wit Math. 26. where Christ says: This is my body, and John. 6. where he
says: My flesh is truly food. This then is the first imposture which Plessis
is proved to have used in alleadginge Scotus against his own meaning,
discourse, and resolution.

The second is, for that he says, that Scotus arguments against the real
presence, were the quantity, locality, and circumscription annexed to a true
body; whereas these are not arguments of Scotus, but of heretics refuted by
Scotus, as appears by himself in the same places, where he adds also these
words: If heretics would expound the forsaid words of Christ: Scot. ibid.
This is my body, to be understood figuratively, yt is quite against the
intention of our Savior. These 2. corruptions then, being so manifestly laid
forth out of this first place of Scotus, and showed that they could not be of
ignorance, but of wilful malice to deceive the reader, The first shift of
Plessis to defend his impostures.
Plessis was sore pressed, but yet had divised a certain way of some kind of
escape, if yt may be called an escape, and not rather a greater ^ntanglement,
which was to say, that he affirmed not simply that Scotus doubted of the real
presence, but rather of the manner of Christ's body being there, to wit, by
Transubstantiation, and for that respect he named the Council of lateran in
his speech, which Council first of all had determined the said article of
Transubstantiation: But the Bishopp showed this to be a very slight evasion,
Council. Lateran. ^an. 1.
for that the Council of Lateran determined as well the article of the real
presence, as of Transubstantiation, as appears in the said Council, and that
Scotus was as resolute in the one as in the other. And finally that Plessis
words before recyted are plain enough without a comentary, that Scotus durst
to call into question whether the body of Christ were really in the Sacrament
or no, under the ^ormes of bread and wine, yea and to dispute that yt was not,
which words do speak plainly, as you see, of the reality. So as these shifts,
are but a new abusing of the Reader.

And as for the places he would seem to allege out of Scotus, as somewhat
soundinge against Transubstantiation, yt was told him first, that yt was from
the purpose, for so much as his citation of Scotus was against the real
presence; and secondly that these other places made no more for him, then the
former, but wholly against him, and so yt was proved by readinge and examininge
publicly the said places, wherein there was an hour spent. And the Bishopp
perceauinge that Plessis desired to draw out the time, urged the deputyes to
give sentence upon the falsisication of the places alleged, which they
differred to do, until the next place of Durand was examined, for that they
understood the case was in a manner all one, or much like in both schoolmen:
And so yt was in deed, The sente^^ce against Plessis.
for that in both of them you shall hear the sentence given afterward, that
Plessis had taken the objection for the resolution, which was a great a
disgrace, Act. fol. 52.
if you mark yt, as could be to such a man, that presumed to understand what
he read.

The second Place examined out of Durandus about Transubstantiation.
The next place of the 19. chosen by Monsieur Plessis to be examined, was out
of Durandus, Plessis his words as they ly in his book page 870. are rhese:
Durandus called by our Sorbonists the mostre solute Doctor, Act. fol. 46.
has these words in his 4. book upon the sentences did. 11. To the contrary
(says he) supposinge the substances of bread and wine (after the consecration)
do remain; there ensucth thereof but one difficulty, and this neither very
great nor indissoluble, to wit, that two bodies remain together (under the
same accidents) but if you put the contrary (to wit that there is
Transubstantiation) there ensue more difficultyes, that is to say, how those
species or accidents (without their substance) can nourish or be corrupted, and
how any thing can be generate thereof, seeing all generation is of matter or
substance, and therefore it seems that we ought to stick rather to the first
way, (to wit against Transubstantiation, etc. So he.

Out of this place the B. of Eureux did argue Plessis of the same falsity and
deceytfull dealinge as before in Scotus, A dishonorable imposture.
or rather more plain and evident, and consequently more wicked and
dishonorable to him, for that all these words here alleged out of Durandus
are not his own, but the words of others that do object the same, which he
dissolueth afterward, when he has put down his own sentence in these words:
Primum est dicendum, Purand. sent. li. 4. did. 11. q. 1.
quod substantia panis and vini conuertuntur in substantiam corporis Christi.
First we must say and hold (notwithstanding the former objections and
arguments to the contrary) that the substance of bread and wine, are turned
into the substance of the body of Christ. This is his resolution, quite
contrary, to that which Plessis would have him seem to hold. And then having
set down this resolution according to the common faith of the Catholic
Church, he passes to answer the former objection, saying to the former
argument to the contrary (about difficultyes): we must answer, that in those
things that appertain unto faith, we must not always choose that which
seems (to humayne sense) to have less difficultyes; Durand. ibid.
but we must hold that which is consonant to the sayings of holy Fathers, and
to the tradition of the Church. So Durand.

Which words being recyted in the hearing of all, you must imagine in what a
pitiful plight poor Plessis was, to see one man look upon another, and
either smile or byte their lips at such manifest gross trumpery; but yet
necessity made him take heart, and to adventure a new evasion, saying, that
albeit this were but an objection in Durand, yet it seemed to him such an
objection, as might hold the place of a resolution, if the authority and
decision of the Church had not withheld him. And for proof of this, he would
needs cite diverse other places out of Durand, where he says; that if God would
he could have made his body to be in the Sacrament, together with the
substance of bread without Transubstantiation, and that yt should be temerity
to hold the contrary: but the Bishop refuted this presently as impertinent
matter, and nothing to the purpose to help his cause: For albeit Durand did
hold, that God out of his omnipotency might have appointed yt so if he would,
that both substances, (to wit both of his body and bread) should have been
together; yet did he it not so de fact^, as Durand proves out of his own
words, when he said of bread, this is my body, etc. Math. 19.
It was noted also that in the end of the first text alleged by Plessis out of
Durand, the words in vulgar were: Therefore the first way is to be followed,
whereas the true words of Durand in Latin were, Plessis taken in two falfityes
at once.
ergo (vt videtur) primum est eligendum: therefore (as yt seems) this first
way is rather to be chosen: so as Plessis of purpose left out the words ( vt
videtur) that yt might not seem (as yt was) an objection, but rather a
resolution, which was another trick of unfaithful dealinge.

Well then after all textes read at large, and examined by the judges, when
Plessis would have cauilled yet further and drawn out the time, as he did in
the former place of Scotus; the B. desired the K. that the law of this trial
might be observed, and sentence given upon the matter yt self already
proposed, without further excursions, whereupon the King willed the deputyes to
give sentence, which they did by the Chancelour, after he had asked every man's
voice in particular, and the sentence was in these words in French. The
sentence of the first two places.
Que le Sieur de Plessis auoit pris la objection pour la resolution. That the
L. Plessis had taken the objection (in Scotus and Durand) for the resolution.
And this was the end of this second trial, with shame enough, you may imagine,
to him that professed more learning, then to be deceived in such a matter, if
he had not listed to have been both deceived and to deceive.

The third place examined out of S. Chrysostom, about Prayer to Saints.
After the former two places of Scotus and Durand dispached, Acts of the conf.
fol. 52.
the third chosen by Monsieur Plessis, to be defended, was out of S.
Chrysostom, in his homily, upon the first of Saint Paul's epistles to the
Thessalonians, where handling those words of Jeremy the Prophet: Ierem. 15.
If Moses and Samuel stood before me, my affection should not be unto this
people, etc. Plessis says, that whereas the Papists do allege this saying of
the Prophett to prove prayer unto Saints, S. Chrysostom draws a quite
contrary conclusion from thence, his words are these page 537. of his book
against the Mass: S. Chrysostom does draw from these words of the Prophett a
quite contrary conclusion, Chrysostom. ^ hom prima in 1. (...). Thessal.
to wit that we must not rest our selves upon the prays of Saints, but must
work our salvation (as S. Peter says) in fear and trembling. etc.

Out of which allegation of S. Chrysostom the Bishopp did show, and plainly
declare, that Plessis had depraved S. Chrysostomes meaning, for that he did
not infer any such conclusion at all against prayer to Saints, but manifestly
the contrary in these words in the very same place, saying for his conclusion
after a long discourse: These things then being so (as we have showed) we must
neither neglect the prayer of Saints for us, Chrysostom. ibid.
nor yet putt all our hope therein, for that the one would deprive us of great
succors, the other would make us idle and neglect. Wherefore we must pray to
them, to make intercession, and hold up their hands for us, and we of our part
must live virtuously.

These are the words of S. Chrysostom truly alleged, which do evidently show,
that Plessis did notoriously corrupt both S. Chrysostom his words and meaning
in his forsaid allegation: Two impostures of Plessis.
his words, in that he affirms S. Chrysostom to say: that we must not rest
our selves upon the prayers of Saints: which he does not say, but that, we must
not put all our hope therein. Secondly he leaves out those words of S.
Chrysostom, where he exhorts us to pray unto Saints, and to live virtuously.
He corrupts also S. Chrysostomes meaning, for that he enforces upon him the
quite contrary conclusion, to that which he makes, to wit, that we must not
pray to Saints at all, whereas S. Chrysostom says, we ought to pray to Saints,
and not to deprive our selves of so great a succor.

Here Plessis was in a great Bracke again, and could not tell which way to
wynd himself out, yet two leapes he gave, but neither did serve his turn.
Two vain leaps of Plessis to get out of the bracke.
The first was, by saying, that his intention was not to set down Saint
Chrysostomes words formally as they lay in the text, for that his discourse was
long, and endured for diverse pages, but only to put down the some thereof. But
this was beaten back by the B. asking him first, why then he set down those
words in a different letter, as proper words of S. Chrysostom? Secondly, why
he left out Saint Chrysostomes true words before recyted, and put in other of
his own, of a contrary sense? Thirdly why he changed, and falsified Saint
Chrysostomes whole meaning, drifte, and conclusion, as has been showed; and
finally he told him, that albeit S. Chrysostomes discourse were large in
expounding the forsaid verse of Jeremy the Prophett; yet was his conclusion
about praying to Saints very short, and uttered in no more words then before
was set down; so as this helped him nothing.

His second skip therefore was to say, that S. Chrysostom in this place spoke
of prayinge to live Saints only, and not to dead Saints, but the Bishop
replied, that albeit this were true (as it appears evidently to be false by
the examples of David and Job, whom Saint Chrysostom there names) yet that
this relieved him and his falsehood nothing at all: For if he spoke of live
Saints only, then could not Plessis draw an argument from that his speech
against the Catholic use of praying to Saints desceased; Plessis concluded by
the B. and sentence given against him.
and if he spoke of dead Saints, or both of dead and living, then does he
confirm the Catholic use, and not impugn the same, as Plessis would have
made his reader believe. And howsoever yt be, the Bishopp urged, that he was
here convinced of diverse falsehoods, and so required sentence, whereupon the
judges commanded two several Greek textes of S. John Chrysostom to be
brought of diverse impressions, the one at Heidelberge, the other at Verona, and
conferringe them together, found the Fathers words to be just as before they
have been set down by us, and falsified by Plessis in his book, and therefore
after every man's opinion required, and conferred among themselves, the
Chancelour pronounced in all the deputyes names in these words: Que le Si^ur du
Plessis auoit obmis en ce passage ce que y deuoit estre mis. that is to say:
That the Lord Plessis had left out in this passage, that which ought to have
been put in: which in effect, is to call him a falsifier in good and honorable
terms. And so much of this place.

The fourth place examined out of S. Chrysostom, about prayer in like manner
to Saints.
The fourth place was another of S. Chrysostom about the same argument of
praying to Saints cyted falsely by Plessis in the 574. page of his book
against the Mass, where he makes S. Chrysostom to speak thus against
praying to Saints: Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 5. in Math.
( says he) seems to have attempted the overthrow of this abuse assaultinge
the fundament thereof by all occasions, for so much as he saw, that the people
did think more how to help themsel^es by suffrages of others, then how to
amend their lives; wherefore he did endeavor to batter this opinion; saying we
are much more assused by our own suffrages then by the suffrages of others;
and God does not so soon grant our salvation at the prayers of others, Acts
fol. 58.
as to our own prayers, for so he took pity of the woman of Cananaea, and
gave pardon to the adulteress, and paradise to the thief without being moved
with intercession of any advocate or mediator, etc.

Out of which words, besides that which was before objected upon the precedent
place, the B. accused Monsieur Plessis, that he had dealt fraudulently also in
cytinge these words, for that he had cut of the very next words ensuing, which
made against him, and declared plainly S. Chrysostomes whole meaning, to wit:
And this we say (says S. Chrysostom) Chrysostom. ibid.
not to the end we should not make our prayers or supplications unto Saints,
but that we should not thereby become slothful in doing also for our selves. To
which charge Monsieur Plessis answered, that Chrysostom in this place did not
speak of dead Saints, but of living Saints, for proof whereof, he alleged
certain coniecturall reasons, Two or three scapes of Plessis stopped by the B.
which the B. having refuted, as both false and impertinent to the matter, he
urged him that this refuge, if yt were true that S. Chrysostom spoke only of
living Saints, yt was against himself, and proved two absurdityes in steed of
one, the first, that he deduced a conclusion out of S. Chrysostom against
prayinge to dead Saints, whereas the Father spoke of living Saints only: the
second, that he cut of from the text, the principal words that should have
declared the Fathers meaning. To this replied Plessis, that he brought not
this place of Chrysostom against praying to Saints, but against them that
would help themselves by the suffrages of others.

Upon this answer the K. himself began to speak, saying, that the word
others, was a general word, that might be extented as well to the dead, as to
the live, and that Plessis should remember, that he had said a little before in
cyting S. Chrysostom, that Chrysostom attempted the overthrow of this abuse.
The K. took the argument.
And then he demanded of him what abuse he meant, if he meant not the abuse of
praying to Saints desceased, as impugned by S. Chrysostom: which instance of
his Majesty was confirmed by the B. cyting diverse places of Plessis book,
where by name he avouches S. Epiphanius and S. Chrysostom in the Greek
Church to be adversaries of prayinge to Saints, Acts fol. ^o.
which yet now he would not stand unto. But Plessis replied; that he did not
allege S. Chrysostom in this place, Another poor shift of Plessis.
as directly impugninge prayer to Saints deceased, but indirectly, in that he
says, that we must not put our confidence in the meritts of other men. Whereto
the Bishop answered, that S. Chrysostom said not absolutely, that we must not
rely at all upon other men's prayers, but that we must not so rely, as we be
negligent of our own parts; which speech does neither directly nor indirectly
impugn prayer to Saints, especially being joined with his plain declaration
before mentioned, cut of by Plessis.

Wherefore after diverse such vain, and impertinent replies of Monsieur Plessis,
the B. required sentence to be given; whereupon the texts alleged being openly
read, both in Greek and Latin of diverse editions printed both in Paris and
Basil, and one Greek copy of hand wrytinge out of the Kings library, the
words were found as before has been cyted, and sentence was given by the
consent of all deputyes in the same words that the other was before, to wit,
Acts fol. 64.
that the L. Plessis had left out in this passage, that which he ought to have
putt in. And with this ended their examen of the fourth place, and the blushing
remained to Plessis as you may imagine, seeing all his Protestants to hang
down their heads at this success.

The fifth place examined out of S. Hierome about the same argument, of prayer
to Saints.
After the two forsaid places of S. Chrysostom discussed, as you have heard,
there came in order a place of S. Hierome upon Ezechiell, cyted by the said
Plessis in the 583. page of his book against prayer to Saints, Hier. in Ezech.
lib. 4. cap. 14.
and put as yt were for an antidotum to other sayings of S. Hierome in favor
of prayings to Saints, in his books against Vigilantius. The place is cyted in
Plessis book in these words: But Saint Hierome ( says he) in his
commentaryes, when he was out of choler and grief, did write thus: If we have
confidence in any one, let yt be in God only, for yt is written, that the man
is cursed that confideth in men; albeit they be Saints, and albeit they be
Prophets, yet must we not confide in them, nor yet in the Princes of the
Church, who though they be just, yet shall they deliver but their own souls,
and not those of their children.

Out of this place the B. objected, that Plessis had alleged these words with
fraud and corruption, leaving out the clause which made all clear, and utterly
marred Plessis markett, to wit, Si fuerint negligentes, if their children be
negligent, then cannot Saints save them: filios autem and filias (says S.
Hierome) quos in Ecclesia genuerim, si ^uer^t negligentes, saluare non
poterunt. That is, Saints cannot save their sons and daughters, whom they
have be gotten, by their preachinge in Gods Church, if the said children be
negligent on their parts. And the same very exception or restriction had S.
Hierome repeated in other words before in the same Chapter, Hier. ibid.
saying: Nec principes nos poterunt liberare, nisi filiorum suerit assensu^,
and illorum obsecrationes suis conatibus iuuerint. The very cheifest and
principal Saints of the Church cannot deliver us, except we their children do
give our consent thereunto, and except we do aid, by our own good endeauours,
their prayers made for us. Which two clauses she winge evidently, that S.
Hieromes former speech was but conditional, and not absolute, when he said,
that we must not put our trust in others, (even as that of S. Chrysostom was
before) yt follows that the leauinge out of these clauses that conteyne the
principal point of all the speech, was wilful fraud, and falsification,
endeauouringe to make Saint Hierome to speak against himself, about prayinge
to Saints, which he never meant.

Here now Plessis being strayned, as before, ran to his ordinary shift, of
saying, that S. Hierome spoke not of dead Saints, but of living only, which
though it were evidently false, as the Bishop showed by other plain words of
S. Hierome in the same place, and by Plessis himself, VVilfull false dealinge
against S. Hierome.
that cyted this place as an anti^otum to other places of his, against
Vigilantius, where Plessis himself confessed, that he talks of prayer to
Saints deceased: besides all this (I say) whereby this refuge was evidently
known to be but a shift, the Bishop pressed him most with this; that of what
sort of Saints soever S. Hierome speaks here, quick, or dead, he speaks
not simply or absolutely, that they cannot save us by their prayers, but with
this express condition, twice repeated by him, and left out by Plessis: If we
be negligent of our own parts; or as S. Chrysostom said before; if we rely
wholly upon them, and do nothing of our selves.

Wherefore he prayed the judges to give sentence concerning this place, as of
the former; whereupon Plessis began to cavil again, Acts fol. 69.
and to say, as he did in the former passage of S. Chrysostom, that he
alleged not this place of Saint Hierome directly against Saints deceased, but
indirectly. But the B. proved that neither directly, nor indirectly this place
of S. Hierome made any thing against prayers to Saints, but rather for the
same. For he that says, that prayinge to Saints avails not him, that is
negligent of his own part, signifies in effect, that if he be diligent, he
may be helped thereby, which is S. Hieromes doctrine against Vigilantius, as
Plessey confesses, though he says that he was then in choler but now out of
choler, when he spoke the contrary as he would have him to seem.

After this, Plessis leapt to another place of S. Hierome in his co^mentaryes
upon S. Paul's epistles to the Corinthians, Another shift of Monsieur Plessis.
where he says: That Saints shall not be able to help at the day of judgment,
etc. Which the Bishop expounded, and granted, for that then there shall be no
more place for prayer or intercession, but every one to receive his reward: yet
he added further, that this place of S. Hierome, was brought into examination
out of the order of those 19. that Plessis had chosen, and that if he would be
content, to continue the examination of this one page of Saint Hierome, An
offer to prove 4. new falsifications against Plessis in one page.
whence this place is drawn, the B. offered to bynd himself to show 4.
notorious falsityes committed by him, in this one page: but Plessis refused
this combat, and said that he would not interrupt the order set down already
for examination of his 19. places aforesaid; but yet both the King and rest of
the auditory, did well mark and note this offer made by the Bishopp and diverse
times repeated by him, and that the other durst not accept thereof. Wherefore the
judges being called upon again, to give sentence, conferred together, and
with one consent gave this verdict. Acts fol. 97.
Que le passage auoit deu estre mis entier. That this place or passage on S.
Hierome ought to have been set down by Monsieur Plessis wholly, and entyre, as
yt lay in the author, and not mangled or dismembered, as it was found to be. And
you may imagine how Plessis blushed at this sentence.

The sixth place examined, out of S. Cyrill, about honouringe the holy Cross.
The sixth place was out of S. Cyrill cited by Monsieur Plessis page 223. of his
book in these words: S. Cyrill Cyril. l. 6. contra Julian. Apostat.
answered the Emperor Julian when he reproached Christians for honor done
unto the cross, that Christians did not give adoration nor reverence to the
sign of the Cross. So says Plessis: But the Bishopp charged him, that the
last words of this sentence, to wit, that Christians did not give adoration
nor reverence to the sign of the Cross, were not in S. Cyrill, and willed him
to show them. Plessis answered, that in deed they were not S. Cyrills own
words, and therefore he did not put them in a different letter of quotation, but
yet that the sense of them was to be found in S. Cyrill. The B. replied, that
neither the words nor sense were there, and yet that Plessis page 89. The
firstly proved against Plessis.
of his book against the Mass had set down the same thing as of S. Cyrills
own words in a different letter of quotation thus: Cyrill likewise reproached
by Julian the Emperor does answer flattly, that the Christians did neither
adore, nor honor the sign of the Cross. So as heer^ you see not only these
words alleged as S. Cyrills in a different letter, but also often urged by
Plessis, that for so much as he could not bring forth the words, at least he
should show the sense thereof in S. Cyrill.

Plessis answered, that the sense might be gathered out of Cyrill, A frivolous
objection of Plessis answered, and returned upon himself.
in that Julian the Apostata, against whom he wrote, obiectinge unto him, that
the Christians adored the Cross of Christ, Cyrill did not answer that it was
true, which of likelihood he would have done, if in those days Christians in
deed had worshipped the Cross. But to this the Bishop replied, that the
consequence was not good, for so much as Christian writers of that time, were
wont to go very reseruedly, in uttering the points and misteryes of our faith
unto paga^s, though here in effect Cyrill did confess yt, as presently shall be
showed, for that he yeldeth the reason why they did yt. But on the other side
yt is a far better argument to say: Julian the Apostata objected that
Christians adored the Cross of Christ, and painted the images thereof upon
their foreheads, and upon their doors, and S. Cyrill denies yt not, but
endeavors to give a reason, why they did so; Ergo it is more probable, that
Christians did worshipp the Cross of Christ indeed in those days.

And here the King took up the argument again saying, The K. reply against
Plessis.
that yt was very probable, that Julian would never have objected this to the
Christians, if they had not done so indeed, for otherwise he should have been
laughed at by all. Which speech of his Majesty the B. confirmed, by showing
how learned an Emperor Julian the Apostata was, and how he had been brought up
from his youth in Christian Religion, and could not be ignorant in so public a
matter as this; and moreover (said the Bishop) if yt were true, that S. Cyrill
did reprehend the Emperor Julian, for charginge falsely Christians to worshipp
the Cross, yt is not likely, that other Christian Emperors followinge soon
after, as Justinian and others, would in their laws have called the same,
Adorandam and honorandam vere crucem, Justin. Imper. in Authentde Monachis. Si
quis aedi^icari.
the Cross that is truly to be honored and adored Which mention of Emperors
being heard by the King, he required presently that the books should be
brought, and the places read openly, which was done out of the constitutions of
Justinian printed at Geneua, and the words were read there as the B. had
alleged them; and the same showed out of diverse other authors more ancient
then Justinian, as Rusticus Diaconus, Acts fol. 72.
Sedulius presbyter, Athanasius, and S. Chrysostom.

Which being done, Plessis came out with another objection of Minutius Foelix,
who answeringe to one Cecilius, a pagan, said, Cruces nec colimus, nec optamus.
We do neither worshipp nor wish for Crosses; but the Bishop showed this to be
but a rest, and quite against himself. A deceytfull reply of Plessis turned
upon himself.
For that the pagan having objected to Christians, that they honored Crucem,
whereby he understood a gibbett or gallows, said, Christiani adorant and
merentur Crucem, Christians do adore, and do deserve the gibbett, in which
sense Minutius answered him: Nos Cruces nec colimus, nec optamus, we do neither
worship nor wish Crosses in your sense, that is to say, gibbetts. And all did
maruayle at Plessis, that he would bring in this deceatfull objection: out of
which notwithstanding the Bishop inferred, that except the Pagan Cecilius had
known in those days, that Christians worshipped Crosses, he would never have
objected the same so confidently against them, either in jest, or in earnest.

And this being done the B. demanded judgment upon the place, but there stepped
up one Monsieur Mercier, A reply of Monsieur Mercier the Protestants secretary.
one of the secretaryes of the conference for the Protestants side, saying
that by the text of S. Cyrill there lyinge on the table, before them, yt was
manifest, that he objected unto Julian extremam imperitiam, extreme ignorance
or lack of skill in Christian affairs, for obiectinge to them that they
honored the Cross, and made the sign thereof upon their foreheads and doors,
which by likelihood he would never have done, if Christians had used to do so
indeed. Whereunto the Bishop answered, that S. Cyrill did not object ignorance
about the fact, and custom of honouringe the Cross, and making the sign
thereof, as is aforesaid, for that this thing was so notoriously known, as yt
had been rather lack of wit or shame, then skill in Julian to object yt, if no
such use had been: but S. Cyrill accused him of ignorance, and folly for his
illation made thereupon, which was, that Christians were miserable and
contemptible thereby, to wit, for yelding so much honor to the sign of a
cross or gibbett, so odious to them as nothing more. And this to be his
meaning is plain by S. Cyrills whole discourse, which was there read both in
Greek and Latin in these words: Furthermore (says he) Julian calls us
miserable, Cyril. l. 6. contra Julian.
who are so careful always to sign our houses and foreheads with the sign
of the precious Cross, but we shall easily demonstrate unto him, that such
kind of speeches do proceed from wicked cogitations, and do savor of extreme
ignorance, etc. Which text being pondered, The sentence against Plessis.
and the judges having conferred among themselves, this sentence was given upon
the place of S. Cyrill before alleged. Acts fol. 76.
Que le passage allegue par le Sieur du Plessis ne se trouoit point dans S.
Cyrille. That the passage alleged here by the L. Plessis out of S. Cyrill is
not found at all in Cyrill. Of which sentence you see the consequence that
ensues, to wit, that Plessis had made or divised yt of himself.

The seventh Place examined out of the Code or Imperial laws, about
paintinge or caruings the sign of the Cross.
After the place of S. Cyrill examined and found falsified about worshipping
the cross (as you have heard) there was brought into trial, another place
concerning the same argument, about a law of the two Emperors Theodosius, and
Valens cyted by Plessis in the 223. page of his book, against paintinge or
caruing the image of the cross in these words: What will these men say, (to
wit the Catholics) of the Emperors Theodosius and Vale^s, that prohibited
expressly by edict, this custom of painting or caruing images of our savior.
For so much (say they) as we have care of nothing more then of the service of
God, we forbidd all sorts of persons to make the sign of our Savior Jesus
Christ, either in colors, stone, or other matter, either to engraue paint or
cut the same, but rather whersoeuer any such thing shall be found, that yt be
taken away under pain of grievous punishment. So cyteth Plessis the words of
the law. But the B. of Eureux showed that this cytation is full of wilful
fraud, and corruption, for that among other things it leaves out the words
humi and in solo, which signify on the ground: which words conteyne the very
life and sense of all the whole text, and law alleged, and do declare the true
meaning of the lawmakers therein, for that the true text of the law in the code
lies thus:

Cum sit nobis cura diligens, etc. Cod. Lib^^tit. 8. nemini licere. etc.
Whereas our care is diligent in all things to defend the Religion of almighty
God: we command that it shall not be lawful, for any man to carue or paint
the sign of our Savior Christ, either on the ground, or in any stone or
marble lyinge upon the ground, etc. Which ordination the Bishopp did show to
have been made by the Emperors, An egregious corruption.
for more honor of sacred images of our savior, to the end that they should
not be defiled with men's feet, as appears by the same prohibition made and
confirmed not long after by the Council of Constantinople, Council.
Constantinop. in Trullo. cap. 73.
named In Trullo, where it is said: we command that all the figures of the
Cross, that are made upon pauiments be taken away or defaced, to the end that
the triumphant sign of our victory, be not unworthily defiled by men's feet.

And at this sore charge Monsieur Plessis seemed much ashtonished, and had no
other refuge, but to say that he alleged the text as he found yt alleged by
Petrus Crinitus: but the Bishopp replied, that it had been convenient for a man
of Plessis quality and profession in learning, before he had written and
printed this thing, and especially before he had so insolently asked the
question, what Catholics would say unto it, to have seen the place it self,
knowinge that Petrus Crinitus was but a rash grammarian of later times,
reprehended of this very falsification by sundry learned men of our days, and
namely by Alanus Copus, Doctor Sanders, Cardinal Bellarmine and others. Which
Plessis could not but know, and have seen; and moreover the very title of the
law yt self is extant in the Code in these words: Nemini licere signum
saluatoris Christi humi, vel in scilice, vel in marmore, aut insculpere aut
pingere; Plessis either ignorant or strangely malicious.
Which is: that it is not lawful for any man to engraue, or paint the sign of
our Savior Christ on the ground either in flint or marble; which title of the
law seems impossible, but that Plessis must have seen and read, for so much
as he cyteth diverse other laws out of the same Code, or else he is a very
superficial fellow: and if he saw yt, and yet alleged it as he does, his
falsehood is intolerable.

But he persisting in denial, that he was bound to look the law it self in
the Code, but that it was sufficient to follow Crinitus his allegation thereof,
the judges for compassion (as it seems) after consultation among themselves
gave this sentence: Que il auoit veritablement allegue Crinitus, mais que
Crinitus ^'estoit abuse. That Monsieur Plessis had truly alleged Crinitus, but
that Crinitus was abused. Which had been some excuse if Plessis had been a simple
young scholar; but being the man he is, and takes himself to be, yt is hard
to say where the abuse was greater, either in him, or Crinitus; for so much as
in his text he alleged not Crinitus, but the Emperors themselves, and insulted
thereby over Catholics, as you have heard, though in his margent he quoted
Crinitus, which was little to the purpose, knowinge that he lied, as must be
presumed that he did, and cannot well be avoided.

The eight Place examined out of S. Bernard about honouringe our Lady.
The L. Plessis being desirous to make a flourish against Catholics, for giving
to much honor (as he says) to our Lady, he alleges a sentence out of S.
Bernard in the 604. page of his book, in these words: Acts fol. 83.
S. Bernard (says he) writes of the virgin her self in his 174. epistle,
that she has no need of false honors, for so much as she is full of true; and
this is not to honor her, but to take away her honor; the feast of her
conception was not well invented. So he.

In which words the B. accused Plessis to have used as great falsehood as in the
former passages, for that he had guilfully patched together two different
sentences of that epistle, written in several places, to make one to his
purpose, after the fashion of Centons of Homer, Virgill and other poets, and
had so recyted them, as they might seem but one, and moreover had cut of the
sentence that went between them, and was immediately annexed to the former, and
contained the decision of the whole question, to wit, inventrix of grace, S.
Ansel. accused of impiety by Plessis.
mediatrix of salvation, etc. For better understanding whereof must be noted,
that Mensieur Plessis a little before had accused S. Anselme of impiety, for
calling the blessed Virgin Inuentricem gratiae, mediatricem salutis,
restauratricem saeculorum: saying that these praises, and honors were false
and immoderate. For proof whereof he alleged Saint Bernard, as though he had
been of a contrary opinion to Anselmus, and to the Catholics of these days, in
that he disallowed false honors given to our Lady, for which he cyted the
passage before mentioned, Great falsehood in alleaginge S. Bernard.
made of 2. several sentences, tied together, and cutting out from the middle
thereof these words of S. Bernard: Magnifica gratiae inuentricem, mediatricem
salutis, restauratricem saeculorum, etc. Do thou magnify this inuentrix of
grace, this mediatrix of Salvation, and restorer of the world, etc. Which are
the very same words that Anselmus did use before him, and for reproving whereof
S. Bernard was alleged: so as two or 3. falsehoods were urged out of this place
against him: First that of two sentences are guilfully made one; Secondly that
the principal clause was left out of purpose; and thirdly that S. Bernard was
alleged to overthrow that, which expressly he confirms.

To the first Plessis answered, that in leauinge out that sentence, he did no
more, then the Apostles did, who alleged some times several sentences of the
old testament, together as one text. A s^ift of Plessis shaken of by the B.
But the Bishop replied that the Apostles might do yt, for that they had the
self same spirit, which the writers of the old testament had, and therefore
could not go from their true meaning: but that we shall never find the Apostles
to allege two places of scripture contrary to the writers mind, and to leave
out in the midst, that which makes most to the purpose for declaring their
meaning, as Plessis has done here in S. Bernard.

To the second and third points, about clippinge of the sentence in the middle,
and alleaginge S. Bernard against his own meaning; Plessis endeavored to
make certain answers, and to show that the sentence which he had left out,
made nothing to the purpose which he had in hand; which the Bishopp granted,
if his purpose was to deceive his Reader (as no doubt but yt was) but
otherwise, if he had meant truth, yt must needs be much to the purpose to putt
yt in; for that it overthrows directly (as you see) all that which Plessis
would have proved, by S. Bernards authority against S. Anselme. And finally the
Bishop after diverse other cauills answered, returned to the first matter
again, and to affirm as at the beginning, that Monsieur Plessis had not dealt
truly and sincerely in this allegation of Saint Bernard, but that he should
have alleged the sentences severally, as they lay in the book, and not have
left out the principal clause, that went between them, if he had dealt truly.
Wherefore he desyringe judgment upon this passage, The sentence given against
Plessis.
the Acts do set it down in these words: Monsieur le Chancelier, auec l'aduis
des deputes pronon^a qu'il eust este bon que il eust fait. Acts fol. 96.
The L. Chancelour with the advice of the deputyes, did pronounce, that yt had
been good that Monsieur Plessis had done so; (as the Bishop of Eureux required)
which is as much to say that in not doing so, he behaved himself but badly,
which was a check of no small moment in such a matter.

The ninth Place examined out of Theodorete about Images.
The last place that was tried in this first days conference, was out of
Theodorete upon the 113. Psalm cyted by Monsieur Plessis in the 118. page of
his book against the use of Images in these words: God makes what he
pleases, but Images are such as pleases men to make them; they have the
places or habitations of senses, but have no sense indeed, and in this much
less them flies and fleas and such other vermin, and yt is just that all that
adore them do leese both reason and sense, and be like unto them. Here the
Bishopp objected two manifest and wilful falsifications: Acts fol. 90. 91. 92.
First for that he had against the express meaning of Theodorete translated
the Greek word Idol for Image, which Theodorete did clearly distinguish: and
secondly for that he cut of a plain clause in the midst, whereby the author
of purpose did expound himself, to wit these words; adored by pagans, and
adored for Gods, so as this declared evidently, that he had no true meaning.

To this Plessis answered, that as for the words Idol and Image, they were all
one, The difference betwixt Idol and Image.
which he said he could show both out of scriptures and Fathers. The other
replied, that albeit according to their Etymologye in Grammar, the Greek word
Eicoon and Eidoolon do sometime signify the same, and that some old heathen
writers do use them so: yet the Ecclesiastical use thereof both in scriptures
and ancient Fathers, does always distinguish most exactly these 2. words: as
for example, it can never be found, either in scriptures or ancient Fathers,
that the word Idol is taken in good part, as Image is, nor that they did ever
call the Cherubins, Exodus 25. 3 Re^. 6. 1. Cor. 11. ^. Cor. 3. and 4. Coloss. 1^
and other Images in the Temple of Jerusalem, Idols; nor do the scriptures
call man the Idol of God, but the Image of God; nor did ever any Christian
writer dare to speak otherwise, nor to call our Savior the Idol of his
Father, but only the Image of his Father, and other like examples, whereby is
evident, that both the scriptures, and holy Fathers did observe a strict
distinction betwixt these words: And heervpon was there spent some time in
certain vain replies used by Plessis, but no one example could he give out of
the scriptures to the contrary, nor yet out of any Father to this purpose.

And on the other side the Bishop pressed him with the words of Theodorete
Theodor. quaest. 38. in Exodus
himself in his questions upon Exodus, where he sets down expressly the
difference between Idol and Image: and besides this, that in his
Ecclesiastical Greek history of the lives of Fathers, called the Religious
history, he recounteth in the life of Saint Symeon Stilites, that the Christian
Romans in his time did set up Images for devotion to the said Stilites, and
thereby procured to themselves both safeguard and protection, as the authors
words are, whereof the Bishopp inferred, that for so much as Theodorete did
praise the Romans for this Act, yt cannot be imagined that he held Images to
be the same that Idols, which before he so much detested in the place here
alleged by Monsieur Plessis, for that so he should praise the Romans for
idolatry.

Here the deputyes called for Theodorete in Greek, ^Another shift t^^en away
from P^essis.
and examined the place of Stilites, and found it true as the Bishop had
alleged: and Plessis had no other refuge left but to say, that these Images of
Stilites were not putt up in Churches. But the Bishopp replied that to be of no
importance, whether they were or not. For if they were Idols they were
unlawful also in private houses, and consequently Theodorete would not have
praised them. But yet to show that in that time also of Theodorete and before,
Christian Images were accustomed to be set up religiously in Churches, the
Bishop alleged many places out of S. Orat. de S. Barl^am.
Basil, S. Orac. in B. Theod.
Gregory Nissen, In Biblioth. cap. 52.
Photius, In him. de S. Cassiano.
Prudentius, Ad S^uerum sulpit.
Paulinus and others, which textes were there brought forth, read, and allowed.
And all this ended he required Monsieur Plessis to confess this first abuse
against Theodoretes own meaning, and to answer to the second, why he had
left out those words, that declared his meaning, to wit, Idols adored by the
pagans, and adored for Gods? He answered that he had left them out for
breuityes sake, and had set down only the substantial clauses of Theodoretes
text. But the Bishop replied, that this breuity was not commendable, and that
the clause left out was the most substantial of all the rest, for declaringe
the truth, and Theodoretes meaning in the matter in hand. Plessis answered,
Many turnings and windings of Plessis.
that it appertayned not to his purpose to allege those words. The Bishop said
that yt did, if his purpose were to deal plainly, and to have the truth
known. Then fell Plessis to his old refuge and said, that he had not alleged
the forsaid text of Theodorete directly against Images, but indirectly, and by
a certain analogy or consequence, which the Bishop refuted. And finally after
all, he demanded judgment upon the place, and upon both the two corruptions
objected, which after diligent reuew of the place in Theodorete, and advise
taken of all the deputyes, the Lord Chancelour pronounced in all their names in
these words. Acts fol. 105.
Que ce Passage ne se deuoit entendre que des Idols des payens, and non des
Images de Chrestiens: comme il paroissoit par ces mots; Ador^es par les payens,
and adorees pour dieux, que auoient este obmis. Which is to say, that this
passage of Theodoret must be understood of Painim Idols, and not of Christian
Images, as is plain by the words: adored by Paynims, and adored for Gods,
which were left out. By which sentence (given also by his own men) he remained
condemned as you see of both the falsityes objected at the beginning by the
Bishop.

And here now it being upon the point of seven of the clock at night, the K.
dismissed the company for that time, and remitted the continuation of the same
conference, to begin again the next day at seven of the clock in the
morning, The conference reiourned till the next day.
and to endure until an eleven, and then again after dynner from one to six,
and so forward until all the places might be examined, and the same was agreed
unto by all the rest. And presently the Bishopp of ^ureux caused all the books
to be carried to the house of Monsieur du Plessis, to prepare himself in the
other passages, that were to be examined the day followinge.

WHAT HAPPENED AFTER THE END OF THIS FIRST DAYS Conference; of Monsieur
Plessis his demeanor, and departure: Of the book he sent forth for his excuse;
and what success has ensued of men's conversion thereupon.
CHAP. III.
As soon as the K. Majesty was departed from the place of conference, every
man began to talk and reason of that which had passed, but especially those
that had expected without in other Chambers, and Galeryes round about, and in
the K. garden beneath, and could get no place within the Chamber, where the
conference was holden; these, I say, as well Catholics, as Protestants, pressed
greatly to know what had been done, and what had been the issue of that trial.
And so earnest suit was made unto the Secretaryes, for copyes of the sentences,
as that very night they were given abroad in writing, containing as before you
have heard, to wit that upon the first 2. places of Scotus and Durandus, the
sentence was; that Monsieur Plessis had taken the objection for the resolution.
Upon the second places of S. Chrysostom; that he had left out that which he
should have put in. A brief recapitulation of the sentences.
Upon the fifth place of S. Hierome; that he ought to have alleged the passage
entyre, as yt was in the author. Upon the sixth place of S. Cyrill: That the
passage alleged out of S. Cyrill was not to be found in him. Upon the 7. place
out of the Emperors Theodofius and Valens; That Plessis had alleged truly
Crinitus, but that Crinitus was abused. Upon the 8. place out of S. Bernard:
That it had been well, Plessis had cyted the place distinctly as yt lay in the
author, without cuttinge of any thing in the midst. And finally upon the 9.
place out of Theodorete against Images: That the passage alleged, was not to
be understood of Images, but of Idols, and that this appeared by the words
which Plessis had omitted in his allegation.

Which judgments being read and considered, yt was wonderful to behold the
great diversity of affections, which they styrred up, to wit of comfort, and
alacrity in the Catholics, and of confusion and grief in the Hugonotts there
present, who being in number above 200. considered, that these sentences had
passed by the consents as well of their own judges, as of the other, and that
there was no way left of tergiuersation. And further that Monsieur Plessis
being one of the cheifest men simply of their Religion in France, and most
accoumpted of for his learning, this his disgrace was the disgrace of all
their Religion, and his error inexcusable, in respect of his former bragges,
and Protestations, and of the wilful falsehood now found in him. Diverse chief
Protestants began to think of their conversion.
Wherefore diverse of them, and those also of the principal, began soon after,
by assistance of Gods holy grace, to open their hearts to another cogitation for
their conversion, as a little after you shall hear.

The Kings Majesty also was exceedingly moved in mind, to see what had passed,
as may appear by his affectious speeches, and letter written to Monsieur
Espernon that very night after his departure from the conference, which letters
we have recyted Supra cap. 5.
before, and the causes of his motion we shall touch a little afterward, when
we have set down what ensued immediately upon this first days conference,
which was a great reason also to move his Majesty the more, as presently you
shall see. Wherefore we shall relate the same in the very words of the printed
Acts, which are these that follow.

The next morrow, What passed after the first conference ended.
which was friday the fifth of May at 6. of the Clock in the morning, came a
gentleman to the Bishop of Eureux, telling him that Monsieur Plessis had been
very evil that night, and that he prayed the Bishop to be content to have the
conference differred for that morninge; Acts fol. 105.
but the Bishop asked him for how long this delay should be, the gentleman
answered until that Mo^sieur Plessis should be in state of health to prosecute
the same. Soon after this, there came to the Kings chamber Monsieur de la
Riuiere chief physician to his Majesty, tellinge him that the conference was
like to be broken up, by reason of the L. Plessis indisposition, whom he said,
that he had left very sick, with violent vomitts, and tremblings of all the
parts of his body; which he King hearing, commanded him presently to go, and
tell the same to the L. Chancelour, to the end that he and the deputyes should
not take their journey in vain that day to the palace; which being told unto
them, and they imagininge, that perhaps Monsieur Plessis his sickness might
endure long, sent that very night late to his Majesty, to know his judgment
and pleasure, whether they should remain still in Fountayne-bleau, or return
to Paris. The King that he might give them more certain answer, willed the
Chancelour at ten of the clock at night, to go and see Plessis, and to know
from his own mouth, what he would do concerning the prosecution of this
conference. The Chancelour having with him at that time, the L. President
Fresnes Canay, chief deputy for the Protestant party in the said conference,
desired him to go to him which he did, and brought answer, that Plessis was
not in state to go forward now, but he would advise upon it in Paris: which
answer being related to the Chancelour, by the President, and from the
Chancelour, to the King; his Majesty gave license to the judges, and deputyes
to depart to Paris, which they did the next morninge, being the sixth of May,
except only the President Fresnes, who remained at Fontayn-bleau with the King.

But the next day at noone, about six hours after the departure of the said
deputyes, the President Fresnes, having been to visitt Monsieur Plessis again,
came, and advertised the Chancelour, that he was much better in health, and
that for his part the conference might begin again, which the Chancelour
hearing, A new offer of Plessis for continuing the conference, but dured not.
sent presently for the B. of Eureux, and in presence of the said president
told him the news, who was gladd thereof, and offered himself presently, and
said moreover, that as yet his books were not sent away. Which the Chancelour
hearing, called for the Secretary Monsieur Mercier chosen for the part of
Plessis, and willed him presently to go and signify unto him, that he had
understood, that he was better in health, and content to return to the
conference, which if it were so, the B. was also ready and his books not yet
sent away, and though some of the deputyes were departed, yet the president
Fresues their chief deputy remained, and others might be nominated at, or upon
the very place it self.

But Monsieur Plessis answered, that he was not master of his own sickness,
which grew more and more upon him, and that he was goinge to Paris from whence
he would not depart without seeing the L. Chancelour, Plessis flees the
co^fere^ce, and slippeth away from Paris, without taking his leave of any.
to inform him of his affairs; and so conform unto this he departed the 8.
of May being Monday; and the Chancelour having received his answer,
advertised the K. thereof, and so they went all to Paris, and his Majesty
arrived there upon the 12. of May. And about some 4. or 5. days after,
Monsieur Plessis departed to his government of Saumur without taking his leave
of his Majesty or seeing the L. Chancelour (as he had promised) and without
sending any word at all to the B. of Eureux, about the conference or further
trial.

Thus far goes the narration of the printed Acts, published by authority of
the King and deputyes that were present, whereby we see the end of this action,
and how the L. Plessis behaved himself therein: But about 2. months after,
came forth the aforesaid little discourse with out name of author, Plessis his
new discourse
bearinge the title of, true discourse of the conference at Fontayn-bleau, full
of elusions, disguisments, and inuectiues (says the B. of Eureux) set forth
by Plessis himself, though dissemblinge his name, to the end he might enjoy
the fable under this mask and ly with out blushing, obtruding to his Reader
what he thought best: For so are the words of the said Bishopp in the
refutation of this michinge discourse, which contained, as before has been
showed three principal points; the one in perverting the story of the Acts
themselves: the second in diuising new shifts and euasions, which occurred not
unto him while he was in the trial: the third, in recriminations, or
obiectinge other men's falsityes in like manner. Which kind of proceedinge did
more yet discreditt Plessis with the wiser sort of men, then his former
overthrow in the field, for that this did show indeed that to be true which
Tertullian says; Tert. de praescript. aduer. haereses.
that heretics may more easily be overcome, then persuaded; and that Plessis
had an obstinate mind to go forward, notwithstanding whatsoever was, should,
or might be proved against him, but yet diverse other of the more learned and
grauer sort of his own side, began, as has been said, to enter into another
cogitation, and to think whether yt were not best by this occasion, to seek
out the truth of matters indeed, and that without pertinacity or passion, for
so much as yt was a matter concerning the eternal salvation or damnation of
their souls.

And this happy course among others, took, (as in part before you have
understood) the aforsaid noble man of Normandy, Monsieur Sainct-Mary du Mont,
who being a great Protestant before, was first moved toward Catholic
Religion, partly by the Sermons of Monsieur Buchage brother to Duke Ioyeus made
afterward a Capuchin friar, as has been Supra cap. 1.
declared (which Sermons were principally against the falsifications of Plessis
in his book against the Mass) partly also by the sight of some of the said
falsifications themselves, The conversion of Monsieur du Mont, and of Monsieur
Fresnes.
showed unto him in private by the said B. of Eureux before the conference, but
he was fully converted by the trialll it self, and became afterward a zealous
Catholic. But more notorious and admirable was the conversion of the L.
Fresnes Canay chief president for the Protestant party, in the parliament
Chamber called Demi party in Languedocke and chosen by Monsieur Plessis
himself for chief deputy on his party for this conference: who taking the
same course in enforminge himself, found matters so evident, as he became a
Catholic upon the sight of this trial, and that with such fervor, as he
would not be absolved secretly of his heresy before held, (as for respect unto
his dignity and place was offered) but would needs abjure publicly in the
hands of the B. of Paris, and so he did, being a very learned man in his
profession, and at this day is Ambassador for his Christian Majesty with the
State of Venice, where his wife in like manner the last year, by his own
especial means (she being a Lady of much nobility) was converted also, and
both of them remained most zealous Catholics.

Which two examples of Monsieur Sainct-Mary and Mousieur President Fresnes
(both of them being learned and earnest Protestants all their life before) did
greatly move the King himself, for his comfort and confirmation in Catholic
Religion, but no one thing so much, as his being present at the forsaid
Conference, and so he is said to have often confessed afterward, for that he
saw there, that which he could never have imagined, to wit that men of
learning and judgment, would wilfully for maintayninge of faction, write and
publish that, which they must needs know in their consciences to be false. He
considered that these 9. places there examined, Motyues of much consideration
to the Kings Majesty in this Action.
were picked out by Plessis himself of 60. sent him by the Bishop, and that
these 60. were but a parcel of 500. which the said B. had bound himself to
exhibit in 10. days, to be discussed: and that by all probability the forsaid
9. were of the least falsified, and easiest to be defended of all the rest, at
least wise of the first 60. for that otherwise Monsieur Plessis would not have
chosen them. Wherefore having seen by experience, that no one of those 9. was
able to be defended from plain and wilful falsehood, he imagined what would
fall out in the rest, if the conference had gone forward, and if all should
pass as in these 9. throughout the 500. there ready to be exhibited, yea in
3500. more which the Bishop said he had gathered out, and offered to bynd
himself to convince them, of no less falsity and imposture, then those nine,
and all this out of one boooke. These things (I say) laid together, his
Majesty had good cause to think, what may be thought of that man's conscience,
that writes and printeth such a book in matters of Religion.

Moreover his Majesty could not but remember what tales the said Plessis, and
other such fellows had told him against Catholics and Catholic Religion for
many years, whilst he was yet a Protestant, to wit, that they had no truth on
their side, no antiquity, noe true ancient authority, but all was for them, and
their new pretended Religion. How the K. was abused by Hugonot^s whilst he was
of their Religion.
He could not forgett also, what sollemne protestations they were accustomed to
make, of their own sincerity both in wrytinge, and preachinge, and especially
Plessis in this last conte^tion about his book, before yt came to the trial,
offering to leese his life and honor, yea to burn his own hand, if any one
place were proved to be wittingly corrupted, or falsified, which yet was so
evidently convinced by the trial, not in one only, but in every one of the
nine places, as no man of reason could deny yt, and the deputyes of his own
party gave sentence against him.

Wherefore this having so fallen out, and the Bishop of Eureux protestinge of
his side, that the places of greatest corruption remained yet behind, above
twenty fold more in number, then those that had been examined, seeing also the
shamfull flight of Monsieur Plessis from the continuation of the combatt, His
Majesty's comfort in being a Catholic.
and the shameless discourse cast abroad by him without a name, wherein many
matters of fact well known to his Majesty were denied, affirmed, or disguised,
according to passion, most contrary to the known real truth thereof: All these
considerations (I say) and many other concurring together, and representing
themselves to his Majesty's wisdom, made him to feel infinite comfort in the
happy resolution he had taken of being a Catholic, and to contemn from that
day forward all contentious wrytings of factious sectaryes, that care not what
they say or write, so they may thereby hold up their sect and faction.

Neither did this event of Plessy Mornayes conference, work those effects only
for the openinge his Majesty's eyes and understanding in Religion, but of many
more besides throughout France, whereof though I be not so particularly
informed, as many others be; yet diverse persons of mark could I name besides
the former two, that received like light and grace from almighty God, by the
same means, and of great Hugonots became good Catholics; as the L. Baron
Saligniac Liefetennant for the K. of the country of Lymoge together with his
wife, Hugonots converted in France by disclosing heretical frauds and
falsifications.
daughter of the Chauncelour entitled Del Hospital, and sister to the
Archbishopp of Ais. The L. Baron du Bonneuald a great noble man in Lymosin,
together with another Baron of Gascoigne, whose name occurreth not at this
present, though I have seen the narration of his conversion written out of
France. Monsieur du Sansay Entendent over the Kings Finances in France. Diverse
chief learned men also, and among them some Ministers, as namely Monsieur
Caiette late Minister and Preacher to the Kings sister, married to the Prince
of Loraine, together with diverse of her chief officers, amongst which, was
Monsieur du lac de Barn, Monsieur Rebeul, and Monsieur Sponde the elder, two
great learned men, and another Sponde brother to the former, no less learned,
who at this day has the care of the Popes library in Rome, together with a
nephew of John Caluyn converted, and entertained like wise by his Holiness.
And in this very years, wherein we write this, to wit 1603. we have diverse
letters and relations out of France, by which we hear of sundry conuersions of
many, whereof before there was little hope, as for example of one Aluarez a
learned Spaniard, that had preached many years heresy in Languedocke, of one
Tirius a Scottishman, Master of a College in the City of Nimis; of a chief
Minister in Gascoigny Preacher in times past unto his Majesty of France, when
he was King of Navarre. And of a learned schoolemaister, who among other
scholars brought up the children of the chief Preacher, and Minister of all
those parts named Chamier. Letters relating diverse conuersions of Hugonots in
France.


I have seen letters also, relating the particular conuersions of diverse
chee^e Protestants in the City of Metz in Lorayne, and in the cittyes of Nimis
and Mompelier in Languedock, which later two cittyes are in the hands of
Hugonotts, and were wont to have few or no Catholics in them, and now are so
many, as his Christian Majesty has been entreated of late, to name them
several Catholic Bishops. And the same letters do report, that there is no
one month lightly passed, but that in Auinion for example (from whence one of
these letters were written) some 20. 25. 30. or 40. persons, coming from
other parts abroad of their own accord, where heresies do reign, do abjure
the same in the hands of the Catholic Inquisitor, with great zeal and
fervor, and detestation of heresy. And that in the City of Aubenas, where
one P. Iacobus Salesius a Jesuit was martyred by the Hugonots a few years
gone, above 200. have been of late converted, and so in other towns there
about, where heresies were wont to reign, and on the other side scarce any one
Catholic is heard of, to be perverted (God be thanked) in many years
together.

All which in great part is ascribed both to the event of this conference with
Plessis Mornay, and to the diligence of other Catholic writers and preachers,
who every where in their books and sermons do discover the falsehood of
heresy, and heretical authors, which no doubt is a principal point to be
urged against them, though themselves would seem to make yt a matter of small
consideration: But the truth is, that no one thing does gaul them more, nor
move discreet, and ingenuous men to forsake them, then to see that they deal
not sincerely, but deceytfully and with false consciences, be they subject
never so little concerning Religion. A vvish that his Majesty of England
would permit the like trial.
Wherefore if it might please almighty God to move the high wisdom of our
learned King, to make the like trial in England, I would not doubt of the like
success both in his Majesty and other well-mynded protestants, especially if
yt might be made with like indifferency of judges, deputyes, and Secretaryes
for both parts. And so much of this matter.

WHAT MONSIEUR PLESSIS DID ANSWER, AND CAVSED to be cast abroad after his
return home, from the Conference at Fontayne-bleau.
CHAP. IV.
WE have showed before how that Monsieur Plessis, after his secrett departure
from Paris, and return to Saumur, calling his Ministers, and friends about him,
diui^ed how he might repair the loss of credit received at Fountayne-bleau by
the conference; and yt seemed good in their eyes, full of passion, and grief,
to set forth a certain wrytinge entitled: A true discourse of the conference
at Fountayne-bleau, putting no certain name thereunto, but only these 4.
letters F. D. L. M. and this discourse was printed, and diuulged with such
diligence, for saving the honor of their cause, as with in 3. months after,
there were 3. several editions extant thereof, as appears by the B. of Eureux
his citation of the third edition.

The contents of this discourse consisted in three things, Three points of
Plessis reply.
as before we have showed: first in misreportinge and peruertinge, the very
history yt self, of the conference: The second in diuisinge new shifts, for
covering the falsifications before condemned, and sentenced: the third in
recharging the B. with other pretended falsityes, taken out of Gratian, that
gathered the canon law, and some other; and some other objected out of the
Bishopp his own works. All which three assaults are beaten back by the B.
upon him, with a particular confutation thereof printed together with the
public Acts: wherein he shows that the first of these points is great
audacity, to go about to deny, or disguise that, which the records of 4.
several Secretaryes, and the memory of above 200. witnesses, can, and do
testify to the contrary. The second is importunity, to endeavor to call in
question and doubt again matters, so authentically examined, and decyded, and
this with less reason, then at the beginning. The rhird is impertinency: for
that albeit Plessis could prove that others had been faulty also in their
allegations, (as he does not but only by calumniation) yet was not this any
good excuse for him, nor any just defense of his honor. And for that the said
Bishop does handle largly and learnedly all those three points in his forsaid
confutation: I might remit wholly the Reader thereunto: and so I shall be forced to
do for the later two points, for that this brief defense of mine admits not
so large a disputation: only I will note here some few examples of the first
point: whereby you may easily judge of Monsieur Plessis manner of proceedinge
both in that and all the rest, Necessitas cogit. ad turpia.
and how necessity (as the proverb says) enforces a man oftentimes to
shameful attempts.

First then (says the Bishop) besides a perpetual deprauation to be seen in
this discourse of Monsieur Plessis of whatsoever passed in the conference, and
besides his silent passing over and dissemblinge so many aduantagious
conditions, as were made unto him, The first point examined. Acts and Refut.
fol. 108.
besides many intolerable slanders and calumniations laid by him upon the K.
himself, as also upon the Chancelour and deputyes as partial against him: he
obiecteth diverse things in particular so manifestly false, and to be convinced
by the records themselves, as yt easily declares, that he had set up his rest
to continue the defense of his cause, by the same means of shameless lying,
whereby he had begone yt.

As for example in the 34. page of his discourse and third edition, 1.
Deprauation.
he writes that the Bishop had objected unto him, in the examination of the
third place which was out of S. Chrysostom, upon the first epistle to the
Thessalonians, that he had left out of the text, these words: ( if we our
selves be negligent) and heervpon he insulteth, for that these words are not in
S. Chrysostom. But this is great folly: for the Bishopp objected the leauinge
out of those words in the sentence of S. Hierome, Sup. cap. 2. place 5^.
and not of S. Chrysostom, as before has been seen in the examination of
those places: and the words objected to be left out of S. Chrysostom, were
others no less maliciously cut of then these. As before you have seen in the
examination of the said third place.

Then passinge to the page 38. of his discourse, Plessis says (talking of the
same place of S. Chrysostom), 2. Deprauation.
that the andience hearing Chrysostom to speak of preaching to Saints,
imagined that he had spoken of dead Saints: and upon this ignorance (says he,
for so he qualifieth the judgment of all that were present) they gave an
applause, etc. Which is altogether false, for that the applause given, was not
upon this first place of S. Chrysostom upon the epistle to the Thessalonians,
but another out of his homilyes upon the second epistle to the Corinthians,
brought in upon the examen of the fourth place of the nine before examined. And
the cause of this^ said applause of laughter of the auditory was this: That
Plessis pretending to bring two places out of Saint Chrysostom against
prayinge to Saints, which were the third and fourth before examined, and then
yt being proved by the Bishopp that both those places were falsified by him,
and that they made expressly for prayer to Saints, if he had put them down
wholly, and truly, he had no other refuge, if you remember, but to say, that he
had putt down the true sense of S. Chrysostom, though not his words: and then
being beaten from that with other places of Saint Chrysostom, declaring his
own meaning for prayer to Saints, Plessis was forced to confess against
himself (that had alleged him for impugning prayer to Saints) that indeed
Chrysostom allowed prayer to Saints, but yt was to live Saints only, and not
to dead: against which shift the Bishopp recyted this place followinge out of
his 26. homily upon the second epistle to the Corinthians, talking of the pious
devotions of the Emperors of his time, in prayinge to S. Peter, and S. Paul,
and highly praising the same in these words: He that is apparelled in purple
does make supplication to Saints, Chrysostom. hom. 26. in cap. 2. Cor. and hom.
66. ad Pop Antiochen.
that they will be his intercessors to God, and he that wears a diadem, does
pray to a tent-maker, and to a fisherman now dead, to be his protectors: and
will you dare then to say that their master is dead, whose servants now after
their deaths, are the Protectors of Emperors living upon earth? Which place
being recyted out of S. Chrysostom, A Cufusion of Plessis.
that confirms so evidently both prayer to Saints, and to dead Saints, some
laughter there was, and strangewondering at the impudency of Plessis, in
running so often to his refuge of dead and live Saints: and he could not but
blush to see himself so evidently taken. And this is the applause, which he
complayneth of, though wrongfully and fraudulently alleged, as you have heard.

Furthermore the same Plessis passinge on to handle the decision, and sentence
given upon the foresaid fourth place, tells his reader for certain, that the
judges did not determine that there was any omission used therein in cytinge
Saint Chrysostomes words. Which is such an impudency, 3. Deprauation.
as not only the records of all the four Secretaryes do uniformly convince,
Discourse. page 36.
who have the sentence of the deputyes thus registered; that Monsieur Plessis
had left out that which he should have putt in: but the very layinge open of
the text of Saint Chrysostom does convince the same, to him that has eyes and
skill to read.

It follows upon the examination of the same fourth place before mencyoned,
4. Deprauation.
that he charge the deputyes of ignorance, in geuinge sentence (as he says)
that the words of S. Chrysostom, there cyted out of his homily upon S.
Mathewes gospel, ought to be understood of Saints deceased, whereas they gave
no such sentence at all, as the records of all four secretaryes do testify,
Discourse. page 46.
but only the very same sentence, which was given before upon the third place,
to wit; that Plessis had left out, that which he should have put in: and the
Bishop grauntinge in that place, that those words of S. Chrysostom, Acts fol.
59.
being indifferent to be understood either of dead, or live Saints: did urge,
that if Plessis would understand them only of live Saints, they made most
against himself, who had brought that place of S. Chrysostom to impugn
prayer to dead Saints. So as this does only show a mind in Plessis to ly,
cavil, and calumniate without releeuing himself thereby, but rather increasing
his dishonor and shame.

About the fifth place examined out of S. Hierome upon Ezechiell, 5.
Deprauation.
he accuses greatly the B. for that he would not (as he says) harken to him,
when he alleged another place of S. Hierome upon the epistle to the
Galathians, where he has these words: Discourse page 48.
At that day when we shall be before the tribunal of Christ, neither Noe, Job,
nor Daniell, can pray any more for any man, etc. Which charge is evidently
false, as before Suprae cap. 2. loc. 4.
you have heard declared in the examination of this place, and may see in the
Acts themselves. For that albeit the Bishopp told him, that this place was
brought in against order, besides the number of those 19. which Plessis had
chosen to be first examined: yet he was content to stand upon the examination
thereof, if Plessis would, and of other places cited in his book, and to bynd
himself to prove, that in that only one page he had committed 4. notorious
falsificatio^s; but Plessis refused to join with him in that point; Acts fol.
69.
and so the Bishopp expounded the place alleged of S. Hierome, that yt was
meant of the day of judgment, when no more praying to Saints shall be, nor of
Saints for us, which does not impugn our present prayinge to them, but rather
confirm the same. For that S. Hierome affirming here, that there shall be no
more prayinge to Saints, or of Saints for us at the day of judgment, does
evidently signify that before that time, both may be used.

About the examen of the sixth place, 6. Deprauation.
out of S. Cyrill, concerning the honoring of the Cross, Plessis deceaueth
notably his Reader, in tellinge him, that falsity being objected unto him by
the Bishop, Discourse page 49.
the King spoke in his behalf, pronouncing with a loud voice that both parties
had reason: which all men there present know to be false; for that the King did
rather the quite contrary, saying, that whereas Plessis had brought that place
of Cyrills words to Julian, to prove that Christians in his time did not adore
the Cross, yt seemed to him that they proved neither the one nor the other,
(which was a condemnation of Plessis, that had alleged the same against
honoring the Cross) and then his Majesty added further, that by the
objection of Julian, exprobratinge unto them that they did honor the Cross:
yt seemed to him evident, that he would never have made such an objection, if
yt had been altogether false. Which speech of his Majesty being public and
registered in the ears of all men, a man may see the modesty of Plessis, that
dares so openly, and in print, to pervert the same.

Upon the very same place he falsifieth also 7. Deprauation.
in like manner, the sentence given by the deputyes, Discourse page 50.
saying that the Chancelour pronounced simplely, that the words alleged out
of Cyrill, were not found in him, leaving yt easy to the hearers (says he) to
infer, that the sense notwithstanding was to be found in him. Which is a
great untruth, for that the sentence registered by all 4. secretaryes
comprehends the whole passage in these words: Acts fol. 72.
The passage cyted by Monsieur Plessis out of Cyrill, is not found in Cyrill;
which sentence conteyneth as you see both sense and words. And it is a poor
shift of Plessis, to go about to help himself by so childish an inference, as
for that they gave sentence, that the words alleged by him were not in Cyrill,
yt might be inferred, that the sense was.

After this the Bishopp shows diverse other gross untruths in this kind, as
namely, that in reportinge the sentence of the Chancelour, 8. and 9.
Deprauation.
and deputyes upon the last place examined out of Theodorete, about Idols, he
falsely peruerteth the same, leaving out the principal important words of the
said sentence, to wit, adored by Paynims, and adored for Gods, contrary to the
faith of the records themselves, uniformly taken by all 4. secretaryes; and
then again to excuse himself from a foul disgrace, happened in the
examination of the first place about the real presence out of Scotus,
Discourse page 60. and 65.
whose text Plessis could not read, he tells in his discourse this notable
lie, that the B. of Eureux had used a certain fraudulent slight to disgrace
him, which was to bring two editions of Scotus, the one fair to be read, which
he sent him ouernight with the 60. places to prepare himself, the other he
retained with him of an evil print, which he obtruded to him in the
conference. But this shameless fiction the Bishop refuteth first by the
testimony of them, that brought back again the books from Plessis house to
the conference, and then by the witness of 4. several French gentlemen, A
foolish calumniation refuted.
to wit, Monsieur du Bertant, du Beaulien, du Berulle, and du Salettes, that
came with him from Paris, and knew that he brought but one only edition of
Scotus with him, which was in folio of the print of Badius Ascensius in the
year 1519. and lent unto him by the college of Sorbone in Paris for this
conference, which book being given to Plessis to verify his place alleged
out of him, he could not so much as read, nor turn the book, for that there
were some abreuiations therein after the manner of schoole-doctors, and thereby
all the lookers on, and hearers well perceived that he was utterly ignorant in
reading schoole-doctors, though every where for ostentation of learning, he was
accostomed to cite them in his books. And this shame Plessis had no other way
to cover, at that present, before all the auditors, but to say that he was not
practiced but in his own books only, though afterward upon more deliberation,
he thought good to devise this other shift of changinge the book by the
Bishopp, which yet being so maliciously co^uinced of calumniation by the
witnesses before mentioned, did exceedingly tend to Plessis discredit. And
this shall suffice for the first point of Plessis reply, wherein you see, that
for defense of his 9. places before convicted of falsification, he utters 9.
other great untruths, for doublinge the number.

As for the other two points of new shifts and recrimination, The other 2.
points of Plessis discourse
I will remitt the Reader to the Bishop his own refutation, for them that
understand the french tongue; and for the rest yt will not be hard to guess by
example of this which we have alleged, what manner of stuff yt is, which
Plessis could allege for his further defense in so manifest convinced
falsifications; and you shall hear presently what O. E. in England can say for
him. And if you find him by this little, a man with out faith or spirit of
truth in his assertions, then shall yt be wisdom to beware not only of this
his book against the Mass, wherout so many falsifications have been gathered,
but of others also written in the same spirit, and namely of one, that for
many years has gone in English, entitled of the Church, which being smothely
written, and stuffed out with great show and ostentation of Scriptures,
Fathers, Historyes, and other such furniture, has dazeled the eyes of many, as
did also this other against the Mass, until yt was sifted and examined by
learned men. But for the other in English, I can assure the Reader, that yt is
a most deceytfull book, and may be well brother to this against the Mass. A
note of Plessis Mornay his book of the Church.
And yt is now very near twenty years gone, that the late Earl of Lecester
gave one of them to a kinsman of his, named Guilford, to read for his
satisfaction in Religion, who conferring the same with another learned
gentleman a friend of mine, desired that yt might be examined, which my said
friend began to do with such comodity of books, as he could procure at that
time, and found so full stuffed with all kind of deceatfull impostures, and
falsifications, as he remained astonished thereat, and conferred the same with a
learned Baron of the Realm now dead, and he with another yet living, and
near to his Majesty's person, who did all wonder at so notorious treachery,
though th'exame^ passed not through the greater part of the book, for that it
was interrupted by some trouble fallinge to the examiner; but he has affirmed
many times since, and does at this day, that yt is incredible to believe, what
corrupt dealinge there is therein, and exhorts all those that have means, to
try the truth of this his assertion, which I cannot do at this present, for
that I have not the book by me; yet I thought it convenient to give a note
thereof, for stayinge of them, that have, or may be deceived thereby, and for
styrringe up of others to make this examen. And so for this time we leave
Plessis to himself, and to his shifts in France, and shall pass over to
consider what O. E. his advocate can say for him in England.

WHAT O. E. (OTHERWISE MATTHEW SVTCLIFFE) HAS written for defense of Plessis
Mornay, concerning the 9. places handled in the former Conference: and how he
commits far greater faults then Plessis himself.
CHAP. V.
HAVING perused what Monsieur Plessis has been able to say for himself, both
in the conference and after, upon better deliberation: we must now examine
briefly what our old friend O. E. (for under that vizard he masketh hitherto)
has divised for his defense: For that my forsaid breife relation, fallinge
into his hands, he thought yt to appertain to his manhood, as a martial
minister, to proclayme himself champion in Plessis quarrel, thereby to
fulfill the proverb; that none so bold as blind bayard: and though he be not
able to defend his own head (as after you shall see) from the same or like
blows which Plessis has received: yet will he needs be doing, and intrude
himself for a shylde to the other; and this with such violence, or rather
virrulency of speech raginge and rauinge at all those, that will seem to touch
Plessis fidelity, in the places alleged, as he may seem to need rather
byndinge then answeringe: yet somewhat shall we say to him, as the straitness
of this place and time will permit; and thereby show sufficiently what manner
of adversary he is, and that having lost or laid aside (as it seems) all
manner of respect to shamfastnes and modesty, he may easily lend out his
tongue and pen for small hire to any man. And truly I can not but maruayle,
that a man of his profession and place, can persuade himself that so excessive
a raylinge and opprobrious style, against all whom he answers, should gain
him credit with any modest or sober sort of men: he will find some in the end
that will return him legem talionis and then he may count his gain. I for my
part am resolved not to be drawn by him to that vein, but to urge him only
with substantial points of the controversy in hand, as the reader shall see by
that which ensues.

Wherefore to come to the matter, whereas Monsieur Plessis divided his refuge
into three points, as before you have heard. The first concerning the history
of the conference it self; Three parts of Plessis defense.
the second in seeking out new euasions, the third in recriminations: O. E.
sets before us the same Coleworts sodden again, but guised after another
fashion; puttinge recriminations in the first place of all, but much more
vaynely then Plessis did in the third. And in the second he takes upon him to
defend the truth and fidelity of Plessis in all the places before examined. And
for that in this point consists in deed the only substance of the
controversy: I shall only examine the same in this place, leaving the other to
a more full and larger answer, when we shall have vewed a second edition,
which O. E. is said to have made of his new challenge, in five several
controversies to N. D. now to the places as they lie in order, with this only
aduertisment premised, that it shall be good for the Reader first to look over
the examen of each place, handled before in the second Chapter of this defense,
where all the 9. places are examined severally, and I do mean to remit me
often for more breuityes sake, thereunto.

The first Place out of Scotus.
You have heard Suprae cap. 2.
before how Monsieur Plessis, was argued by the Bishop of two several
impostures in alleaginge one place of Scotus about the real presence, saying:
that Scotus was not afraid to call in question, Acts fol. 34.
if the body of Christ be really contained under the species or accidents (of
bread) and he disputes that yt is not, Scot. in 4. sent. did. 10. q. 1.
and his arguments are, for that the quantity does not permit yt, etc. Hence,
I say, two deceatfull falsifications are objected: the first, in that he makes
his reader believe, that Scotus his objection is his resolution: the other,
that the arguments of heretics, brought in by Scotus against the real
presence, and refuted by him; are Scotus his own arguments. Of which
impostures, sentence was given of the deputyes against Plessis, as before you
have seen, neither could the impertinent replies and euasions attempted by
him, deliver him from the shame thereof.

Now let us hear what O. E. his spokesman, has divised for a new supply of
holes to run out at. O. E. in his Refutation. page 12.
First (says he) though Scotus had not so spoken (as Master Plessis has set
down) yet could not Master Plessis be charged with falsification, seeing he
does not quote his words, but sets down his own collection: The most that
could be said, was, that he had mistaken the meaning of Scotus. The 2. first
shifts or startinge holes.
These are two shifts, poor ones as you see. For first, the Bishop did not
charge Plessis for misciting Scotus words, but for peruertinge of his meaning,
in settinge down his objection for his resolution. Secondly, if Plessis be a
man of any learning or common sense at all, this his mistakinge of Scotus
meaning, (which here O. E. would have to by so called) cannot be censured for
less then wilful imposture. For if he had not so much judgment, as to
discern an objection from a resolution, then was he a simple fellow to write
books: and if he did discern yt, and yet sought to deceive his Reader in so
weighty a matter, as is the controversy of the real presence, he was and is a
wilful imposter.

These then are the 2. first points of our English Advocates defense; let us
hear how he goes forward. Refut. ib.
And yet (says he) if Peron had charged him only with mistakinge, himself bad
been mistaken, and greatly had he wronged his adversary. For that yt cannot be
denied, but that Scotus did indeed call into question, whether Christ's body be
really, (by These two words are put in by O. E.
Transubstantiation) contained under the forms of bread and wine, and
disputes that yt is not; which is all that the L. Plessis does say of Scotus,
for which he is challenged by his wrangling adversary, etc. Is it all Sir
Matthew? As truly as you are true of your word. Sup. cap. 2.
He that shall read the examen of the place rehearsed before, shall find that
his adversary chalengeth him not for saying that Scotus made this objection for
the real presence, or disputed against yt after the fashion of schoolmen; but
for that persidiously he alleged the place, as though Scotus had been of that
negatyue opinion, and that the arguments objected had been his own, and not of
heretics, and solued by him. This is the charge of the Bishop against him. And
what will you say to Master Sutcliffe auouchinge the contrary? But let us see
what manner of proof he will bring for his assertion, for that he durst not
let so gross an absurdity pass without some shadow of reason, which yet you
shall see to be far worse, then if he had passed it over in silence. Hear
then his evasion.

Neither is it material (says he) that this is the use of schools, Refut.
ib. page 12.
first to object against the truth, and afterward to resolve what is true, and
to answer the objections, for that does not disprooue Monsieur Plessis his
assertion, seeing Scotus, does not only in his objections, but also in his
resolution of that question, say as much as M. Plessis collected out of him,
etc. If this can be proved I will call O. E. a cunning advocate indeed. But if
it cannot, then is he to to forgetful of his credit to avouch this again so
boldly, after he has seen yt convicted before out of Scotus own words, Sup.
cap. 2. pl. 1.
in the resolution of that very question saying. I do affirm, that yt is
simply a substantial point of our faith, Scot. in 4. Sent. did. 10. q. 1.
to believe that Christ's body is truly and really under those accidents of
bread, etc. Which resolution he having proved out of diverse places of
scripture, as namely Math. 26. and John 6. he dissolueth the arguments made
before to the contrary. Which being so, what shall we say of Master Sutkliffe
that after all this seen and read, avouches the very same again, that M.
Plessis did before?

But how does he go about (think you) to prove, that Scotus in his resolution
touching the real presence did hold the same, that in his objection against
yt? You shall hear his own words immediately following in the same matter. In
Refat. ibid.
Nay (says he) Scotus seems rather to dislike Transubstantiation then
otherwise. Behold here the true dealinge of M. Sutkliffe who gives us quid
pro quo as Apothecaryes are wont. He should have proved that Scotus determined
in his resolution against the real presence, and now he says that Scotus
seems rather to dislike Transubstantiation then otherwise. So as for the
real presence, Sutcliffe gives quid pro quo.
here is thrust in Transubstantiation, and for determination and resolution is
shuffled in a seeminge to dislike rather then otherwise. Was there ever any
such good Apothecary that gave quid pro quo? And if here to help himself out
he will say, that the real presence and Transubstantiation is all one
controversy, he impugneth himself in the very next place of Durand, as you
shall see when we come to it, where he affirms Durand to hold (and yt is
true) and Scotus holds the same also, that the real presence of Christ's body
in the Sacrament, might have been by other means, then by Transubstantiation,
if God would have had yt so: and consequently are distinct things.

And hereof also I do convince O. E. of another false trick of thrustinge in
the words ( by Transubstantiation) a little before in recytinge the question of
Scotus, which is not in S^otus himself, nor in his words more truly alleged
in this behalf by Plessis as before you may see, for that Scotus question is,
whether Christ's body be really contained under the forms of bread and wine?
Deceatfull dealinge.
And this fellow proposes yt thus. Whether Christ's body be really by
Transubstantiation contained, etc. And this to the end he might deceive his
Reader, as here he does by leapinge from the one to the other, when he is
pressed or gauled, whereas Scotus does handle these two controversies of the
real presence, and Transubstantiation as different and distinct things, not
only in sundry questions, but in sundry distinctions also, to wit the first in
the tenth, the second in the eleventh distinction upon the Master of the
Sentences: So as here I must represent unto you the boldness or ignorance of O.
E. to exceed much that of Master Plessis his Client.

And thus much of the controversy about the real presence. But now least you
might think he had somewhat more to say, to prove Scotus to be against
Transubstantiation then against the real presence, VVhither Scotus held
Transubstantiato^ and how?
for that he so leapeth from the one to the other, let us hear his arguments,
though you must note by the way his nice assertion in saying: that Scotus
seems rather to dislike Transubstantiation then otherwise, and his arguments
are two objections of Scotus against Transubstantiation as the other were
before against the real presence.

The first objection First objection.
of Scotus against himself is, for that bread, together with his accidents or
species, do more represent unto us the nature of spiritual food without
Transubstantiation, then the bare accidents by and after Transubstantiation;
ergo the nature of the Encharist in this respect of nourishment, might have been
conserved, though God had not appointed Transubstantiation, but his body to
have been together with the substance of bread. Which argument you see makes
against the alleager O. E. flatly, for that yt proves the Real presence, and
Transubstantiation to be distinct things, and that the one might have been
without the other, and therefore it was folishly brought by O. E. seeing it is
not only an objection and no resolution, but also an objection that impugneth
his assertion.

The second objection 2. objection.
of Scotus against Transubstantiation, is^ that in misteryes of our faith, that
interpreta^ion seems most to be admitted, which requires least miracles for
maintayninge thereof; but fewest miracles seem to be required without
Transubstantiation, then with Transubstantiation, ergo we should rather admit
the reality of Christ's body, together with bread without Transubstantiation,
then the same body with only accidents of bread by Transubstantiation. These be
two objections among others made by Scotus against Transubstantiation, above
fifty leaves after his former obiectio^s against the real presence. Which
objections after his resolution set down for Transubstantiation he answers
and solueth, beginning thus: Ad argumenta, etc. Now must we answer the
arguments made to the contrary, etc. But yet about the first objection he
repeateth again: Dico quod been fuisset Deo possibile instituisse, Scot. 4. in
sent did. 11. q. 3.
quod corpus vere esset praesens, substantia panis manente, etc. I say that if
God would, he had been well able to have appointed his body to have been present
in the Sacrament together with the substance of bread, without
Transubstantiation, etc. But having appointed otherwise (as appears by the
declaration of the Church) we are not to respect more or fewer miracles, etc.

And hence now you see, that O. E. endeauoringe to deliver Plessis from the
shame of cytinge Scotus his objection for his resolution, in the controversy
of the real presence, himself brings forth tow more objections for
resolutions, without seeing the shame thereof about the article of
Transubstantiation, Refutat. page 12.
yea and further blusheth not to infer thereupon this conclusion; That Scotus
plainly misliked that interpretation, that without diverse miracles cannot be
maintained, etc. Two Rotorious lies.
And that albeit he was content to subscribe to the Popes determination, and
durst not do otherwise; yet that he himselse thought otherwise, etc. O Jesus!
what shall a man say of these manner of people? Let us hear Scotus his own
words, in the same place where he talks of the Churches determination and
exposition of scriptures, for this point of Transubstantiation. Dico (says he)
quod eo spiritu expositae sunt scripturae quo conditae; Scot. in 4. sent. did.
11. q. 3.
and ita supponendum est quod Ecclesia Catholica eo spiritu exposuit, quo
tradita est nobis fides, spiritu scilicet veritatis, etc. I do day that the
scriptures are expounded by the same spirit, by which they were written, and
so we must suppose that the Catholic Church has expounded them unto us (to
wit the scriptures that concern this mystery of Transubstantiation) with that
spirit wherewith our faith was delivered unto us, that is to say, by the
spirit of truth, etc.

Lo here, Scotus foundeth the truth of Transubstantiation not upon the Popes
determination, or upon the authority of the Church only, as falsely O. E.
charge him; but upon the truth of scriptures expounded by the Church, with
the same spirit of truth whereby they were written, and consequently is far
of from plainly mislikinge this interpretation, as O. E. affirms, but for
that among other arguments, Scotus named the determination of the Church, the
calumniator, that could not abide the word, charged him presently, to be moved
only with that reason. What would he have babled against him if he had left
written as S. Augustine has done, August. cont. epist. fundame^ti cap. 5.
that he would not believe the gospel, if the authority of Church did not
move him thereunto? And do you note further that Scotus in the same place
affirms, that albeit this verity about Transubstantiation, was declared first
in the Council of Lateran, yet was the substance thereof believed also from the
beginning, How Transubstantiation was believed from the beginning.
under other words of conversion Transmutation, Exchange of substances, and the
like. Which he shows out of the ancient Fathers, yea and that yt was included
implicit in all the old creeds of the Apostles, and others Ponitur (says he
talkinge of the Council of Lateran) veritas aliquorum credendorum magis
explicit, Scot. ibid. did. 11. q. 3.
quam habebatur in Symbolo Apostolorum, vel Athanasij, vel Niceni. In this
decree of the Counsel of Lateran the truth of certain articles belonging to
faith, is more clearly and particularly set down, then yt was before in the
Creed of the Apostles, or of S. Athanasius, or of the Nicene Council. So as by
this it appears, that Scotus did not believe the truth of T^ransubstantiation
as a thing determined only by the Council of Lateran, but as contained in the
scriptures, and believed in substance from the very beginning, and declared or
expounded only by the Council of Lateran, directed by the spirit of God. And
this is sufficient to convince O. E. of plain calumniation; and though he say
in the end of his defense, that Dominicus Soto and Josephus Angles, are at some
difference about Scotus his meaning: yet are his words and whole discourse
clear enough, without any commentary of others, as you have seen. And quently
this shall suffice for the examen of this first place.

The second Place out of Durand.
For that we have been longer in the first place, to show thereby some
portrayture of O. E. his manner of answeringe and defendinge his Clyent; so
shall we be bree^er in the remnant. The charge upon the second place was (if
you remember) that Plessis had abused Durand, as he had before done Scotus, but
most of all his Reader by them both, in alleaginge an objection for a
resolution; which is evident, for that Durand beginning to comment upon the 11.
distinction of the fourth book of the Master of Sentences, which distinction
is about. Transubstantiation (as the former is about the real presence) he
frames his first question thus: Primo quaeritur, etc. Durands objection li. 4.
sent. did. 11. q. 3.
First yt is demanded, whether the body of Christ be in the Sacrament by
conversion of the substance of bread into yt, etc. Et arguitur quod no^, etc.
And yt is objected that yt is not, but rather the substance of bread remains,
for that sewer difficultyes do follow that way, then by putting
Transubstantiation, etc. And after this he sets down his resolution to the
contrary, The Sum of the ^ controversy. Sup. cap. 2^
and answers this objection as before you have heard: whereupon after diverse
shifts attempted by Plessis for some evasion, he found none to the purpose, and
so had sentence against him.

And what now does his advocate think you bring to relieve him? truly nothing
at all. For first he does not so much as mention this place of Durand, whereof
the controversy was; but another where Durand says (as Scotus also did
before) that God by his omnipotency might have ordained, that his body should
have been in the Sacrament without Transubstantiation, if he had would. Which no
man denies. But hear his words: The second place (says O. E.) O. E. his
reply Refut. page 13.
was taken out of Durand, who says that yt is rashness to affirm that the
body of Christ, may not by the power of God be in the Sacrament, by other
manner, then by the conversion of bread into his body, neither can it be denied
that Durand has these words, and why then is Master Plessis charged with
falsification? Fersooth because they say he took the opposition for the
resolution. Thus he. Whereto I answer, that he is grossly deceived, for that
Plessis is not charged for settinge down the objection in steed of the
resolution out of this place of Durand, but in the former place by me alleged,
which he has here omitted. For of this place there was never any question or
difficulty of the Conference, though yt was alleged to another purpose, as
before is mentioned. You will ask me perhaps, and why then does O. E. O. E.
his error in part excused, and in part aggrauated.
allege this wrong place of Durand, leauinge out the other, whereof the
controversy is? Surely I must in part excuse him, for that he erred also
heerin, who set forth the particular passages without the Relators knowledge,
after the relation ended and printed, as before has been signified, and is
testified in the preface to the said passages: yet was his error much more
pardonable then this of O. E. for that he had only a written copy of a
particular friend from Paris, and had not seen the public Acts printed, nor
Plessis reply, as this other had done, writing more then a whole year after
they were published; and therefore for him to come now, and dissemble the true
place in controversy, and deceive his Reader with a new fraud, saying that we
accused Plessis with falsification, for taking the objection for the
resolution in this place, (whereas as all men do know yt was in another) shows
as well his condition devoted to continual shiftinge, as also his weakness to
defend his clyent in the former charge, he being glad to slipp out and run
away under the shadow of an other man's error.

And yet to leave behind him some sent of what he is, he would needs utter two
other notorious untruths Two notorious untruths about Durand.
at his parting: the one, where he says: that yt may plainly be gathered by
Durands words, that the determination only of the Council of Lateran, and the
Romish Church moved him to hold Transubstantiation. Whereof there is no such
word in Durand but rather the plain contrary, for so much as he proves Primum
patet authoritate Sanctoru^, and ex determinatione Ecclesiae^ did. 11. q. 1.
n. 9.
Transubstantiation not only by the Council of Lateran, but also by diverse
clear sentences of ancient Fathers, namely S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Prosper
and Eusebius which were long before the Council of Lateran. The other untruth
is, where he says, that not only they, but Bellarmine also does note the same
in Durand, taxinge him for hard belief of Transubstantiation. Whereas
Bellarmine in the place cited does expressly say, Bellar. I. 3. de Eucharist.
c. ^1.
Durand to hold conuerti panem in corpus Christi per consecrationem: that the
bread is converted by the words of consecration into the body of Christ, but
yet that he has a certain particular opinion about the manner thereof, which
is nothing to our controversy: So as O. E. not having relieved his client
any thing at all in this point, has loaded himself with 2. or 3. faults more
then he had on his back before, And so he passes from this place to the other
that follows.

The third Place out of S. Chrysostom.
The charge given upon Plessis in this place, is as before you have seen, for
that he going about to allege S. Chrysostom against prayer to Saints, Acts
fol. 52.
said that his conclusion upon the words of Hieremy was quite contrary to that
of Catholics at this day, to wit, that we ought not to rest our selves upon
the prayer of Saints, Sup. cap. 2.
but work our salvation with fear and tremblinge; whereas the true words and
meaning of S. Chrysostom are quite contrary, who says in the very place: Let
us not contemn the prayers of Saints for us, nor yet place all our hope
therein: the first not to deprive our selves, Chrysostom. ^om. in ^. epist. ad
Thessal.
of so great a succor, the second not to make our selves negligent, etc. As
before you have Supra^ cap. 2.
heard^ which words being discussed, and all Plessis shifts and turnings
examined, sentence was given of falsehood against him. Now let us see how O. E.
will releive his cause: The third place (says he) was drawn out of
Chrysostom, but neither can his adversary prove this place to be falsified by
him, not impertinently alleged: not the first, O. E. Refut. page 13.
for that he does not allege Chrysostomes words, but makes a collection upon
them: not the second, for that as Master Plessis affirms, yt may evidently
be gathered out of his words; that we must not rely upon the prayers of Saints,
but work our salvation with fear and tremblinge.

Behold here a quick dispach of matters, and no maruayle yt is, though O. E.
do lend his labor to many in answeringe for them, seeing yt costeth him so
little, and he does yt with so great facility: but I must return upon him in
both these points, and do say to the first, that Plessis in his collection has
falsified both the words and sense of S. Chrysostom, 2. falsifica^io^s, of
Plessis.
as before in the second Chapter has been showed. The words, in leaving out
those that expressly made against him, the sense, in drawing a quite contrary
conclusion to that, which S. Chrysostom did make. For that he exhorts men to
pray to Saints to be intercessors for them, and withal to live well
themselves: but Plessis by including the one would exclude the other. And as
for impertinency, there is little accoumpt to be made, where there is
imposture, and open co^trariety to the authors meaning, as here, and therefore
impertinently does O. E. go about to excuse impertinency, where we object
greater crimes: but mark his reason, why yt is not impertinent, Two falsehood
of O. E.
for that (says he) it may be evidently gathered out of Chrisostomes words,
that we must not rely upon prayers to Saints.

But why does the crafty minister, leave out the word ( wholly) which makes or
marreth the whole sense, for to rely, and to rely wholly are two different
things. Why also does he leave out the other words added by Saint Chrysostom
for explication of his own meaning, Chrysostom. ibid.
to wit, So as we be not negligent of our own part? You shall hear his grave
answer. Neither is it material (says he) that these words: O. E. Refut. ibid.
if we be negligent, are omitted, for they are not to purpose, seeing
Chrysostom would not have us rely upon the intercession of Saints, albeit we
be diligent to do our endeavor our selves. This now is to to shameless, for
yt is the quite contradictory to that which S. Chrysostom in express words
exhorts, to wit: to the end we do not deprive our selves of so great a
succor, let us pray unto Saints to be intercessors for us, and of our own
parts, let us live virtuously, etc. And who then is more shameless here,
either the clyent or the advocate? but let us hear out the rest of this
defense. It is also objected (says he) That Chrysostom aloweth intercession
of Saints, Refut. ibid.
but be yt he did so, yet does not this convince that he is falsely alleged by
Master Plessis, seeing that which he gathered, may be true, albeit this were
granted, etc.

Here I would have the Reader to stand attent, and mark the conueyance of
these deceytfull masters in deludinge men. Plessis gathered out of S.
Chrysostom that he impugned prayer to Saints deceased: and now faith O. E.
that albeit Chrysostom did allow prayer to Saints, yet that which Plessi^
gathered may be true: But I would ask how Plessis could truly gather out of S.
Chrysostom that he impugned prayer to Saints, Impude^tinglinge of Plessis and
of his Attornay O. E.
if he allowed intercession to Saints, except you will say that S. Chrysostom
both allowed and impugned one and the self same thing. It follows in O. E.
for the conclusion of his defense. How much then (says he) is it more
unlikely, Another contradiction between O. E. and Plessis.
that Master Plessis shall be convicted, seeing Chrysostom in that place has
nothing which does not appertain rather to the prayers of holy men living,
then of holy men departed. These are the last words of his defense immediately
followinge upon the former, and all that he says in this cause. And you will
easily consider how they hang together; I only will say this. That if this
place of S. Chrysostom alleged by Plessis against prayer to Saints departed,
does rather appertain to lyuinge Saints then to dead, as O. E. here affirms
(and has been Supra cap. 2. loc. 3.
before refuted) then either Plessis was ignorant or maliious to allege yt
against prayers to Saints departed as he did: so as you see, that O. E. does
rather impugn his client then defend him; and so not worthy any see at all.

The fourth Place out of S. Chrysostom.
The falsifications objected unto Plessis upon this other place of S.
Chrysostom, out of his commentary upon S. Matthew, was, that the said Plessis
having told his reader in his book against the Mass, Acts fol. 57.
that S. Chrysostom was careful every where to overthrow the foundatio^s of
the abuse of prayer to Saints, said: Chrysostom. hom. 5. in Math.
that we have more assurance by our own prayers, then by the prayers of
others, etc. leaving out his words immediately followinge, which declared his
meaning, to wit; we do not say this to the end we should not make our prayers
to Saints, but to the end wshould not be slothful, our we selves. Which being
proved after diverse euasions in vain attempted by Plessis, to be a plain
wilful corruption and falsification of the authors meaning; sentence was
given against him, as before you have heard. Let us hear what the poor
Advocate has to bring of new.

And first you must note, O. E. seeks to be obscure oftentimes of purpose.
that whenever he is puzeld, and finds himself entangled, so as he sees
not which way to turn or get out; his custom is, to make himself obscure of
purpose, that so by casting some mistes before his Readers eyes, he may escape
away; and heerof you shall have frequent examples if you stand attent. Now then
O. E. having recyted part of the former text of S. Chrysostom, as Plessis had
set yt down; he enters thus into his defense: This (says he) the adversary
himself cannot deny to be truly alleged (by Master Plessis) how then came yt
to pass, that he dealinge thus justly and truly, O. E. Refut page 14
he should notwithstanding be charged with falsification? Forsooth says his
adversary for that he left out the words followinge; to wit and this we say
not, that we would deny prayer to Saints, etc. And for that he applied
Chrysostomes words against prayers, to Saints departed.

Lo here, you have first a Justification of Plessis, that he had dealt justly
and truly videlicet in alleaginge S. Chrysostom, and then two objections of
his adversary brought in with a forsooth, as though they had been trifles. The
first was, that he had cut of certain words of the sentence that made most to
the matter: the other, that he had alleged S. Chrysostomes words quite against
the authors drift and meaning, etc. Let us see how his advocate will answer
the two charges: you shall hear him in his own words: Refut. ^ib.
As if (says he) yt were so heinous a matter, not to set down words
altogether impertinent. This is to the first objection, and he has no one
word more. Wherefore it is to be considered, whether the aforsaid words left out
were altogether impertinent or no, which we shall briefly examination.

The question was whether S. Chrysostom in his commentaryes upon S. Matthew did
go about to overthrow the foundation of prayinge to Saints, The state of the
question and O. E. his impertinency.
as Plessis said that he did, and for proof thereof he alleged the forsaid
words: that we have more assurance by our own prayers and good life, then by
the prayers of others, etc. And presently after the said Father adioyneth for
his explication the other words left out by Plessis: we do not say this, that
we should not pray to Saints, but to the end that our selves be not slothful
for our selves. And now I would ask: were these words altogether impertinent
to have been put in or no? Or is not O. E. an impertinent fellow, not to blush
to make such an answer? Seeing these words if they had been expressed, do
utterly overthrow Plessis whole drifte and argument. And thus is the first
objection answered or rather shamelesly shifted of by him, let us see the
second, whither he will answer it more substantially.

The second objection was, The second charge more foolishly answered then the
former.
that Plessis had wrongefully alleged the forsaid words of S. Chrysostom,
(we must have more assurance in our own prayers, then in other men's) against
prayer to Saints desceased, whereas S. Chrysostom expressly protests in the
very same place, as now you have heard, that he means not so, and so
consequently Plessis did abuse him egregiously to force him against his own
meaning, words, and protestation. How answers O. E. unto this think you?
you shall hear: O. E. Refut. page 1^
As if (says he) yt did not follow, that we are not to rely upon Saints
prayers, and therefore we are not so continually to pray to Saints, and so to
trust in their intercession as the Church of Rome does, that makes prayer to
Saints a great piece of their Church service. Mark here two points (gentle
Reader) first that albeit S. Chrysostom do say and protest, that by his words;
we must confide more in our own diligence, then in others, he means not
against prayer to Saints: yet O. E. says that yt follows of his words, that
we must not rely upon Saints prayers, whom shall we believe, either
Chrysostom of his own meaning and intent, or O. E. that will force him to
say that which he denies? Secondly do you mark that O. E. seems here to
admit some certain measure of prayer to Saints, so yt be moderate: for he
says that, we must not so continually pray to Saints, nor so trust in their
intercessions, as the Church of Rome does, etc.

But here (perhaps) some man will ask me, is it possible that O. E. has so
little judgment as not to see this absurdity, to force S. Chrysostomes
meaning against his own protestation? Whereto I answer that at length he saw
yt, and went about to remedy the same, thus: O. E. Refut. ibid.
But were yt (says he) that the argument were not good (to wit of Plessis
collection out of S. Chrysostom) and his consorts do commit falsifications, as
often as they bring weak or evil shapen arguments. Whereto I answer, that if
they should be so misshapen as yours (Sir Matthew) are, that do belly the author
to his face, and will bear him down that he means the plain contrary to
that which he protests in express words, I would not only say that they were
weak and misshapen, but false and malicious also; and the authors worthy to
leese their creditt for ever.

Finally O. E. having no more to say about this place, A false and ridiculous
conclusion.
concludes his whole defense in these words: Yt was also (says he) further
answered (videlicet in the conference by Plessis) that Chrysostom had nothing
in this place, that might force us to believe that he taught or believed
prayers to Saints departed, which may serve fully to answer all the
adversaries vain cautillations. Whereto I reply, that I know not what may be
sufficient to force O. E. and his faithless brethren, to believe that S.
Chrysostom approved prayers to Saints: but if his own words often repeated
may be sufficient, you have heard them before sufficiently out of him self,
and consequently the judicious Reader will easily discern, where substantial
proofs and where vain cauillations do lie and so much of this place.

The fifth Place out of S. Hierome.
The fraud and unfaithful dealinge objected unto Plessis upon this place, Acts
fol. 65.
was like to that of the former; to wit, that he had cyted certain words out
of S. Hierome upon the Prophett Ezechiell as making against prayer to Saints,
leauinge out those words that immediately followed, and declared his whole
meaning. The words alleged were: that we must confide in God, Hier. l. 4. in
Ezech. cap. 14.
and not in other men's prayers: for albeit they be Saints and Prophetts, yet
shall they deliver but their own souls, and not those of their children, if
their children be negligent. Which last words (if their children be negligent)
Plessis craftily cut of, and being pressed therewith and not able to clear
himself, had finally, after many shifts rejected, judgment given against him
of falsehood, as before you have heard. Let us see now, Sup. cap. 2.
how O. E. will recover his creditt again, and remember what I noted before of
his willing obscurity, when he has no list to be understood, as I presume the
ordinary Reader will hardly understand him in this passage, VVillfull obscurity
of O. E.
if this explication of mine were not premised, which seems to be the thing
he most desires in this place: For you shall see him pitifully plunged in the
puddle of contradiction, before he get out, thus then he begins his defense.

The fifth objection was (says he) for that in Plessis citing these words out
of Hieroms comment aryes upon Ezechiel lib. 4. cap. 14. O. E. Refut page 14
bonum est confidere in Domino, etc. He left out those words. Sincgligentes
fuerint. But no falsifications can be without fraud: now what fraud could be
immagined in omitting words that make nothing for his adversary, nor against
himself? Thus he, An obscure narration of the state of the question.
making his exordium with an interrogation as you see. But before I answer
yt, I would first ask him, why he puts down the state of this controversy
so darkely? for if I had not explaned the matter somewhat before, who would
here have understood wherein the difficulty lies? for what sense do make those
words in Latin, and not englished, bonum est confidere in Domino, etc. and si
negligentes fuerint? but all this is of art and fraud to dazell the Readers
eyes, that he understand not the falsity wherein Plessis was taken. For if his
proctor O. E. had set down the true words of the controuesie, as I did
before, his question had been answered of it self: for who but a simple fellow
will put in doubt, but that the words before rehearsed (if their children be
negligent) be of chief importance to be putt in, or left out, seeing they do
solue all the difficulty? For if the children of Saints be negligent (says
Saint Hierome) then will not the only prayers of their parents save them:
Hier. ibid.
but if they be diligent, and do cooperate also of their own parts, then will
they avail them, as S. Chrysostom in like manner declared in the former
passage. Consider then how true, and substantial this first defense of O. E.
is, which makes his entrance with so blind and false relation of the
controversy it self, and how well he deserves to be an advocate for others,
that so marreth his clie^ts cause even at the beginning. But let us hear his
second defense of the same charge, or rather his second evasion if it be better
then the first.

Besides (says he) the ordinary gloss does rehearse these words no otherwise
then the L. Plessis quoteth them, whom I think the Mathureux Bishopp of
Eureux will not charge with falsification. Discourse veritable page 148.
This supply is taken out of Plessis own discourse sent from Saumur after his
flight from Paris, and it shows that O. E. had read the same, and thereby is
inexcusable when he dissembleth yt, as before in voluntary mistakinge the
second place out of Durand, and upon diverse other occasions, but to the point.
If the gloss upon Ezechiel did cite the words of S. Hierome dismembered as
Plessis does, yt were in no wise a just excuse for him. First, for that the
gloss uses to cite short pieces of sentences, as yt serves to purpose for
explication of words in the text, but Plessis took upon him to set down a
whole place out of S. Hierome, for impugning prayer to Saints desceased, and so
cyted them verbatim and at large, until he came to the words that made against
him: Gloss. in cap. 14. in Ezech.
to wit, that Saints prayers will not help their children, if they be
negligent, which condition yet the gloss omitteth not but expresses yt in
other equivalent words thus: if they follow not the faith and works of their
parents. Wherefore this shift helps neither Plessis nor his proctor any thing
at all. And as for the Malheureux B. of Eureux, The B. of Eureux Unlucky only
to hugonots.
he may perchance, be called malheureux, that is to say unlucky to the
Hugonots of France, for that having been once so chief a man of their party,
has since his conversion so learnedly and luckily battered their sect, as no
man more in France, nor perhaps in Europe, and they do well feel the blows,
but otherwise the reproach is foolish to call him unlucky.

And this is all which O. E. can divise to bring forth for defense or excuse of
the falsification objected in leauinge out S. Hieroms restriction ( if children
be negligent): but now let us hear another objection made by the Bishop and
answered by O. E. It was also here objected (says he) that Hieromes words in
Ezechiel make nothing against prayers to Saints: O. E. Refut. ibid.
but it must be remembred^ that the controversy here was not whether^ M.
Plessis had well concluded out of that place but whether he had rightly
alleged yt, etc. Well Sir; and we have showed now, that he alleged it not
rightly, having left out the principal clause, that he should have put in:
and if you grant also, (as you seem thereunto enclyned), that he has not
rightly concluded; then is he dooble false, to wit, both in alleagation and
conclusion: but somewhat I hope you will divise to excuse his collection and
conclusion, though the authors words themselves be against it. Let us see then
what yt is. O. E. taken in most clear absurdity.
Besides that (says he) we answer, that it is no vveake argument to conclude
thus: (as Plessis does out of S. Hierome) we must not trust in the prayers of
men, and therefore are not to rely upon the prayers of men departed this life.
But I say to the contrary, that it is a weak and wicked argument to conclude
thus, as the words lie in S. Hierome, we must not rely upon the prayers of men
though never so holy, if we be negligent of our own parts, ergo we must not
trust in the prayers of Saints departed, though we be never so diligent, to
live virtuously our selves; this I say were an absurd manner of argument and
conclusion, Eureux in Refut. of Plessis false discourse fol. 141. 132. 243. and
de inceps.
and yet this is the argument and conclusion of Plessis and of O. E. for
impugning prayers to Saints deceased, against which false conclusion the Bishop
in his refutation of Plessis reply, does allege above a dozen most plain and
effectual places, out of S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, and other Fathers, which
plainly and perspiciously do approve the doctrine and practice of prayer to
Saints deceased in their days, and O. E. durst not take upon him to answer
any one of them, but pullinge down his hatt over his eyes, passed by them as
he had not seen them. But let us hear his last conclusion. Hier. l. 2. in
epist. ad Gala.
Finally (says he) Hierome writing upon the epistle to the Galathians does
flatly demne prayers made to Saints departed and for dead men, saying, Dum in
hoc saeculo sumus, etc. Whilst we are in this world, we may help one
another by prayers or counsels, but when we come before the trihunall of
Christ neither Job, nor Daniell, nor N^^ can pray for any man, but every one
shall bear his own burden. And do you see what plain places these fellows
bring forth and how flatly they conclude? This place if you remember, was
alleged by Plessis in the conference and answered by the Bishop, that being
meant evidently of the day of judgment, made nothing against prayer before
that day, nor could he reply any thing at that time, nor did he afterward in
his discourse, as appears by the Bishops refutation fol. 146. Disecous du
Pless. page 4^. Refut. fol. 144. and 146. 147.
and 147. but only stood upon his vain distinction and refuge of lyuinge and
dead Saints, which shift to avoid most evident authorityes of the Fathers, the
Bishopp refuteth die diverse places alleged out of S. Hierome himself, and one
namely against Vigilantius, where he obiecteth to that heretic the very same
words, used here by his scholar O. E. Hier. ep. 2. cont. Vigilant Anotable
place of S. Hier. against the heretics of this time.
Dicis in libello tuo, quod dum viuimus, etc. Thou say (says he) in thy
book, that whilst we are in this life we may pray one for another, but that
after death no man's prayer shall be heard for other, etc. but if the Apostles and
Martyrs being upon earth in flesh, could pray and be heard for others, when
they had need, yet to pray also for themselves, how much more now after their
victoryes, crowns, and triumphs, etc. S. Paul says of himself, that 276.
souls, were given him at his prayers in the shipp, when he was alive, and
do thou think^ he will be mute now after he is gone to Christ, and will not
dare to open his mouth for them that have believed his gospel throughout the
world? and shall Vigilantius a live dog, be better then Paul a dead Lion? So
S. Hierome: meaning that Vigilantius presumed, that himself being a live Saint
could be heard for others, but S. Paul being a dead Saint, could not, and O. E.
presuminge the same also of himself (as you may well imagine that he does) may
in like manner apply the same answer of S. Hierome to himself, being in this
point no less a barkinge dog against prayer to Saints, then was Vigilantius.
And so much of this place.

The sixth Place out of S. Cyrill.
The falsehood objected to Plessis upon this place, Acts fol. 70 and Refut. fol.
148.
was, that whereas he had alleged the authority of S. Cyrill against
worshippinge the Cross, saying: S. Cyrill answered the Emperor Julian, who
reproached the honor done to the Cross by Christians: that Christians did not
give adoration nor reverence to the sign of the Cross, etc. It was objected,
I say, that the last words of this sentence, which are of most moment, to wit;
Lib. 6. cont. Julian.
that Christians did not give adoration or Reverence to the sign of the
Cross; are not in S. Cyrill, albeit Plessis vsinge often to repeat those
words as the words of S. Cyrill, had putt them down also (in one place) in a
different letter: which charge Plessis being not able to avoid, after diverse
shifts, turnings, and wyndings, was condemned as before you have seen, neither
was he able to reply any thing of moment afterward in his discourse from
Saumur, Refut. of discourse fol. 147.
as appears by the Bishops refutatio^, all which O. E. having perused, and
thought well upon, let us see what he brings for relief of his clyent, and
I shall set down all his words together, as they ly in his answer, for that
they conteyne not many lines, he knowinge not well which way to turn himself,
but yet must needs say somewhat, for that he could not well hold his peace.

The sixth place (says he) which the L. of Plessis was charged to have
corrupted, O. E. Refut. page 15
was drawn out of Cyril contra Julian, 1. 6. and why was he charged think
you? forsooth by cause he alleged him to prove that adoration was not to be
yealded to the sign of the Cross, A very poor defense of Plessis by O. E.
but heerin there could not be any falsification used: and that first, for that
he did not allege the authors words; and secondly for that he does well
conclude according to Cyrills meaning; for where Julian objected to Christians
that they worshipped the cross; Cyril answers, that these words proceeded of
badd thoughts and extreme ignorance; so likewise says Minutius Foelix in his
Apology Cruces nec adoramus, nec optamus, that is we neither worshipp nor
desire Crosses.

This is his whole discourse, full wise and learned as you see, which the poor
man having seen refuted particularly in the Acts themselves of the
conference, and after more largely in the refutation of Plessis michinge
discourse without a name, he brings it in here again, as though it had
never been heard of or refuted before, without adding one word of help or new
supply for poor Plessis, but only some new untrue lies of his own, as his
fashion is: as first of all, where he says, that forsooth Plessis was charged
with falsification, Three new untruths brought for a supply by O. E. to help
out his clie^t.
because he alleged Cyrill to prove; that adoration was not to be yielded to
the sign of the Cross. I say forsooth yt is an evident untruth; for he was so
charged for that he alleged that out of S. Cyrill which was not in Cyrill. And
again it is another untruth, to affirm; that Cyrill objected extreme
ignorance to Julian, for that he reproached Christians for honoring the
Cross. Seeing it was for another distinct cause, as Supra cap. 2. lo^. 6. A
fraudulent equivocation of the word Cross taken of the author for a gibbet or
gallows.
before has been showed: to wit, for a false inference or collection made
thereof. And it is a third untruth, that Minutius Foelix did say in our sense,
we neither vvorshipp nor desire Crosses, that is to say, as they signify, the
Cross of Christ, and not gibbets as his pagan adversary objected unto him; and
O. E. deserves some such Cross, for impugninge the other of Christ, and for
deluding his Reader in this place with so gross an equivocation, if his other
Acts and Gests by sea and land do not meritt also the same.

And I do call these later two, proper untruths of O. E. though they were
objected before by Plessis in the Conference, for that he having seen them
evidently answered, and refuted before, brings them in again, and
dissembleth the refutation, as you have seen in the second Chapter of this
defense, where all these nine places are examined particularly, as they were
handled in the conference it self.

The seventh Place out of the law of the Emperors Theodosius and Valens.
The legerdemayne objected unto Plessis upon this place, was, as before you
have seen, that pretending to allege a certain law or imperial institution
against paintinge and caruinge of imoges, he left out the words humi and in
solo, Lib. 1. Cod. tit. 9. Nemini licere vel in sol^ vel in marmoribus humi
positis sculpere, etc.
that is to say upon the ground, which did make or mar all the markett. For
that the Emperors for reverence of images, forbiddinge them to be painted under
men's feet, Plessis alleged them against images absolutely: and not being able
to defend this falsification, but by layinge the fault upon one Petrus Crinitus
a new author of our times, whom he had quoted in the margent, but not named in
the text, he was condemned at length of this forgery. Let us see how his
advocate will defend him, I shall set down his whole defense together as in
the former place.

The seventh place (says he) was out of Petrus Crinitus where the Lord of
Plessis is charged to leave out the word ( humi) alleaginge the law of
Theodosius and Valens against the making of the sign of the Cross, O. E.
Refut. page 15.
but his accuser should have remembered, that he did allege not the words, as
now they are found in books falsified by Idolaters and Cross worshippers, but
out of Petrus Crinitus which cyteth the law out of authentical records. Our
wise relator here, An other defense of O. E.
to make the matter seem more heinous, says, he falsifyeth the law of
Theosius, Valens, and Justinian, as if they had been joint authors of that law:
when as Justinian was not yet in the world, when that law was made. Neither is
it much material if Tribonian, in the Emperors name, had putt in the word (
humi,) for we are rather to rely upon the Originals then upon Tribonians
honesty, that put words in and out, and altered laws at pleasure. An obscure
defense by O. E.
Neither was the law of Theodosius and Valens to be reputed new, albeit the
word ( humi) had bin left out, seeing both Epiphanius, and the Council of
Eliberis in Spain, and diverse other Fathers had condemned paintinge of images.

Thus pleads O. E. for his client, but in such sort, as I think verily
hereafter few will entertayne him for their advocate, and though he thrust
himself in, as he has done in this cause, he will be rejected and thrust out
again, and barred of all practice, as a puny pettifogger, that does more hurt
then help his clients cause, we shall make a few notes upon this his answer,
whereby, and by readinge the examen made before upon this place, Sup. cap. 2.
in the conference yt self, you will easily see the vanity thereof. First then
yt is false, that Plessis alleged Petrus Crinitus, though he quoted his name
in the margent, there being great difference between allegation and quotation.
Acts. fol. 77.
As all men know that are learned the text of Plessis went thus: what will
they say (to wit the Papists) to the Emperors This is false for it was
Theodosius the second and. Valentinian the third.
Theodosius and Valens, who by an express edict, did forbidd the paintinge of
images. Thus he did triumph, with the Emperors themselves in the text, though
in the margent he quoted Crinitus for his refuge, when he should be pressed.
Secondly, where he says; that Crinitus cyteth the law out of authentical
records, and not as they are found now falsified by Idolators, yt is a
notorious vanity, and this audacious Iconoclast should have cyted some proof
out of some one author or other for yt, and not so boldly of him self, without
all reason or authority avouch so untrue a paradox. Plessis himself in the
conference, could only say that Crinitus alleged them Ex libris Augustalibus,
out of the Emperors books, which books the Bishop showed evidently, to be no
other, but the Codes now extant, Pet. Crinit lib. 9. de honest^ disciplin^ cap.
9.
conteyninge the Emperors laws and constitutions, and this by the words of
Crinitus himself, referringe his reader thereunto: Si quis (says he) authorem
desiderat, etc. If any require the author of this ^ allege, let him read the
decrees and Edicts of the Emperors, gathered by most learned men Trebonianus,
Basilides, Theophilus, and Dioscorus, especially under Justinian, etc. Thus
Crinitus of the Emperors constitutions. Out of which he cyteth this law by
memory as yt seems, erringe as well in the Chronology, as also in the names
of Theodosius and Valens, who did not live together, nor made laws together,
whereas he should have said in deed Theodosius and Valentinian, as also leaving
out the words humi and in solo. And yt is a desperate defense of O. E. to call
in doubt the truth of all the Imperial laws for this thousand years and
more, gathered by Trebonianus and other learned men, before named, and read in
all schools and universities without note or corruption, until now that this
new academike minister O. E. will needs call them all in question and
suspicion, so as nothing hereafter shall be of certain credit.

And if this had been so as O. E. affirms, that the Imperial laws had bin
corrupted, and that Trebonian that lived above a thousand years past under
Justinian the Emperor, had pu^ in, and put out, and altered laws at his
pleasure, was there no man to have noted yt in so many ages before Sutcliffe?
Cuias a learned lawyer noted only, that Trebonian by consent of the Emperor
Justinian changed the word crux, A vain calumniation of O. E. against
Trebonia^.
that before Constantine, signified a gibbett or gallows in the old pagan
Emperors laws, into the word furca. But what is this, that O. E. should say so
boldly, that he altered laws at his pleasure? but this is the spirit of
heretics to bring all things in doubt, and to take away fidem publicam all
creditt from all things but their own sayings, and then he that can talk
most, shall be most credible; and this is one ground of their new gospel.

Thirdly whereas O. E. endeavors to tripp the Relator for ascribinge this law
to three Emperors jointly, Theodosius Valens, and Justinian, which Justinian
lived after the former two; he shows more will then skill to be revenged, for
as Justinian could not make a common law with the former two Theodosius and
Valens, Lib. 1. cod. tit. 8. Nemini licere, etc.
for that they lived not together; so neither could the former two make any
common law between semlues, for that they reigned not jointly, Valens being
slain a dozen years before Theodosius the first came to be Emperor, wherefore
yt is to be understood of Theodosius the second, and Valentinian the third, and
so yt appears by the Code yt self, which Code for that yt was gathered by
Justinians order, and authority, bears the name in like manner of Justinians
Code, Another Cavil returned upon O. E.
and by that reason this law also may be called in this respect Iustinianus
Law, and consequently O. E. was much ouerseene in running so hastily upon the
relator, who yet was not he that did set forth these particular passages in
print, as before has been said.

Fourthly I would have you to note, the arrogance of heretical writers in
conte^ning learned men when they stand in their way, About old originalls
pretended by O. E.
as here Trebonian. Vir doctissimus (says Crinitus) a most learned man that
gathered the laws together with others, under Justinian. But what says O. E.
of him? you shall hear. Neither is yt much material (says he) if Trebonian
in the Emperors name had putt in the word humi, for we are rather to rely upon
the originalls, them upon Trebonians honesty, etc. Here to say nothing of the
difference of honesty, honor, learning and dignity, between Trebonian and
Sutcliffe, for that comparisons are odious, I would ask what originalls are
those that O. E. says we must rely upon? Crinitus out of whom he would seem
to gather them says (as you have heard) that they are the Imperial
constitutions contained in the Code, Crinit. l. 9. de hom. disciplin^ cap. 9.
and gathered under the Emperor Justinian, which constitutions have continued
now in diverse editions over all Christendom, for more then a thousand years
without any difference in this behalf, yea the edition of Geneua it self
produced in the conference has the text of this law as the rest, with the
words humi and in solo. The ancient commentaryes, and Glosses also made above
300. ^eares past upon this law, as that of Azo, Salicet, and others, have the
same words and do note no difference ever to have been in this point. Whence
then or where are Matthew Sutcl^ffes originalls, O E. foy^^ about his ne^
originals.
corrupted as he says) by Idolators and Cross worshippers? Crinitus is but a
late writer, and says he has none but out of the Code, and these are all
against the Minister; what will he do? or what shall we say to such people? are
not our poor deceived contreymen in a good state, to depend upon these men's
words and assertions in matters of Religion.

But let us see the end of his defense upon this place. O E Refut. page 15.
Neither was (says he) this law of Theodosius and Valens, to be reputed new,
albeit the word hum^ had been left out, seeing both Epiphanius, and the Council
of Eliberis in Spain and diverse other Fathers had condemned Images before. But
why had not O. E. cyted the places out of Epiphanius, and those other Fathers
which condemned paintinge of Images, that we might have read them. Acts fol.
8^. 2 83. and Refut. fol. ^69. 170.
The B. of Eureux did cite both in the conference it self, and in his
refutation of Plessis discourse, many ancient Fathers express words, both
before, and after this law was made of Theodosius, and Valen^inian, (named
here again ignorantly by O. E. as the law of Theodosius and Valens) to wit,
the authorityes of Eusebius, Chrysostom, Hierome, Cyrill, Prudentius,
Paulinus, S. Gregory Nissen, S. Gregory Nazianzen, and others, all allowinge
the pious use of images in their days; yea and an other express law of the
same Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian, Cod Theod. lib. 16. tit. 10.
is also of him alleged, commanding the sign of the Cross to be put in
Churches; and how chances it that the Minister here also pulls down his
hat over his eyes, and will not see, nor answer any one of these authorityes?
you may easily gheasse the reason.

And as for the Council of Eliberis in Spain, yt being a provincial Council
of 19. Bishops only, about the year 305. they prohibited nothing, but that
Images should not be painted in those days upon walls, both in respect of the
indecency and corruption that came thereby unto them, The Canon of the Counsel
of El^^eris a^^^^red.
by the moisture of the said walls, somewhat contemptible to the pagans and
heretics, yet living among them; as also to the end, that being painted in
tables rather then upon the said walls, Christians might carry them away, as
they did other Ecclesiastical ornaments when persecution fell out, and not
leave them to the spoil and dirision of the persecutors. And this reason is
gathered out of the words of the constitution it self, confirmed by the
practice, both of that t^me and after. And so much of this place, O. E. having
borrowed this objection of the Council of Eliberis, out of Plessis reply in
his discourse upon the place, though in the Conference he came out with yt,
Discourse page 55.
and had his full answer upon the 9. place out of Theodorete, which O. E.
here dissembleth and replyeth no one word, (as has been said) to this or to
any of the authorityes alleged there by the Bishop, for the ancient use and
honor of Images.

The eight Place out of S. Bernard.
First yt is to be noted that this 8. passage, being by error of the aforsaid
french written copy sent from Paris, placed in the 9. room by him that set
forth the said passages, is restored here by us again unto his proper place,
according to the Acts of the conference, and Plessis reply, which O. E. also
follows without mencioninge the error, which is an argument that he had read
all, and so much greater is his shame, that he comes so bare and weak to
play the Advocate, after much better matter uttered before by Plessis himself,
who was accused upon this place (as before you have seen) for tyinge together
fraudulently two different places of S. Bernard, as making against the
honoring of our blessed Lady, and persidiously leauinge out in the myddest
that clause of the Father, Acts fol. ^3.
which being in the text annexed to the former of the two sentences, made all
clear (if yt had been left in) and overthrew the whole drift of Plessis cavil,
the clause was: Magnify the inuentrix of grace, Ber^. ep. 174.
the mediatrix of Salvation, and the restorer of the world. Upon which
deceytfull dealing, after many corners sought in vain to run out and escape,
Plessis had sentence against him. But let us see what relief the new attorney
brings.

As if yt were necessary (says he) where diverse places are alleged out of
one author, O. E. Refut. page 16.
to write out all that comes betwixt one and the other. Lo a quick dispatch
of the matter. But I would ask O. E. a case of conscience as professinge also
divinity, which is this: if when that which goes between, conteyne the very
substance and soul of the matter or controversy (as here yt does) whether in
such a case yt be lawful to leave yt out, or not? or whether this be properly
falsehood and falsification? For if yt be not, then we may pervert the Pater
noster or any prayer, or piece of scripture, and make yt seem blasphemous. And
let the reader mark that O. E. has no evasion here, but most absured. Yet
let us hear him further for Plessis excuse. He alleges Bernard (says he)
not as an authentical witness, O. E. Refut. ibid.
but as a man fauouringe his adverse party being nourished in monastical
errors and superstitions. Well Sir, and for that S. Bernard did not favor him
in Religion (as no Saint ever did) is it therefore lawful to falsify and
corrupt his words and sense? We know well that both you and he do allege the
words of S. Bernard, and other Catholic writers, as the devil does
scriptures, which bynd not him, but others against whom he alleges them; How
heretics do allege Cath. authors.
and so Plessis alleged Scotus and Durandus before, but as the proverb is: A
man should not belly the devil. And no less falsehood, and corruption of mind
is discovered, in falsifyinge authors whom they creditt not, as others whom
they credit. Wherefore let us hear his conclusion upon this place. He says
that S. Bernard and we do not agree about honors to be given to our lady, as in
the feast of her conception, in calling her Mediatricem salutis, and that both
he and Epiphanius wrytinge against the heretics called Collyridians, do much
mislike the honors which we give to the blessed Virgin. All which are toys,
and answered before in the examen of this place, for so much as concerns S.
Bernards agreement and ours; but for the foolish women called Collyridians
condemned by Epiphanius, and by the whole Church for offeringe sacrifice to our
Lady, this cauiller has been answered See the confutation of O. E. his challenge
by VV. R. Chal. 3. ^. 9. n. 61. 62. and 3 conuers. of England part. 2. cap. 2.
^. 21. 22.
so often (to wit that yt appertains nothing to our controversy) and this
in diverse books now out against him, as only lack of judgment and matter (as
it seems) have induced him to object yt here again, he having been foiled
therein, and made to see, that Epiphanius expressly in that place honors
highely our El. Lady. and denies only divine honor unto her. And not that
which the Catholic Church does give unto her.

The 9. and last Place out of Theodorete.
The charge of falsifying laid to Plessis upon this passage of Theodorete, Acts
fol. 90.
was, that he cyting a place of this author in his commentary upon the Psalms,
Theodor. com. in Psalm. 113.
against pagan Idols, Plessis did fraudulently so allege the same, as if he
had spoken yt of Christian Images, for which purpose he used two sleights, the
first in translating the Greek word Idol by the Latin word Image; the second
by cutting of these words: Idols adored by pagans, and adored for Gods. For
excuse of which two fa^sifications, when Plessis had used diverse shifts as well
by some show of proof, that Idols and Images may somtymes be taken for the
same, and then that the clause omitted was not of such importance, and after
both these refuges largely confuted by the Bishopp, The state of the question.
as in part you may see before upon the examen of this place, sentence was
given against him by consent of all the deputyes, which O. E. would now gladly
have reuersed. Let us see his good reasons and arguments he brings for the
same.

To the first objection of Translating falsely Images for Idols, O. E. page
17. of his Refut.
O. E. first answers thus: As if every one (says he) that does translate
amiss, were to be charged with falsification, or as if all badd translations
of the old Latin interpreter of the Bible, were so many falsifications. And is
not this a substantial answer? we do not say ( Sir Matthew) that all erroneous
translations be falsifications, if they be of mere error, without malice, but
if yt be with plain intention to deceive the reader, and to make him apprehend
one thing for another in favor of their heresies, then can yt not be denied,
but that yt is falsification and wicked deceyte, as here now to translate the
word Idol in Theodorete by the word Image, and leauinge out those other words,
adored by the pagans for Gods, whereby his meaning was declared, that he meant
not of Christian Images, but of pagan Idols. Was not this deceyt in Plessis,
and was not this cosenage in wilful corruption? resolve you the case out of
your divinity.

And where our English Sectaryes at this day in their translatio^s of
scripture, in their Bibles do translate one and the self same word out of
Hebrew, Heretical corruption in Translatinge.
Greek, and Latin, diversely, according as yt serves to their purposes, is it
not truly falsification? as for example, the self same Greek word Idol and
Idolator they translate in some places so, and in other, Image, and
Imageworshippers: the Greek word signifyinge tradition, whersoeuer traditions
are reprehended, they translate yt tradition; but whersoeuer they are
commended, yt is turned into ordinances, instructions, etc. Whersoeuer Priests
are reprehended or spoken evil of, there the word Priest is never omitted, but
where they are spoken well of, there must come in the words Elders, Ministers
and the like. Though the Greek and Hebrew words be the self same as in the
other place. And almost infinite other such examples you may read, learnedly
laid together in the discovery of Master Gregory Martyn, M. Martins discovery
printed as 1582. cap. 1.
of heretical corruptions in translation of the scriptures. And thus much to
O. E. his first answer, let us see his second.

Besides this (says he) Master Plessis offered to prove, and most true it
is, that every Image having idolatrous or heathen worshipp done unto yt, is
Idolum. And who denies this (Sir Matthew)? can you or yours prove that the
reverence we do to the sacred Images of Christ, and his Saints is idolatrous or
heathenist? Then may you condemn all those ancient Fathers, with the
universal Church of their time for heathenist Idolators, which are alleged by
the Bishop in his reply to Plessis discourse, and showed out of their own
words and testimonies, Refut. of discourse. fol. 184. 155. etc.
that they used Images with this Christian hononr^ and worshipp, which we talk
of, in the most flourishing time of Gods Church, whereof themselves were the
cheifest flowers, as namely (to recyte some as they ly in his book.)
Prudentius, Cassianus, Paulinus, Gregorius Nissenus, Basil, Theodorete,
Hierome, Gregorius Turonensis, Gregory the great, Euagrius, Chrysostom Bid,
Damascen; and others, to whose authorityes and sentences O. E. answers here
not one word, but lets them slipp, as though he had never heard of them; and
this is his common trick when he has nothing to reply: yet notwithstanding
shall you hear him bragg, and vaunt anon when the skyrmish is ended, as if he
had fully answered all, and played his prise with great manhood.

And thus much about the first falsification in translatinge Image for Idol,
wherein O. E. has valiantly helped his client as you see. Let us now examine
what succor he gives him for the second charge, to wit, for leauinge out the
words: adored by pagans for Gods, which should have explicated Theodoretts
plain meaning, that he understood not of Christian Images, when he spoke
against such kind of Idols. To the second (objection) is answered (says he)
that the words ^ gentibus culta being set down in the allegation, O. E.
Refut ibid.
do rather hurt, A notorious shifting answer.
then help the Papists, that vvorshipp Images with kissinge, croachinge,
censinge prayinge, as the gentills did their Idols: those reasons therefore
that are forcible against the Idols of the Gentills, are also most forcible
against the Popish vvorshipp of Images. So says he. And this is all the
substance of his answer to this objection, wherein to omit his intemperat
raylinge I would have every man of reason to consider the folly and falsehood of
his answer; falsehood in tellinge us only that these words a gentibus culta,
were left out, whereas Theodoret says a gentibus culta, and pro dijs culta,
worshipped by pagans, and worshipped for Gods, wherein stands the whole point
of the controversy. His folly is apparent, in telling us, that if these words
had been truly set down, and not left out by Plessis, yt had been worse for us,
geuinge us thereby to understand, that Plessis of compassion not to hurt us more
left them out; but yet at leastwise this good we should have had thereby, if he
had left them in, as he found them; that the place of Theodorett cyted by him
against Images, would plainly have appeared impertinent to the purpose, for
that yt treated only of pagan Idols, and this had b^n help enough for the
Papists against Plessis and O. E. who from this place of Theodorete corrupted
by them, would impugn Christian Images, now let the Christian reader judge
what help Plessis and O. E. had need to have to deliver them from the note of
so false dealinge.

And this shall be sufficient for this brief examen of the 9. places aforesaid,
out of which O. E. being once gotten; harken I pray you how he craketh, O E.
Refut. page ^7.
boasts and vaunteth: If then (says he) the adversary could not get any
ground of Master Plessis in these places, which were See this to be fal^e
cap. 1.
chosen as principal, and placed first as places of most advantage, we may
well suppose if the trial had proceeded, that he would have received far
more disgrace, Ibid. p. 19.
etc. And again if a gentleman no professed divine, upon such unequal
terms, was able to make A broken head.
head against his adversaries; much better I hope should we be able to resist,
if professed divines might procure an indifferent trial, etc. And yet further:
Ibidem.
most ridiculous it is to think, that this Thrasonicall Chalenger was able to
make good that cause, which neither with lyinge, forginge, facinge, nor any
wit or policy, Great bragges.
the greatest clarks of that faction are able to maintain. And in his preface
to the refutation of my relation: It will plainly appear by examination of the
particulars, that the L. of Plessis was most unjustly charged with
falsification, etc. And we will plainly prove that the Popish sect has
gained nothing by this conference, but shame, and confusion, etc. And finally
(says he) if Persons mean to reply, let him pull of his vizard, and come
barefaced into the field, and he shall not want those that will encounter
him, etc. Thus he, as a cock of the game that croweth when his head bleedeth;
and you must further note, that whilst he cries here to other men, to put of
vizards, and to come bare faced into the field, himself lay yet hidden under
the vizard of O. E. so as that which he reprehendeth in others, he practices
in himself, which is the worst, and weakest kind of persuasion, that may be.
Christ Jesus inspire his heart with his holy grace, and mine also to consider,
not so much what makes for the maintenance of any part or faction, as for
simple truth, whereby both of us must be saved, which salvation I desire to him,
as to my self, and this is all the hatred I bear him, notwithstanding all
his scolding, and with this would I end, but that an others book of his is
come to my hands, whereof I must say a word or two briefly in the next Chapter
for conclusion of all.

THE CONCLUSION OF THIS TREATISE, WITH THE notice of another book set forth
by Matthew Sutcliffe, and the contents and parts thereof examined.
CHAP. VI.
AS I was drawinge toward the end of this Treatise, I had the sight of a
second edition of O. E. his challenge, printed again under the name of Matthew
Sutcliffe, whereby we see, that now at length himself confesses, to have gone
hidden hitherto under the veyle of those two letters, which he so much objected
to others for a fault in his wrytings. I had heard of this new edition before,
but had not had the view until now, and I do think, that if the author had
stayed a little longer, and seen the answer that is now out against yt, he
would have lost much of his appetite to publish yt again; The cause of the
second edition of S^tcliffes fond challenge.
but the cause of this hasty resolution was for that one E. O. opposinge
himself to O. E. set forth a certain detection, of diverse notorious
untruths, corruptions, and falsifications, found in the former edition of this
vain challenge, which so greatly troubled O. E. being otherwise cholerike and
impatient, both by nature and custom, as yt drove him not only to run out of
his name O. E. but near also out of his wits and right senses, in diuulginge
that which must needs turn to his utter discreditt, if I be not deceived: I
mean his former ridiculous challenge, very learnedly and substantially refuted
as I have said by VV. R. and therewithal this his new answer to E. O. who if
he reply again (as I presume he will, if the inequality of time and place, or
contempt of the author, do not let him) he is like to take exceedinge advantage
against him, as in part may be seen by that little, which afterward I do
examine out of the first two or three places objected by him.

And whereas to make up a more complet ostentation of defense, O. E. turned now
into Matthew Sntcliffe, has thought good to adioyne another supplement also of
recriminations against diverse sorts of men: this of all other things is like
most to disgrace him, when yt comes to examination, for here will be fulfilled
the poets saying: Vana and sine ^iribus ira; much malice and little power; all
which will in part appear by some short notes, 4. parts of Sutcliffes new
edition.
which in this place I mean to make upon every part of this work, which are
four: to wit, the Epistles and prefaces, the challenge renewed; the defense
against O. E. and the recriminations against diverse.

To begin then with the first part, 1. part.
this whole work is dedicated, to Sr. Robert Cecill, now L. Cecill, but with
what reason, every man will easily consider, that knows the author, and whom
and what courses he has followed, and is acquainted with his speeches of him,
whilst his best master was in authority. For my part I refuse not the noble
man's judgment in this controversy between us, of false and true dealinge,
for that I assure my self, that howsoever otherwise in affection he may stand
auersed from our Religion: yet cannot his understanding (being such as yt is)
swerve in so evident a matter of fact, as here we are to handle. Wherefore let
us make (if he please) the L. Cecill judge, and vmpire in this our contention
de crimine fal^i, desiringe his honor to take so much pains, as first to
look back upon that, which has hitherto been treated about Monsieur Plessis,
and then to stand attent to that, which in this Chapter we are to handle of
Matthew Sutcliffe, and so to give sentence, according to his wisdom, and
verity of the cause.

One principal point in his epistle dedicatory, as also in his preface to the
Reader is, extraordinary vauntinge, as though no man could match him, or durst
appear in his sight, whereof you have seen what cause hitherto he has had,
and shall do more heraafter. Sutcliffes foolish vau^ting.
I have written diverse treatisses (says he) not only against Robert Parsons,
but also against Robert Bellarmine, and their consorts the Papists; yet do I
not find any that dare encounter me hand to hand, nor have I received any
answer to any purpose, nor have I yet encountered any, that has opposed
himself to any discourse or argument of mine, etc. This to Sir Robert; but
much more earnestly after in his preface to the Reader: If Persons have not
leisure to answer me, let Garnet or Black well that are nearer supply for
him; yt is a shame to begin a quarrel and to give yt over first; for one
bout they have no reason to refuse me.

Here now I suppose my L. Cecill must needs smile, to see the man so earnest
to have one boute, especially when he shall have understood, that some five or
six books are out against him upon the suddayne, and each one of them geuinge
him so many boutes, as at length by reelinge, the poor fellow is on the
ground: albeit I must confess, that Catholic writers are come now in such a
loathinge and contempt of this man's works and writings, both for the vanity of
the matter therein contained, and perpetual scurrility of words infecting the
same, as few are willing to leese time in answering him, he bringinge nothing
commonly but absurd shifts, foolish euasions, old worn-out allegations of
others, and such excessive turpitude of tongue, as is loath some to any man to
answer him, whereof you are like to have some little last in this place, as
occasion is offered.

There follows in the same epistle dedicatory another complaint, apprtayninge
to the same vein of vauntinge, Sutcliffe accounts falsifications for trifles
ad bymatters.
to wit, that Catholics do now fly the main point of ioyninge with him, and
his fellows upon the trial of controversies, and do run to trifles and
by-matters; let us hear his words: My base and unworthy adversaries pleasure
is ( says he) to contend with me about certain small quyrks, and questions,
about certain pretended untruths, and falsifications, etc. And again. Your
honor shall perceive the great weakness of our adversaries, and the poverty
of the principal actors in the same, who abandoninge the main points in
controversy, begin now to pick quarrels at words, allegations, points,
quotations, and other by-matters, and ceasing to join with us and like divines
to argue and dispute, fall to plain calumniation and railing. Thus he.

And here again I doubt not but the Lord Vmpyre, will laugh to hear
Sutcliffe accoumpt the falsification of Fathers, Doctors, and ancient writers,
and this both in words and sense, alleging them expressly against their own
meaning, to be but quirkes, quarrels and questions about words, points,
quotations, and other such by-matters, as if two contending about some great
inheritance, and the one obiectinge that his adversary had falsified the
evidences, whereby the whole controversy must be tried; the other should
answer, that these are but quirks and by-matters. And this is the accoumpt,
which Master Sutcliffe and his people do make of false or true dealinge, or
changinge, choppinge, alteringe, or peruertinge the authors, whom they
allege, as yt makes best for their purpose: But we on the contrary side must
here profess, as men bound to strict truth, Of what importance Catholics do
hold false dealinge to be.
that we esteem highly of these matters, not only in chief points of
controversies, the belief whereof concerns our souls, but even in less
matters also, for that they discover a badd mind, and wicked conscience,
whersoeuer they are found wittingly, and willingly committed; and yet are not we
so rigorous in this point, but that we do easily allow unto Master Sutcliffe,
that which in this epistle to Sir Robert he demands for himself saying: Do
what a man can, yet may ^ther marginall notes be misplaced, or words
stand-disorderly, or things be mistaken.

This I say we easily grant; neither was there ever (I think) any
controversy hitherto between us, about misplacinge of marginall notes, or
disorderly standinge of words (so they altered not the true sense of the
authors) which yet yt has pleased Master Sutcliffe disorderly to bring in, to
the end he might seem, that the accusations laid against him, are for such
trifles: but neither these trifles, nor the mistakinge of matters themselves
(so yt be without fraud) are urged by us against them, but only where wilful
deceyt is evident, and where the deceauer cannot morally be thought to have been
ignorant of his deceyt. These (I say) are the faults which we object unto
Master Sutcliffe and his fellows, and not misplacing of marginall notes, or
mistandinge of words, points, or quotaetions; nay we may ad a further degree of
false dealinge, that has no excuse in the world, which is, Diverse degreas of
falshode and falsifications.
that where the falsehood is evident, and cannot be denied, nor by any probable
means defended, yet not to confess the same, nor to excuse yt by ignorance,
forgetfullnes, trust upon other men, or by any like error, but to continue, and
bolster out the same by other sleights and new frauds: this I say is the
highest degree of all falsehood and impudency, and used as now you have seen
both by Master Plessis in his reply after his first confutation; and much more
by Master Sutcliffe his advocate in his broken defense, and the like we shall
see practiced again by him afterward in this Chapter, upon like occasions of
defendinge himself, and his own wrytings.

Concerning which wrytings, he demau^deth in his said epistle to Sir Robert
Cecill, as also in his preface to the reader a certain privilege from the
civil law, which is, that when diverse cases are proposed by one party in law
to be admitted, or excepted against by the other, and that the other excepteth
only against some, and lets pass the rest; then yt is to be understood
(says the law) that those which are not excepted against, are admitted. Which
benefitt Master Sutcliffe would have allowed to his challenge; that is, whereas
E. O. has excepted only against some 26. places of Fathers and Doctors
corrupted and falsified by him; all the rest besides these 26. might be held as
free from corruption. Decius in I. 1. ff. de Reg. iur.
If lawyers say true (says he) that exceptions confirm the rule in cases not
excepted, then has my adversary confirmed the main discourse against Persons,
and his adherents, having not said any thing unto yt, but only excepted
against a few places, whereof he takes 13. to be untruly alleged, and 13. to
be falsified. And again in his preface to the reader: if he be not able to
except against more places then 26. or there about, yt is clear that I have
said true in the rest, and that I have argued and alleged authorityes to good
purpose. Sutcliffe would authorize the rest of his book by a privilege of the
civil law.
So he. And will not here our judge laugh again think you, to see this poor
man endeavor so diligently to authorize his book, by the accusations of his
adversary, and by a privilege drawn from the Civil law? The rule alleged of
exceptions does hold only where some few cases are proposed to be excepted
against, by the adverse party, but it holds not in a main book, where the
points are many, and almost infinite that are handled and proposed, and out of
which is lawful for any accuser to take his accusations where he will, without
authorizinge or ratifyinge the rest, and in our common law of England no man
can be ignorant, but that if one should be accused (for example) for stealinge
of 5. sheep, and should acquitte himself thereof: yet this would not bar any
other accuser, that would afterward call him into trial for having stolen
fiftye more.

Wherefore Master Sutcliffe can not shroud himself by this, but that other men
also may examine his challenge Challeng. 3. cap. 9.
besides E. O. as we have seen that VV. R. has done, and gathered out an
infinite huge heap of untruths, and if I guess not amiss, not much less
then a hundred in one Chapter. Wherefore seeing Sutcliffe is so earnest to
provoke and entreat adversaries to write against him, yt is reason he prepare
himself to answer all comers, and not to slipp away under the shadow of a
Ciuilian rule or privilege, for so much as he is an Englishman, and
consequently must be tried by the common law of the land.

And this may suffice for this first part of his new work, standinge in
epistles and prefaces, except you would have a brief example represented you
here at this very beginning, of the manner of answering and shiftinge, which
he means to use afterward in his whole discourse, and thereby know the man
and his talent even at his first entrance. Hear then how he answers a speech
of his adversary touching the continuance of Catholic Religion. In his preface
to the Reader.
My adversary (says he) calls Popish Religion Catholic, and affirms it
was planted here by Gregory the great, etc. and that it was always visible
since Christ, etc. but he should do well to show how true Religion can be
visible, for our Savior Christ says: that true worshippers vvorshipp God in
spirit, and truth, but spiritual vvorshipp and true internal devotion, is
not so easily seen; unless therefore our adversary suppose Popish Religion to
consist in the Popes myter, and in cooles of monks, and such like external
matters, he shall hardly prove Religion to be visible.

And is not this matter subtly shifted of think you? or may not this man
play his prize in this kind of fensinge, in what place soever? True Religion
(says he) is not visible. What then? yet men that profess true Religion are
visible, The confutation of a ridiculous answer of Master Sutcliffe.
and by them may the continuance of true Religion be visibly deduced; and this
was that which his adversary mea^t when he said, that the visible Church or
Congregation of Englishmen, coming down visibly from the time of S. Gregory
unto ours, and professing always one and the self same faith and Religion,
did make a visible Church, and thereby a visible deduction of Catholic
Religion, for the space of a thousand years to geather, and that this was not
only to be seen or proved by the Popes myter, or cooles of monks, (as this
merry madd minister iesteth) but by all English Kings crowns, and coronations,
by all parliament robes, and other honorable testimonies of our nobility both
spiritual and temporal, and by whatsoever other most authentical proof this
scoffer can divise. And who then will not laugh to see him, for overthrow of
all this demonstration, to start out behind a bush, and say: Let him show us
if he can, that true Religion is visible. Whereby you may somewhat see into the
man, and his wit and talent; Let us pass to the second part of his book.

The second part of this new edition conteyneth (as before has been showed) a
renewinge of his former challenge, The second part of his edition.
whereof yt shall not be needful for me to speak any more in this place,
having declared before the causes and special motiue^ of this needless
renouation, only I will say, that whosoever will take the pains to read the
brief and learned Entitled a brief and clear co^futation of avaine and
vaunting chaleng of O. E. minister, etc. By VV. R. 1603.
answer of VV. R. against the same, and the multitude of errors, ignorances,
lies, and frauds therein convinced, he will blush in Sutcliffes behalf, if he
be his friend, or laugh and insult over him if he be his enemy: and whenever
he shall make his reply for the first edition already answered, I do not think
but that VV. R. (if the thing it self be not to contemptible) will vouchsafe
to return his full reioynder, both to that and this, or at least wise to the
most principal points of them both. Wherefore we shall leave this, and pass to
the third part, wherein we shall be forced to stay and entertain our selves
somewhat longer, for examination of certain places objected against Master
Sutcliffe by E. O. and thereby see his talent in answe^inge for himself,
whether yt be better then for his client before, and albeit I shall not be able
to stand upon the siftinge of many places here; yet will the view of some two
or three of the first, give a good conjecture of all the rest.

Wherefore the third part of this new edition comprehends (as before has been
signified) the show of a certain answer, The third part of this edition.
or defense of Master Sutcliffe his truth and honest dealing in 26. places, or
therabout, objected to him by E. O. as fraudulently handled. And albeit before
he come to the combat, he do send forth those excessive vaunts, and bragges,
which in part you have heard: yet in the conflict yt self, you are like to see
the poor man not a little daunted, and encumbred. The difference also of
speech between him and his adversary will appear notoriously markeable,
Sutcliffes immodestie.
for so much as himself recytinge his adversaries words and arguments (for
besides his own relation we have nothing thereof) does scarce ever note hard
speech or phrase, used by him against himself, whereas, the others answer is a
perpetual inuectiue of intemperate scoldinge, ass, dolt, dizard in grain,
frantic, lunatike, estaticall, owleglas, and like terms, Sutcliffes
scolding.
ate the ordinary and chief flowers of his phrases, and yet notwithstanding
if you stand attent to the matter, and mark what passes in the combatt, you
will quickly lay the truth of these reprochefull phrases upon Sutcliffe
himself, and say that he deserves them, for contemning so lightly, so grave,
modest and learned an adversary, as his seems to be.

And surely if he be the man in deed, whom Sutcliffe aduentureth to name in
some parts of his annswere, that is to say Master Ph. VV. I have known him
for such, many years, and he may hold Sutcliffe to School, as many years
more in discretion, virtue, and true skill of divinity, if a man may judge of
him according to his wrytings: but this shall appear better by the
examination of the places, which I ^aue promised to discuss. And yet here you
must be advertised, that we shall not be able to make this exame^ so exactly in
all points as otherwise we would desire, for that we have not the treatise yt
self of E. O. his accusations, for which cause we are forced to allege things
only as Sutcliffe is content to cite them, whom in every thing lightly we
find both faulty, false, and faithless, and therefore if he be convinced here
by his own relation, you must be sure that yt is with more then evident reason.

The first place then objected by E. O. against O. E. (now discovered to be
Mathuw Sutcliffe) is taken out of this challenge of the first edition cap. 1.
page 20. number. 10. The first places of Sutcliffes (...)
where he avouches boldly; that the use of exorcisuis, blowinge, salt,
spittle, ballowed water, annoyntments, lights, and other such ceremonies (as
his words are) were not practiced by the ancient Church, etc. Against which
false assertion E. O. (...)
obiecteth first John Caluyn his master, who confesses these ceremonies to be
very ancient. And secondly he alleges diverse Fathers, that make mention of
the same, each one in their times, Origin, Nazianzen, Ambrose, and others. Let
us see now how this minister will deliver himself of this first charge, and do
you mark his shifts, for never mouse in a trapp, nor dog in a cannase did
seek more holes to run out at, th^^ this slippery fellow.

First about Caluyn he seems to be most troubled, esteeminge more of his
authority perhaps, then of all the rest alleged, and therefore he says. How
leglasse does affirm (for so he teasmeth his adversary, without comparison
more learned then himself) that Caluyn does confess yt (to wit the antiquity
of these ceremonies) but what if yt be true? Answer to Except page 1.
and what if Master Caluyn do not confess that which I say to be untruth?
Mark good reader, do you not see here a sound beginning of answeringe by
contrary interrogations, to wit, what if yt be true? and what if yt be not
true? but you will ask me what in the end is his resolution about John Caluyn.
You shall hear yt many lines after, for in this place he says no more. But
neither does Caluyn, (says he) nor any of these Fathers mention either the use
of the Apostles, or practice of the ancient Church; nor does any Fathers
speak of all these ceremonies together, nor can the practice of the Roman
Church, in the signs and forms of these ceremonies be justified by Fathers.

Lo here 3. or 4. holes opened to run out at; The holes opened by Sutcliffe
to run out at.
first, that albeit Caluyn confess these ceremonies to be very ancient, and
that the foresaid old Fathers and Doctors do mention them in their writings:
yet do they not mention the use of the Apostles, or practice of the ancient
Church before their days. Is not this a pretty shift? as though themselves
were not sufficient witnesses of the ancient Church? The second is, that albeit
the Fathers, though dispersedly as occasion was offered, mentioned these
ceremonies as used in the Church in their days, yet did they not set them
down altogether in one place. And is not this a more silly shift? as though
the Fathers testimonies of them in several were nothing, except they did set
them down altogether; by which reason, the Evangelists themselves may be
rejected, for that they putt not down all things together but many
dispersedly, as occasion is offered to treat of them. The third is, that albeit
these ceremonies were in use in the primitive Church, yet not in the same
particular signs and forms of words, as they are used now in the Roman
Church; for so he has a little after, that if we will be obstinate, we must
prove that the Fathers prayed in consecratinge lights, or used the same words
in hallowinge water and salt, which is now set down in the Roman Missall; and
by these and other like shifts, which for breuityes sake I omit, he puts of
all, that can be laid against him.

And it is as good a manner of answering, as a merry good fellow is said to
have used at Oxford, The interpretation of statutes by a good fellow stude^t in
Oxford.
in a visitation to avoid the punishment for the breach of certain Statutes of
his college, in the beginning of the late Queens reign; to wit, that when
the statute was urged against him, which did forbidd scholars upon pain of
expulsion to come in or go out over the walls; he answered: that is true when
the gates be open: and then being urged by another statute forbiddinge under
the same pains to bear any weapons; he answered: that bearinge is understood
in men's hands, but not as hanginge at their girdills. And by these means was
he able to answer fully all objections made against him for breach of
statutes. And so is Sutcliffe for falsifyinge of Fathers by the like manner of
answeringe. And this shall suffice for the first place. In the end whereof
notwithstanding he returns again to Caluyn as being more troubled with his
authority, then all the other Fathers brought against him.

Master Caluyn (says he) does not affirm any thing contrary to my words,
Answer to except. page 5.
for albeit he says, that he knew how ancient some of these ceremonies are,
which I deny to have been used in the first Churches; yet does he not express
how ancient they are, nor speak any thing of their several forms, etc. Lo
shiftinge and shufflinge upon Caluyn also. He did grant, they were ancient,
but did not tell how ancient; and Sutcliffe said before, that they were not
practiced in the ancient Church, and now he says; that he denied them to be
used in the first Churches; and though thirdly you should prove that they were
used as Caluyn says in the ancient Church; yet will he say that Caluyn does
not affirm them to have been in the first Churches of all; nor does he specify
the particular forms of words, now used by the Roman Church. And so will he
escape out that way; but now I would ask the discreett reader in good sadness
what scriptures, what Fathers, what most evident truth, may not be shifted of,
and deluded by these kind of illusions. Let the reader but look over the sixth
Chapter of ceremonies, Magdeburg. cent. 2. 3. 4. cap. 6.
in the 2. 3. 4. and fifth centuryes of the Magdeburgians, and he shall see the
antiquity of all these points against Sutcliffe in this place.

The second place objected by E. O. to O. E. is in the same page, where he
says: It is no Catholic doctrine of the Council of Trent, Examination of the
second place.
to denounce them accursed, that shall not hold baptism to be necessary to
Salvation. The words of the Council are these in the fourth Canon concerning
baptism: Si quis dixerit baptismum liberum esse, Sess. 7. Can. 5.
hoc est, non necessarium ad salutem, anathema sit. If any man do affirm that
baptism is free, that is to say, not necessary to salvation, let him be
accursed. And it is to be understood re vel voto, as generally all Catholic
divines do expound, to wit that a man be either really or actually baptized,
or at least wise have a desire thereof, which desire is to be understood in them
that have years of understanding, and are let otherwise by some
extrinsecal means from actual receauinge the same. And what Christian man
would reprehend this doctrine, or call it vncatholike, as Sutcliffe does? E. O.
assaulteth him with three sorts of weapons, as himself confesses. First the
authority of ancient Fathers, that affirm baptism to be necessary to
salvation; secondly the words of their own communion book, where talking of
the Sacrament of Baptism, they say, that none is saved that is not regenerate
by water. Thirdly out of his own words, diverse times repeated in other places
upon other occasions, where he says, that children by baptism are received
into the arc of Christ his Church. And again; that want of baptism sends
infants to hell fire. Whereof his adversary infers: ergo yt is necessary to
salvation; for that neither out of the arc, nor in hell fire, can they be
saved, which is the same doctrine that the Council of Trent does teach, and
adds a curse to them that deny yt. And these are the charges given; now let
us see how Sutcliffe seeks to run out of the lists.

First he stands much upon the words let them be accursed, and wills us to
show out of the Fathers that they do use the word accursed: Answer to except.
page 5.
Neither does any Father (says he) affirm, that such are accursed that hold
not baptism to be necessary. Is not this an egregious foolery? as though the
controversy were of the word accursed, and not of the doctrine yt self, seeing
that Sutcliffes own words in his accusation are: The first notable shift.
Which doctrine (of the Council) does not (says he) appear to be Catholic,
and yet now would he hide himself under the word accursed, as though the
controversy were not about the doctrine, but about the word, and yet of we
will stand also upon the curse, Sutcliffe cannot so escape, but must undergo
the said curse in like manner, for he shall find the same both condemned and
accursed expressly in the Counsels of Carthage and Miliuitanum, at which S.
Augustine was present: and upon both the said Counsels earnest request, the
same was accursed also by Pope Innocentius the first, as testifyeth S.
Augustine epist. 90. 92. and 93. And this is the first shift.

Secondly, of all the Fathers that spoke of this matter against him, and S.
Augustine by name in almost infinite places, he makes his adversary to allege
only one text out of the said Father (and we must believe him for that we have
not his adversaries treatise) S. Augustines place is lib. 3. de anima cap. 9.
Aug. l. 3. de orig. animae ad Vinc. Vict. cap. 9.
but cyteth not his words, yet answers them thus: To S. Augustine I answer,
that he speaks of such as die in original sin, and seem to contemn
baptism. Asnamelesse shifting of, of S. Austen. and the rest of the Fathers.
This is the most blockish refuge, that possibly can be imagined: for first all
men before baptism die in original sin, and secondly S. Austen speaks of
infants that have not capacity to contemn baptism, his words are these: Noli
credere, noli dicere, noli docere, etc. do not thou believe, do thou not say,
do thou not teach, if thou will be a Catholic, that infants prevented by
death, before they be baptized, can come to receive pardon of original sin.
Behold then the forehead of Sutcliffe that would wype of both this, and
infinite places of S. Augustine more expressly auouchinge the same doctrine by
such a sensles slight. Damnari animas^ (says he writing to S. Hierome)^ Aug.
epist. 28. ad Hieron.
si sine baptismo de corpore exierint, and sancta scriptura, and sancta testis
est Ecclesia. that the souls are damned, that pass out of this world without
baptism, both holy scripture and holy Church is witness: now would I demand
of Sutcliffe whether ever he read these places or not? if he did not, then must
he confess himself to be ignorant or wilful, in that he would answer S.
Augustine without lookinge upon him: if he did and answered as he does, then
is he both malicious and shameless.

But now thirdly to the authority of their communion-booke brought against him
by E. O. saying; that none is saved, The 3. shift.
that is not regenerate by baptism, he answers thus: It is impious to tie
Gods grace to Sacraments, etc. We exclude not extraordinary courses. Wherein
first (as you see) he rejects plainly the authority of the said
Communion-booke, that tyeth salvation to regeneration by baptism, and secondly
you must remember, that the question, whether this doctrine of Sutcliffe of
extraordinary courses, and sauinge men without baptism be Catholic, and
conform to the universal doctrine of ancient Fathers or not, whereof he
speaks not one word, nor alleges any one testimony to prove his opinion
Catholic, that is to say general and universal, but only says: we exclude
not extroordinary courses, and tells us not who these: ( we) are, for that
it cannot be the Church of England which set forth the said communion book,
and consequently having neither the ancient Church, nor our Church at this
day, nor the Church of England to stand with him, I would gladly know how he
will make his opinion Catholic, that is universal. And thus much of the third
shift.

The fourth is in his answer to his own words, alleged against him by E. O.
whereunto he answers thus: The fifth shift and cosenage
I do confess that infants dyinge in original sin are damned to hell fire,
but I hope no man will say, that all that die before baptism, albeit they much
desired yt, and believed in Christ Jesus, died in original sin. O slippery
evasion? our question here is Sir Matthew of infants that cannot desire
baptism. For as for others that be of age, and do desire yt, they may be saved
by baptism in desire, as before is granted. Again your immediate words
before in this very sentence, do speak of infants: for you say; I do confess
that infants are damned to hell fire; and what a fellow are you then, which say
in the second part of the same sentence, albeit they much desire yt and believe
in Christ Jesus. Thirdly you said a little before, that want of baptism did
soud infants to hell, and now you say, that infants dying in original sin
are damned to hell fire, which though in our sense is all one, that hold
infants dying without baptism, do die in original sin, yet in your sense,
that hold that infants may die before baptism, and yet freed from original
sin, is altogether different, and consequently a mere consenage, so to
alter your words for deceauing your reader.

But now we come to the last shifting answer of all, which is such, and so
unintelligible, as no man reading and considering the same can otherwise
think, but that the author was either distempered, or bereaved of his senses,
when he framed it. I shall relate it in his own words, and let the reader
judge of it. The fi^th absurd evasion upon this place.
He concludes finally (says he to wit E. O.) that seeing the want of baptism
does send infants to hell (these are Sutcliffes own words before recyted) ergo
baptism is necessary to Salvation; but his consequent is weak and of no
value, Answer to except. section. 4. page 13.
for many die for want of knowledge, and for want of small matters and not only
of baptism; and yet God is not necessarily tied to save none, but such as are
baptized: sick men dody for want of physic, and yet is not physic
absolutely necessary. In this place therefore the detector wandreth out of his
way, and yet effects nothing. Thus he; and heerwith ends his whole defense
upon this second charge given him by E. O. and suerely if he wrote yt not more
then half a sliepe, or when he was greatly distracted in other matters, I know
not what to think or say of yt. Many (says he) dye for want of knowledge and
for want of small matters, and not only of baptism. Either he means here of
eternal or temporal death? if of eternal, how can yt be caused by the want
of small matters? if of temporal, how is it caused by want of knowledge? or
how agrees it with the death caused by want of baptism, which is eternal? how
agrees yt also with sendinge to hell, which is to endure everlastingly? again
if a man die precisely or only for want of physic, then was physic
absolutely necessary to save that man's life, otherwise he did not die
absolutely for want of physic; and so whereas he accuses the detector for
wandringe out of the way, and effectinge nothing, this man reeleth up and
down in the way, and effects his own disgrace and shame with all readers
and lookers on.

And now by the examination of these 2. places you may see the fashion of this
man's answering, and how easy a matter it is, and may be for any man to take
upon him the answering of all adversaries whatsoever in this manner; and by
these two examples you may guess at all the rest. And albeit I would gladly
end here, having been longer then I purposed; yet can I not without examining
one place more, which is the fourth in order, concerning prayers and sacrifice
accustomed to be offered in old time, Examination of the 4. place about mass
and prayers for the dead.
for such as were departed this life; in which place Master Sutcliffe, being
taken trip by E. O. and much pressed with the authorityes of diverse ancient
Fathers about that matter, he beats himself up and down pitifully; to get
out of the lists, but cannot, and as a hare in the nett mesheth himself more
and more by struglinge: You shall have the commedy (for so it is in deed) as
himself sets it down in his own words, which we must believe, for that
(as often has been advertised) we have not the treatise it self of E. O. and
albeit the falsehood of this minister discovers yt self by so many ways in
every thing, as I am forced to stand in iealosy of all that he relates of
others, if yt be not for his own profitt; yet must we take his word, as I have
said, and therefore let us he are him tell the story.

Where I affirm (says he) that the Papists say masses and prayers for souls
departed, Answer to Except. page 11.
and for the dead have appointed special offices, and that my adversary shall
never be able to prove, that such masses, prayers, and offices have been
frequented by true Catholics, there howleglasse stormeth and shows great
impatience. This is the beginning of his narration, which I cannot otherwise
but suspect of calumniation, in that he talks of impatience in his adversary,
for that he shows no particulars at all of any such matter; and he that shall
see the event of this combatt will judge (I trow) the cause of impatience to
fall rather upon Sutcliffe then his adversary, if shame and confusion may cause
impatience: let us pass then to the matter and points themselves as Sutcliffe
relates them. First E. O. alleges (says he) the testimony of S.
Chrysostom, S. Chrysostomes sentence of prayinge for the dead in the masle.
Chrysostom. hom. 69. ad Pop.
that says, that not without cause it was ordained by the Apostles, that in
the dreadful misteryes commemoration should be made of the dead, knowinge
thereby that much gain and profitt does come unto them: secondly he alleges
Epiphanius Antloch. S Epiphanius.
haeres. 75. and Augustine do haeresibus haer. 53. that seem to say, that
Aerius was condemned for denying that sacrifices and oblations were to be
offered for the dead, or that prayers were to be made for them. Thirdly he
alleges Caluyns confession, that says yt was a received custom thirteen
hundred years ago, 10. Calni^.
to pray for the dead, and reproves S. Augustine S. Augustine.
and Monica for yt; finally he calls out my brother Willett VVillett.
for a wittnes against me, in that he says, that diverse ancient writers
enclyned to maintain and commend prayers for the dead. Hitherto Sutcliffe,
relatinge the words of his adversary E. O. now let us see how handsomely he
will answer the same, and do you note his art, for yt is excellent, and to
the purpose.

First (says he) in all these proofs is no mention of special offices for
the dead. Sutcliffes first shift.
Do you see which way the hare will go away? as though the question or
controversy between us and Protestants, were about special offices for the
dead, and not whether we ought or may pray for the dead or not? But yet do you
hear more of these his escapes, for he sets them forth by articles. 2.
shift.
Secondly (says he) there can no masses be showed like unto the masses of
Requiem aternam. Do you see the folly of the man? Tell me, (I pray you) what
imports yt, with what words the mass begins or ends (which the Church
upon particular devotion may institute, change, or alter diversely) so that the
substance remains, which is, that souls departed were prayed for in S.
Chrysostomes days in tremendis mysterijs, in the dreadful misteryes, as his
words are? and that deduced from the Apostles time, as by this very place of
his here alleged is evident: so as the particular form of the mass, little
imports, but only for Sutcliffe to run out under the shadow thereof, for
that neither Catholic Priests now at this day, are bound to say masses
beginning with Requiem aeternam. when they pray for souls departed, so they do
remember the substantial point, which is to pray for them in the mass, Masses
for the dead in the primitive Church.
or ad altar (as S. Augustines phrase is) dum offertur pro eis sacrificium,
August de cura pro mortuis cap 1.
at the Altar whilst sacrifice is offered for them, or as S. Cyprian before
them both said, dum sacrificium pro dormitione corunt celebratur, whilst
sacrifice is celebrated or solemnized for their departure. 9. Conf. 110 Cyp.
epist. 66 ad Clerum.


And these two examples shall be sufficient to show in general his manner of
euasions, what they are and how wittily invented. For albeit he go forward in
diuisinge diverse other, as that there were no Speciales missae votinae at these
times, and that the commemoration made for the dead then, was but a bare
recytall of their names, and other the like, without so much as offering to
prove any one point thereof, or to allege any one author before himself; yet
do I not mean to stand upon these toys to refute them in particular, the
judicious reader will easily discern of himself what substance they have,
wherefore let us pass to see how he answers the foresaid authorityes of
Fathers alleged against him.

To the place of Chrysostom (says he) I do answer, Sutcliffes shiftinge
answer to Saint Chrysostom.
that he meant only that the dead should be remembered in celebration of the
misteryes, and was uncertain what good yt did unto them. But this last part of
the comentarye is plain contrary to the text yt self, which says if you
remember, that much gain and profit does come unto them thereby, though the
words themselves as they ly in S. Chrysostom are yet more significa^t, for
that talking of the Apostles, whom he affirms to be the authors of this
custom of praying for the dead in time of the deadfull misteryes, he says:
Sciunt enim inde illis multum contingere lucrum, vtilit atem magnam. The
Apostles did know, that the souls departed were to receive much gain, and
great vtility by that remembrance made for them. The former part also of the
answer, is clearly false, to wit, that S. Chrysostom meant only, that the
dead should be remembered without praying for them, which the whole text, and
his drift in the same place does evidently convince, and the very next words
immediately followinge upon his former by me alleged are these: Cum enim, etc.
For when all the whole people meetinge together and holdinge up their hands
(in the Church) as also the Sacerdotalis plenitudo constiterit.
fullnes of Priesthood being there with them, and that the dreadful sacrifice
is proposed, how can yt be but that we shall move God, when we pray for
them; to wit the dead, of whom he speaks. Consider then good Reader) the
shameless dealinge of this cauiller in peruertinge S. Chrysostom so
manifestly: and if thou will see more places, where that Father explaneth
himself at large in this matter, read the 41. homily upon the first to the
Corinthians, and his 21. upon the Acts of the Apostles, and then you will
confess, that these are egregious companions, in so deluding their readers by
shameful shiftinge. And this of S. Chrysostom: now let us see what he says
to S. Epiphanius and S. Augustine about Aerius condemned of heresy well near
1300. years past for denying sacrifice and prayers to be offered for the dead.

Unto the places (says he) of Epiphanius and Augustine (I answer) that Aerius
was condemned for disalowinge the order of the Church in this commemoration for
the dead, How Sutcliffe shisieth of Epiphanius and S. Augustine about Aerius
and prayer for the dead.
and giving thanks for their blessed end, and this is that prayer which Caluyn
and we confess to have been in the Church a long time. Here you see that he
takes upon him to answer to three several parties, to wit S. Epiphanius,
S. Augustine and John Caluyn, and that with the same truth that he answered
before S. Chrysostom: to wit, with plain cosenage and shiftinge. For unto
the two Fathers he says (if he say any thing) that they affirmed Aerius to
have bin condemned as an heretic, not for denyinge sacrifice or prayer for the
dead, but for disallowing the order of the Church in their commemoration and
giving thanks for their blessed end, which comme moration he expounds a
little before, to have been a recytall only of dead men's names, without any
prayer for remission of sins, which if yt were so, and that Sutcliffe will
grant as he seems to do, that Aerius was justly condemned and held for an
heretic, for disallowinge this commemoration or recytall of dead men's names,
why do the Protestants also disallow the same, or at leastwise do not use yt in
England in their communion, and so by omitting the same do participate with
him in the same heresy.

But all this is shameful shifting, turning and wyndinge of a lewd and lost
conscience to deceive the reader, for the words of Saint Epiphanius and S.
Augustine are most plain and evident that Aerius was condemned of heresy, for
denyinge prayers and sacrifices to be offered for the dead: Aug. haer. 53.
orare vel offerre pro mortius non oportere (says S. Augustine) he held that
prayers and oblations ought not to be made for the dead, and do you note that
this was not yeaster day but in the time of Constantine the great, when Aerius
was condemned as an heretic by the whole Church of that time, for denyinge
these points which our Protestants deny also, and blaspheme at this day. Magnum
mundo malum (says Epipbanius of Aerius) suriosus mente, Epiphan. haer. 75.
elatus opinione, etc. Aerius was a great plague of the world, furious in mind,
and proud in his opinion, etc. What would he have said of Sutcliffe at this
time, who shows himself no less proud then he, and avouches the same
heresies, and many more besides?

But to return to Sutcliffes answer to the forsaid two Fathers concerning
Aerius. First you may see and consider, that in his former relation of the
matter, he uses a sleight of his budget, when he says: that Epiphanius and
Augustine seem to say that Aerius was condemned, etc. for they do not only
seem to say so, The beginning and cause of Aerius his heresy.
but do absolutely affirm yt, and S. Epiphanius makes a long discourse
thereof, shewinge the beginning and occasion of Aerius fall into this heresy,
to wit, that he being a Priest, could not be made a Bishopp (which S.
Augustine also touches) and that upon this envy, spite and malice, he began
to object against the clergy, that they ought not to offer sacrifice or prayer
for the dead, but only for the lyuinge, and consequently for the same was
condemned, and held always after for an heretic by the Church of that, and
all other ensuinge ages. Secondly yt is another slight to say, that Aerius was
condemned for disallowing the order of the Church in this commemoration of the
dead, as though Aerius his fault had not been against any point of Catholic and
universal doctrine of the Church, but disobedience only against some
Ecclesiastical order; and therefore if you mark yt, he never names him
heretic, as indeed disobedience to orders is not properly heresy, if it be not
against some article of doctrine. Three several shifts of Sutcliffe to deceive
his Reader.
And all these are shifts and conueyances of Sutcliffe to dazell the readers
eyes, whereas the forsaid Fathers say plainly, that he was condemned for
heretical doctrine. And S Chrysostom, as you have heard, before alleged,
affirms the contrary doctrine of prayinge for the departed in time of the
dreadful misteryes, to have come down from the Apostles themselves, and the
same in effect says Epiphanius, Ibid. page 13.
traditione a patribus accepta, by tradition received from their forefathers.

The third shift is, that Sutcliffe in this his shufflinge answer foisteth in
these words, commemoration of the dead, and geuinge thanks for their blessed
end: as thongh Saint Epiphanius or S. Augustine had said or meant so: which is
quite contrary, for they expressly affirm, that this commemoration was to
pray for them, that is to say for those that are sinners, and have need of our
prayers, which Epiphanius expresses in these words: Ibidem.
pro just is and precatoribus memoriam facimus, peccatoribus quidem
misericordiam Dei implorantes: we make commemoration of just men, and for
sinners, desiringe Gods mercy for those that be in sin, etc. Which is the
very same that S. Chrysostom distinguishes in the place before alleged of
his 69. homily to the people of Antioch: that some are greater sinners, some
less, some perfect and holy. But S. Augustine (according to his manner) more
clearly and perspicuously in these words: Non omnibus prosunt, Aug Enchirid.
cap. 110.
etc. our prayers and sacrifices offered for the dead, do not profitt all sorts
of men; And why do they not profitt all but only for the difference of life,
which every man has lead in this body? Wherefore when sacrifices either of the
Altar, or of any other alms are offered up for Christians departed, if they be
very good men, for whom they are offered, they are thank geuings, Three sorts
of men desceased.
and for them that are not very evil, they are propitiations or appeasings
with God; but if they be very wicked, then though they be no helps to the
dead: yet are they some kind of comfort for the living, and unto those
deceased, whom they do profitt, they are profitable in this, that either they
procure them full remission, or at least wise, that their punishment or
condemnation, be thereby made more tolerable.

So S. Augustine, who explaneth as you see most perspicuously the Catholic
doctrine, and cutteth of all shifts from cauillinge heretics, about the
different sorts and qualityes of men desceased, and with what distinction the
Catholic Church does make commemoration for them in the public sacrifice,
either by praying, or praising God for them. And thus much of his shuffling and
shifting away the Fathers authorityes, let us now come to consider, how he
will put of his Master Caluyn, How Sutcliffe shifteth of Calvin and VVill^tt.
and his Brother Willet alleged also if you remember against him. But as for
VVillett he makes him not worthy of a several answer, but presumes him to
be of his opinion in all points, and the like he would also force Caluyn unto,
for that having said, that the commemoration of the dead (for denial whereof
Aerius was condemned) was but a thankesgeuing for their blessed end, he says
immediately: And this is the prayer which Caluyn and we confess to have been in
the Church a long time, but makes nothing for Howleglasse his purpose. Which
I think also, nor yet for Sutcliffes purpose, if he have any purpose but only
to play the fool, and to mock and delude his Reader. For first we have
showed, that Aerius was not condemned for denying thanksgiving, but sacrifice
and prayer for the dead. And secondly Caluyn is not alleged by E. O. as
confessinge only the use of thankesgeuing, or bare recytall of their names to
have been in use above thirteen hundred years past, but of prayinge for the
dead, and for reproving S. Austen, and S. Monica for that custom, and how
chances then that Sutcliffe answers not unto this objection, which
himself had set down before with his own pen, but slideth away in silence,
as though he had never spoken yt, nay he dissembleth and omitteth the quotation
of Caluyns place, to the end we should not find yt out, but I have thought good
to note the place in the margent, whose words are; Calu. 3. Iustitat. cap. 5..
10.
ante mill and trecentos annos vsu receptum fuit, vt precationes fierent pro
defunctis: yt was received by common custom above a thousand, and three
hundred years ago, that prayers should be made for the desceased: and a
little after he says, that they were all deceived in that doctrine.

Now then do you look in Sutcliffes face, and see what countenance he will set
upon this notorious cogginge: this is that prayer (says he) which Caluyn, and
we confess to have been in the Church a long time, but makes nothing for
howleglasse. What prayer Sir? commemoration only of names with thankesgeuinge?
This first is no prayer at all. Neither do either the Fathers aforecited, or
Calvin call this a prayer, or treat of this, as by there words you have seen.
How then can it be said that Caluyn, Sutcliffe, and his brother VVillett, do
agree in this confession of this prayer to have been in the Church for so long
time? But if he speak of true prayer in deed for the dead, as both Caluyn and
the Fathers do, then how makes this nothing for his adversaries purpose,
whom fondly he terms by the name of Hovvleglasse; himself being the true
owl indeed, and worthy to be bayted by all the byrds of the air, for his
ridiculous behavior in this his answer; for yt makes expressly and directly
for E. O. his purpose and principal conclusion, to wit that prayers for the
dead, were frequented by true Catholics above thirteen hundred years gone,
except Sutcliffe will say, that the chief Fathers of that age were no true
Catholics, or that Aerius was no true heretic.

And this shall suffice for this time and place, though I might press the
poor fellow with many other absurdityes, and ridiculous refuges in his defense
of this charge, as that he leapeth disorderly to a place of S. Chrysostom,
Hom. 30. in epist. ad Phillippens.
where he says, that just men whether lyuinge or dead are with Christ. Which
is true in spirit, and then to another place, where he says; Hom. 69. ad Pop.
Antio^hen.
that just men dying, see God face to face; which is true in the first sort of
those three before mentioned by Saint Augustine, which is if they be very just.
And yet out of these two places would this simple disputer infer, that Saint
Chrysostom believed not purgatory, which is expressly agaidst S. Chrysostomes
own words and discourse, in this very place by Sutcliffe alleged, but let us
pass to his conclusion and so make an end.

Lastly (says he) in ancient time, A notorious vntrut he about praying a for
Patriarchs and not to them.
they made commemoration of the patriarks, of the blessed Virgin, of the
Apostles, Martyrs, and others, now they pray to them, not for them as in times
past. And why does not this simple shameless fellow allege some one author,
some one testimony, witness, or authority for so bold an assertion? Now they
pray to them, and not for them (says he) as in times past: But what ancient
Father, Doctor or historiographer can he cite, that ever said so, or mentioned
any such practice either of himself or others, that prayed for the blessed
Virgin, Apostles, Martyrs, or the like in those ancient days? But we have
manifest proofs to the contrary, that they were prayed unto in the mass of
old times, not prayed for. S. Cyrill B. of Jerusalem that lived above twelve
hundred years agone, has these words talking of the mass: Cyrill. Cath.
Mist. 5.
Cum hoc sacrificium offerimus, etc. When we offer up this sacrifice, we do
make mention by name of those which died before us, and first of Patriarks,
Prophetts, Apostles, and Martyrs, that God vuill receive our petitions by their
prayers and deprecations for us: Behold here, S. Cyrill did make a
commemoration of the Patriarks, Prophetts, Apostles and Martyrs, as praying
unto them, and not for them, in his mass and sacrifice.

The like says S. Basil both in his liturgy and elsewhere affirminge the very
same, for that speakinge of the forsaid co^memoration of Patriarks, Prophetts,
Apostles, etc. in his mass he prays thus: ^asel. liturg. and in Anaph.
Syriaca.
Per cos audeamus ad te accedere and tremendo hoc sacro munere defungi. Let us
presume by them and their intercession to come unto thee (o Lord) and to
exercise this dreadful and holy office. And finally S. Augustine, not only
affirms this doctrine, but yeldeth a reason also thereof, to wit of the
different commemoration, that is made in the mass of desceased Saints, and
disceased sinners in these words: Aug. tr^ct. 84. in Joan and sermon. 17. de
verbis Apostol.
Ideo quippe ad ipsam mensam, etc. Therefore do we not at the Altar make like
commemoration of Martyrs, as we do of others that are desceased in peace; so as
we pray not for them, but rather that they do pray for us. So S. Augustine.
And the same he repeateth again in diverse other places; so as this is clearly
convinced against Sutcliffe by testimony of antiquity which he presumes to
name, but cyteth no witness at all.

Now then to conclude this whole matter, A consideration about Sutcliffes manner
of writing.
let the Reader by this little make some guess, what he may judge of the
whole. And if in the examination of these two or three places only, so many
falsehoods, frauds, sleights, shifts, contradictions, and impudencyes have been
discovered, what would be found, if the whole number of six and twenty objected
by E. O. should be discussed? yea the whole challenge diligently skanned?
consider also I pray thee good reader, whether in defense of these 9. places
Sutcliffe have not used the highest degree of falsehood before described of
witting and willing deceyte, seeing that before he did set down this article
in his first chaleng about masses and prayers for the dead, yt is probable,
that he had read some ancient Fathers that made mention thereof, and yet would
he avouch that no true Catholic had used the same, but being reprehended for
yt, and told of his lyinge by his adversary, and diverse Fathers cited for
proof thereof, and his own Master Caluyn, and his brother VVillett for
acknowledginge the same, yet comes he now to affirm and print yt again in
his second edition of his challenge, and dissembleth, peruerteth and shifteth of
the authorityes both of the said Fathers, and Caluyn himself, as though they
had never ben objected against him. And what will you say to this manner of
dealinge? will you adventure your soul with such a man? or will you give
creditt any more to his fond crakinge or vauntinge above mentioned?

But we are ouerlong in this third part, The 4. part or principal member of
this edition.
and cannot well get out of it, through the multitude of advantages that
Sutcliffe gives us in pursuinge him in this his chase of defendinge himself;
yet must we sound retreat, and say only a word or two of the fourth part of
this his new book, conteyninge, as you have heard, a heap or fardell of
recriminations gathered together against ancient Popes, Counsels, synods,
historiographers, and other Catholic writers, and lastly against Cardinal
Bellarmyne, Cardinal Baronius and F. Parsons; by which ostentation of names
and authors, he would make men believe, that all the world were full of
corruptions and falsifications in wrytinge, and consequently that those of his,
and of his fellows are little to be respected; but when the occasion shall
come to answer this second edition at large, the differences will be showed,
and how vainly this little envious mouse, has gone about to gnibble at
Catholic authors edges of their garments, and particularly at the wrytings of
the most famous, learned, and honorable men of our time, Cardinal Bellarmine,
and Cardinal Baronius, who have so beaten down heresy with their most
excellent works, as by allusion we may say of them in respect of Sutcliffe,
ipsi conterunt caput tuum, tu vero insidiaris eorum calcaneis, they have broken
thy head, and thou do byte at their heels. Of the third which is F. Persons
and the objections here brought against his wrytings, we had thought to have
spoken somewhat more particularly, but lack of time and room makes us also
to albreuiate this, yet somewhat for example sake shall be said.

Sutcliffe names two books of his, Sutcliffes obiectio^s to two of F. Persons
books.
the first entitled. A brief discourse conteyninge reasons, why Catholics
refuse to go to Church. The next is called: A Christian directory, and commonly
known by the name (says he) of Parsons Resolution. Against the former book
he brings two reasons, as wise as his head can devise: the one, that he
promised to make three parts of that book, and performed but one, Answer to
except. page 182.
abusinge (says he) both his friends and adversaries with his false promises:
The other reason is (says he) for that to persuade men not to go to
Protestants Church must needs stand upon this supposition, that the Popes
Religion is true, and therefore he should first have proved this principle
before he had gone about to give reasons, to stand steadfast therein. But now
(says he) if Parsons can say nothing why the Religion in England is not
Catholic and Apostolical, then all his reasons fall to the ground. These two
reasons do well declare what a man of worth Sutcliffe is. And not to show on my
part distrust in the Readers judgment, I will not go about to refute such
vanities. For if this last reason have any force, yt proves also that no
Protestant Preacher or writer, may exhort any of his Religion to constancy,
perseverance, patience, humility, or any other virtue, except he prove first
all that Religion to be true. But let us pass to the other book, perhaps his
objections will be stronger against that.

His directory also (says he) is a most idle, Ansvvere^ to except. ibid.
and vain discourse (so idle and vain do seem all treatises of piety to this
profane minister) yt should consist of three parts, but as the fashion is, of
three promised, he keeps back two, performs the third very simply. Eight
fond obiectio^s against the book of resolution.
This is his censure of that book. And presently (as he is fertile in
invention, though foolish in his election) he comes with eight choice
accusations against yt. The first is, for that he proves Which rather does
hinder a man (says Sutcliffe) from leading a Christian life, then help him The
second. That the greatest part (says he) is taken out of Loartes, Stella,
Granatensis, and other such authors. The This was only set down for you and
yours to dravv them from atheism
third. for that yt argues Catholics to be badd Christians, that they must be
taught there is a God, hell, heaven, and the like. The fourth: That Sutcliffe
does not find, that yt has made hitherto any one Christian, or directed him to
the way of life, but many young men to the gallows. The fifth that yt Father
Persons him self yet among Christians already well persuaded, is impertinent.
The seventh. For that yt as if (says he) a man could practice that is not
entered into the exercise of Religion; or as if resolution were not far
different from practice. The eight and last,

These are Sutcliffes reasons, The conclusion.
which show the man's depth; and conform to these, are his objections picked
out of the forsaid two books about allegation, whereof I would gladly have set
down some half adozen at least for example, so to have seen the weight and
substance thereof, but that I am forced to make an end, referring my selue to a
fuller exame^ when his reply shall come forth. Now then only I am to advertise
the Reader, that he weigh with himselue what manner of man Sutcliffe is, in
these his wrytings, he vaunteth and chalengeth as you see, as if he were
agyant, and when he comes to the gryping he is just nothing: he offers to
answer for all, as Jewel, Fox, Peter Martyr, Ridley, Fulke, Sutcliffe a
Knight of the post in being suerry for many.
Plessis Mornay, and whom else you will besides, but when yt comes to the
trial, he is able neither to make good for them, nor for himself, and is just
like a knight of the post, that will offer to be surety for ten thousand
pounds, when all his own substance is not worth ten shillings.

His writings are loose, ragged, negligent, barr^n, obscure, and unsavory,
without substance either of learning, prudence, sharpnes, or good style: A
censure of Sutcliffes writings.
if you look them over, you shall find them for the most part fraught, and
furnished only with bare assertions of his own, cast out without proof or
authority, witness, or testimony, in margent or text; except in his vain and
vaunting challenge, where having to speak of matters testified by Catholic
writers both ancient and new, he makes ostentation of many quotations, and
allegations of authors, (though little to the purpose) and might have done of
many more out of every one of his fellows note-bookes; but when he goes from
that fountain, and must add any thing of his own invention, there shall he
find him, very cutted, obscure, dry, and barren, as may appear by his aunswers
before examined, both of Plessis Mornay and himself: and you may see the same
confirmed more largely, by only lookinge over the pages of his feeble defense
of Sir Francis Hastings, now battered again to the ground by the recharge of
the VVarn-word.

The principal talents then of this man seem to be extreme vaunting and
railing, whereof I have laid you down some examples before, and might do many
more especially in the later, to wit of railing, for I think scarce ever any
civil man took pen in hand to write, with that a cerbity and scurrility of
style, which this man uses against all with whom he deals, and seems to
putt his cheifest glory therein. And not to go out of the present example in
hand of his answer to E. O. who being a modest man has dealt with him very
temperatly, for so much as we can gather by Sucliffes own reply: yet harken I
pray you what manner of speech and threat he uses toward him, and to all
Catholics for his cause, and this for some kind of rusticity (as yt seems)
committed against Sutcliffes person: I will set (says he) a fellow to answer
him, (to wit Master Sutcliffe Sutcliffes raylinge in Praefat. to the Reader.
himself under some mask or vizard) that shall so curry him, and his consorts
the Papists, and that shall in such sort ripp up their villanyes, that the
whole fraternity of asses shall curse him for brayinge so uncivilly. Consider I
pray you, whether this be not a fit speech for a minister of malediction? if
E. O. should return upon him again and say: I could ripp up also for my part,
if I were delighted with this kind of revenge, for I know what has passed both
in England, Ireland, and other Islands, I know of the matter of Castle Carry; of
the arraignment and sentence given in Dublyn; the knights that did accuse or
bear witness; the words touching the bowling green of Exceter, what they
were, whom they concerned, the manner of the man's return from Ireland, and
dep^rtement in England, and other such particularityes: If E. O. (I say) should
make such a reply, and offer to stand to yt in deed, and to take out records as
he may; what would O. E. gain by this uncivil provocation, of the whole
fraternity of asses? but these so intemperate and unadvised speeches, are but
impotencyes of an unbridled mind, and therefore rather to be pittyed or
contemned, then revenged or further answered, except further necessity be laid
upon us thereof.

Wherefore to end all at this time, Sutcliffes barbarous conclusion against
Catholics blood. Answer cap. 13.
we do pardon also his uncharitable conclusion, exhortinge the prince that then
was, and the State to shed more blood of Priests, Jesuits, and Catholics;
impiety proceedinge of the same passion, and distemperature of judgment and
affection which the other did, we pass over with like contempt: we disdayn in
like manner his false and wicked, if not madd accusation, that the last noble
Queen of Scotland of most pious memory, was ruyned by Priests and Jesuits;
whereas no man knowinge the affairs of England can be ignorant, but that whilst
Priests and Jesuits, and all other English Catholics forrowed heartily, and
prayed most earnestly for her Maiestyes preservation, this fellow and his
companions barked daily at her most bitterly and spitefully, and never ceased
or could be satisfied until they had seen her most noble blood shed for
stoppinge their mowthes, yea and for drawinge her into more certain danger
thereof, their custom was to urge Priests and other Catholics at their very
deaths, and places of execution, when they prayed for the Queen, to explane
what Queen they meant, either that of Scotland, or the other of England, so
jealous they were of Catholic Priests affections toward that renowned
Princess, now with God in glory, whose death and other iniuryes, if his divine
justice shall think convenient not to leave unpunished: we beseech him, that
yt may fall rather upon such as were the styrrers thereunto, then upon others
deceived by them, and upon those also rather in this life temporally, then in
the next everlastingly; and so to his high tribunal we commit the whole.

FINIS.

