The Testaments of the (...) Patriarchs, the Sons (...) Jacob: translated
out of Greek (...) Latin by Robert Grosthed, (...) Bishop of Lyncolne, and
out of his copye into French and Dutch by others: Now englished by A. G.

To the credit whereof an ancient Greek copye written in parchment, is kept
in the University Librarye of Cambridge.



AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. 1576.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regi^ Maiestates per dicennium.

To the Christian Reader.
ALbeit these our happy days in some respect, good Christian, have and enjoy
diverse and sundry works, te^dyng to the subuersio^ of Belial, and the erection
of godliness: yet considering that as earthly, so we spiritual soldiers
seldom ru^ne to the watch without a larum: I thought it convenient to call upon
you with this grave and godly book, of long time hid in Hebrew, now come to
light in English. The malice of the Iewishe people in concealing it, by reason
of Christ the righteous, so often prefigured, was intolerable, but the
singular providence of God in preserving it unspeakable, and now at the last,
though chargeable, yet fruitful is the expressing and printing in our natural
language of this, so worthy, so golden a writ: being of it self, without the
accessory painting of eloquent speech, a Mirror for Princes, a Preacher for all
Christians, a beutiful Glass for Women: for Children, Servants, and such
like, a wise, plausible, and most ready Scholemaister. For, to apply to every
particular estate his peculiar property: art thou a Prince, a Magistrate, a
Ruler, let Judah rule thee: If thou think upon ma^ly courage, he teaches
thee valiantness, if thou seek to govern aright, he wills thee to flee
tyranny: if thou thirst after manners of life, he sounds it out, that
Uaineglorye

^^nication and Discord, blemishe, wea^en, and at length utterly consume
Nobility. Let me proceed farther, and ask a question: Art thou a Bishop, a
Minister, a Preacher of Christ his birth, life and death? behold Leuy as a
lanter^e. ^euy.
Thou can teach thy self, but he can teach thee better: thou speak to
other, harken to him that talks to thee: of thy office, how Holy it is, how
Honorable, the contemners thereof how miserable, by whom begone, continued, and
confirmed: of thy state of life, what, and how it should be, Nunquam sine Sale,
sine S^le: to be short, of thy blessedness if thou art godly, wise, and
learned: of thine and their plagues where thou lyuest, if wicked and ignorant.
What should I say more? Look upon Jacob, Jacob.
O you Pare^tes, peruse these 12. godly Fathers in ^yme and order: learn of
him and his, to pray to God in Christ his name for your Children, have a regard
to their instruction: the want of the former your Ch^ldren shall miss, the
neglect of the latter, you your selves shall bewail. For the hearty prayer of a
Father to the Almighty for his Children, is a right singular benefit: but he
that for foolyshe pity gives to the^ the bridle is before God accounted a
guilty partaker of their sinful race. Uewe this book therefore, harke^ how to
teach your selves and your Children. You have already handled a Sick man's
salve, enjoy now at length a Sick ma^s tongue, to ^n^^ruct them when you leave
them, and what to leave them when you dye: else their end will be lamentation,
but yours lamentable misery. And come you hither you Children of the earth:
Ruben.
read, see, and say that old Father Ruben with his good Brethren redely and
rightly describe the blessed path of righteousness, and the (...) way of Belial,
the one to flee, the other to follow. Wylt thou begin with the eldest, for
that old age seems wysest? stop not then the cares of thy heart and body to
so wise and sweet a Charmer. O the number, O the ouglesome portraiture of
those deadly spirits, that ^e has so orderly numbr^d, and cunningly colored.
Lechery, Envy, Glotony, Bravery, Pride, Vaineglory, Unrighteousness, Wilful
Ignorance.


All these as they seem, are in deed pernicious: but the former is most
detestable, the end whereof is consumption of this earthly body, and
destruction of the soul* which welspring and puddle of evil, if thou will have
dried up, cease from drunke^nes: if not see it, have not a narrow and greedy
eye upon a beutifull face: if not drink, stop thy mouth from busy questions
with wanton women: to conclude, if not therein be ducked and drowned, use
labor, ^ame youthfulnes. For in this I ouershooting my self, (says Rub^n to
his Children) defiled my Fathers bed. Therefore look not upon the beauty of
women, muse not upon their doings, but keep your selves occupied, either in
learning or some work: charge your wives and daughters that they (...) not
their heads, will them to chasten their looks, for every woman that deals
deceitfully in these things, is reserved to the punishment of the world to
come. Which trade of life to eschew, seeing it is difficult without the
fulfilling of the law, and the law, partly consists in mutual love: strive
with Symeon Symeon.
the second Brother to avoid strife, which blinds y^ mind, pineth the body,
provoke murder. The remedy whereof, is both forgeuing and forgetting. Take
unto thee Joseph his cherefull countenance, a perfect platform of a quiet
mind, yet set before thine eyes Simeons wythered haud, a ^ight plague for such
(...). All which disquietnes and mischief, safely to set aside, let not Judah
be set apart. ^ather by him experience, that for a man to glory in his own
works is sinful, and (...) which vpbraydeth an other man his vice, stands
slippery. Judah choked Ruben his eldest Brother with his fornication: mark, who
^^med immediately but envious and ^aylyng Judah? Did he not offend after y^ flesh
in the Chananites house? Did he not take a wi^e without consent of Parents?
two great sins, and alas in these our days to much used, yet punished, the
one with want, loss, or at the least, small joy of Children, says Father Judah,
the Patriarch: but the other (...) intolerable damage of body and soul, says
S. Paul the Apostle. Wherefore abstai^e from wine, abhore dro^kennesse, for
such a one slau^dereth not, rehearses not another ma^s sins, breeds no
sedition, but embraces love and charity with a single heart as good Father
Isachar, Isachar.
who never rayled, never was hurtful or spiteful to his neighbor, never cate
his meat alo^e but gave part to the poor, never removed the bonds and marks
of other men's ground, but loved all men as his natural Children. O that as we
read this, so we might express the same in life and conversation. Mercy and
love is a precious iuell, the maintainers whereof being jointly co^nexed
prosper, once disseuered come to naught: for the waters (says Zabulon) Zabulon.
wash away the sand, when the stones and timber are dissolved. Whose mercy and
singular compassion was rewarded singularly. Si^t his Testament, resemble his
rare charity in clothing the naked, and feeding the hungry, known and
unknown, as well strangers as his country men. D^n.
Let not the spirit of Dan possess your mind: Gad.
Suffer not the wrath of Gad to settle in your heart, for such work with ^.
perilous instruments, bitter speech, treachery, and violent hands, yelding fruit
not much unlike as you may read, as you may see. Wylt thou be taught the ready
(...) to that that thou do seek? two ways ther^ (...) (says Aser) Vice
the one, the other: Virtue, Neptalims Neptalim.
race* Embrace the latter, eschew the former. But he that walks in them both,
blyndeth men, becemeth himself, and mocketh God, whose double faced dealyng
shall be double punished. Such are the co^etous, such are they, y^ are merciful,
in naughtines, such are they says Aser that fast from meats but not from
fornication. Have therefore a simple heart with simple and righteous Joseph
Joseph.
the blessed of the Lord, the right figure of Jesus Christ: for hatred he
showed love: being cursed, he blessed: being shot thro^gh, he did not so much
as bend his bow: albeit his brethren would have slain him, albeit they cast
him into a well, though they sold him as a bond sla^e, and y^ to strangers and
such as hated shepherds to y^ death, of whom he was whipped and tormented: yet
he, when they stood in fear, gave them comfort: when they were well nigh
famished, gave them food: when by his authority might destroy, by his
authority did preserve: being their Lord, using them as his betters: being
their Brother, acceptyng them as his Children, their unkindness not spoken of,
their conspiracies forgotten, their cruel dealing most lovingly, most
mercifully forgeuen. You have heard his love toward his neighbor, harken his
obedience toward God. When he was miserably afflicted, did he rage and swell?
When he was made a bond^^^ue of a free man's son, did he cry out of heaven?
being almost utterly forsaken, did he impatiently accuse Gods justice? no,
expectans Expectauit Dominum. And at the last, the Lord which hid his face did
show his countenance, of a caiti^e, in respect, making him free, of a freeman
wealthy, of a wealthy subject an honorable personage, Lord President of Pharaos
land. Whom the Egyptians being alive loved, being dead loved, being ^otten
loved. Whom ^yuing, neither wealth nor woe could make to swell: neither
promise or threats of the Egyptian strumpet could make slide: and therefore,
being dead, neither world, Devil, nor man's policy could make forgotten. O that
our mortal race might thus begin, thus persevere, might thus, thus O Lord,
most happily finishe: The spirit is willing but the flesh is weak. Benjamin.
Learn therefore of Benjamin to inflame thy heart, that thou may be ready
both in body and soul, Let us, ^ayth Ecclesiasticus commend, and so say I,
Let us behold the noble famous men, and the generation of our fore elders.
Eccle. 44.
For many glorious acts has the Lord done in them, and snewed his great power
ever since the beginning. Upon the consideration whereof and especially for that
I would have nothing wanting in this book that might serve thy conte^tation, I
thought if as well pertinent to deal with the righteous Father, as with the
godly children. For to shadow a face only without a body has his deserved
commendation: but who so painteth a leg without a body, or a body without a
head, it shall not be amiss, as I suppose, as well to term him a foolish
painter, as to judge the thing v^discreetely painted. Wherefore as well to see
the head as the leg, and to hear the Father as the children, I have
faithfully drawn out of scripture, (and not according to my fancy fashioned)
the death and Testament of Jacob that blessed and right happy Father added to
this ancient monument of the children. Therefore to recompense my pay^es, read
them but read them diligently, neither read only, but co^te^d to follow. For
the imitation of good and godly men is the direct way and course to godliness.
So may we account of Jacobs blessing: so may we thoroughly chalendge to be his
Children, I mean, not by flesh, but spirit. The lord which made heaven and
earth, y^ Lord which gave his son to shed his heart blood for us, god which
disposes things to his pleasure, preserve our Queen, increase our faith* and
make us thankeful for his bene^ites. Amen.

Richard Day.

FINIS.
The Testament of Jacob, that he made at his death, to his xij. Sons the
Patriarchs, concerning what should be^ide them in the last days: gathered out
of Genesis.48.49. and added to this book.


Com^, hark my Sons, two things I give, my blessing and my ban:
The first to them that godly live, the last to wicked man.
Jacob the son of Isaac, Gene. 25.
borne of Rebecca, the year of the world 2108. his Father being three score
years of age, Simple or (...).
was a perfect man and righteous, dwelling in tents, not given to pleasure and
hunting, as his elder brother, elder by nature, not by grace: Romans 9.
for the elder shall serve the younger, says the Lord. Jacob beloved not of
^erite but (...) Grace.
Why? not for that Jacob had so deserved, but because God had so appointed.
Wherefore when he thus by the determinate will of God, and heavenly
disposition, which orders things whatsoever, Gene. 25.
had got his Brothers byrthright and his Fathers blessing, Gene. 26.
his Parents, cons^dering that the slippery days of carnal copulation did
approach, Gene. 27.
and warely fearing his brother Esaw, The wicked ever resist gods ^^geme^ts.
for y^ he conceived murder in his heart, and instituted a birth day of his
deuilishe purpose, sent him from Berseba to Mesopotamia to Laban his mothers
brother, Gene. 2^.
there honestly to take a wife and ^uietly to live. For Matrimony without
consent of Parents, A (...) for marriage.
and due consideration of either party co^tracted, as it breeds their
disquietnesse, so it provoke Gods displeasure. Gene. 29.
Jacob therefore after long trauile, being placed with his Uncle Laban and
serving him xiiii. years in labor and payue (albeit he was the child of
promise, Trouble and pain are destined to the elect.
the blessed of the Lord, Borne of a free woman, and y^ which is more, his
Uncles bone and flesh, and Lord of Chanaa^: not arguing with himself as the
worldly children of this earth, An example for children.
saying: shall I which am a free and wealthy m^ns son be made a servant?
shall I be a drudge in my kinsmans house, (...)
being sent to marry and not to serve) had given him by Laban to wife for his
good service (by which God blessed that little that Laban had before) his two
daughters Lea first, ^ godly note for servants.
then Rachell with their handmaydes Bilha and Zilpha: of whom, according to
the promise made unto him of God in Bethell, that his seed shou^^ be
multiplied: he begat xii. sons.xii. godly Fathers of the earth: Ruben.
Simeon. Leui. Judah. Dan. Neptalin. Gad. Aser. Isachar. Zabulon. Joseph.
Be^iamin.


Thus he b^y^g blessed of the Lord, Man's life is but a pilgrimage.
as well in Children as in substance, returned again to his native country,
he and his Children: there to live and there to die. But behold, the divine
providence of God. After three and thirty years expired, he was removed from
Chanaan to Gosen in Egypt by means of his son Joseph chief steward of
Pharao his land, whom his brethren heretofore had sold. Where when he had
lived 17. years, and seen his family increased exceedingly, to his great joy
and comfort no doubt, especially all the other countries about being plagued
with a great famine, God alw^^ provides for the righteous.
and by Gods mercy not greatly feeling y^ same, perceauyng also his troublesome
pilgrimage dra^ing to an end: called his son Joseph, unto him and said: If I
have found grace in thy sight, oh put thy hand under my thighe ( for in this
order they took an oath in Jacobs time) deal mercifully with me and truly,
bury me not in Egypt, but let me sleep with my Fathers. Where notinge his sure
faith in the promise of God made to his fathers, willed him to look for Canaan
his hoped inheritance, and not to trust to Pharaos, land. To which his
request, when Joseph his loving son obediently did condescend: Jacob taking a
little more strength unto him, and sitting up, desirous also to show forth the
great goodness of the Lord in preserving him and his, Parents ought to tell
their children Gods blessings.
said: God almightye appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed
me saying: Behold I will make thee fruitful, and cause thee to multiplye, and
will make a great number of People of thee, and will give this land to thy
seed for an everlasting possession. Uerified in (...) carnal Israel to Christ
his c^mming, in the spiritual for ever.
Thy sons Manasses and Ephraim I take as mine own, their other brethren
shall be called That is (...) be vn^^r their (...).
after their names. As I came from Mesopotamia, Rachell dyed in the land of
Canaan, and was buried by the way to Ephratha, the same is Betheleem. Then
Jacob, albeit somewhat dim for age, beholding Iosephes ii. sons, said: what
are these? to whom Joseph answered: they are my sonns which God has given
me. O bring them to me ( said Jacob) and let me bless them. I had not thought
to have seen thy face Joseph* yet lo, God has showed me thy seed. God in
whose sight my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk: God, which has fed me all
my life long vnt^ll this day: Christ.
and the * Angel, which has delivered me from all evil bless these land,
and let my * name* Comp^ed as one of his children not that they should pray
unto him b^^ng dead as (...) gathered.
be named in the^, and the name of my Fathers, Abraham and Isaac, and that they
may grow into a multitude in the mids of the earth. Then as Joseph lifted
his Fathers hand from Ephra^m to Manas^es the Elder, Jacob said: Let it be, I
know it well my Son, God has mercy on (...) he will.
he shall also be a great people, but his younger brother shall be grea^er, in
thee let Israel bless and say, God make thee as Ephraim and Manasses. (...) he
fainting said: By ^ayth Jacob (...) the la^d as yet but, hoped (...).
Behold Joseph I dye. God shall be with you, and b^ing you again to the land of
your Fathers. Moreover I * give unto thee a portion of land above thy brethren,
which I conquered by sword and bow of the Amorites. And come you hither also, O
my Children, that I may tell you what shall come on you in the last days.
Gather ye together, and hear ye sons of Jacob, harken unto Israel your
Father.

Ruben my first borne, my might, Begotten in my youth.
my strength, excellent in dignity and power, unconstant as water, thou shall
not excel because thou did defile my couch.

Symeon and Leuy, brethren in evil, who in your wrath slew a man, and in your
self will dug down a wall: Leuy had no tribe and Simeon was under Judah.
Cursed be your wrath, for it was shameless, and your fearcenesse for it was
cruel. I will divide you in Jacob, Judge. Cap. 1.
and scatter you in Israel. Blessings of Judah.


Judah Thy. A worthy cap^ayne.
hand shall be on the neck of thine enemies: Thy Brethren shall stoop unto
thee: as a Lions whelpe shall thou come up from the spoil: Thou shall couch as
a Lion, and as a Lioness. Who shall stir thee up* A (...) Prince.
The Scepter shall not depart from thee, nor a lawgeuer from between thy feet,
until Shiloh come, all nations shall seek after him. A (...) land.
Thou shall bind thy Ass sole to the vine, and the Asses colt to the best
vine: thou shall wash thy garment in wine, and thy cloak in the blood of
grapes: thy eyes shall be red with wine, and thy teeth white with milk.

Zabulon, thou shall dwell by the sea side, and thou shall be an haue^ for
ships: thy border shall be unto Zido^.

Isachar, thou shall be a strong Ass, couching down between two burdens: And
thou shall see that rest is good, and that the land is pleasant, and shall bow
thy shoulder to bear and shall be subject unto tribute.

Dan, Judge. 13. (...)* 15. 16.
thou shall judge thy people, as one of the tribes of Israel. Dan thou shall
be a Serpent by the way, an adder by the path* biting the Horse heels, so that
his rider shall fall backwarde. Then Jacob foreseyng in his mind the great
calamity, The Philistines.
that should betide his posteritye, co^sorting him self and resting in Gods
promise, tried out with heart and mind: O Lord I have waited for thy
salvation.

Gad, Joshua. 1. 21.
an host of men shall overcome thee, but thou shall overcome at the last.

And what shall I say to Aser? Number. 32.
his bread shall be far, and he shall give pleasures for a king.

Nephthalim is a hind sent for a present giving goodly words. Judge. 45.


Joseph is a flourishing bough by a well side, The blessing of Joseph.
the small boughs Increase of family.
shall run upon the wall. The Archers shot against him and hated him: but his
bow was made strong, and his arms (...).
strengthened by the hands of the almighty God of Jacob. Out of him shall come
an Heardma^ a stone in Israel. All these things come from thy fathers god
which has helped thee, All things come of God.
and blessed thee with blessings* of the heaven, with blessings of the deep
benea^^, with blessings of breasts and womb. The blissinges of (me) thy
Father (that I geeue thee,) are stronger then the blessings (that I had) of
mine elders. Until the end of the hills of the world they shall be on thy
head.

Benjamin shall raven, as a wolf, In the Morning he shall devour the pray, and
at night divide the spoil. And now when I shall be gathered to my people bury
me with my father in the cave that is, in the field of Ephro^ the Hethite, in
the cave that is in the field of Machpelath which is before Mamre in the land
of Canaa^ which Abra. Not for the holiness of y^ place, but for memory of G^ds
promise.
bought with the field of Ephro^ the Hethite, for a possession to bury in,
where as were buried Abraham and Sara his wife, and Isaac with Rebecca, and
there I buried Lea. The field and the cave that is therein, was bought of the
Children of Heth.

When Jacob had made an end of commanding all that he would unto his Sons,
having lived a hundredth forty and seven years he plucked up his feet into
the bed, ^ A token of a good conscience.
and quietly dyed, Then Joseph falling upon his fathers face, and kissing him
with tears, caused, him to be enbawmed by Physicians to the space of forty
days, and mourned for him threescore and ten days. Who departing from Egypt
into Canaa^ with noblemen of the land in Charets and horsemen buried him in y^
place which Jacob had appointed.

The Testament of Ruben made to his Children at his death, concerning the
things that he had in his mind, by the suggestion of the spirit of
foreknowledg*


Behold the pot, the hear, the bed, do note the strength, the lust:
Of Ruben and unconstant head, who therefore was accursed.
This is the copye of Rubens Testament, concerning all the things which he
gave in charge to his children, before he dyed, in the hundred and five and
twenty year of his life. Two years after the decease of Joseph: his children
and childrens children came to visit him in his sickness and he said unto them.

My children I dye, and go the way of my fathers. And saying there his
brethren, Judah, Gad and Aser, he said unto them: Lift me up my brethren, that I
may tell you and my children the things that I have hidden in my heart, for I
am henceforth drawing to my long home. Death i^ our lon^ home.
The^ standing up he kissed the^, and weeping said: Harken my brethren, and
you my children give care to the word of your father Ruben, mark what I give in
charge to you: Behold, I command you this day before y^ God of heaven, that ye
walk not in the ignorance of youthfulness and fornication, Fornication
^la^ned. Gene. 35. 49.
whereint^ I ouershot my self, and de^^^ed the bed of my father Jacob. 1. Cor.
5.
For I assure you that the Lord did therefore (...) me with a sore plague in my
flanks by the space of seven months, and I had perished if my father Prayer
and repentance stays God his wrath.
Jacob had not prayed to the Lord for m^e, The blessing and prayer of a father
to God for his children of what benefit.
because he was minded to have slain me. I was thirtye years old when I did
this evil in the sight of the Lord, and seven months was I sick to y^
death, In repentance the heart is to be considered not external action.
and with a free heart did I seven year penance before the Lord, I drank no
wine, nor strong drink: no flesh came within my mouth: I tasted not any fine
bred: but I mourned for my sin, for it was great, and there shall none such
be done in Israel. The eight instuments whereby man works and the effect of
them.
And now my sons hear me, that I may show you what I saw concerning the
seven spyrites of error in my repentance. Belyall gives seven spirits
against a man, which are the welspringes of youthful works, and seven
spirits are given man in his creation, Life.
whereby all his works are done. The first is the spirit of life, wherewith is
created his being. The second is the spirit of seeing, Seeing.
wherewith comes lusting. The Hearing.
y^ spirit of hearing, wherewt comes learning. The Smelling.
is y^ spirit of smelling, wherwt comes delight by drawing in of y^ air, and
by breathing of it out again. The Spech.
is the spirit of speech, wherewith knowledge is made. The Tasting.
is y^ spirit of tascing whereof comes y^ feedyng upon things y^ are to be
eaten and drunk, and through them is engendered strength, S^^de and of what
property.
because the substance of strength is in meat. The seventh is the spirit of
seed and generation, wherewith enters sin through y^ lust of pleasure. For
this cause it is the last of creation, and the first of youth, because it is
full of ignorance, Sleep. and of what property.
and ignorance leads the younger sort as a blind body into the ditch and as
an Ox to the stal. Among all these is the eight spirit, which is of sleep,
with who^ is created the wasting away of nature and the image of death. Eight
spirits of error and of what property.
With these spirits are mingled the spirits of error. Whereof the first is the
spirit of Lechery who lies within in the nature and senses of man. Rechery.
The second spirit insatiableness lies in the belly. Gluttony
The third spirit of strife lies in the liver and in choler. Envy.
The fourth spirit is of bravery and galantnesse, Bravery
that the party may seem co^ly by excess. The fistbe is the spirte of pride,
Pride of (...) property.
which moves a man to mind over great things, or to think well of himself.
Vain glory in what it consists.
The ^rth is the spirit of Lying or vain gloriousnes in boasting a man's self
and in desire to ^ile his talk concerning his own kin^ed and acquaintau^ce.
The seventh is the spirit o^ unrighteousness which stirs up the affections
that a man should perform the lustful pleasures of his heart. Unrigh^^ousne^.
For unrighteousness works with all the other spirits, by taking guile unto
him. Wilful ^gnorance.
Unto all these spirits is matched the vii^. spirit, which is the spirit of
sleep or sluggishnes, in error and imagination, and so the souls of young
folks perish, Discommodities of ignorance.
because their minds are dar^kned from the truth, and understand not the law
of the Lord, neither obey the doctrine of their fathers as be^el to me in my
youth. But now my children love the truth, and that shall preserve you.
Ringleaders to fornication
Harken to your father Ruben, and let not your eyes ^ gredy eye.
run gazing after women, neither be ye Close company with women.
alone with a woman that is married, neither seek you about Busy questions.
what women are a doing. For if I had not seen Billa bathing of her self in a
secret place, I had not fallen into that great wickedness. But my mind ran so
upon the naked woman, that it suffered me not to sleep till I had committed
abomination. For while my father Jacob was away at his Father Isaackes, Genesis
35.
and I in Gader hard by Ephrata a house of Bethleem, Billa fell Drunk^nesse.
drunken, and as she lay a sleep uncovered in her chamber, I went in and
seeing her nakedness wrought wickedness with her: and leaving her a sleep went
my way. Nothing so secretly don but it shall be open
By and by an Angel of God bes^rayed my wickedness to my Father Jacob, who
coming home mourned for me, and touched not* A godly cou^at.
Billa any more Therefore look not upon the be^u^tye of women, neither muse
you upon their de^nges, but walk ye with a single heart in the fear of the
Lord, busi^nge your selves about some work, Labor a preservative from
fornication.
and keeping your selves occupied either in (...)* or about your flocks, till
God give you such wives as he lifts, least (...) suffer as I have bone. I
durst not look my father in the face to his dying day, A gilty conscience is a
great burden.
nor speak to any of my brethren for shaine. My conscience byteth me^ eue^ yet
still for my sin. But my father comforted me, and prayed for me to the Lord,
that his wrath might pass away from me, as the Lord himself showed unto me.
Therefore from that time forth, ^^norse of conscience slays sin.
I was kept from sinning any more. And you my children likewise keep ye all
that I shall tell you, and you shall not sin. The fruit of fornication.
For fornication is y^ Destruction of the soul.
destruction of the soul, separating it from God, 4 making i^ to draw unto
Idolatry
Idols, because it leads the mind and understanding into error, and bringth
men to their Shortness of life.
gra^e before their time. For whor^^om has undone many men. And although a man
be ancient or noble, yet does it sha^e him and make him a laughingstock both
before Belial, Ignominious shame.
and the sons of me^. Iosephes chastity rewarded.
But Joseph because he kept himself from all women, and cleansed, his
thoughts from all fornication, found favor both before the Lord and men. Gene
9.
The Egiptian woman did much to him by using the help of witches, and by
offering him slaversawees: but the purpose of his mind admitted no noisome
desire. Look pa. and 5.
For this cause the God of my father^ delivered him from al death b^t^ seen
and unseen: for if fornication ouerrule not your mind, neither shall Belial
prevail against you, women are hurtful things my sons, Properties of
v^chast women.
because that when they want power and strength against a man, they work
guilfully to draw him to them by trains: and whom they cannot ouermatch in
strength, him they overcome by deceit. For the Angel of the Lord which taught
me, fold me^e of them, that they be ouermaistred by the spirit of fornication
more then men be, and that they be ever practicing in their hearts against me^,
first making their minds to err by decking of them selves, the^ sheadyng
their poison in to them by sight, and finally catching them prisoners by their
doings: for a woman is not able to enforce a man. A note for garish attire and
wanton looks.
Therefore my sons, flee fornication, charge your wives and daughters that
they trim not their heads, and will them to chasten their looks, for every
woman that deals deceitfullye in these things, is reserved to y^ punishment
of the world to come. An example of this (...) chief^.
For by such means were y^ Watchers deceived before the flood: as soon as
they saw the^ they fell in love one with another, Genesis 6.
and conceived a work^ng in their minds, and turned them selves into the shape
of me^, (...)
and appeared to them in their companying with their husbands: and the women
by conceiving the desire of them in the imagination of their mind, brought
forth Giants. ^eachers.
For, the ^ Wat^here appeared to them of height unto heaven. Therefore keep
your selves from fornication, Infectious (...) corrupts the ^inde.
and if ye intend to have a clean mind, keep your senses from all women, and
forbid them likewise the company of men, that they may have also clean minds.
For although continual companyings do not alw^res work wickedness, yet
breed they incur^ble stinges to them, and to us everlasting shame before
Belial, because that fornication has neither understanding nor godlynes in it,
(...)
and all enuiousnes dwells in the desire thereof, and for that cause shall ye
envy the children of Le^y, and seek to be exalted above the^, but ye shall not
be able to compass it for, god will ^duenge them, and you shall dye a
daungerfull death: Genesis 49.
for unto I cuy and I^da hatl, the Lord given the souereinty, and unto me and
Dan, and Joseph, has he granted to be princes with the^. Wherefore I charge
you, He prophesies of Christ.
hear Leuy: for he shall know the law of the lord, and deal forth judgment,
and offer sacrifices, for all Israel, til the full time of Christ, the chief
priest, because the Lord has spoken it. I charge you by the GOD of heaven,
Faithful dealing with neighbors.
that every of you deal faithefully with his neighbor, and stick unto Leuy
in humbleness of heart, that ye may receive blessyng at his mouth; for he
shall bless Israel and Judah. Gene. (...).
God has chosen Judah to be the king of all people, wherefore worship you his
seed, for he shall dye for you in battles, both visible and invisible, and
shall reign over you world without end,

Ruben having given his children the foresaied charge, and blessed them, died:
Then they put him in a coffin, and carried him out of Egipte, buried him at
Hebron, in the double cave, where his fathers slepte.

Finis.
The Testament of Simeon, made to his Children at his death concerning (...).


The heart in wom^ns mouth, the face, the sword, the Wolf, the cap:
All these paint out the cauious race, that run to their mishap.
THe copy of Simeons words, which he spoke to his Sons at his death, in
the hundred and twenteth year of his life, in the which Joseph died. For they
came to visit him upon his death bed, and he sittyng up, kissed them, saying.

Harken my children, hear me your father Simeon, whatsoever I have in my heart.
I am my father Jacobs second son, and my Mother Lea named me Simeon, because
the Lord heard her prayer. Genes. 29.
I became very mighty, I went through with my doings, and was not afraied of
any thing. Hardines of whom it is.
For my heart was stout, my mind immovable, and my stomach discourageable:
for hardiness is given of the highest in^o men's souls and bodies. Genes. 37.
In those days I envied Joseph, because my father loved him, I hardened my
heart against him, to kill him, because the Prince of error sendyng forth
the spirit of envy, blinded my mind, that I could not take heed to spare my
Father Jacob. But his God, Man purposes, God disposes.
and the God of his fathers, se^dyng his Angel, did rid him out of my hands.
For while I went into Sychem, to crary tar for our flocks, and Ruben into
Dotai^^ where all our necessaries were laid up in store: Gene. 37.
our brother Judah sold him to the Ismalits, and therefore when my brother was
come again, he was sorry, for he intended to have conveyed him safe again to
our father. But I was angry with Judah, for lettyng him go alive, and bare him
grudge five months after: Ch^^st after blood plague^.
howbeit God ^etted me, and restrained the woorkyng of my hands, for my right
hand was half withered up for vii. days together. Then did I perceive (my
Sons) that that befell me for Iosephes sake, whereupon I repented sone after,
and besought the lord to restore my hand, and I would abstain from all
rancour, envy, and follye. For I knew I had conceived a wicked thought
against the Lord, and against my Father Jacob, for my brother Iosephes sake
who^ I envied.

Now therefore my children, Envy described.
keep your selves from the spirits of error and envy. For envy ouerruleth
the. Blinds the mind.
mind of every man^^e, sufferyng. Hinders (...) susteuaunce.
him not to eat or drink in rest* or to do any good thing, and is always
eggyng him to. ^ provoke (...).
slaie the party whom he enuieth, and ^inyng. Pineth at
away at his prosperity. men's prosperity.
Two years together I punished my soul with fasting in the fear of the
Lord. For I knew, A remedy against envy.
that the way to deliver me from envy, was the fear of the lord. If a man
flee to the lord, the wicked spirit flees from him, so as his mind becomes
meke, and of spiteful, he becomes pitiful, bearyng no grudge toward such
as love him, and so his envy cease. And because my father saw me sad, he
asked me the cause of it. To whom I lied, saying: I have a pain in my
stomach: for I was foriest of all my brothers, for that I had been the cause
of Iosephes sellyng into Egipte. Gene. (...).
And when I came into Egypt, and was put in ward by him as a spy: Then
perceived I that I was justly punished, and I was not sorry for it. Joseph
merciful to his brethren.
But Joseph being a good man, and having Gods spirit in him, and being full of
pity and mercy, Gene. 50.
minded not to do me any harm, Look page 71.
but loved me as well as theresidue of my brethren. Therefore my children,
keep your selves from all spite and envy, and walk in singleness of mind,
and good conscience, after the example of your fathers brother, that God may
give you grace, glory, and blessedness upon your heads, I sure toke^ of a
good nature.
as you see in him. Of all the days of his life, he did never cast us in the
t^th with it, but loved us as his own soul, and more then his own Children,
honoryng us, and geuyng us riches, Cattle, and Corn abundantly. You
therefore my children, love ye one an other with a good heart, and put from you
the spirit of Envy: Properties of envy.
for, it makes a man's soul to. Cor^uptio^ of life.
grow savage, Distemperature of body.
marreth his body, bredeth wrath, and war in his thoughts, sets his
blood on fire, drives him out of his wits, and suffers not reason to bear
any swaie. Moreover, Small sleep.
it takes away his sleep, disquieteth his mind, and makes his body to
tremble: For even in sleep some spice of imagined malice guaweth him, combryng
his soul with Spirits of mischief, making his body ghastly, and his mind
afrighted with trouble, and appearyng unto men, as it were with a pernicious
spirit, and pouryng out of poison. Genes. 39.
Therefore was Joseph fair of face, ^ token of a quiet mind.
beautiful, and comely to behold, because no wicked thing dwelte in him. For
he had a count enance clear from comberaunce of mind. And now my children,
let your hearts be meke before the lord, and walk right before man: so shall
ye find favor both with God and man: and beware, that ye fall not to
whoredom. Effects of who^edome.
For whoredom is the mother of all naughtiness, separatyng a man from God,
and sending him to Beliall. Genes. 49.
For I have seen in Enockes writings, that you and your children shall be
corrupted with whoredom, and do Leuy wrong by the sword. But they shall not
prevail against Leuy, because he shall ^ight the lords battles, and take
all your tents, and very few shall be divided in Leuy and Judah, Genes. 49.
for he shall be your Capitai^e, and my father Jacob prophesied in his
blessings. Behold, Parents teaching not their childr^^ are guilty.
Commodities of concord.
I tell you al things aforehande, that I may be clear from the sin of your
souls, Now, if you put from you all enuiousnesse, and all stifneckednesse, all
my bones shall florishe as a Rose in Israel, and my flesh as a Lilly in
Jacob, and my savor shall be as the sent of Libanus, and my holy ones shall be
multiplied as the Ceders for ever, and their boughs shall spread out in
length for evermore. Then shall thee seed of Chanaan perish together, Exodus
17.
with the remenaunte of Amalecke. All the Capadocians shall perish, and all
the Schithians shall be destroyed. Then shall the land of Cham fail, and all the people go to wrecke. Then shall all the ^earth rest from trouble, and all
men under Heaven from war. Then shall Sem be glorified, when the great
Lord God of Israel appears upon earth as a man, to save Adam in him. Then
shall the spirits of error be trodden under foot, and men shall reign over
hurtful sie^des. (...).
The^ shall I rise again in joy, and bless the highest in his wonderful
works: for God taking a body upon him, and eating with men, shall save men.
And now my children obey Leu^ and you shall be delivered by Iuda^ and ^^uauce
not your selves above these two Tribes, The fruit of ^^^dience.
for of them two shall the saving health of God spring unto us. Gene. 49.
For the Lord shall set up, of Leuy the Prince of Priests, and of Judah the
king of kings, God and man. So shall he save all the Gentiles, and the
offpryng of Israel. For these things sakes I charge you to command your
children, (...) for (...).
to keep these things throughout al their generatio^s.

And Simeon making an end of these his sayings, and commandments to his
children, slept with his Fathers, when he was of the age of a hundred and
twenty years. And they laid him in a Coffin of woodde that rotteth not, that
they might carry his bones again into Hebron, and they conveyed him privily in
the war of the Egiptians. For the Egiptians kept the bones of Joseph in the
Kings treasury. For, their I^cha^ters told them, that, whenever Iosephes
bones were carried away, there should be such a plague of miste and darkness
among the Egiptians, as one Brother should not know an other, no not even by
torch light. And Symeons Children bewailed their Father according to the Law
of mournyng, and continued in Egypt, till the day of their departing thence
under the hand of Moses.

The Testament of Leuy^ (...) his Children at his death conce^nyng Priesthood.


The sin, be just, rage not give light,
Ye Preachers of Gods word:
For what thing else shows Sun and Moon,
Dame Venus, Wolf and sword.
THe Copye of Leuyes words, namely, which he spoke to his children, concerning
all the things, which they should do, and which should happen to them unto
the day of judgment. He was in health when he called the^ unto him, for he
knew before* when he should dye. Therefore, when they were come together, he
said unto the^:

I Leuy was bred and borne in Carram, Leuy his birth and country.
and afterward came with my father into Sichem. Genes. 14.
I was at y^ time but young, about xx. years old, when I helped my brother
Simeo^ to revenge our sister Dina against Hemor. Now as we were feedyng of our
flocks in Abe^^naul, the spirit of y^ understanding of the Lord came upon me,
and I saw all men vnderminyng their own ways, and how unrighteousness had
builded her self a fortress, and wickedness sat upon the towers thereof.
Love of a true Pas^or.
And I was sorye for mankind, and besought the Lord to save them. Then fell
there a sleep upon me, and I saw a high mountain: It was the mountain of
Aspis in Abelmaull. The visson of Leuy.
And behold, the heavens opened, and the Angel of God said unto me: Christ.
Leuy, com^ hither: and I went from the first heaven to the second, and there
saw the water hanging between the one and the other. And I saw the third
heaven much brighter the^ them both: ^or* the height thereof was infinite. And I
said to the Angel, what means this: Christ.
And the Angel answered me, marvel not at these things; for thou shall see
four heavens yet brighter, and without comparison, when thou come up to
them. Ministers wha^ they are* and their o^^ice.
For thou shall stand by the Lord, and be his minister, and utter his secrets
unto men, and preach of the deliverer of Israel which is to come. By thee and
by Judah the Lord will appear to men, to save al mankind in them. The living
of the ministry from whence.
Thy life shall depend upon the Lord, by him shall thou have thy fields,
vineyardes, fruits, gold, and silver. Therefore harken as touching the seven
Heavens. The description 1. of the seven heavens, his vision.
The lowest is most lowering, because it is nerest to all the unrighteousness of
men. The second, has fire, Snow, and the day of judgment, to take vengeance
upon the spirits of error and of Belial. In the fourth above these are the
(...)
Because that men will continue in unbelief and unrighteousness. even when the
stones shall cleave a sunder, the Sun be darkened, the waters dried up, the
fire quake, and al creatures b^^ro^bled at the faintyng of the invisible
Spirits, and at the spoiling of hell in the passion of the Highest: therefore
shall they be condemned to punishment. The highest then has heard thy
prayer, to separate th^e from unrighteousness, and to make thee his son and
servant and a Minister in his presence, A minister what he should be: of him
self not righteous.
a Lantern of knowledge to lighten Jacob thoroughly, and to be as a day Sun
among the children of Israel, and unto thee and thy seed shall ^he power of
blessyng be given, Math. v. End of the Priesthode prophes^ed. Christ his
^assion pro^hes^ed.
till God visit al nations in the bowels of the mercy of his son for ever.
Nevertheless thy Sons shall lay their hands upon him to crucify him, and
for this cause is wisdom and understanding given thee, to give thy children
knowledge of him, because that if they bless him, they shall be blessed, and
they, that curse him, shall perish in his sight. Christ.
And the Angel opened me the gates of heaven, and I saw the holy temple, and
the highest sittyng on the throne of glory, and he said to me: Leuy, I have
given thee the blessings of the priesthood, till I come my self to dwell in
the mids of Israel. Then the Angel brought me down to the earth, and gave
me a shield and a sword, saying: execute vengeance in Sichem for Dina, and I
will be with thee, for God has sent me. And at that time I slew the Sons of
Hemor, ^enes. 34*
as it is written in the tables of Heaven. And I said unto him, lord I pray
thee tell me thy name, that I may call upon thee in the time of my trouble. And
he answered, I am an * Angel which excuses Israel, Christ (...).
that he might not be stricken for ever, because all wicked spirits lie in
wait for him. Afterward, being waked, as it were out of sleep, I blessed the
most highest, and the Angel that excuses the offspring of Israel, and all
righteous men. And when I came to my Father, I ^ounde an Asp of brass,
whereupon the hill took the name of Asps, which is hard by Gebat on the
right side of Abyla. And I laid up these sayings in my heart. I counseled my
father and my Brother Ruben to persuade the sonns of Hemor to be circumcised,
The zeal^ a minister Genes. 34.
because I was zelously grieved for the abomination, which they had wrought in
Israel. For first of al I killed Sichem, and then Simeon killed Hemor, and
after us came our brethren, who smote the City the edge of the sword. Genes.
34.
When my Father heard of it* he was angry, Genes. 49.
because they had received circumcision, and were killed afterward, and
therefore he dealt otherwise with us in blessing. For we ^^nned in The manner
not the doing rebuked.
doing it against his will, and he fell sick the same day. The S^nne of the
Sichemites.
But I knew that the Lord intended evil unto the Sychemites, because they had
heretofore purposed to have done the like unto Sara, as they did to our sister
Raped Dina.
Dina. But GOD let them. And they persecuted our father Persecuted
strangers.
Abraham as then a stranger, and carried away his cattle, and furdermore did
beat Ieblae very sore, who was borne in his house. After the same manner delte
they with all other strangers, Genes. 12.
taking Ravished their wives.
away their wives from them by force, and driuyng the men themselves out of
their country. For which cause the wrath of the lord came upon them in the
end. And I said to my Father: Sy^ be not offended, for GOD will bring the
Chananites to nothing before thee, and give their land unto thee, and unto thy
holy one after thee. For from he^ceforth Sichem shall be called the City of
fools, because that as men do scorn fools, so have we scorned them for
their workyng of folly in Israel^, in taking away our sister to defile her.
Then came we into Bethell, and there when I had Sacrificed three score and ten
days together, Gene.xxx^
I saw ^he thing again, as I had seen it before. And I saw ^euen men in
white raiment, saying unto me: The Min^^sterie descr^^^bed.
Up, put on the Stole of Priestehoode, the Crown of righteousness, the
Reasonall of understanding, the Robe of truth, ^xod.xxvii^^ Leuit.viii.
the Breastplate of faith, the Mitre of holiness, and the Ephod of Prophecy.
And so every of the^ bryngyng somethyng with him, did put them upon me, saying:
Be thou henceforthe the Lords Priest, thou and thy seed for evermore. The
^irste anointed me with holy Oil, and gave me the Scepter of judgment. The
second washed me with clean water, and ^edde me with bread and wine, that is
to wit, with the holy of holies, and clothed me with a holy and glorious Robe
down to the ground. The third did put upon me a Silken garmente, like an
Ephod. The fourth girded me with a gird^e like to purple. The fifth gave me an
olive bough full of fatness. The sixth did set the Mitre of Priesthode upon my
head. The seventh filled my hands with Incense, to the intent I should execute
the office of Priest unto the Lord. And he said unto me: Leuy, unto three
principal things is thy seed appointed of GOD, The th^^e blessyng es of the
famely of L^^y.
namely to be a sign of the glorious lord that is to come* and he, that
believes, shall be the first. The great lot shall not fall upon him. The
second shall be in priesthood. Christ Prophes^ed.
And the third shall have a new name, because a king shall rise up in Judah, and
ren^e my Priesthood, according to the figure of the Gentiles, among all
nations. But the coming of him is unutterable, as who shall be the P^ophet of
the highest, borne of the seed of our Father Abraham. All the pleasant things
of Israel shall be given to thee, and to thy seed, A distributyng excludes a
sole receiuyng of the Sacraments.
and ye shall eat all that is fa^re to see to, and thy seed shall distribute
the Lords Table, and of them shall be high Priests, Judges, and Scribes: for
in their mouth shall the holy things be kept. When I awooke, I perceived,
that this vision was like the other, and I laid it up in my heart, and showed
it not to any man living upon earth. The first two days I and Judah went to
our Grandfather Isaac, and he blessed me, according to all the sayings of the
visions that I had seen, but he would not go with us unto Bethel. But when we
came to Bethel, my father Jacob saw in a vision concerning me, that I should
be their Priest before the Lord. And he rose in the Morning, and tithed all
things to the lord by me. Then came we to Hebron to dwell there, and by and
by Isaac called me, to expound the law of the lord, according as Gods Angel
had showed it me, Exodusxxix. Leuit. (...).
and he taught me the Law of Priesthood, Sacrifices, Burnt offerynges,
Firstlings, Freewill offerynges, and offerynges for health. Every day he
taught me understanding, and called upon me continually before the lord,
saying: ^n exhortation for Ministers.
my son, give no ear to the spirit of fornication, for he will follow thee
and defile the holy things by thy seed. A Minister may be ma^^ed.
Therefore take thee a wife in thy youth, such a one as has not any blemishe
nor uncleanness, Leuit.xxi.
nor is of the kindred of the Allophites, He must come with a pure mind to
execute his office.
or of the Gentiles. And before thou enter into the holies, wash, did likewise
ere thou sacrificest, and also when thou have done, Offer unto the lord the
fruits of the twelve trees that are ever grene, Leu. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
as my father Abraham taught me to do: and the fruit of all clean beasts,
and of clean fowls offer thou in Sacrifice. Likewise offer up the first borne
of all things, and the first fruits of the vine, and sprinckle all thy
Sacrifices with salt. Now therefore my sons, keep ye all the things that I
command you: for* whatsoever I have heard of my fathers, that have I told
unto you. A comfort for godly parents.
I am clear from all the wickedness and sin, which you shall commit to the
end of the world. Prophes^e of the destruction of Israel.
Ye shall work wickedness against the Savior of the world, The (...)
plagued, whose ministry is wicked.
and ye shall seduce Israel, stirring up much evil against him from the lord
and dealyng wickedly with him, so that Jerusalem shall not continue, by reason
of your naughtiness. The Ueile of the Temple shall be rent asunder, to
discover* your foulness, and ye shall be scattered as prisoners among the
Heathen, and be scorned, curssed, and trodden under foot. Nevertheless, the
house which the lord shall choose, shall be called Jerusalem, as the book
of Enoch the righteous contains. (...).xxxvi. Leuy his ^rogenie.
Therefore when I was.xxviii. years old, I took a wife, whose name was
Melcha, and she conceived and bare me a Gershon, because we were but strangers
in our land:

For Gershon signified banishement. Now I knew of him, that he should not be
of the chief degree. The second was Caath, Caath, which signifies the
beginning of greatness, and learning. The third was Merari, who was borne in
Merari, which Exodusvi.
as my bitterness. And in the three score and fourth year of my life, was my
daughter Iochebed borne in Aegipt: and so was I honorable among my brethren.
Also my soonne Gershon took a wife, which bare him Libny and Schimi. The
sons of Caath were Amram, Ysh^ar, Hebron, and Vziel: and the Soonnes of
Merari were Mahaly and Mushi. In the four score and fowerteenth year of my
life, Amram took to wife my daughter Iochebed, because that he and she were
borne both on one day. Leuy made Priest at.18. years.
I was eight year old, when I entered into the land of Chanaan: and eighteen
year old, when I entered the office of Priesthood. At eight and twenty years
I took a wife, and at forty years old I entered into Egypt. And behold,
Married at xxviii.
ye be now my Childrens children in the third generation. Joseph died in the
hundred and tenth year. And now my Children, A note for Pa^entes.
I warn you, fear the Lord your GOD with all your heart, and walk plainly
in all things, according to his Law. Moreover, bring up your children in
learning, that they may have understanding by readyng the law of God, without
ceasyng all their life long. For whosoever knows Gods law shall be honored,
B^ e^^ynges of the learn^^ minister.
and go wheresoever he will, he shall be no stranger. Also he shall have more
freindes then his forefathers had, and many shall be glad to serve him, and
to hear the law at his mouth. My sons, deal rightfully upon earth, that
ye may find heaven, and sow good things in your minds, that ye may find
them in your life. For if ye sow evil things, ye shall find and reap all
manner of combraunce and trouble. W^sedome a prectous Jewel.
Get ye wisdom in the fear of God: For if captivity come, and Cities and
Countries be destroyed: gold and silver, and al possessions perish, but none
can take away the wise man's wisdom, Sin binds wi^do^.
save only the blindness of ungodliness and sin. For, his wisdom shall
become a shield to him among his enemies, Co^modit^es of wisdom.
and make a strange country to be as his own home, and cause him to find
friendship in the midst of his foes. If he teach and do such things, he
shall sit with kings, as did our brother Joseph. And truly my children,
Christ his death, and spitfulnes of the Jews Prophesled.
I know by the writings of Enoch, that in the end ye shall do wickedly,
laiyng your hands most spitefully upon the lord, and through you your
brethren shall be confounded, Math.xx^ii.
and made a scornyng stock to all Nations. Howbeeit our Father Israel is
clear from the wickedness of the high Priests, which shall say hand upon
the Savior of the world. The heaven above the earth is clean, and you be the
lights of the Heathen, as the Su^ne and the Moon. What shall all the Heathen
Ministers what the^ are
do, if you be ouerdarckned with wickedness, and bring cursednesse upon your
country folk, for whose sakes the light of the world is put into you, to
inlighten al men withal; this light of the world shall you wilfully ste^, and
teach commandments contrary to the righteousness of God. He shall purloine
yn^ Lords offerynges, and such away pieces of it. The wicked Priesthood and
their misery desc^ibed.
Before ye do your Sacri^ices to the Lord, ye shall steal away the
choiceste things, and eat them disdainfully with Harlottes, ^ ^amuel. ^.
teaching Commandments of coueteousnesse. Ye shall defile Married women, and
enforce Maidens in Jerusalem. Ye shall match your selves with Whores and
Harlottes, ye shall take the Daughters of the Heathen to wife* purifiyng them
with unrighteous purifiyng, and your minglyng shall be as Sodom and
Gomorrha, and ye shall be swollen with wickedness in the Priesthood, in so
much that ye shall disdainefully laughe the h^lie things to scorn, not only
vauntyng your selves against men, but also being puffed up with Pride
against the Commandments of GOD. A prophesle of their destru^^ion.
For this caus^ shall the Temple, which the Lord shall have chosen* be
undoubtedly left desolate in vn^leannesse, and you your selves become captives
to all Nations, and be lothed and abho^red* among them, and receive endelesse
shame and confusion, through God^ rightful judgment: and all, that see you;
shall shun you. And were it not for our fathers Abraham, A Prophes^e of
Christ's persecution.
Isaac and Jacob: there should not one of my seed be left upon earth.
Furdermore, I know by the book of Enoch, that you shall go astray by the
space of threescore and ten we^kes, and defile the Priesthood, Mark the
right portrature of the sh^uelyng generation.
stayn^ the sacrifices, destroy the Law, despise the sayings of the
Prophets, frowardlie persecute righteous folk, hate the godly, abhor the
sayings of soothfa^e men, and call him Heretic, that goes about to re^ue
the Law by the power of the Highest: and in the end ye shall kill * him out
of (...) as you think, Christ and his members.
not knowing that he shall rise again, and so shall ye receive his in^ocent
blood wilfullye upon your own heads. For his sake shall your holy places be
left desolate, which you shall ha^^ defiled, even by utter forswearyng* and
your dwelling shall not be clea^e* but you shalb^e accursed among the Heathen,
and despair shall vex you, till he visit you (...), and mercifully receive
you th^^^gh faith and water. And forasmuch as y^ have ^earde of the three
score and ten weeks, Ergo faith and the holy Ghost justifies, and not merits.
^eare ye also of the Priesthood. For in every Iubiley shall be Priesthood. In
the first Iubiley the first anointed into^the Priesthood shall be great,
and talk to God, as to his father, and his Priesthood shall be full of the
fear of the Lord, and in the day of his gladness he shall rise up children,
and beasts. After that the Lord has sent vengeance upon them in the
priesthood, Christ and his true ministry described.
then will God raise up a new priest, to whom all the Lords word shall be
opened: and he shall execute true judgment upon earth many days, and his
star shall rise in heaven. As a king shall he shead forth the light of
knowledge in the open sunshine of the day, and he shall be magnified over all
the world, and be received and shine as the sun upon the earth, Christ
lighteneth the world.
and drive away all darkness, and there shall be peace upon all the earth.
In his days the heavens shall rejoice, the earth shall be glad, the clouds
shall be merry, the knowledge of the Lord shall be poured out upon the earth
as the waters of the Seas, and the Angels of glory that are in the Lords
presence, shall rejoice in him. Baptism of Christ pr^phes^ed.
The heavens shall be opened, and out of the temple of glory shall
sanctification come upon him with the fathers voice, as from Abraham the Father
of Isaac, and the glory of the highest shall be spread out upon him, and the
Spirit of understanding and sanctification shall rest upon him, whereof he
shall give aboundantlye and mightily to his children in truth for evermore,
(...) Priesthood shall succeed Christ.
and there shall none succeed him from generation to generation, world
without end. In his Priesthood all sin shall come to end, Priesthood of
Christ how beneficial.
and the unrighteous shall cease from their naughtiness, but the righteous
shall rest in him, and he shall upon the gates of Paradise, and stay the
threatnyng sword against Adam, Christ is our propitiatour.
and feed the Lambs with the fruit of life, and the spirit of holiness shall
be in them. He shall bind up Beliall, Christ g^neth power to his to to tread
down spirits.
and give his own children power, to tread down hurtful spirits, and the
Lord shall rejoice in his children and accept them as his beloved for
evermore. Then shall Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob be glad, and then shall I and
all Saints rei^yce. How my children ye have heard all. Therefore choose unto
you either light or darkness, either the law of the Lord, or the works of
Beliall, and we answered our Father, saying: We will walk before the Lord
according to his law. And our father said, the Lord is witness, and his
Angels are wit^^sses, and I am a witness, and you your selves are witnesses of
the words of my mouth: And when we had answered, were will her witnesses,
Leuy rested with this charge given unto his Children.

And he stretched out his feet, and was put to his Fathers, when he had lived
^ hundredth and seven and thirty years, an^ they laid him in a Coffin, and
buried him afterward in Hebron, besides Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

Finis.
The Testament of Judah made to his children, at his death concerning
valiantness, covetousness and fo^nication.


Lo here the blessed Princely state.
Of Judah* suffering not his mate:
The Seepter, Lion, Pursse and Crown,
Betoken glory and renown.
THe copy of all the sayings of Judah, which he spoke to his children, at the
time of his death, when they were come together before him, he said unto them.

I was my fathers fourth son and my mother called me Judah saying: Judah his
exhort^^^^.
I thank thee Lord for that he has given me a fourth so^nne. G^nes ^9. The
(...) of children.
I was swifte of foot and painful in my youth, and obeyed my Father in all
things, and blessed my mother and my mothers sisters. And when I came to man's
estate my Father Jacob prayed over me saying: thou shall be a King and
prosperous in all things. (...) of Judah by the gift of God.
Behold, God gave me grace in all my works both abroad and at home. Upon a
time I saw a ^inde and ran after her and caught her, Genes. (...).
and made meat of her for my Father. Also I ^utran the Roes, and ouertooke all
things that were in the fields, in so much The m^nhood Judah.
and taking him by the paw ouerthrewe him, and rent asunder all wild beasts
that turned upon me, as if I had four to flight. Also our Father Jacob slew
the Giant Beelisa king of all the Kings, The valiantness of Jacob.
who was mighty and houge of the stature of twelve cubits. By reason whereof,
fear fell upon them, and they left their fightyng against us. For this cause
my father was careful of me when I was in any battle with my Brethren. He
saw in a vision concerning me, that the Angel of strength followed me every
where, to the intent I should not be overcome. The second handsell was a
greater battle to us than that which we had at Sichem, in so much that in
fightyng valiantly with by Brethren, I chased a thousand men, and flewe of them
two hundredth persons, and four of their Kings, and followyng after them
scaled the Wall of their City, and there slew two kings m^, and so we
delivered Hebron, and led them all away as prisoners. The next day we went to
a strong walled and vnapprocheable City called Areca, which threatened to kill
us. Therefore I and Gad went to the eastside of the City, and Ruben and Leuy
to the West and Southside. They that stood upon the walls, supposyng there
had been no mo but Gad and I, did set si^rcely upon us, while in the mean^
time my Brothers that lay in stale, brake but upon the other two sides, and
scalyng the wall with Ladders, entered the City ^re our enemies wist it, and so
we won it by the sword, and set fire upon the tower, and burnt it up with
such as were fled unto it. As we returned, the men of Thaffie town, got to the
higher places, and destroyed the whole City. The next day it was told us that
the Cities of two kings came against us with a houge Host. I I Chamma, and my
Father builded Rambahel. Twenty years old was I when this War was made,
and the Chanani^es were afraid of me and my brethren. I had much cattle, and
my chief Herdman was Yran of Odellam, in whose company I saw Barsa King of
Odellam, who made us a feast, and with much intreatance gave me his daughter
Bethsue to wife, which brought me forth Er, Anan, and Sylon, of which three
GOD slew two childlesse. For Sylon lived of whom some of you be the children.
My father and we made eightene years peace with his brother Esau and his
Children. When the eighteen years were past, after our coming out of
Mesopotamia, in the forteth year of my life, Esau our Fathers brother came
upon us with a great and strong host, and was slain by the bow of Jacob, and
conveyed away dead unto mount Seir. We also followed upon the together, I put
my helmet upon my head and in sight of them all set up a ladder, and scaling
the wall slew four of their noble men with a Stone of the weight of three
talentes. The next day Ruben and Gad went in and slew three score other. Then
they offered peace, and we by our fathers advice received them to tribute. And
they gave us two hundred quarters of Corn, five hundred Bates of Oil, and a
thousand and five hundred measures of wine, until we went down into Egypt.
After this my Son Her married Thamar of Mesopotamia the Daughter of Aram. Her
and Anan slain, for not using the benefit of lawful marriage.
Now Her was a wicked I my and doubted of Thamar, because she was not of the
land of Chanaan. Therefore the Angel of the Lord slew him the third night
after his marriage, when he had not yet companied with her by reason of his
mothers subtlety, and so dyed in his naughtiness, for she was loath that he
should have had any children by he^.

When Anan was mariageable; I gave Thamar unto him, and he also of a spite
companyed not with her, notwithstanding that he lived a full year with her.
And when I threatened him, then he companied with her, but yet by his mothers
commandment he let his feed fall upon the ground, and so he also died in his
wickedness. I minded to have given her unto Silon also, but my wife Bethsue
would not suffer me. For she spited Thamar because she was not of the
daughters of Canaan, as her self was, now I knew that the offspring of Chanaa^,
was mischievous, but yet did youthful fancy blind my heart, and as I beheld
her pouring out wine I was deceived by dronkennes and fell in love with her.
Fornication (...) of ^runkennes.
Upon a time while I was away, she married Silon to a Woman of Chanaan, which
her deed when I understood I cursed her in the bitterness of my soul* and so
she dyed in the wickedness of her sons. A two years after these things as I
went to there my sheep, Genes (...).
Thamar decky^g her self like a Bride, sat her down at a gate of the City.
In intolerable custom of the Ammorues.
For it was the custom of the Amorites that their Brides do set them selves
forth at the gates of their Cities, by the space of seven days together,
Apparel, beutie and wi^e prou^keth whoredom.
to be abused in fornication. I therefore being dronken with the waters of
Hor^^, knew her not by reason of wine, in so much that her beautye together
with the attire in decking of her self deceived me, and thereupon turnyng
aside unto her, I said, shall I come in unto thee? Fornication to chargeable.
and she answered, what will thou give me? and I gave her my Staff, and my
Girdle, and the Croune of my Kingdom. Upon my companiyng with her, she
conceived afterward, I not knowing my self to have been the doer thereof,
would have put her to death for it. But she having kept my pledges in store,
shamed me with them, and when I had heard mine own words of her in secret
which I had spoken to her when I lay with her in my drunkenness, I could not
put her to death because it was of the Lords doing, Happy are they that can
cease from doing ill.
but I touched her not any more to my diyng day. For, when I had done this
abomination* Israel, lest she might work wiles with me, I said I would
fetch my pledges again of her. But when I inquired for her, the townsmen said
there was no Bride in their City, because she came from another place, and had
sit there but a little while, and she deemed, that no man knew of my going in
unto her. Afterward we came into Egypt to Joseph, because of the dearth. Sir
and forty years old was I when we came hither and three score and thirteen
years have I lived here. And now my sons hear me your Father, in all
things, that I charge you withal, and keep ye all my sayings, in doing all
manner of righteousness before the Lord, and in obeiyng the commandments of the
Lord God, and walk not after your own lusts, nor after the conceits of your
own minds, in the pride of your hearts, It is sinful for any man to glory in
his (...).
nether glory you in the works of the strength of your youth, because it is
sinful in the sight of the Lord. For, in as much as I gloried in my battles,
and vpbrayded my brother Ruben with Billa^my Fathers wife, See what it is to
vpbraid men their (...)
because no face of any beutifull woman, had yet deceived me, therefore the
spirit of fondnes and fornication fell upon me, so as I was overtaken both in
Bethsue the Chananite, and in Thamar the wife of mine own sons. And I said
to my father in law, I have made my father privy to the matter, and therefore
I will take thy daughter to my wife. Hereupon he showed me an infinite mass
of Gold in his daughters behalf, (for he was a king) and decking her with
Gold and Pearl, willed her to pour out wine to us at the Supper. The beauty
of the woman and the Wine together, dazeled mine eyes, and voluptuousnes did so
darken mine understanding, that I fell in love with her and brake the
commandment of GOD and of my Fathers, and took her to wife. Children that
marry without consent of parents plagued.
According to the intent of my heart, the Lord paid me home for it: for I had no
joy of the children, that I had by her. Now therefore my children, be not
dronken with Wine; Discommodities of wine.
for Wine turns a man's understanding away from the truth, and kindles in him
the fire of lust, leadyng his eyes into error, Blinds understanding.
in so much that wine is a servant to the spirit of lechery, to further the
sedyng of the mind with voluptuousnes, Servant of ^echery.
and so those twain bereue a man of all power. For* if a man drink wine till
he be dronken, he traineth his mind into the filthy thoughts of lecheric and
kindles the body to carnal copulation. Fruit of dronkennes.
And if desired occasion serve, sin is wrought without shame. A dronken man
is shameless.
Such a thing is wine my sons; for a dronken man is ashamed of nothing.
Behold, it made both me and Thamar to do amiss, Example.
so as I blushed not at y^ multitude in the City but went aside unto her in the
fight of al men, and committed a great sin in discoueryng the unclean
priuities of my own sons. Through drinking of wine I was not ashamed to
break Gods commandment in taking a woman of Chananie to Wife. Who ought to
drink Wine.
Wherefore my sons, he that drinks wine, had need of discretion, and the
discrecio^, that every man ought to use in drinking of wine, is, that he be
ashamed to over drink him self. For, if he pass that bon^, he forgoeth his
understanding, and cleaves to the spirit of error, Properties of a dronken
man is filthy talk, and^ wicked deed, Discommodities of whordom.
which causes the dronken man, to talk filthely and to do wickedly, and not
to be ashamed, but to host of his lewdnes, thinkyng it to be good. He that
commits whoredom* is berest of his liberty, and becomes a ^ondslaue, of
(...), and cannot get out of it again, after the same manner that I was made
naked. For I gave over my Staff, that is to say, the stay of my tribe: and
my girdle, that is, my power: and my crown, that is, the glory of my kingdom.
Howbeit repentyng these things, I forbear all wine and flesh unto mine old
age, I was utterly unacquainted with all ^^rth, And the Angel of GOD showed me
that women should from time to time ouermaster all men, as well Kings as
Kaitifes, and bereave great men of their glory. For, the poverty of a poor
man is a greater fence to him, tha^ is the strength of a mighty man. Four
noisome spirits follow dronkennes.
Therefore my children, keep measure in drinkyng, for there are in it four
noysom spirits, Concupiscence.
that is to wit: of concupiscence, Hartburnyng.
of hart^^rnyng, of lechery, and of filthy ga^^* If ye drink wine merrily in
the fear of (...) Lord with ^^^^^fastnes, Lechery.
ye shall live. Covetousness.
But if ye drink without regard of shame, Abstinence from wine what commodity
it has.
and fear of GOD, then turns it to drankennesse, and dishonestie
stealeth^in. And if ye drink none at all, then shall ye no^ sin, neith^^ in
slanderous words* It slaundereth not.
nor in quarelyng, nor in railyng, It quarelleth not nor rayleth.
nor in breach of Gods Commandments, neither shall ye perisho before your
tynie. For Wine disc^^seth the secrets of GOD and man unto stra^igers, It
breaks not the Commau^d^ments.
like as I bewrayed the secrets of God and of my Father Jacob to Bethsue the
Chananite, It perishes not before y^ time.
which God has forbidden to be disclosed. Also wine is a cause of war and
sedition. Moreover, I charge you my sons, that you love not Money, ^e look
upon the beutie of women: for money and womanly beauty made me to ouershoote
my self in Bethsue the Chananite. And I am sure, that these two things shall
corrupt mine ofspryng, and mar the wise men of my lineage, and hurt the
kingdom of Judah, which God has given me for obeyng my Father; Obedience to
parents how profitable.
for I never repined at my Father Jacobs commandment, but did whatsoever he
bad me. And Abraham the Father of my Fathers blessed me to fight for Israel,
and so did Isaac bless me likewise: and I know that the kingdom shall stand
by me. But I have read in the books of Enoche the righteous, that ye shall
work wickedly in the latter days. The discommodities of covetousness
therefore my children keep your selves from lechery and covetousness, and give
ear to your father Judah, for those things withdraw men from Gods law, and
blind the understanding of their minds, and teach them. Full of pride.
pride, neither suffer they any man to show mercy Merciles.
to his neighbor. They bereue his Disquieteth the soul
Soul of alt good things, and hold it down in pains and sorrows. Also they
disapoint him of his sleep, Co^sumeth the body.
and eonsume his flesh. Finally. Contemn Gods holy word.
they hinder Gods Sacrifices, neglect his blessings, disobey the speaking of
his Prophets,

and are offended at the word of godliness: for these two passions are
contrary to the commandments of GOD. The covetous and lecherous can not
fear God.
He that serves them cannot obey GOD, because they dazell men's minds, and
walk abroad as well a nights as of days. My children, covetousness leads
men to idolatry. For, Idolatry the fruit of covetousness.
through dotyng upon money, it calls them Gods, which are not, and
compels the infected party to grow most vilely out of kind. For moneys
sake I lost my children, and had not the penance of my flesh, and the
humblyng of my soul, and the prayers of my father Jacob been: I had dyed as
now without children. But the God of my Fathers being merciful and full of
compassion, knew that I sinned through ignorance. For the Prince of error had
blinded me, and I ouershot my self as a fleshely man, and being corrupted with
sin, knew not mine own infirmity, but thought my self to be invincible.
Two spirits wait upon a man.
Know ye therefore my sons, that two spirits do wait upon a man: that is to
wit, the Spirit of truth and the Spirit of error, and in the mids between
them is set the Spirit of understanding of the mind, whose property is to
incline which way it lists. The things that belong both to truth and
untruth are written in the breast of man, and God knows every whit of it, and
none of al men's works can be hidden at any time from him, because all the
priuities of men's hearts are written before the Lord, and the spirit of truth
bears witness of all things and accuses all, and he that sins has a
burning in his heart, and can not lift up his face to his judge. And now my
children, love ye Leuy, that ye may abide, and exalte not your selves above
him, least ye perish. The Lord has given unto me the kingdom, and unto him
the Priesthood, and has put the kingdom In respect that heavenly things are
better then ^arthly, not in external rule and government.
under the Priesthood. Unto Leuy is given the Priesthood, and unto Judah the
kingdom, (...), the Pope can challenge no earthly power.
and GOD has put the kingdom under the Priesthood. Unto me he has given
the things that are upon the earth, and unto Not in power and rule, but in the
excellency of the office appertainyng to God.
him the things that are in heaven. As far as the Heaven surmounteth the
Earth, so far does the Not in power and rule, but in the excellency of the
office appertainyng to God.
Priesthood surmount the kingdom that is upon the earth. For, the Lord has
chosen him above thee, to approach unto him, and to eat of his Table,

and to take the firstlinges of the children of Israel, and thou shall be as
a Sea to him. For, like as in the Sea both righteous and unrighteous are in
danger, and the one sort are caught Prisoner's, and the other sort are
enriched: even so shall all kind of men be hazarded in thee, some sinkyng in
misery, Ty^ante^ and wicked men described and prophesied.
and other some flotyng in prosperity. For, in thee shall raygne great Whales,
which shall swallowe up men as fishes, and bring free men's Sons and
Daughters into bondage. They shall take away men's Houses, Lands, cattle, and
Money by force, and wrongfully feed Ravens and other greedy fowls with many
folks flesh, and they shall prosper in naughtiness, and be exalted through
covetousness, and there shall be false Prophets like storms, which shall
perfecute all righteous men. But y^ Lord shall set them together by the ears
among themselves, Mutual discord is a plague for Tyrauntes.
and there shall be continual wars in Israel, and my kingdom shall (...)
up in Strangers, till the Savior of Israel come, Christ prophested.
even till the coming of the God of righteousness, that Jacob and all Nations
may rest in peace, and he shall maintain my kingdom in peace for ever. For,
the Lord has sworn to me that the kingdom of me and of my seed shall never
fail world without end. But I am very sorry, my Children, for the filthiness and
treachery, and idolatry, which ye shall work against the kingdom, Note this ye
that seek after witches for lost goods.
by followyng Witches and Coniurers, by vowyng your daughters to deceitful
devils, The misery of Jerusalem.
by making them inchaunters, charmers and strumpets, and by interme^lyng your
selves with the abominations of the heathen, for the which things the Lord
shall bring upon you. Famine.
famine. Pestilence.
and pestilence, death and Death and Sword.
sword, wrathful. Bescegement.
besiegement and. Deuouryng Dogs.
deuouryng dogs, reproach of. Daily reproach.
friends and foes, loss and. Loss and pain of eyes.
pain of eyes, slaughter. Slaughter of children.
of your children, rauishing Rauishing of wives.
of your Wives, spoil of your goods, the burning. Burning of the temple.
of your temple, the desolation. Desolation of the country.
of your country, and the. Captivity.
captivity of your selves among all nations, which shall gelde some of you to
make Eunukes for their Wives. A remedy for all these
But if ye return to the Lord with hearty. Repentance.
repentance and humanity, and walk in all the Obedience.
Commandments of God: He will visit you with mercy, and louyngly deliver
you from the bondage of your enemies. After this shall rise among you a Star
out of Jacob, and a man shall spring out of my seed, which shall walk as
the daysunne of righteousness, among the children of men, in peace and
meekness, and righteousness, and no sin shall be found in him. The heavens
shall open upon him, to pour out the spirit of blessedness upon him from
the Father, and he shall sheade out the spirit of grace upon you, and you
shall be his children in truth, walkyng in his first and last
Commandments. This is the ofspryng of the most high God, and the welspryng
of life to all flesh. Then shall the Scepter of my Kingdom shine brighte, and
out of your root shall spryng the vessel of plantyng, in whom shall grow up
the rod of righteousness to the Gentiles, The most heavenly benefit of
Christ his second coming.
to judge and save all such as call upon him. After this shall Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob rise up again to life, and I and the Princes my brethren, shall be
your S^^pter in Israel. Leuy first, I next, Joseph the third, Benjamin the
fourth, Symeon the fifth, Isachar the sixth, and so all the rest. And the
Lord has blessed us: Leuy shall be the Messenger of my presence, Symeon the
Power of my glory, Ruben Heaven, Isachar the Hearth, Zabulo^ the Sea, Joseph
the Mountains, Benjamin the Tabernacle, Dan the lights, Heptalim the (...),
God the Daysunne, and After an Olive tree. And there shall be one people of the
lord, and one tongue, and there shall be no more the false Spiritie of
Be^^^^* because he shall be cast into endless fire. A sweet comfort for the
godly (...).
They that are buried in sorrow, shall (...): and they that were poor for the
Lords sake, shall be made rich. They that suffered penury, shall have
plenty, and they that were weak, shall be made strong. The blessed estate of
the (...) after death.
They that died for the lords sake, shall wake up unto life, and run in
Jacob, yea they shall run skipping, and leapyng, and they shall fly as Eagles
for iov. But the ungodly shall be sorrowful, and the sinners shall mourn,
and all the people shall glorify the Lord for ever. Therefore my children,
keep all the law of the Lord, for there is hope for all such as walk
aright. A hundredth and nineteen years old do I dye in your fight. Let
none of you bury me costly clothes, Judah would no sumptuous buria^^.
nor rippe my beallie, for so will Rulers do: But carry me back into Hebron
with you. With these words Judah died: and his children doing in all things
as he commanded them, buried him with his fathers in Hebron.

Finis.
The Testament of Isachar, made to his Children at his death conce^nyng a
single heart.


L^^r^e here a simple life,
Not void of pain but strife:
The Sithe, the Spade the Ass,
S^^ forth what man he was.
THe copy of Isachars words. The exhortation.
He calling his children about him, said unto them: Ye children of Isachar
hear your Father, and harken to the words of the beloved of the Lord. I am
Jacobs fifth son, in the reward of Mandrake. Gene.xxx.
For Jacob brought Mandrakes out of the field, and Rachell meetyng him, took
them of him. Thereat Ruben wept, and at his noise my mother Lea came out. Now
the Mandrakes were sweet sented apples, which the land of Aran brings
forth in high countries, by the waterualleis. And Rachell said, I will not
give thee these Apples, because they shall help me to children. Now there were
two of these Apples. And Lea said, does it not suffice thee, that thou have
gotten away the housbande of virginity, but that thou will have this also:
She answered, let Jacob lie with thee to night, for thy sons Mandragoras.
Lea said unto her, do not boste nor brag, for Jacob is mine, and I am the wife
of his youth. And Rachell answered, how so, was he not first handfasted unto
me, and served he not our Father, fowerteene years for me? What shall I do to
thee? For many are the wiles and policies of men, and gile goes forward upon
earth. If it had been otherwise, thou should not have sen Jacob in the face
at this day. For thou art not his wife, but werte guilfully put to him in
my stead. My father deceived me, and conueiyng me away that night, suffered
me not to see him. For had I been there, this had not come to pass. Wherefore
take thee one Mandrake, and in lewe of the other, I grant thee him for one
night. And Jacob knew Lea, who conceiuyng bare me, and called my name
Isachar, because of the hire. Then an Angel of the lord appeared unto Jacob,
and said that Rachel should bear but two sons, because she had forsaken the
company of her housebande, and chosen continency: And if my mother Lea had
not given thee two Apples for his company, she should have borne eighte
children, whereas by reason of that, she bare but six, and Rachell two,
because GOD visited her in the Mandrakes. For he knew that she desired to
company with Jacob for issues sake, and not for lust of pleasure. For she
^^ned up the Mandrake, and delivered it to Jacob the next day, and therefore
God heard Rachell in the Mandrakes, because that although she had a mind to
them, yet she eat them not, but offered them to the Priest of the most
highest, which was in those days, and laid them up in the Lords house. The
godly life of Isachar and his (...) dea^yng.
Therefore my children when I came to man's state, I walked with an vprighe
heart, and became Bayliff^ of Housebandrie to my Fathers, An example for godly
children.
and brought them the fruits of their Lands in their due seasons, and my
Father blessed me, when he saw, how^ I walked plainly and ^mplie. A ^ntterne
of a virtuous life.
I was no busy body in my doings, I was not hurtful nor spiteful to my
neighbor, I rai^ed not upon any manne, neither dispraised I the life of any,
that walked in singleness of mind. By reason hereof, when I was thirty years
old* I took a wife, because labor had consumed my strength. I never knew
the pleasure of a woman through wantonness, but my labor made me to sleep
soundly, and my Father did always rejoice of my simplicity. For whatsoever
pains I took, first of al I offered all the first fruits, and the first
ingendered cattle to the Lord by the Priest, and then gave my Father the
rest, and the Lord doubled his benefits in my hands. Yea, and Jacob him
self perceived well, that GOD wrought with my plain dealyng. For unto every
poor man, and to every man in adversity, gave I of the fruits of the earth
with a single heart. And now my children harken, and walk in singleness of
mind, for I know, that the lord is very well pleased with it. with a plain
dealyng man the Lord is pleased.
The singleharted manne coueteth not gold, undermines not his neighbor,
lusts not after diversity of meats, destreth not shifte of apparel, nor
behighteth him self long time, but only has an eye to Gods will, and the
spirits of error can do nothing against him. I ^^ngle hearted man de^^^^bed,
who and what he is.
For he can no skill to entertain a fair woman, least he should destie his
own mind: wrath ouermaistereth not his wit, envy melts not his soul
neither does his mind run coueteously upon gain. For he leads an upright
life, and beholds all things with a single eye, excludyng all hurtfulnesse
of worldly error, least he should ouersee any of the Commandments of God,
Therefore my children keep Gods Law, and hold fast plainness, walk on in
^^nocencie, and be not to inquisitiue in Gods secrets, Learn you children of
the earth.
or of your neighbors doings: but love God and your neighbor, pity the
poor and weak, bow down your backs to Housbandrie, and labor in tillyng of
the earth, in all manner of Housbandrie, offering presents to the lord with
thankesgeuyng, who blesses the earth with increase, and new spryng of
fruits, as he blessed all holy men, from Abell to this day: for there is none
other portion given thee, then of the fatness of the earth* whose fruits
come by painestakyng; for our Father Jacob blessed me with the benefits of the
earth, and the firstelynges of fruits. Leuy and Judah are glorified of the
lord among the children of Jacob. For, God has planted him self in them,
geuyng to the one the Priesthood, and to the other the kingdom. Obedience and
plain dea^ing commended.
Therefore obey ye them, and walk plainly as our Father Jacob did. For, unto
G^d it is given to destroy the temptations of Israel. My Children, I know,
that in the last days, your children shall forsake plainness, and cleave to
coueteousnesse, let go innocence, and follow lewdness: Leave Gods
commandments, and stick unto Beliall, give over Housbandrie, A plague for
disobedience.
and gadde after wicked devices, and therefore shall they be scattered among
the Heathen, and become bondeslaues to their enemies.

Wherefore warn your children of it, that if they sin, they may return
quickly to the Lord; for he is merciful, and will deliver them, and bring
the^ home again into their own land. I am now an hundredth and two and
twenty years old, and I know not any deadly lynne upon me. The innocence
of Isachar.
I have not known any woman but my wife, neither have I committed whordome in
the lust of m^neeyes. I have not dr^nke Wine unto droukeunelie, neither have I
coueted any pleasant thing of my neighbors. dly pat^^o fol^
There has been no guile in my heart, neither has there any liyng gone out of
my lips. I have been fori^ with every man that was in heau^nesse, and given
my bread to the poor. I have not ^aten my ineate alone, nor removed the
bounds and buttels of lands. Harlien you Land^o^ des, learn you wealthy of
the earth.
I have been pitiful all the days of my life, and dea^te truly in all cases.
I have loved the lord with all my strength, and all men as mine own children.
My sons, if you also do ^ the like, all the spirits of Belial will fly
from you, and nothing, that mischievous men can do against you, shall have
power over you. You shall bring all wild beasts in subjection to you, because
y^ have the Lord of heaven with you, if y^ walk with men in singleness of
heart. And he willed them, to carry his body into Hebron, and to bury him
there in the Cave, with his Fathers. Thus he stretched out his feet, and died
in a good age, having all his limbs strong and found, and s^epte the sleep of
all the world.

The Testament of Zabulo^, made to his Children at his death, concerning
compassion and mercy.


The poor man at home, Zabulon fed,
The strangers unknown also clothed:
When Ship did sail,
God did not fail:
But gave his wit,
To govern it.
THe charge that Zabulon gave to his children, His exhoriation when it was
given.
in the hundredth and fourteenth year of his life, two and thirty years after
the decease of Joseph. And he said unto them, hear ye me ye Sons of
Zabulon, a good gift to my Father and Mother. For when I was begotten,
Gene.xxx.
my Father was greatly increased in Sheep and cattle, by reason of the good
luck that he had, through the straked rods. I wiste not my Children, I wiste
not that I sinned in those days. For I considered not that I dealt wickedly
through ignorance in Iosephes case, and moreover concealed it with my Brothers
from our Father, howbeeit, that I wept much for it in secret, for I was
afraied of my Brothers, because they had all conspired together, to kill him
with the Sword, that should be^^aie that secret, Nevertheless, when they
would have killed him: The love of Zabulon toward Joseph.
I besought them most earnestly with tears, that they would not do such
wickedness. For Symeon and God, came upon Joseph to have killed him, and
Joseph falling upon his knees, said unto them: have pity upon me my
Brethren, have pity upon the bowelles of our Father Jacob. Lay not your
hands upon me to shead innocente blood, for I have not sinned against you.
A good conscience refuses no trial.
If I have done amiss, nurture me with chastisemente, but lay not your hands
upon me for our Father Jacobs sake. Upon his saying of these words, I being
moved with compassion Love between brethren is as a precious ointment.
came and wept, and my heart melted within me, and all the substance of my
bowels were loosened upon my soul. Also Joseph wept, and I with him, and my
heart trembled, and the joints of my body quaked, and I was not able to
stand. And when he saw me weepyng with him, and them coming toward him, to
kille him, he fled behind me, and besoughte them to pity him. Mutual ^oue
is mutual safety.
Then Ruben stepping in, said: My brethren, let us not kille him, ^nt let
us cast him into the dry pit, that our fathers dug, and found no water
in it. For GOD suffered no water to spryng up in it, because it should be a
sauegarde for Joseph. And so God did, til they sold him to the I smaelites.
Thus gave I no consent to the sin against Joseph, but Symeon, G^d, and the
other of my Brothers taking money for Joseph, A ^^gure of the trecheri^ and
cou^teous^esse of Judah, read Math.xxvii.
bought Shoes with it, for them selves, their Wives, and their Children*
saying: Let us not eat it, because it is the price of our Brothers blood,
but let us tread it under our feet, because he said he should reign over
v^ and we shall see what his d^eames will come unto. Therefore in the S^^pter
of Cnoches Law, it is written of him that would not raise up ^eede to his
brother, I have loosed Iosephes Sho^e. For when we came into Egipte, the
young men vnbuckeled Iosephes Shoes at the gate, and so we worshipped
Joseph as it had been Pharao, and not only worshipped him, but also kneeled
down before him with blushyng, and so were put to shame before the
Egiptians, f^r afterward the Egiptians heard of all the ill that we had done
unto Joseph. After the laiyng of him in the pit, my Brothers set meat upon
the Table to eat. Judah careful so: his brother.
But I mournyng for Joseph did (...) no meat by the space of two days and two
nights together, neither would Iu^^ ente with them, but had an eye to the
Pit, because he feared least Sym^on and Gad should step there and kille him:
When they saw that I eat nothing, they set me to keep him till he was sold.
He was in the pit three days and three nights without repast ere he was
sold. Ruben his love toward Joseph.
Ruben hearing that he was sold in his absence, rent his garments, and
wept, saying: how shall I look my Father Jacob in the face? And therewith all
taking money, he ran after the Marchauntmen, but he could not find them: For
they had left the kings high way, and were gone away eapace by bye Lanes, and
Ruben eat no meat that day. Mark the wicked policy of the ungodly.
Dan therefore coming unto him, said: weep not, neither be sad for the
boy, for I wot what we may say to our Father Jacob. We will kill a Kid,
and stain Iosephes coat with the blood of it, and say to him: See if this be
thy sons coat or no. For when they intended to sell Joseph, they stripped
him out of our fathers coat, and put upon him an old coat of a
bondseruaunte. Simeon had gotten his coat, and would not deliver it us, but
was minded to have cut it in pieces with his sword, and he was angry that he
was yet alive, and that be had not slain him. Then all my brethren risyng up
together, said unto him: why should thou not give it us, seeing that thou
only art the worker of this mischief in Israel? Hereupon he gave it them, and
they did as Dan had counseled. And now my children, I warn you keep the Lords
Commandments, Zabulon his exhortation.
be merciful to your neighbors, Compassion is to be showed as well to beasts
as to men.
and have inward compassion toward all, not only men but also beasts. For
in that respect the Lord blessed me, insomuche that when all my brothers were
sick, I escaped without sickness. For God knows every man's intent. Therefore
my children have compassion in your bowels, because that as any man deals
with his neighbor, The unmerciful punished, both they and their children.
so will God deal with him. For the children of my brothers fell sick also
and dyed for Iosephes sake, because their fathers pitied him not, but my
children were preserved without sickness as you know. And while I was upon the
Sea coast of Chanaan, I fell to fishing for my Father Jacob, and whereas many
others were drowned in the Sea, I abode unhurt, Fishers boats first invented
by Zabulo^, but God gave the wisdom.
I was the first that made a fisher boat to float on the sea, for God gave me
understanding and wisdom therein, so that I did set up a Mast in the boat,
and fastened a sail to the mids of the wood, Genes. 49.
and castyng along the shore in it, I fished for my fathers household till we
came into Egypt: and for pities sake I gave of my fishyng to every stranger
that I met with. If there were any forrner borne, The singu^ar compassion of
Zabulon.
or any sick body, or any aged person, I boiled my fish and dressed it well
according to every man's need, and carried it to them, comfortyng them and
having compassion with them. And therefore God made me to catch much fish in
the Sea. Note.
For he that gives his neighbor, receives the things multiplied of the
Lord. Zabulon his ^ercie in geuyng food.
Five years did I fish, giving to every man that I saw and serving all my
fathers house sufficiently. In harvest time I fished, and in winterty^^e I fed
sheep with my brothers. Now will I tell you what I did, A merciful deed to
cloth the ^^^ked.
I saw a miserable man in the deep of winter, and having compassion upon him,
I stale a garment privily out of my House, and gave it the naked man. You
therefore my Children, take pity indifferently of all men, and show mercy with
the things which the Lord gives you, and deal them abroad to all men with
a good heart. And if ye have not wherewith to succor the needy out of hand:
yet have compassion on him with inward mercy. Inward compassion wantyng,
habilltie serves.
I know that my hand for^lowed not to give to him that wanted, and to spend
that time with him, insomuch that I have walked above seven furlo^gs with such
a one weeping, A rare example of a merciful heart.
and my heart yirned upon him for compassion. You therefore my children, have
earnest and inward mercy toward all that are in misery, that God having
pity upon you may be merciful to you likewise. God dwells in merciful
hearts.
For in the last days God will send his mercy upon the earth, and
wheresoever he finds inward and hearty mercy, there will he dwell. For look
how much mercy man shows to his neighbor, so much will God show to him
again. Now when we came down into Egypt, Joseph minded not our evil dealing
with him, Joseph rewards good for evil.
but when he saw me, it made his heart yirne. Whom look ye vpou, my children
and learn to forget y^ harm that is done to you. Love ye one another, and do
not one of you think upon another ill dealyng, for that breaks unity, and
displaceth all kindred, and troubles the mind. For he that is mindful of
harm past, has not the bowels of mercy. He that is mindful of in^uries is
not merciful.
Mark the water and see how it washes away the Sand when the stones and
timber are removed asunder And if a brook be draw^e into many streams, Apt
similitudes.
the earth sucketh it up and it comes to nothing: and so shall you, if you be
divided among your selves. In exhortation to concord.
Therefore divide not your selves into two heads: for all things that God has
created have but one head a piece. He has given a man two shoulders, two
hands and two feet: but yet do all the members obey one head. I know by the
writings of my Fathers, that in the last days ye shall depart from the Lord,
and be divided in Israel, following two kings, The end of discord is misery.
workyng all abomination, and worshippyng all manner of Idols, and your enemies
shall take you prisoners, and you shall fit among the heathen in all misery,
tribulation and sorrow of mind. And afterward you shall remember the Lord, and
repent, and he shall turn you again: for he is merciful and full of
compassion, and thinks not upon the ^ewdnes of the Children of men, because
they be flesh, and the spirits of error beguile them in all their doyngs.
After this shall GOD himself rise up unto you, the light of righteousness, and
holsonnes, and mercy are in his punishments. He shall redeem all men from the
bondage of Beliall, and all the spirits of error shall be trodden down, and he
shall turn all nations to the following of him, and ye shall see God in the
shape of man, for God has chosen Jerusalem, and God is his name.
Nevertheless, by the wickedness of your words, you shall provoke him to wrath,
and ye shall be cast of, till the time of full finishing And now my children,
The hope of the resurrection a present comfort at the death of our friends.
be not sad for my death, neither be ye out of heart because I leave you. For I
shall rise up again among you, as a captaiue in the mids of his children.
And I shall rejoice in the midst of my tribe, among as many as have kept the
law of the Lord, and the commandments of their Father Zabulon. But as for
the wicked, The state of the wicked at the latter day.
God shall bring everlasting fire upon them, and destroy them for ever. I
return to my rest, as my Fathers have don: now fear you the Lord your GOD,
with all your strength all the days of your life. As he had spoken these words
he fell a sleep to his singular bene^ite: and his sons said him in a coffin,
and cariyng him back again unto Hebron, buried him there with his Fathers.

The Testament of Dan, made to his Children at his death, concerning anger and
liyng.


The Serpent
With weapon,
And Dan declare:
The intent
Of those men,
That wrathful are.
THe Copy of Dan his words which he spoke to them in his last days. In the
hundred and five and twenteth year of his life he called his Tribe unto him
and said: Ye children of Dan, hear my sayings, Heart and ou^ward profession
must be consociat.
and give heed to the words of your Fathers mouth. I lyked in my heart, and
showed in my whole life the thing that is good: for truth i^yned with right
dealyng pleases God well. Lies and anger, scholemasters of evil life.
I have hated hurtful things, as liyng and anger, because they teach a man
all manner of naughtiness. I confess unto you my children this day, that I was
glad in my heart at the death of Joseph that true and good man, and rejoiced at
the sellyng of him, because our Father loved him more than us. Self love
thinks him self as good as other.
For the spirit of spitefulnes and pride said unto me: Thou art his Soune too
as well as he. And one of the spirits of Belial wrought with me saying: Des^er
of prerogative entiseth to murder.
Take this sword and slay Joseph with it, and when he is dead thy father shall
love thee. This was the spirit of spitefulnes which counseled nice to devour
Joseph, as the Leopard deuoureth a Ryd. Man purp^^eth but God disposes.
But the God of our Father Jacob did not put him into my hands, nor suffer me
to find him alone that I might dispatch two Scepters in Israel by committyng
that wickedness, And now my children I tell you of a truth, that unless ye
keep your selves from this spirit of lying and wrath, and love truth and long
sufferance, ye shall perish. Wrath is blind my Children, A wrathful man Iiuely
described.
and no wrathful man looks truth in the face, because that although they
were He accom^eth his Pa^entes as enemies.
his Father and Mother, yet does he behold them as his enemies. Though he be
his brother* yet he. He knows not his brother.
knows him not, though he be the Lords He obeieth not the Minister.
Prophet, yet obeieth he him not: though he be a. He regards not the
righteous.
righteous man, yet he regards him not, and though he be his. He co^ssder.
(...) not his ^^inde.
frcinde, yet he considers it not. For the spirit of wrath besetteth him
with the Snares of error, blindyng his natural eyes, and dimmyng the eyes of
his mind by falsehoode, and geuyng to him a sight of his own making. And
wherein bleareth he his eyes? In hatred of heart. For he gives him a self
willed heart against his Brother, to spite him and envy him. My Sounes, wrath is
mischevous, for it becomes a soul to the soul, The proper^ies of wrath.
and subdueth the body to it self by over masteryng the soul, and gives
power to the body to work all wickedness. And when the soul has wrought, it
justifies the thing done because it sees not.

Therefore he that is wrathful, ^ wrathful man works three ways.
if he be a man of might, has treble power in his anger By Servants.
One through the healpe and furtheraunce of his servants. By riches.
Another of his riches, By him self.
wherethrough he persuades and overcomes in unrighteousness: and third of the
nature of his own body which of it self works evil. And though he that is
angry be a poor man, yet has he his natural power doubled. For the said
spirit does always further his wickedness, by causing his deeds to be matched
with liyng. Wherefore consider the power of wrath how vain it is. Fo he is
bitter in speech, and walks at Satan's right hand, Instruments of wrath.
that his deeds may be wrought in untrustiness and liyng, for Satan does
first of all styng him by speech, Bitter speech.
and when he has once pricked him forewarde, he strengthens him by deeds,
Uiolent hands.
and troubles his understanding with bitter nippes and losses, and so
provoke his mind to excessive wrath. M^^^dy against wrath is forbearing of
words.
Therefore when any man speaks against you, be not moved to anger: and if he
praise ye as good men, be not puffed up, nor changed into voluptuousues and
sternnesse of countenance. For when a man hears a thing that misliketh him,
first it ticleth him and stingeth his mind, so that he thinks he has just
cause to be angry. Now therefore my children, if ye fall into any loss and
hinderance, be not out of patience, for the spirit of impatience makes men to
lust for the thing that is forgone, The effect of impatience.
and to be angry for the want of it. Bear you losses willingly, and be not
out of quiet for it: for unquietness ingendreth anger and untruth: and it is
evil to have a double face. Anger and untruth talk one to another, to trouble
the understanding. And when the mind is combred with disdeine, the Lord
departs from it, and Belial gets the dominion of it. Therefore my
Children, keep the Lords commandments and laws, eschew untruth and hate
it, that the Lord may dwell in you, and Belial flee from you. Speak every of
you the truth to his neighbor, that ye fall not willingly into incomberaunce,
and so shall ye be in quiet, and ye shall have the God of peace, and warxe shall
not prevail against you. Love the Lord all your life long, and love ye one
another with a sothfast heart. For I am sure that in the latter days ye shall
depart from the Lord and He eth^. ^^dne*
walk in all naughtines, working the abominations of the Gentiles, and
huntyng wicked women in all leudnes, through the workyng of deceitful spirits
in you. For I have read in Enoch that Satan is your prince, and that all y^
spirits of fornication and pride, shall plie themselves in laiyng snares for
the Children of Dan, to make them sin before the Lord. But my children,
stick ye unto Leuy, and look upon him in all things. The children of Judah
shall snatch away other men's goods like Lions through covetousness. A note for
covetousness.
For this cause shall ye be led away with them into captivity, and there
receive all the plagues of Egypt, and all the malice of the Heathen: Repentance
obtains mercy.
whereupon ye shall return to the Lord and obtain mercy, and he shall bring
you into his holy place, and proclaim peace to you. A propeste of Christ his
humanity.
The Lords saving health shall spring up unto you out of the Tribes of Judah
and Leuy, He shall make war against Belial, and give our young men the
victory in reuengement. M^^^edy against wrath is forbearing of words.
He shall deliver the imprisoned souls of the sainc^es from Beliall, and
turn your unbelieving hearts to the Lord, and give everlasting peace to such
as call upon him. The Saints shall rest in him, and the righteous shall
rejoice in the new Jerusalem, which shall glorify God for ever. Hiernsalem
shall no more be wasted, nor Israel led into captivity, because the Lord
shall be conversant among men in the midst of it, and the holy one of Israel,
shall reign over them in lowliness and poverty, and he that believes in him,
shall certainly reign in heaven. Now my children fear the Lord and beware of
Satan and his spirits: And draw near unto God, and to the angel that
excuses you, for he is the mediator between God and man to set peace in
Israel. Christ is our mediator.
He shall stand against the kingdom of the enemy, and therefore will the
enemy labor to overthrow all that call upon the Lords: Christ assisteth his
in all temptations.
for he knows that whenever Israel decays* then shall his enemies
kingdom come to an end. But the said angel shall strengthen Israel, that he
come not to an evil end. At that time shall Israel depart from iniquity, and
the Lord shall visit such as do his will. In all places of Israel and among
the heathen his name shall be the savior. Therefore my children keep your
selves from all no^^ome dealings, and put from you wrath, and all untruth.
Love truth and mildnes, and look what, you have heard of your Father, deliver
it over to your Children, that the Father of nations may receive you. For he
was soothfast, long suffering, meek, lowly, and a^^^ ^her of Gods law by his
own works. Therefore depart from all vnright^ousnes that ye may stick to
the righteousn^s of the Lords law, and bury ye me by my Father. In saying
these things be kissed them and slept the sleep of the world* And his sons
buried him, laiyng his bones by Abraham, Issac, and Jacob. And like as Dan had
prophesied to them, that the^ should one day neglect Gods law^ and estrange
them selves from the offpryns, and native country of Israel, so came it to
pass.

The Testament of Neptalim, made to his Children at his death, concerning
goodness.


Run Neptalims race, but run apace,
Embrace his goodness, and trustiness,
If your state you see, servants to be:
Then God will you bless, and give success.
THe Copy of Heptalims Testament, concerning the things which he discoursed
at the end of his time, in the hundred and two and thirty year of his life.
At the coming of his children, together in the seventh month, the forth day
of the month, he being yet in good health, commanded a sumptuous feast, and
great cheer to be prepared. When we wooke in the morning from sleep, because
he was even at deaths door, he praised the Lord that had strengthened him,
and began to speak to his children, in this wife.

My Children, give ear to Neptalim, barken to your Fathers words. His birth.
I was borne of Bilha, and because Rachell dealt craftily in puttyng Bilha to
Jacob, in her own stead, and Bilha was delivered of me in Rachels lap,
therefore was I called Neptalim. Why he was called Neptalim.
And Rachell loved me because I was borne on her lap, and she kissed me when
I was a little one saying: God let me see a brother of thine out of mine own
womb after thee. By reason whereof, Joseph was like me in all things
according to Rachels request. Why Joseph was like Neptalim.
Now my Mother Billa was the daughter of Rotheus, the Brother of Debora
Rebeccas nurse, and was borne the selfsame day that Rachell was borne, for
Rotheus was a Ca^dean, His family.
of Abrahames kindred, a worshipper of GOD, free borne, and a noble man. Now
be it for as much as he was taken Prisoner, Laban bought him, and married him
to a bondwoman of his called Eve, who brought him forth a Son, whom he named
Zeliphas, after the name of the Castle wherein he was taken. Afterward she
bare Billa calling her her new hasty daughter, because she was fond of the Dug
as soon as she was borne. The swiftnes of Neptalim.
And because I was as swift of foot as a Stagge, my father Jacob appointed me
to run of all mesuages and errands, Genes. 49.
and blessed me by the name of a Stagge. For as the Potter knows what his
bessell shall contain, and tempereth his quan^itie of clay thereafter: GOD his
wisdom in c. eating us l^ue^y let fo^th.
so the Lord makes a man's body proportionable to the spirit that he will
put into it, and ^^^teth the spirit to the ability of the body, ^o as there
is no inequality or odds betwixt them: for all the Lords creatures are made
in Weight, Measure, and Rule. And as the Potter knows the use of every of
them to what things they be metest: so the Lord knows the body: how far
for the it is fit for goodness, and when it begins in evil, for there is
not any Creature reasonable, nor unreasonable, which the lord knows not,
for he has created all men after his own Image. And as man's strength is, so
is his workeas is his will, so is his work: as is his forecast* so is his
doing: as is his heart, so is his mouth: as is his eye, so is his slepeand as
is his mind, so is his talk: either of the law of the Lord, or of the law
of Beliall. And lo^ke what diversity is between light and darckenesse, or
between sight and hearing, the same diversity is there in man and woman.
Neither is it to be said that there is any betternesse in any thing, either of
the face or of other like things. For God has made all things good in their
order or degree, he has set the five wits in the head, and knitte the head
to the neck, and covered it with hear for his glory. Moreover, he has
assigned the heart to wisdom, the bealie to the auoidaunce of the stomach,
the breaste to health, the liver to anger, the gall to bitterness the spleen
to laughter, All things must be done in time and order.
the kidneis to craftiness, the loins to strength, the ribs to comeliness,
the seed to lustiness, and so forth. So my children do all things in
order, and in the fear of God, neither do ye any thing disorderly, in scorn,
The reason.
or out of due season. For thou caust not comma^ide the eye to hear, neither
caust thou do the works of light in darkness. Therefore have ye not to mar
your doings through coueteousnesse, or (...) beguile your own souls with
fond talk. For by holdyng your peace with a clean heart, ye shall be able to
keep the will of God, and to cast away the wi^^ of the deuell. The Su^ne,
Moon, and Stars, break not their order: neither break you Gods law in the
order of your doy^ges. The Gentiles by going astray, and by forsakyng the
lord, have changed their order, and followed stocks and stones, and spirits
of error. They that break the order of the Lord shall be plagued.
But do you not so (my children:) know ye that your only one God is lord in
the skies, on the earth, in the Sea, and of all creatures, for he is the maker
of them. And be not like Sodom, which altered y^ order of her nature:
likewise wise * the Watchers altered the order of their Nature, Preachers.
and they whom God cursed in the flood, making the earth desolate, and
fruitless for their sakes. My children I say these things, Neptalim
prophesteth the misery of his children.
because I have read in the holy writings of Enoch, that you also shall depart
from the Lord, and walk in all the wickedness of Sodom, and the lord shall
bring thraldom upon you, so as ye shall serve your enemies, and be pinched with
all manner of tribulation and pain, til God consume you euerichone. He
Prophes^eeh also their repentance.
And when ye be made few and small, ye shall turn again, and know the lord
your God, and he shall bring you again into your own land, according to his
manifold mercy. And it shall come to pass, that when they shall be come into
the country of their fathers, they shall forget the Lord again, and deal
wickedly, so as the Lord shall scatter them all over the face of the whole
earth, til the mercy of the lord come, A Prophes^e of the coming of Christ.
a man that pours out mercy and righteousness upon all men, both far and
nere. For in the xl. year of my life upon mount Oliuet toward the East side
of Jerusalem. I saw the Sun and A vision.
moon stand still, and behold Isaac my fathers father said unto us, come hither
apace, and every one of you take hold, according to his strength, for the
Sun and Moon may be caught. And we came runnyng all together, and Leuy
caughte hold of the Sun, and Judas iumpyng up, caught hold of the Moon,
and were both of them lifted up with the^. And when as Leuy became as the
Sun, a certain young man delivered him twelve Boughs of Palm tree, and Judah
shined as the Moon, and twelve beams or rays were under his feet. And Leuy
and Judah runnyng together, vphelde one an other. And behold there was a Bull
upon earth that had great horns, and Eagles vinges upon his back, and we
would have caught him but we could not, for Joseph steppyng before us caught
him, and mounted alofte upon him. And behold, there appeared-vnto us an holy
writing, saying: the Assirians, Medes, Elamites, Gelathites, Caldes, and
Sirians, shall hold the Scepter of Israel in thraldom. And again a seven
months after, I saw our Father Jacob standing in the sea of I amma, and us
his sons with him. And behold, there came a ship sailyng by, full of dried
flesh, without Mariner or Pilote. Upon the ship was written Jacob, and our
father said to us, let us go into our ship, when we were within it, there
rose a sore tempest and a mighty gale of wind, and our Father who held the
stern, flewe away from us, and we being tossed with the storm, were carried
into the Sea, and our ship was filled with Water, and weather beaten, and torn
on all sides. Then Joseph fled out in the boat, and we all were divided upon
twelve bordes, and Leuy and Judah were among us, so were we scattered on all
costs, and Leuy being clad in sackclothe, prayed to the Lord for us all. As soon as the tempest was laid, the Ship came quietly to land, and behold,
our Father Jacob came, and we rejoiced all together with one mind. I told my
Father these two dreams, and he said to me, these things must be
fulfilled in their time, and Israel must endure many things. Then said he
further to me, I believe that Joseph is alive: For I see that the Lord does
always number him with us. Reinorse of conscience moves open confession, but
sha^^^e or fear hinders.
And he said, thou live my son Joseph, but yet I se thee not, neither
see thou Jacob that begat thee, truly he made us to weep at these words of
his, and my bowelles glowed within me, to bewraye to him that Joseph was sold,
but I was afraied of my brothers. Behold my Sons I have showed you the last
times, and all the things that shall be done in Israel. You therefore,
command your children to be helpful unto Leuy and Judah. For by Judah shall
health and welfare spryng up unto Israel, and in him shall Jacob be blessed.
For by his Sccpter shall God appear, and dwell among men upon earth to save
the stacke of Israel, and to gather the righteous from among the Heathen. My
children, By dooyng well, God to glorified.
if you do well, both men and Angels shall bless you, and GOD shall be
glorified by you among the Gentiles, the Deuell shall slay from you, And men
blessed.
the beasts shall stand in awe of you, The devil vanquished.
and the Angels shall receive you. For like as if a man bring up his child
well, the child endeavors always to be mindful and thankful: So of good
works, there is a good remembrance with GOD. By dooyng evil* God is
dishonored.
But as for him that does not good, him shall me^ and Angels curse, Men cursed
and God shall be dishonored through him among the Gentiles, The devil
possesses.
and the Deuell shall possess him, as a peculiar vessel and instrument, and
all beasts shall ouermaster him, and the Lord shall hate him. For the
Commandments of the law are of two sorts, and are fulfilled in work.
For there is a time for a man to company with his wife, and a time to forbear
her, that he may give himself to prayer. There are two Commandments which
breed sin, except they be done in their due order. And so is it in the rest
of the commandments. Therefore be ye wise and skillful in the Lord,
knowing the order of his commandments, and the laws of all things, that
God may love ye. Having commanded them many other such things he prayed
them to conueigh his bones to Hebron, and to bury him by his fathers. And so
eating and drinkyng with a merry heart, he covered his face and died. And
Neptalims Children, did all things according as their Father had commanded
them.

Finis.
The Testamente of Gad, made to his Children at his death, concerning hatred.


You that excel in marciall feats,
Lo Gad, but God obey:
Least in Gads wrath you God offend,
And lose your hoped pray.
THe copy of Gads Testament, and of y^ things that he spoke to his Children,
in the.C.vii. year of his life saying: I was Jacobs seventh son, Gad a good
and ba^cant shephearde.
and skillful and strong in keeping of sheep. I kept the flocks by night, and
when there came any Lion, Libard, Wolue, Bear, or other wild beast upon our
cattle, I ran to it and killed it. Joseph also did feed sheep with us about a
thirty days: who being tender, fell sick by reason of ouermuche heat, and
went home to Hebron to his Father^, whom he lodged by him self, because he
loved him. And Joseph told our father, Gene.xxxvii.
that y^ sons of Billa wasted his goods at Zelpha, and made hauock of them,
without the knowledge of Judah and Ruben. For he kuewe that I had rescued a
la^be out of a Bears mouth, and killed the Bear, and that because the Lamb
could not live (which thing grieved me) we killed it also and eat it. He told
our father of it, and our brothers were greatly disconte^ted with his doing,
even to the day that he was sold into Egipte, and the spirit of hatred was
in me, in so much that I could not find in my heart to hear Joseph speak,
or to se him because he had rebuked us openly, Gad hated Joseph.
for eating the la^^ibe without Judah. For his co^plainyng to his Father.
To beshore he made our Father believe whatsoever he told him. But now I
acknowledge my sin my Children, that I was often in mind to have killed him,
for I hated him from my heart, and I was utterly without compassion toward
him, and the cause of this my great hatred toward him, was his dreams: For
his goodly dreams.
Therefore I would have devoured him, as an ox eats up grass from the
earth. And for that cause I and Judah sold him to the I smalites for 30.
gildre^s: of the whith we kept awaisx. privily, and showed the other x^. to our
brethren. And so coueteonsnesse persuaded me to wish his death. But the God of
our fathers delivered him out of my hands, to the intent I should not do such
wickedness in Israel. The hateful described. He misliketh an other ma^s
doings.
And now my Children, give ear to the words of truth, that ye may live
righteously, and keep the law of the highest, and not go astraie through the
spirit of hatred, for what is evil in at a man's doings. Whatsoever an
other man does, that does the hater mislike and abhor. If one kepe^ He
pratseth no^ the^ that fear y^ lord.
the law of the lord, he praises it not: if one fear the lord, and deal
rightcouslie, him he loves not, but dispraiseth the truth, he enuieth him
that orders his ways aright, he embraces backbityng, he loves
scornefulnesse: and because y^ hatred has blinded his mind, he He seeks to
destroy his neighbor.
does to his neighbor as he did to Joseph, therefore my children, keep your
selves from hatred, because it commits wickedness even against the lord,
for it will not hear the words of Gods commandment, concerning the loving
of a man's neighbor, but synneth spitfully against God. If a brother offend,
by He blaseth abroad other mennesfaultes.
and by it blaseth him abroad, and is hasty to have him condemned and killed,
or punished for his offense. Hasty to have the party condemned.
And if the offender Makes a little matter great.
be a servant or a bondsman, it accuses him to his master, and deuiseth all
means that may be to persecute him, and to put him to death if it be
possible, for hatred woorketh with spitfulnesse, Enuieth the prosperous doing
of his neighbor.
and is always forie to hear or see men go forward, or prosper in well
doing. For like as love bears good will even to the dead, and wishes them
alive, and would (if it were ^ossible) stay them from death, which are
condemned to die: So hatred seeks to flea the living, A comparison.
and demeth the^ unworthy of life, which have offended never so lightly* For
the spirit of hatred does through cankred frowardnes of heart, work jointly
with Satan in all things, even to the death, and destruction of men. But the
spirit of love does through long sufferance work with Gods law, The
properties of hatered.
to the welfare of men. Hatred is evil because it abides with liyng, speaking
continually against the truth, making a great ado of small matters,
ouershadowing the light with darkness, comptyng sweet to be sower, teaching
slaunderousnesse, war, wrong, and abundance of all mischief, and finally
filling the heart with deuelishe poison. A remedy against hatred A righteous man
described.
My children, I* speak these things upon experience, to the intent ye should
eschew hatred, and stick to godly love. Righteousness drives out hatred, and
lowliness kills it: for a righteous and a lowly persons is ashamed to do 1.
He forsakes sin for conscience, not for fear.
wrong, not for fear of rebuke, but for conscience sake, because God feeth
his intent. He backbiteth no man.
He backbiteth no man, because the fear of the highest overcomes hatred* for
the fear of the lord offe^deth not, neither will do any man wrong, no not
even in He thinks no man h^^me.
thought. At length I came to the knowledge of these things, when I had
repented me of my dealinges toward Joseph. The fruits of true repentance.
For the true repentance that is according to Gods will, mortif^eth a man to
obedience, chaseth away darkness, enlighteneth the eyes, gives knowledge to
the mind, and leads the soul to salvation. And whatsoever men know not of
themselves, that does repentance teach the^. O how dear are y^ prayers of
the parents for their children.
For it brought upon me the pain of the heart, and if my father Jacobs prayers
had not been, surely I had died out of hand. For look wherein a man synneth,
by the same is he punished. For as much therefore as my heart was merciless
toward Joseph. God his rigorous justice, due to the merciles.
I suffered Gods rigorous justice in my heart by the space of a.xi. months
that the time of my punishemente might fall out, even with the time that I
urged the ^ellyng of Joseph. Now therefore my children, each of you love his
brothers, and put away hatred from your hearts, Love consists in deed in
word, and in mind.
loving one an other in deed, word, and thought of mind. For before my
Fathers face I spoke mildely of Joseph, but behind his back the spirit of
hatred darckened my understanding, and tempted my mind to kill him. Wherefore
love ye one an other heartily, and if any of you offend other* tell him of it
gently, driuyng out the poison of hatred, and fosteryng no deceit in heart.
And if the offender confess it, and be sorry for it, forgive it him: and if he
deny it, strive not with him, least he fall to swearyng, and so sin double.
Let no stranger hear you vtteryng one an others secrets in variaunce,
least he turn to be your ilwiller, and work some great mischief against you.
For he will talk gilefully with thee, and undermine thee to do thee a shrewde
turn, taking his poison at thine own hand. Therefore if he deny it, and be
ashamed of it, and hold his peace when he is rebuked, draw him not out, for in
deniyng he repents him, so as he will no more offend thee, but honor thee,
and fear thee and be in quiet. But if he be unshamefast, and abide by his
naughtiness, then refer the reuengement of it to God with all thy heart. Envy
no man's prosperity.
If an other man prosper more then you, be not agreeued at it, but pray for
him, that he may have perfect prosperity. For peradventure It may be
perchance to your profit.
it may be to your own benefit. And if he be exalted more and more, envy
him not, but Remember that all flesh is gr^ss^.
remember that all flesh shall dye^ and praise God for it, who gives good and
profitable thy ages to all men. Seek the Lords judgments, and so thy mind
shall let him alone, and be in quiet. Now if a man be enriched by evil means,
as Csau my Fathers brother was, envy him not, for in so doing ye Least you
seem to control the lord.
control the Lord, who either takes away his benefits from the wicked, or
leaves them still to the repentant, or else reserueth the^ in the unrepentant,
to their endless punishment. A poor man how he is rich.
For the poore^man, having sufficient of all things, gives thanks unto the
Lord, and is enriched of all men, because men wish him no harm. Therefore
(my children) away with hatred out of your hearts, and love one an other with a
right meaning mind. Also will you your children to honor Leuy and Judah, for
out of them shall the lord make the Savior of Israel to come. A Prophes^e of
Christ.
I know that in the end your children shall depart from them, and walk in
all manner of mischief, naughtiness, and corruption before the lord. And
after a little pausyng he said again: my sons, hear me your father* bury me
by my fathers. And so pluckyng up his fete, he slept in peace: and after ^iue
years they carried him thence, and laid him with his Fathers in Hebron.

The Testament of Aser, made to his children at his death, concerning two
faces, of Vice and Ve^tue.


Two ways says Aser are preparde
For men: the one for joy,
The last for death: the first is best.
But this breeds sore annoye.
THe copy of Aser his Testamente, and of the things that he spoke to his
children. In the hundred and twenty year of his life, being still in health,
he said unto them. Ye children of Aser harken to your Father, and I will show
you all things that are right before the Lord. Two (...).
The Lord has given two ways to the sons of men: two minds, two
doings, two places, and two ends: and therefore all twooes may be one* yea,
though they be contraries. as are the ways of good and evil. Two m^^ndes in
man* of good and of evil.
Also there are two minds in our breasts* which move us either to
honesty, or dishonestie. Therefore if a man be led to goodness, all his
doings are occupied about righteousness: and if he do any thing amiss, by
and by he repents him: for in as much as his mind is bent unto
righteousness, he puts away naughtiness, and out of hand amendeth his
miss^deedes, and corrects the corruptnesse of his mind. But if his mind
incline to evil, all his doings tend to naughtines* in somuche that he
thrusts away the good, and takes to him the bad, because he is under the
dominion of Beliall: and if he do any good thing, he tourneth the same unto
evil. For if he begin to do any good, he brings the end of his doings
to an evil work, because the treasure of his heart is infected with the
venime of a deuellishe and mischeuous Spirit, and therefore the evil
ouermastereth the go^d in his mind, and brings the end of the thing to
naughtiness. Diners fortes of double faces.
Some man shows compassion upon him that serves his turn in naughtiness,
that manne has two faces, and that deed of his is stark lewdenesse. An
other man loves ungraciousness, and he is leude likewise: and although he
could find in his heart to dye for the compassyng of his evil: yet it is
mani^este that he is double-faced, and his doing is altogether stark naught.
For his love being but lewdness does as it were cloak his evil with a good
name, whereas the d^ist of his doings, tends to a wicked end. An other
steals, The couete^us man's wickedness described.
does open wrong, pilleth and polleth, is coueteous. and pitieth not the
poor. He also has a double face, and all this is stark naught, for in b^yng
nigardly toward his neightbor, he provoke gods wrath, and denies the
highest, in not pitiyng the poor. He despises and spiteth the Lord, which
is the commander of the law, he suffers not the poor to rest, he defiles
his own soul to make his body gaie, he kills many, and pitieth few, this
is the part of a double faced person. Another commits whoredom and
fornication, or vexes many men piteously with his power and riches, and yet
absteineth from meats His fast is naught, for he does the commandments
with an evil conscience, and that is a double faced dealyng, which is all
together naught. Such manner of folk are like swine, and Hares, for they
seem to be half clean, but in very deed they be utterly unclean. You
therefore my children, become not like them, neither bear ye in one hoode two
faces, the one of goodness, and the other of naughtiness, but stick alonely
unto goodness. God abides with y^ plain-dealer.
For in goodness does God rest, and men like well of it. Shu^ naughtines, and
kill the deuell in your good works: for they y^ are double faced serve not
God. but their own lusts, because they seek to please Belial, and such as
are like the^ selves. Now although plaindealing men, and such as pretend but
one face, The preposterous judgment of the wor^e, make not good or bodde.
are taken for offenders, at the hands of such as bear two faces, yet are
they righteous before GOD. For many in killyng wicked persons, do two
works at once, namely good by evil, but in deed the whole work is good,
because that he which has rooted out the evil, has destroyed it. Other
kinds of double faced me^.
Some man hatyng his neighbor mercifully, blames him for his aduoutrie, or
theft: such a one is double faced, but yet is the whole work good, because
he follows the Lords example not respectyng what seems good, when it is
evil in deed. An other will not make merry with riotters, least he should
be stained by them, and de^ile his own soul. This manne also is double
faced, but yet is al his doing good, and he is like a Ro^ or a Stagge, which
in common wild herd, some to be unclean, and yet are altogether clean,
because he walked in the zeal of the Lord, shunnyng and hatyng those* whom
God wills to be shunned in his commandments, and so kills he evil with
weldoyng. Se therefore my Sons, how there are two in all things one against
the other, and the one hidden under the other. Death succedeth to ^fe, shame to
glory, night to day, and darkness to light. All righteous things are
under light and life: and therefore does eternal life ouermaister death. It
is not to be ^aied, that truth is untruth, righteousness unrighteousness, or
right wrong, because that as al things are under God so all truth is under
light, Aser his righteous living.
I have practiced all these things in my life, and not straied from the truth
of the Lord, but sought out the commandments of the highest, to the
uttermost of my power, and walked with one face in goodness. Take heed
therefore my Children to the Lords Commandments, and follow the truth
with one face in goodness. Take heed therefore my Children to the Lords
Commandments, and follow the truth with one single face: Double faced,
double punished.
For they that are double faced, shall be double punished. The spirit of
error hates the man that sighteth against it. Keep the law of the Lord,
and regard not evil that seems good, but have an eye to the thing that is
good in deed, and keep the same, retournyng to the lord in all his
Commandments, and restyng upon him, for the ends where at men do ame,
do show their righteousness. And know the Angels of the Lord, from the
Angels of Satan. For if ye cleave to wicked spirits, your souls shall be
tormented of the wicked spirit whom ye serve, in wicked lusts and works.
But if ye quietly and cherefully acquainte your selves with the Angel of
peace, he shall comfort you in your life time. My Children become not like the
Sodomites. which knew not the Angel, and perished for ever. For I am sure
that you shall sin, and be delivered into the hands of your enemies, your
^ande shall be laid waste, and your selves shall be scattered into the four
corners of the earth, (...).
and be despised as unprofitable Water in your dispersyng abroad, until ^he
highest do visit the earth, eating and drinkyng as a man, with men, and
breakyng the Serpents head in pieces without noice. He shall save Israel and
all the Heathen by water, ^eyng GOD hidden in manne. Therefore tell your
children these things, that they neglecte not Gods Law written in the Tables
of heaven: For the time will come, that they shall give no credit to the Law
of the Lord. And you falling to naughtiness, shall deal wickedly against
GOD, giving no heed to his Law, but to men's commandments. For this cause
shall ye be scattered abroad, as my brothers Gad and Dan, which were not
acquainted with their own Country tribe, and tongue. Nevertheless the lord
shall gather you together again in * Note this of faith and mercy.
faith, for the hope of his mercy, for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacobs sake. When
he had so said, he commanded them to bury him in Hebron. And he died slepyng
a good sleep, and afterward his sons doing as he had willed them, carried him
back, and buried him with his fathers.

The Testamente of Joseph, made to his brethren and children at his death,
concerning chasti^^e and patience.


Let Joseph teach thee*
Lo^^e and Chas^itie,
So shalt thou have:
A blessed long life,
Void of all firise.
Even to thy grave.
MN sons and dry (...) thren, beardye Joseph the well-beloved of Israel. My
Children, hear your (...) have known in my life Envy and death; with the
which my brethren would have bestoyed me. Iosephes affictions. Lock pa^^?
For they hated me; and God loved me, they would have killed me, and the GOD of
my Fathers kept me: they put. me into a pit, and the most highest brought
me out again. I was fold as a (...) manner, and the Lord made me free, and
his strong hand helped me. God (...) his in distress.
I was kept in hunger, and the Lord him self nourished me: I was left alone,
and the Lord comforted me: I was sickr, and the Lord visited me: I was in
prison and the Savior made me glad: I was fassned in cheynes, and the Lord
vabaunde me: He pleaded my cause in the accusations of the Egiptians, and not
only delivered me from eunie and dereipte, but also exalded me in so much
that Putipher. Chief Steward of Pharaes house. did lend me lodgyng, where I
was in ieapardie of my life, by reason of a shameless woman, which entised me
to do naughtines with her, through the slame of volupteousnesse burnyug about
her breaste. I was cast in prison for her: I was beaten and mocked for her:
yet the Lord caused the keeper of the prison to be moved with mercy toward
me. God never forsakes his
He forsakes not them that fear him, neither in darcknesse, neither in
bonds, neither in tribulations or necessities. God is not ashamed as manne,
neither dreadeth he as men, neither shakes or shrinketh he for fear as
yearthly men. He is present in all places, and in their most grievous sorrows
he comfort his. (...) con^^ount in ten temptations.
He goes away for a reason, to try the thoughts of their mind. He found me
trusty in ten temptations. And in every one I was constant and preserved.
For sufferaunce is a great medicen, and causes much goodness. How often
did the Egiptian threaten my death? Sufferance what it is.
How often was I punished, and yet the woman called me again? how often did
she threaten me to dye, because I would not have to do with her? She said
unto me, thou shalt have governance of me, and all that be mine, if thou
will give thy self unto me. and obey my desire, and thou shalt be lord
over us. A present medicene in temptation.
But I remembered the words of my Father Jacob, and enteryng in to my Chamber,
made my prayer to the Lord, and * Not from m^^te, but from wa^ton f^re.
fasted seven years, yet I appeared unto the Egiptian, in that state of body,
as I had lived in pleasures or delights. For they that fast for GOD, receive*
^autie of face. When I had wine given unto me, I drunk none: and Fasting three
days, I took my meat daiely, and gave it to the sick and needy, and early
I waked unto the lord, and wept for Memphetica the Egiptia^, because she was
evermore troublyng of me. A crafty practice of a wom
She came unto me in the night, as though she would have visited me. And first,
truly because she had never a soonne, she fained to take me as her son. And
I prayed unto God, to send her a son: until which time she embraced me, as
though I had been her son, And I perceived not the cause. And for a
conclusion, she drew me to have done fornication with her, and I rememberyng my
self, was sorrowful unto y^ death. And when she was gone out, I came to my
self, and sorrowed many days: For I perceived her deceipte and error. And I
spoke unto her the words of the most highest GOD, if by chance she might
be turned away from her pernicious concupiscence. Flattery the Deuelles
sweet bait.
Many times as to a holy man, she spoke flatteryng words to me, not without
deceipte, laudyng my chastity before her housebande, which would utterly have
destroyed me: Both manifestly and secretly she said unto me, fear not my
housbande, for he is persuaded of thy chastity. For if so be that any manne
showed him of thee and me, he would not believe it. A token of a ^ious heart.
For because of this thing, I covered me with Sackclothe, and laid me flat
upon the earth, and prayed unto almighty GOD, that he would deliver me from
this woman of Egipte. When she could do nothing this way, she came again
armed with other reasons, ^ipocrites ^re of all (...) for ^ucre.
that is to say, that she would feign learn the word of God of me, and began
to speak after this manner. If thou will have me to forsake mine Idolles,
follow my desire* and I will persuade my housbande the Egiptian to go from
his Idolat^^^^, (...)
and we shall walk in the law of thy God. I made answer to these things:
GOD will have ^o^e to worship him with uncleanness, neither has he any
pleasure in Adultere^s. And she held her peace, desiryng to fulfill her
concupiscence. And I fasted and prayed, that God might deliver me from her.
Again at an other time, she said unto me: Note the fruit of lust.
If thou will not do adultery with me, I will kille my Prince, and so by the
Law I shall take thee to my housbande. When I heard that, I rent my garmente
and said: Woman* I pray thee be ashamed of these things before GOD, and
fear GOD, and do thou not such an abominable thing: Neither despair
utterly that thou droune not thy self in thine own evil, for if thou go
above it, I shall utter and declare the thoughts of thine iniquity. She
fearyng these things, prayed me that I should not bewraie her naughtiness,
and so departed. Yet again, she went about to begile me with gifts, senoyng
unto me all things that men have need of, and she sent me meat, strewed
about with enchantment. And as the Cunuke brought it in, I beheld and saw a
terrible fellow, geuyng me a sword with the dishe, and I perceived that she
went about to deceive me. And when he was gone, I wept, and touched not that
meat, nor any other of her sendyng for a good while after. A day after that,
she came to me and said, what is the matter that thou haste not eaten of the
meat? And I said unto her, because thou haste poisoned it. Therefore thou
shalt know that I will not come unto Idolles, but only unto GOD. Joseph did
first monishe and not pro-
Now understand therefore, that the GOD of my Father by his Angel, has
showed thy mischief unto me, and I have kept the meat to thy shame, if
perchance thou might repent, or learn that the malice of wicked dooers
prevails not against them that worship the Lord in Chastity. And I took
and did cate before her, saying: the GOD of my Fathers, and the Angel of
Abraham shall be with me, and then she fell down at my feet and wept. The
name of God, and fear of (...), pricketh the conscience.
Then liftyng her up, I exhorted her many ways, and she promised me, that she
would never do such i^^quitie after that day. Yet because her heart was
mournyng, and did burn toward me in adultery with sighs, coming from the
depth of her stomach, she cast boune her countenance. Note this.
The Egiptian her housbande perceiuyng her, faied: wherefore hold thou down
thy face? she answered, I am even sorrowful at the heart: And he comforted
her that was not sick: yet again she entered into me (her housbande being
without) and said* I am strangeled or choked: Either I will break my neck,
or else droune my self, without thou will obey me. And I perceiuyng that the
spirit of Belial troubled her, pra^ed unto the Lord, and said thus: Wherefore
art thou vexed or troubled, all blind in sin? Remember thy self* for if
thou do kille thy self: the Concubine of thy housbande called Sechon, enuiyng
thee, shall beat thy Children, and destroy the memory of thee from the
earth, And she said unto me. Have done* have done* I perceive that yet thou
haste some care for me: I have eue^ enough that thou defendest my life, and my
Children. I have good hope in time to come, that I shall obtain my desire. And
she perceived not that for the love of my Lord GOD I said so, and not for her
sake. Whatsoever he be that follows the concupiscence of his pernicious
desire, is made servant unto the same, as this woman was. And if he hear any
good thing in the passion wherein he is overcome: he draws the same to his
pernicious or filthy desire. I say unto you my sons, that it was about fire
of the Clock when she went from me, and I fell upon my knees praiyng to GOD
all that da^e, A remedy against temptation.
with the night following And about the break of the day, I rose weping, that
I might once be delivered from this woman Egiptian. Finally, she caughte me
fast by the garment, drawyng me to have gone to bed with her. Then
perceiving that she waxed mad, and that violently, and with strength she
held my clothes, I let my clothes (...) from me, and fled away.

Then she complained to her housbande of me* which put me in prison in the
kin^ges house. The day followyng after, I was fore beaten and cast into
prison. And when I lay bound in Fetters: this Egiptian woman wa^ed sick for
sorrow, and harkened how I lauded GOD, being in a house of darckenesse. For I
reioysyng with a glad voice, glorified my God only that by such occasion I
was delivered from the Egiptian woman. Yet she left not to stand harkenyng,
Note a subtle woman.
and said: have done, and take the offer which I put unto thee, and fulfill
my desire, and I will deliver thee from thy bond and bring thee out from the
darkness: but all that could persuade me nothing, Joseph's singular chastity.
in so much that in thought I was not inclined to any desire of her. For God
loves him better which fasteth in chastity, God respects the virtuous not
the wealthy.
being in a Prison of darkness, then him which takes his pleasure with
voluptuousnes in a chamber of honor and riches. For if a man live in chastity,
and desire glory, (if God perceive it to be expedient for him) he gives unto
him as he has done unto me. Many times as though she had been sick, she
descended unto me unlooked for, and heard the voice of me praiyng, and stood
the more still. But when I heard her sighe I held my peace, A property of a
harlo^.
for in her house, she stripped her self naked, breasts, legs and arms
whereby she might have kindeled me into the love of her. For she was very
fair, and gloriously adourned to have deceived me but God kept me from her
works. Therefore my sons, The commodity of prayer and sufferaunce.
behold what sufferaunce with prayer and fasting does. And therefore if you
love sober^es and chastity in sufferaunce and humility of the heart, the Lord
shall dwell in you, for he loves sobriety: and when the most highest does
dwell in a man although he chance to fast into envy or into bondage or slander,
the Lord which dwells in him will for hy^ (...) not only deliver him, but
also ^^alt him, and glori^^e him as he has done me, for he is always with him
in word, in deed and thought.

My brethren, (...)
ye know how well my father did love me, and yet was I never the prouder
thereof in my heart. For though I was a Child, I had ever the fear of God in my
mind, When I grew to age I moderated my self, and honored my brethren who^
I feared. I heald my peace when I was sold, because I would not have the
Ismaelites to know my stock and kindred how I was the son of Jacob a man
of great strength and power. Therefore have you in your deeds the tear of
God, and honor your brethren, for all men that observe the law of God, are
(...) of him. Then I came with the Ismaelites to a certain place called
Indoculpe* and they demanded of me what I was, and I said (because I would
not reprove my brethren) that I was one of their household ^^aues. Then said
the chief of them, thou art no slave, for thy at a window, and sent unto her
husband, saying: thy judgment is unjust, for thou do punish wrongfully the
young man y^ is stolen. A token of mercy if it were not for an ill end.
But because I did not cha^^ge my words, yet again was I beaten, and commanded
to be kept at his commandment, until such time as my masters came.

And his wife said unto him: wherefore do ye keep in captivity the noble
child? It were more almose to let him go, and to beat you. Note a flatteryng
woman.
She would feign have spied me in desire of sin, and I knew nothing of this.
He said again to Memphetica, it is not honest among the Egiptians, to take
away an other man's goods before he show him of it. He said that of the
Merchaunt and of me, when I should be imprisoned. After that xxiiii. days,
the Ismalites came, and they hearing that Jacob my Father was heavy for me,
said unto me. Wherefore is it that thou saidest thou wast a bondsman, and now we
know that thou art the son of a great man in the land of Chanaan, and thy
father soroweth for thee in sackcloth. A good nature.
Then I would feign have wept: yet I retrained my self for shamyng of my
Brethren, and said, I know it not, for I am a bondsman. Then they took counsel
among them selves, whether or to whom they might sell me, least I should be
^ound in their hands. For (...) ^eared Jacob, least he would be revenged of
them: for they had heard that he was mighty both to God and man.

Then said y^ Merchant to them, redeem him now from the judgment of Putiphar.
They hearing this went and asked for me, sa^yng y^ they had bought me for
money, and he delivered me. Memphitica spoke to her husband to buy me, for she
said, I hear say they would ^ell him. And they sent an Eunuch to the
ismaelites and desired to buy me, (...)
and when he could not bargain with them, he returned and showed his Lady that
they asked a great price for the child, she sent again an other Eunuch
saying, although they ask two besauntes of gold see that thou spare not for
money, but buy the child and bring him to me. He paid 80. golden crowns for
me, and said unto his Lady that he paid an 100. And I per^^iuyng this, heald my
peace ^east y^ Eunuch should have been searched. Behold my sons, what I
have sustained. Love one of you another, and with continuance cast out from
among you deceitful minds, for God deliteth in the concord of brethren, and
has pleasure also in y^ love and choice of a proved heart. Love between
brethren pleases God.
For when my brethren came out of Egypt and knew me, I gave the^ again their
money, and I never gave reproach unto them but comforted them. And after y^
death of Jacob I loved them more abundantly, Iosephes merciful heart declared:
and all that ever he commanded me I did very gladly, and they marue^led
because I suffered not them to be troubled for a small cause for all that was
in my power I gave to them. Their children were reputed to me as mine own, and
mine own children as their servants. Their life was my life, and their sorrow
was my sorrow, and all their infirmity or disease was mine, my land was their
land, my counsel was y^ counsel of the^. And I never exalted my self above
the^ in pride for mine own worldly glory. But was amongst them as one of y^
least.

Therefore my Sons, if ye walk in the commandments of my Lord, A promise
for them that pray for their enemies.
the Lord shall exalt you and bless you in riches perpetual. And if any man
will do evil to you, with meekenes look that ye pray for him, and GOD shall
deliver you from all evil. Now behold and see that for my long sufferaunce
the daughter of my Lord was given me to wife, (...)
and there was given to me with her an hundredth talentes of Gold. For God made
them to serve me and gave me beauty that I should be as a flower above them
that were fair in Israel, and he kept me unto mine age both in strength and
beauty, because I was like to Jacob in all things. And what dreams I have
seen, (...)
my children now hear. There were 12. Hearts feeding and 9. were divided
abroad in the earth. Also I saw, how that of Judah was a virgin borne having a
white silkin Robe, and of her came forth an immaculate Lamb. And on the left
hand of the said Lamb, was as it were a Lion, and all beasts* made against
him, and the Lamb overcame them, and troad them under his feet and in him
ioyed the Angels, the men, and all the earth. These things shall come to pass
in their time, that is to say in the later days. Christ (...).
Therefore my sons, keep the commandment of the Lord and honor Judah and
Leuy. For of them, to you shall spring the lamb of God, which by his grace
shall preserve all Gentiles and Israel. The kingdom of him is a kingdom
eternal which shall never pass. For my kingdom shall be ended in yo^, as the
keepyng of an Orchard, for after the harvest it shall appear no more. I know
right well that after my death the Egiptians shall trouble you. But God shall
revenge you and bring you to the promised land which he swear to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. But carry my bones with you, for in so doing, the Lord shall be
in the light with you against the Egiptians, and Belial shall be in darkness
with the Egiptians. Also carry with you your mother Zilpha, and nigh unto the
valley, nere unto Rachell, bury her. When he had said these words he stretched
forth his feet and slept the sleep of all y^ world. Then they enbaumed him
with spices, putting him in a chest in Egypt after he had lived 110. years who
saw Ephraims Children unto the 3. generation. For unto Machir the son of
Manasses, were children borne on Iosephes knees. After this all they of Israel
bewailed him and all the Egiptians with great mournyng. For he had compassion
of Egypt as of his own proper members, and assisted them both with his labor
and counsel, and did them good at all times and seasons.

The Testament of Benjamin, made to his Children at his death, concerning a
cl^^ne mind.


Lo what true faitfull love does mean^,
All you that lovers be:
It is in heart and not in Lust,
As here you plainly see.
THe Copy of Bensamins words, which he uttered to his children, being of the
age of a hundred and twenty years. He kissed them and said: As Isaac was
borne in the hundredth year of Abraham, so was I in the hundredth year^ of
Jacob: and because Rachell died at my birth, I sucked her bondwoman Bill^. For
after that Rachell had borne Joseph, she was barren xii. years. And when she
had prayed to the Lord in those xii. years, she conceived and bare me. For my
father loved Rachell excedingly, and wished to see 2. sons by her, and
therefore I was called Benjamin, Be^iamin what it signifies.
that is to say, the son of my days, or the son of my sorrow, because my
mother died in the birth of me. When I came first into Egypt, and that my
brother Joseph knew me, he said to me: what said they to my Father, when
they had sold me? I answered: They stai^ed thy coat with blood, and
bringyng it to him, said: See if this be thy sons coat or no. And my
Brother also said unto me: Truly when the Ismalites took me, one of the^
stripping me out of my coat, gave me a thin shirt to put on, and lashyng me
with a Whyp, bad me run. Ioseph^ (...).
And as he went aside to hide my garment, a Lion met him, and slew him, and so
his partners being afraid sold me to their fellows. You therefore my
children, love the God of heaven, and obey his commandments, followyng that
good and h^l^e man Joseph, and let your mind be set upon goodness, as ye know
that mine has been. He that has a good mind looks rightly upon all
things. F^are God and love your neighbors, (...) shall not overcome them that
fear the Lord.
and then although the spirit of Belial tempt you to all naughtiness to
trouble you, yet shall it not get the upper hand of you, no more then it did of
my Brother Joseph. How many folk would have killed him, and yet GOD de^ended
him? For he that fears God, and loves his neighbor, cannot be wounded of
the ayry spirit Beliall: and he that is shielded with the fear of the Lord, is
safe from harm both of man and beast, and cannot be overcome because he is
helped by the love of God which he has toward his neighbor. For Joseph be
sought our father Jacob to pray for my Brethren to the Lord, that he would not
lay to their charges* the mischief that they had devised against him. Whereat
Jacob cried out, O son Joseph, thou have overcome my heart. And there withal
imbracyng him, he kissed him two hours together, Joseph a right figure of
Jesus Christ.
and said: In thee shall the prophecy of heaven be resembled to the full,
concerning the lamb of God and Savior of the world, that the unspotted shall
be delivered for the wicked doers, and he that is without sin, shall dye
for the Sinners in the blood of his Testament, to the salvation both of the
Gentiles and of Israel, and he shall dashe Beliall and his servants. My
children look upon the end of that good man and follow his mercifulnes with a
good mind that you also may have a crown of glory upon your heads. A good man
A good man has not a darcke eye, for he is merciful to all men, yea though
they be sinners and have devised mischief against him, and he that does good,
overcomes evil. Ouercom^^th evil.
by the defense of goodness, and loves. Loves the righteous.
the righteous as his own Soul. If another. Enuieth not.
man be honored, he enuieth it not: if a man be enriched, it greeueth him
not. If a man be strong. Praises the valiant.
or valiant, he praises him, and beleuyng him also to be chaste, he
defends. Defends him that ^eareth God.
him that has the fear of God. He works together with him that ^oueth God,
and if a man forsake the Admonishes the sinner.
almighty, he warns him to return again. Whosoever has the grace of the
good spirit, him does he love as his own life. He Pittieth the poor.
pitieth the poor, succoureth the weak, and praises and honors God. The
example of a (...).
My children, if ye have a good mind, evil men shall stand in awe of you,
and unthrifts shall for very shame be converted to goodness. So that covetous
men shall not only depart from their nigardlines, but also give of their
abundance to the needy. If ye be good doers, both unclean spirits shall
flee from you, and shrewd beasts shall shun for fear of you. For where the
regard of good works is in the mind, there darkness flies away. For if he
do wrong to any holy man, he is sorye for it: and if a holy man receive
wrong, he pittieth the doer, and puts it up with silence. And if any man
betray a righteous soul, and the righteous pray for his betrayer, the betrayer
is not a little disgraced, and the righteous becomes much more notable
afterward, as did my Brother Joseph. The guilefull spirit of Beliall has no
power over a good man's mind: For the Angel of peace guides his soul. The
properties of a righteous man.
He looks not affectionatly upon corruptible things, ne raketh together
riches in the desire of voluptuousness. He is not delighted with pleasures:
He greeueth not his neighbor, he stuffeth not himself with meat, neither
wandreth he in the pride of his eyes: for the Lord is his portion. He takes
no glory for geuyng good counsel, he passes not how men dishonor him,
neither can he skill of any guile, untruth, strife, or slaunderousnes. For
the Lord dwells in him, and inlighteneth his mind, and he rejoices before
all men in a good time. A good mind has not two tongues: one to bless with,
and another to curse with: one to slander with, and another to honor with:
one of so^row, and an other of ^oy: one of quietness, and an other of trouble:
one of di^^^mulation and an other of truth: one of poverty, and an other of
riches: but it has one only disposition pure and vncorrupt toward all. It
has no doble sight nor doble hearing. For in all things that he does,
speaks or sees, he knows that the Lord beholds his heart, and therefore
he cleanses his mind that he may not be ^ound faulty before God and man.
But all the works of Beliall are double, and utterly void of simplicity,
Wherefore my children, shun the naughtiness of Beliall, for at the first he
delights those that obey him, Disobedience the father of seven mischiefs.
but in the end he is a sword, and the Father of seven mischiefs. For when
the mind has once conceived by Beliall, it brings forth, first envy, Envy.
secondly desperatnesse Desperation.
thirdly sorrow, Sorrow.
fourthly bondage, Bondage.
fifthly needinesse, ^^^edines.
sixty troublesomnesse, ^rouble.
and seventhly desolation: ^esolatio^.
and for that cause was Cain tormented with seven punishments by God, for in
seven year together God brought every year a new plague upon Ca^^. (...)
example of Ca^^.
Two hundred years he suffered, and in the nine hundredth year the earth was
made desolate with the flood for his righteous brother Abels sake. In seven
hundred years is Cain judged, and Lamech in seventy times seven: for they
that are like Cain in spitefulnes and hatred toward their brethren, shall be
punished with the same punishment for ever as he was. You therefore my Children
eschew malice, envy, and hatred toward your brethren, and cleue to goodness
and louingnes. He y^ has a mind clean in love, looks not upon a woman in
way of lechery. For he has no desyling in his heart, because y^ spirit of y^
Lord rests in him. An apt ^^^^litude to a mind resisting sin.
For as the Sun is not defiled by shyning upon a puddle or dunghill, but does
rather dry up and drive away the stinch: even so a pure mind stryueth against
y^ uncleanness of the earth, and overcomes it, but is not defiled it self.
And I perceive by the sayings of the righteous Enoch, that there shall be evil
deeds among you. For ye shall defile your selves with the fornication of
Sodonie, and perish all save a few, and multiply mord^nate lusts in women,
and the reign of the Lord shall not be among you, for he shall take it away
suddenly. Nevertheless the Lords temples shall be made in our portion, and it
shall be glorious among you. For the Lord himself shall take the kingdom upon
him, (...) Christ*
and the twelve tribes shall be gathered together there, and all nations shall*
resort thither, until the (...) highest send his salvation in the visitation
of his only (...). And he shall (...) into the first temple, (...)
and there the Lord shall suffer wrong, and he despised and be (...) up upon a
piece of timber. (...)
And the veyle of the temple shallbe rent (...), and the spirit of the Lord
shall come down upon the Gentiles poured out as fire. (...)
And rising up from the grane, he shall ascend from earth to (...). He shall
remember how (...) has bin upon earth, (...)
and ^ow glorious he is in heaven. When Joseph was in Egypt, I longed to see
his person, and the form^ of his countenance. And through the prayers of my
Father Jacob I saw him awake in the day of his full and perfect shape. Now
therefore my Children, know ye that I shall dye. Wherefore deal every of you
truly and rightfully with his neighbor, work ye justly and faithfully, and
keep ye the law and commandments of the Lord: for that do I teach you in
stead of al inheritance. (...)
And g^ue you the same to your Children for an everlasting possession. For so
did Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: they gave us all these things for an
inheritance, saying: keep the Lords commandments, til he reveal his
saving health to all nations. A prophsy of to^ last coming of Christ.
Then shall ye see Enoch, Noe, Sem, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, rising at his
right hand with ioyfulnesse. Then shall we rise also every of us to his own
scepter, The resurrection and judgment described.
worshipping the king of heaven which appeared on earth in the base shape of
man. As many as believe in him shall rejoice with him at that time. And all
these shall rise again to glory, and the residue (...). And the Lord shall
first of all judge Israel for the unrighteousness (...) against him, because
they believed not in God y^* came in the (...) to deliver, Then shall he judge
all nations, as many as believed not in him when he appealed upon earth, and he
shall reprove Israel among the chosen of the Gentiles, as he reproved Esau in
the Madianits that seduced his brethren by fornication and Idolatry, who were
estraunged from God, and fell away from the inheritance of the Children because
they feared not God. But if you walk in holiness before the Lord, ye shall
dwell in hope again in me. And all Israel shall be gathered to the Lord and I
shall no more be called a (...) Wolf for your robberies sakes, but I shall be
called the Lords workman, which gives food to such as doc good. And in my
s^ede shall be raised up the beloved of the Lord, (...)
whose voice shall be heard upon the earth, and he shall give ^ewe knowledge,
and inlighten all nations with the light of understanding, and shall come up to
save Israel. (...)
He shall take from them as a Wolf, and give to (...) of the Gentiles, and
continue in the (...) of the Gentiles unto the (...), He shall be among their
Princes as musical melody in the mouths of al men, and his doings and
sayings shall be written in holy books. He shall be the Lords dearling for
evermore: And as concerning him, my Father Jacob taught me, saying: He shall
amend the defaultes of thy Trybe, (...)
And when he had ended these sayings, he c^mmaunded his Children to carye his
bones out of Egypt, and to burye them in Hebron by his Fathers. So Benia^^^
dyed a hundred and five and twenty year old in a good age, and they put
(...), and in the four score (...) before the departure of the Israelites out
of Egypt, they and their Brethren conveyed their Fathers bones privily again
into the land of Chanaan, and buried him in Hebron at the feet of his Fathers,
and returned again out of the land of Chanaan, and dwelt in Egypt, till the
day of their departure thence all together.

FINIS.
How these Testaments of the twelu^ Patriarchs, were first found, and by
whose means they were translated out of Greek into Latin.
THese Testamentes were hidden and concealed a long time, so as our teachers
and the ancient (...) could not find^ them. Which thing happened through the
spitefulnes of the Jews, who by reason of the most evident manifest, and often
prophesies of Christ that are written in them, did hide them a long while. At
(...) the Greeks being very narrow (...) out of ancient writings, ^ought
these Testamentes warel^, and got them more (...), and translated the^
faithfully out of Hebrew into Greek. Neuerthele^^e, this writing continued yet
still (...), because there was not any man to be found, y^ was skilful both in
y^ Greek and Latin, nor any interp^^^e^ that might procure the translation of
this noble work^, until the time of Robert the second, surnamed Grosthead
(...) Lincoln, who sent diligent searchers as far as Greece, to fetch him a
copy of the said writing without respect of their charges which he bare most
liberally. Therefore to continue the remembrance of those most lightso^
prophesies to y^ strengthening of the christian faith, that reverend Bishop did
in the year of our lord 1242. translate the^ plainly and faithfully, word
for word out of Greek into Latin, (in which two tounges he was counted very
skillful,) by the help of M. Nicholas Greek, Parson of the Church of Dachet,
and (...) Albo^s to y^ intent that by that mea^es the evident prophesies which*
shine more brighter the^ the day light, might the more gloryously come abroad
to y^ greater confusion of the Jews, and of al heretics and enemies of the
Church of Christ, to whom ^e praise and glory for ever,

Amen.
AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum Gratia and Priuilegio Regne Maiestate^.


