A QVIET AND SOBER RECKONING WITH M. THOMAS MORTON somewhat set in choler by
his Adversary P. R. CONCERNING Certain imputations of wilful falsities
objected to the said T. M. in a Treatise of P. R. entitled Of Mitigation, some
part whereof he has lately attempted to answer in a large Preamble to a more
ample Reioynder promised by him.

But ^eere in the mean space the said imputations are justified, and
confirmed, and with much increase of new untruths on his part returned upon
him again: So as finally the Reckoning being made, the Verdict of the Angel,
interpreted by Daniel, is verified of him. Daniel 5. verse. 27. Appensus es in
statera, and inuentus es minus habens.
You have been weighed in the balance, and are found to want weight.


There is also adjoined a piece of a Reckoning with Sir Edward Cook, now L.
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, about a Nihil dicit, and some other points
uttered by him in two late Preambles, to his sixth and seventh Parts of
Reports.

Permissu Superiorum. M. DC. IX.

THE STATE OF THE QVESTION handled in this Book.
MASTER Thomas Morton upon the year 1606. took upon him to write a malicious
Dis^o^erie against Catholics, and their doctrine about Rebellion presently
upon the powder treason: and the Pamphlet was soon after confuted and returned
upon himself by the Moderate Answerer: he replied with a discourse entitled,
A full Satisfaction: adding thereunto another Treatise against Equivocation. To
this opposed himself P. R. Author of the Treatise tending to Mitigation: and
handled in the same both the one and other subject, charging him further with
many foul faults of witting falsehood; whereunto M. Morton has exhibited now
lastly a large new Preamble, with promise of another book to follow in time,
that is to say, he has presented a great head without a body; and this with no
small signs of extraordinary impatience.

For pacifying whereof P. R. has taken the pains to reuiew o^^er again the
accounts, and finds him far more faulty then before. For that in lieu of
clearing old debts, he contracteth new, and in excusing former falsities, he
multiplieth many other. So as now,

The chief question comes to be,
Whether M. Mort. (in the cause he defends) can write truly or no: and
whether his falsehood therein be volu^tary or necessary, or rather both: that is
to say, voluntary in respect of himself, that might have omitted them: and
nec^ssarie in regard of his cause, that could not be defended without them and
consequently in different respects, both voluntary and necessary. In which
point M. Morton holds the negative, I the affirmative. The Reader shall see
the proofs of both sides.

A BRIEF NOTE OF THE CHAPTERS WHICH ARE set forth more largely in the end of
this Book, with their several Paragraphes.
THE first conteyneth the Answer to M. Morton his first Inquiry, about the
Wit, Learning, Memory etc. of his Adversary P.R.

2 The second answers the second Inquiry, about some points touching the
subject of Rebellion and Equivocation.

3 The third ha^dleth a part of the third Inquiry about many falsities objected
by M. Morton against Cardinal Bellarmine.

4 The fourth discusseth like imputations of falsities objected by him against
his Adversary P. R.

5 The fifth examineth how substa^tially M. Morton endeavors to ^^^are
himself from many wilful untruths, objected against him by P.R.

6 The sixth lays forth a great number of untruths, objected to M. Morton,
which he pretermitteth without answer or mention.

7 The seventh, wherein are handled diverse other sorts of voluntary omissions
of M. Morton, as well in defending himself, as the credit of his Clients
commended unto him; and namely of Sir Edward Cook, now Lord Chief Justice.

8 The eight treats diverse several points with the said Sir Edward Cook,
about two new Prefaces of his lately set forth in print.

9 The ninth, returning to M. Morton again, lays together another choice
number of new falsities and falsehoods made in excuse of the old.

10 The tenth and last handles twelve new Challenges made by M. Morton, after
the Victory lost.

There is added for an Appendix in the end, a Case of Equivocation newly
written from England to be resolved, about the false Oath of two Ministers:
VVherin there is mention also made of D. Kings Sermon at the Court, upon the
fi^th of November 1608.

Cyprian. lib. 4. Ep. 9. A pud prophanos and extra Ecclesiam positos, esse
aliud non potest, nisi men's praua, and fallax lingua, odia venenata, and
sacrilega mendacia.

Idem lib. 1. Ep. 3. ad Cornelium. Haec est vere dementia, non cogitare, nec
sentire, quod mendacia non diu fallant; noctem tamdiu esse, quamdiu illucescat
dies: clarificato autem die, and sole obo^to, luci tenebras and caliginem
cedere.

Hilarious lib. de Trinit. Haeretici cum stulte mentiantur, stultius tamen in
mendacij sui defensione sapiunt.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO THE UNIVERSITIES OF ENGLAND.
MVCH more then one year is not yet past (learned Cou^try-men) since I
presented unto you a Treatise, entitled of Mitigation, in answer of an other
most bitterly written by M. Thomas Morton Mini^^er, about Rebellion and
Equivocation. In which Treatise of mine, besides the two said points of
principal argument handled at large (especially the later, as more capable of
variety in the Treatise thereof) a great multitude of falsities were laid open,
as uttered by M. Morton; and those so frequent, gross, and palpable, as they
must needs be thought to have been both wilful and witting: the censure
whereof notwithstanding, I was content to remitt unto you, as presuming more of
the integrity of your judgments in points of learning, and matter of fact, then
distrusting the sequel of your unequal, affections, by reason of our
difference in religion.

2. This Treatise M. Morton perusing and fynding himself, as it seems, not a
little strayned therein, was carried thereby into so great and exorbitant a
stream of passion, as neither he could stay himsel^e from answering somewhat
out of hand (thereby to prevent the Readers prejudice, as himself confesses)
nor yet daring to join issue upon my book and argument thereof as it lay; In
his Epistle dedicatory.
did after a strange new fashion^ devise to set forth a Preamble (for some
present remedy) accompanied with a promise of a larger book, and Reioynder to
ensue afterward. And I do call this a strange devise, not only, for that I
have not seen the same often practiced by any writer lightly, except Sir
Edward Cook (who perhaps by this man's imitation has answered of late with a
Preface of less then four leaves in quarto, La preface de la sixiesme part
des Reports.
his Adversaries book of more then two hundred against him:) but also for that
in this Preamble, which inlargeth it self to above two hundred and twenty
pages, there is not the tenth part bestowed upon the two chief Questions of
Rebellion, and Equivocation, but rather upon other matters and subjects framed
by himself of n^w, whe^of the most may ius^ly be de^med wholly impertinent.

3. As for example, to p^^termitt his two ^pistles, the one to my L. of
Salis^urie, the other to my self (whereof I may chance to have occasion to
speak more in my next ensuing Epistle to him) he d^uideth this whole Preamble
into three several parts, Preamb. page 2.
which he terms Inquiries. I do divide (says he) this Prea^ble into three
Inquiries: M. Mort. division of his work
The first is, what sufficiency and excellency there is in P. R. to make so
great an insultatio^: the second, whether he may be thought a sufficient
Proctor in this case or no: the third, whether he has sufficiently performed
his task, either for the defense of his cause, or justification of his
conscience; with a Challenge against him for them both.

4. This is the division of his Work, whereby I doubt not, but you will
discover also the vani^ie, though I should say nothing thereof. For that he
being pressed with a Work of such ^eight, as the argument of my former book
did import, and urged therein, not only with an overthrow of his whole cause,
but charged furthermore with a monstrous number of plain wilful untruths,
not possible, as they seemed, to be answered, or excused; the judicious Reader
will easily consider, whether this were a time to tryfle as he does, making
himself an Inquisitour (without commission) and to ^rame his first Inqui^y of
the sufficiency and excellency of his Adversary, and to spend eight whole
Paragraphes, as he does, therein: Impertinent proceeding.
Inquiring first of his wit, then of his memory, thirdly of his learning in
Logic, fourthly of his skill in Greek and Hebrew, fifthly of his kind of
charity, sixthly of his modesty, with other like points, spe^ding large
discourses upon every one of them. Is there any man (I say) so simple or
sottish, as not to see the impertinency of this manner of proceeding?

5. His other two Inquiries are as wisely employed, and prosecuted as this. For
that the second, Whether P. R. may be judged a competent Advocate or no, is but
a silly discourse, containing not full two leaves in all: and the argument
thereof is a ridiculous Dialogue feigned between the Mitigator, and the Moderate
Answerer^ The third co^prehe^deth the rest of the book (which is, of four
parts, three) which may be not vnfittely divided into the terms of offensive
and d^fensiue wars. For that first to impresse some opinion of manhood in
defending himself from the imputations laid against him of wilful falsehoods,
he takes upon him (quite from the argument of the controversy in hand) to
impugn others of like dealing, as namely Cardinal Bellarmine, my self, and
others: and then having made this flourish, he comes lastly to his own
defense, in fourteen untruths laid against him, and culled by himself out of
more then forty objected by his adversary, and no one of them well dissolved
by him, as after will appear. And after all ^his, he imagining the field to
r^mayne wholly to himself, he concludes all with a new vaunt and fresh
Challe^ge in the ninteenth, and last Paragraph of this his book, phantasying
himself to have had the victory in every thing that he has taken in hand to
treat. And this being the su^me of M. Mort. new work, I shall briefly lay
forth to your judgment the method which I have thought good to use for his
confutation.

6. First I have bin content to follow him into those follyes of his first
Inquiry, The method used for M. Mort. confutation.
about my wit, memory, learning; skill in Logic, and the like, confessing
willingly the mediocrity thereof in all things: but yet showing by the substance
of the po^nts handled, if I be not de^eyued, First Inquiry.
that if M. Mortons wit had been excel^ent, or learning emine^t, he would never
have ^yn drawn to have leapt over grauer matters, to handle such light toys
as these be. For what ^mporteth me the disestimatio^, which M. Mort. ^rofesseth
of my wit, memory, or learning; for ^o much as the things themselves that are
handled (wherein wit and learning are to be showed) will be better witnesses,
Witless contention about wit.
and of more credit with the prudent Reader, then either his or my bare words
or vaunts? Wherefore to them I remit me.

7. In the second place, Second Inquiry
I have had patience in like manner (for without patience it could not be done)
to peruse over his second Inquiry consisting of a mere idle fancy and fiction
of a Dialogue (as has been said) devised between me, and his Adversary the
Moderate Answerer, as though he had fallen out about answering his book: and
me he brings in speaking very rudely and uncivilly thus: See his Preamble
page 31.
Nay, I have not been arrogant, but thou have been rash and pr^cipitant. For
is thou by thy former Answer mig^test have been thought sufficient for a
reply, what needed such posting to me beyond the seas, for a supply of a more
exact, and learn^d Reioynder? Thus goes his fiction, and it is a very fiction
indeed. For the truth is, that when I began my Treatise of Mitigation against
M. Mortons first exasperating discovery, I knew of no other that was in hand to
answer the same: as more largely I have showed in the third Chapter of my said
Treatise.

8. Moreover he feigneth us to reason together about itching and scratching,
as though the Moderate Answerer had used these words: Preamble page 32.
I think you are troubled which the dis^ase of some of our Catholic lawy^rs,
of whom you have said, they itch to be doing and answering M. Attorney: this
was also my disease, but I after found a scratch, and so may you. Whereby he
seems to insinuate as you see, a certain threat of scratching his
adversary, Threats of scratches.
when other weapons of more force do fail him. But this I have answered
afterward in due place, and showed, that as well these scratches (meant perhaps
of those scolding skirmishes before mentioned about wit, m^morie, learning,
and the like) as also deeper wounds of conviction of falsehoods, and manifest
impostures, are like to fall upon himself: and that in so evident a sort, as
all the standers by may clearly see it, and take compassion on him, and of his
manner of fight: whereof I am content to make your selves also, my learned
Countryme^, both Judges and vmpires.

9. Wherefore fynding so little substance in these two former Inquiries (for what
is added and brought in by me in the second, which are but two particular cases
only concerning our subject and argument of Rebellion and Equiuocatio^, was
borrowed from the third to make up some matter whereof to treat:) I do pass to
the said third Inquiry, wherein one only exploit being requi^ed on M. Mortons
behalf, two are attempted, ^ut with very evil success in them both. The
^xploit required was, that for so much as M. Morton in this his last
Preamblatory reply by aba^^oning the principal argument and subject of ^ur
former controversy, What was principally required of M. Mort. and what he
performs.
had changed the whole state of the Question by occasion of great multitudes of
witting untruths objected against him, he should now have gone roundly to the
matter, and directly, plainly, and substantially have answered the said
imputations: but I found him to take a far other course, allowing to himself
a more large field to walk and flourish in. And this was first, to seek out,
what likelihood or appearance of falsities he could find in any Roman writer
whatsoever: then of what Popes in particular; then of Councels, and their
Interpreters: after this again, against Cardinal Bellarmine, and that in
diverse kinds, as namely for calumniating his adversaries for false allegation
of the Fathers, for differing in his opinions from sundry writers of his own
religion, whereof notwithstanding no one can be proved as after you will see.

10. Finally then after all this, he falls upon my self, pretending to show
that in fourteen several points at least he has taken me tardy, which if he
could prove, (as in no one he can) yet all this while, as you see, he walks
without the list of our controversy concerning the defense of his own
falsehoods, which he drives of as long as may be, according to the fashion of
those that having many deep wounds are loath to discover them, or have them
handled. Wherefore this point of his own defense or excuse, which was first in
his intention (for this was the cause that made him so hastily to shape out
this Preamble) was the last in execution, as least gustfull unto him: and so he
dispatcheth it only in one Paragraph, of ninteene, that he has in this
Preamble, to wit the eyghtenth only: and by all liklyhood would have
pretermitted it wholly if handsomely he might.

11. But perhaps you will imagine, that he has helped somewhat his cause by
seeking these diuerticles from the purpose, in that he having weakened first his
adversaries credit may find better passage to the defense of his own. But
indeed this reckoning falls not out so, but rather the quite contrary, The
cont^ary succes^e of M. Mort. expectation.
for that not being able when it comes to the trial to fas^en any one
untruth upon his adversary, I mean in that nature that it may be thought
witting and willing, which is our only question; he comes by consequence to
confirm, and authorize extraordinarily the credit of their integrity in their
writings, who have not given place to any least touch of just reprehension in
that behalf: and by this means contrary to his meaning he becomes their
Encomiast or Prayser, who endeauored to be their calumniatour, rectum ab
errore, as oftentimes by Gods providence it falls out.

^2. Wherefore I seeing M. Morton take this ^ourse, The su^m^ of all this my
Answer in 10. Chapters.
after I had examined the first two In^uiries in two several Chapters of mine,
I was ^orced to bestow seven or eight more upon his ^hird. Wherefore the first
is to answer all the ^articuler objections, which he has against other Card.
B^llarmine and others. The second, for answering the like M. Mort. defe^deth
himself in other fo^rteen charges produced against him, which he thought good
to choose out as defensible amongst a far Sir Edward Cook now L. Chief
justice of the Common Pleas: with whom M. Morton, after all this battery, as
though nothing had been said against him: wherein I can commend nothing, but his
courage, remitting the rest to your better discretions, when ye shall have read
both parts, this being the sum of our whole Concertation.

The reason of the title of this book.
13. There remains to say a word or two, concerning the reason of the title of
this my Answer, which is, A quiet and sober Reckoning: whereof I know that your
Wisdoms will easily guess the cause, but much more will have seen it, if ye
have perused over this Prea^ble of M. Morton which is so bitter and sharp, and
over eager in many places, as does easily show that the man was in great choler
when he wrote it. And though I could allege many exorbita^t speeches of his to
this effect throughout the whole book, yet the beginning and ending shall only
serve for proof thereof: the beg^nning, for that he bestows seven or eight
whole Paragraphs of his first Inquiry (as already I have said) to examine my
wit, memory, skill in Logic, ignorance in Gre^ke and H^brue, modes^y,
charity, and the like, which hardly could p^oceed but from impatience. The last
Paragraph also of his new challenges declares the same more abounda^tly where
he auouching me first to be a man without all conscience, lame in hands, dumb
in ^peach, dead in sense and feeling of all co^trition; ^e passes on to the
most extrauagant, and ridi^ulous terms of impatience, that ever I read in ^y
Author, that valued his own credit, or you either perhaps. For he says, that
if he do ^ot manifest me to be so malignant, as if the Capital letters P. R.
did justly betoken Princeps Rabularum: and so vain, as if they signified
Phormio Romanista: so dissolute in my cause, as if they might be interpreted
Praeuaricator Rasus: so impudently unjust, as that they might import Persidiae
Reus: then is he content that his Treatises be purged with fire, and himself
challe^ged to a Recantation. And will ye not take pity of this man's passion?
Or can ye marvel, why I took this title of A quiet and sober Reckoning?

14. Truly, if I should have suffered my self to be c^rryed away with the same
passion, and with the like impatience have returned him an Answer in his own
vein, and character of writing; you do easily see, whereunto this contention
would have grown: but I have thought best to endeavor the pacification of M.
Mortons choler, by a more moderate kind of conference, if it may be, where heat
of words laid aside, the truth of matters may peaceably and more calmely be
considered. Wherein (as before I said) though I may have just cause to suspect
your affections: yet can I not distrust your judgments in a matter of such
apparent euidency, as this is, now committed unto you. Wherein Christ Jesus
direct you, to the discovery of that truth in Religion, which only can save us
all. And so to his protection I commit you, this 19. of December, 1608.

Your loving Countreyman, wishing you all good, that is truly good. P. R.

THE EPISTLE ADMONITORY TO M.r THOMAS MORTON.
IF your self had not given me the example ( M. Morton) by writing to me a
several Epistle, termyng it Preamblatorie, it is likely I should not have
troubled you with this Admonitory of mine, as having written sufficiently in my
precedent Dedicatorie to our two Vniuersyties, concerning the subject of this
our whole Co^trouersy. But for so much as you do fyrme and subscribe your said
letter thus: Yours to warn, and to be warned, Thomas Morton, and have put in
execution the first part thereof by warning me, I presume you will be content, the
second part be put also in ure, and that you be warned by me. To which ^ffect I
have thought best to style this my Epistle an Admonitorie. Now then to the
matters that are to be handled therein.

The points wh^rof you have warned me be two: which you call two Romish
maladies. Two calumniations.
The one, the tra^scendent Jurisdiction of the Pope (to use your words)
troubling or subuerting all Princes, and people of contrary Religion: the
other; our professed art of mental Equivocation, which by your Mynisteriall
phrase you t^rme, the ^aude to all Rebellion. But h^w vain and ^riuolous this
aduertis^m^nt is, and fyt only to fill up paper without s^nse, every m^ane
capacity will ^as^ly conceive, and witn^ss^s are at hand. For who does not see,
that Prot^stant Princes and people of diff^r^nt S^ctes have been now in the
Christian world for almost an hundred years, both in Germany, De^marke,
Swe^land, Scotland, England, France, Flanders, and yet no subu^rsion ^^m^ unto
them by the Popes transcendent authority; Who does not know in like mann^r,
that the gr^at^st Rebellions that have fallen ^ut in this age have not been
procured by Equivocation as the ^aude, but by Heresy as the Harlot her self,
and that by crafty d^ceipts and lying shifts, which is quite opposite to the
nature of Equivocation, that allwai^s sp^ak^th truth, though allwaies not so
vnd^rstood by the ^ear^r. But for that of these two heads of Rebellion and
Equivocation I have spoken abundantly in my f^rmer Treatise, and s^mw^at also
in this, ^specially in my second Chapter to your s^c^nd Inquiry, w^^re you
insert some f^w pages about the same; I will leese no more time in rep^ating
th^rof, but r^mit the Reader thither, only adu^rtis^ng him by the way, that
whereas you make a flourish in this your Epistle Preamblatorie with two
authorities of S. Augustine, August. lib. 2. co^t. Petil. cap. 83. and ep. 48.
ad Vin^ent. Rogat.
noted in the margent, the one against Petilian, the other against Rogatia^,
both of them Donatists, who feygned clemency and practiced cruelty where they
durst against Catholics; let him but take the pains to read the pla^es in the
Author himself, and compare their cause with the cause of M. Morton and his
fellow Protestants in these days (as well in making and following Schism
against the general body of the Catholic Church as in particular actions
recounted by Optatus and others: Optatus l. 2. cont. Pa^m. and lib. 6. August.
cont. Donat. in psalm. 132. and cont. Petil. lib 3. c. 40. and lib. 4.
to wit, in breaking down Altars, and casting the B Sacrament to dogs, in
co^temnyng holy Chris^^e, and breaking the sacred vessels wherein yt was ^ept,
in profaning Chalices, in scraping Priests ^^ownes for hatred of sacred
unction; in persecuting ^onkes, in letting out Nuns of their Monaste^^es, and
the like, which proceeded from their parti^^ler spirit of pretended perfection)
and he will see ^^ether they agree more to Protestants or Catholics ^our
days: and consequently whether you M. Mor^^n did advisedly, in bringing in
mention of these (...), and of their contention with S. Augustine, ^^out the
true Church, and manners both of here^^ks and Catholics. Wherein they are so
like unto Pro^estants, both in words and actions, and S Augustine (...) a
Papist, as that there needs nothing but the ^hange of names to distinguish,
or agree them with ^ou, or us, at this time.

I would wish also the said Reader to consider the last ^art of this your
Epistle, where you say that you do convince me out of my own Confession,
granting, that there is an Equivocation, which no clause of mental reservation
can save from a lie: Preamb. p. 43. and 48.
and you set yt down in a different letter, as though they were my words. But
if the said Reader go to the place, where I do handle this matter, both in the
second and seventh Chapters of this my Answer, he will find, that I say no
such thing, either in word or sense, but rather the quite contrary: to wit,
that there is an external speech (as that of Saphyra in the Acts of the
Apostles, for thereof was the question) which no mental reservation can justify
from a lie, and consequently nor make properly an Equivocation, for that it is
false in the mind of the speaker, and so cannot stand with the nature of
Equivocation (that always must be true) as has been largely demonstrated in
our Treatise of that matter.

Which point being once well noted and po^dered by your Reader, he will wonder
at your strange vaunting illation made hereupon, that is to say, upon your own
fiction, when you write: About the Equivocation of Saphyra.
That this one Confession of mine is sufficient to convince all me^tall
Equiuocators to be apparent liars. And yet further: That by this you have
obtained your whole cause in both qu^stio^s, of Rebellion and Equiuocatio^,
which is a short and compendicus Conquest, if it be well cons^d^r^d, and such
as ^u^rie man may frame unto himself by ^alse charging his Adversary. And this
shall suffice for advertisement to your Reader in this place, and upon this
your epistle to me. For albeit sundry other things might be observed, yet is
the study of brevity to be preferred: and what remains to be advertised to
your self, will be common also to your Reader, until I return unto him again,
as a little after in this Epistle I mean to do, to the end not to weary you
over much with so many admonitions to your self. Now then shall I pass to the
principal points, whereof I think you to be admonished.

Among which, the first and chief is, that you se^me greatly to mistake my
meaning, or at leastwise my affection in writing against you, as though it were
maligna^t, contemptuous, despitefull, and full of hatred and auersio^ of mind:
which Almighty God (I hope) knows to be far otherwise: That I am in charity
with M. Morton.
and that I do love you in Christ Jesus with all my heart, wishing you all good
in him and for him, but especially the best good for the salvation of your
soul: for which I would be content to undergo any pains or peril whatsoever;
esteeming also (as they deserve) your good parts and talents, if they were
rightly employed by you to the aduanceme^t of Gods truth, as hitherto they
seem to me to have ^in to the contrary. And if in our contention about this
matter, I have se^med so^times to have bin over sharp ^r earnest in my writing,
I do assure you, that it proceeds not from hatred or contempt of your person,
but rather from some grief or indignation of mind, to see you so greatly
deceived, or endeavor to deceive.

Three things also I must confess to have b^ne the special causes of this
grief and indignation s^metimes conceived. Three causes of exasperation.
The first, to see a young man (as they say you are) so lately come from the
Schools, so lightly furnished, and so little exp^rienced in greater studies,
as scarsely you could have life or leisure to look at the variety of Books
and Authors that have written thereof, especially concerning the Catholic
religion for a thousand years together, which you grant to be ours, to come
forth as it were in his hose and dublet, and challeng the whole Church of God
and the whole rank of profound learned men thereof, whose books for deep
learning, judgment and variety of reading, you can not but confess in truth
and modesty, that you are not able to bear after them. And finally they are
thousands, and you are but one: thy were old, you are young: their beards were
hoarie and gray, yours is yet red: they wore out their ages with study, you
have yet but lately begone: they have had the continuance of many ages, the
wit, learning, experience, diligence of all Christian Nations that held the
same Religion with them, M. Mort. great presumption.
your prescription of time is small, your association of fellows, Fathers and
Doctors, or Counsels less. For if you go out of the little Island of Britany,
where all that profess themselves Protestants, in all things are not wholly
with you; you shall find abroad all the rest in most things against you. And
yet do you so confidently triumph and insult every where, as though you alone
were able to overcome and vanquish whatsoever was established before you in our
Religion different from yours, saying every where, with contempt, when you
speak of this rank of learned men, and when any thing displeases you in
them, your own Bishops, your own Doctors, your own Cou^cells, your own
Fathers, your own Popes say this or that: yea though they were never so
ancient and holy. As of three Popes together Zozimus, Bonifacius, Preamb. p.
51.
and Celestinus, that lived with S. Augustine, and were highly commended by him
above twelve hundred years ago, you speak so contemptuously, as if they had
been some three petty Ministers of your own rank. And this I confess to have
been one principal cause of my sharp writing against you: which yet if you
would once amend on your part, you should qui^klie find correspondence on mine.
And so I suppose ^ou will perceive, that I have begone in this Book; though
whiles you perseu^re in your old vain of pre^^mption and insolency, you are
like to draw forth ^nsweres nothing pleasing your own humor: which ^ing of
pride, as in all Sectaries as accust^med to be, (...) likes humility and
patience in all people, but only (...) themselves.

Another cause was the circumstance of time, The second cause of exasperation.
when (...) wrote your first. Discovery against Catholics. (...) not being
contented to have set abroad diverse ^^^tings of yours in Latin, touching
f^ygned absurd^^^es and contraries of doctrine f^und, as you pre^^^^, in their
wrytings (whereof you are like shortly ^heare out of Germany, and to receive
the said ab^^^dities and falsehoods doubled upon your self, as ^^u will perceive
by that piece of the latin Epistle ^^itten from thence, which I have imparted
with ^^u in the last Chapter of this my r^^koning:) not ^^ntented (I say) with
this injury offered us, ^ou watching a time of pressure and tribulation, and
fynding the same to fall out in full measure by the hateful accident of the
powder treason, you ra^ne as the Raven to the fallen sheep to pick out her
eyes: that is to say, to add exasperation to exasperation, affliction to
affliction, calumniation to sycophancy against all sorts of Catholics. And
then came forth in have your little infamous bloody Lybell without a name,
which out of your charity would needs make all Catholics Traitors in the very
root of Catholicisme it self, that is to say, in the fundamental doctrine of
their Religion. So as every one of them must be forced to deny his faith in
that Religion, or else acknowledge himself traiterous in his duty of temporal
allegia^ce and subjection. Which paradox to make somewhat probable, you were
forced to accompany with so many fraudulent shifts, deceipts and falsities
as have been convinced against you, in my former Treatise, and confirmed now in
this: which though of it self it moved no small indignation, to see so many
manifest falsehoods, so bouldly avouched and ratified again by you afterward,
as in this fynall reckoning will apeare: yet must I confes^e that the forsaid
circumstance of time did principally move me to be more sharp in my
Co^futation.

And it made me also to remember a certain history, that I had read in old
Lactantius Firmianus in his first book, entitled De Iustitia, which I shall
recite as I find it in him: you may apply unto your self so much thereof, as you
may think to fit you. The story is of a certain heathen Philosopher, who in
time of persecution took occasion to write against Christian religion. Ego
(says Lactantius) cum in Bithynia Oratorias litteras accitus docerem etc. A
story out of Lactantius, about the circu^sta^ce of time, which an enemy of
Christian Religion took for his advantage.
When as I being sent for, taught Rhetoric in Bithynia, and the Churches of
Christians (by the Edicts of Diocletian and Maximinian) were commanded to be
overthrown, a certain chief Philosopher taking the occasion of that time,
nescio vtrum superbius an importunius iacenti atque abiectae veritati
insultaret, did insult over the truth of Christ's Religion oppressed and
trodden under foot, I know not whether with greater pride or importunity etc.
And then he describes at large the manners of this Philosopher, which were
ouerlong to repeat here. I mean of his Lybertine life, of his good fare, of
his ambi^ion with the Magistrate and Princes. And fy^ally he says of him:
Disputationes suas moribus destruebat, and mores disputationibus arguebat: ipse
aduersus se grauis censor and acer^imus accusator: He overthrew his
disoutations ^ith his manners, and condemned his own manners by his
disputations: being a grave Censurer and most sharp accuser against himself.
And the^ says further: Eodem ipso tempore quo iustus populus nefarie
lacerabatur, tres Libros euomuit contra Religionem nomenque Christianum. In the
very self same time, that the innocent Christian people were impiously torn in
pieces by the persecutor, he cast forth three Books against the Religion and
name of Christians. And Lactantius add^th, that alb^it he was effusus in
Principu^ lauds, and flattered the Emperors then living (no l^sse th^n M.
Morton has done ours:) yet all sorts of men, as well H^athen as others, did
mislyke and detest his cruel devise, to write against them when as they lay
under so heavy a yoke of present persecution. Id omnes arguebant (says he)
quod illo potissimum tempore id ope^is es^et agressus, quo furebat odiosa
crudelitas. All sorts of men did condemn this, that he had taken in hand to
put forth his books at that special time, when odious cruelty raged against
all Christians. And then immediately adds: o Philosophum adulatorem, ac
tempori seruientem! O flattering Philosopher and tymeseruer! A fit encomium for
such an enterprise.

And with the same will I leave you M. Morton, and and the relation of this
history, permitting unto your self, or to your Reader, to apply so much thereof
unto you, as the likeness of your cases and factes does deserve. Only I must
say, that the malice in taking hold of the circumstance of time s^^meth so very
like and conform, as I cannot dou^t, but that as many H^athen men then,
otherwise modest and morally honest, took compas^io^ of the afflicted
Christians, and detested the afflict^r: so many Protestants in our case would
do the same, whereof my self can be witness of some. And thus much for this
second point.

The third thing that excited me to be more sharp sometimes with you, The
third cause of exasperation.
was your manner of writing, so exorbita^t in diverse respects, as I never
lightly read the like: but especially in professing sincerity with great
vehemency, when you could not but probably know, that you had, or did, and
would deceive; whereof there are so many examples, as there are witting
falsities couin^ed against you in this subsequent Work. Your ^auntes in like
manner are wonderful extraua^ant and prouocatory, as we have now heard out ^f
your new Challenges, repeated in part in the recedent Epistle.

I will pretermit diverse other excesses and ^erlashings in your book, which
cannot but ^timulate your Answerer to some sharpnes in ^^iting. As for example,
where page 29. you ^ite of me thus: M. Mort. prouocatory speeches.
I do profess unfeignedly, ^t I never found any writer of any profes^^n
whatsoever, who has used such shame^^l frau^ in answering: and ^et except you
have (...) your self, you have found one of your own p^^fession, I m^ane your
self, that has used n^ times more: you being most evidently con^^cted thereof
in this my re^ly, and no one fraud (...) fa^^hood in all the work being able
to be veri^^ed against m^, as experience will teach him, ^^at will take the
pains to peruse these our Rec^onings.

Again, page 43. you beginning to speak ^f the lie of Saphyra which she made
to S. Peter in the Acts, of the Apostles, and supposing yt to be an
Equivocation, which I deny; you say in the title of the Paragraph, Act. 5.
that I my self do flatly overthrow thereby my whole defense of mental
Equivocation, which (say you) is made so evident, as no wit of man can possibly
excuse it. And yet when the matter comes to be tried, every mean wit may
easily perceive, that you understood not, or mistook of purpose the question,
as afterward in this Answer is declared. And yet do you insult strangly
saying: Preamb. page 48.
Where is now P.R. etc. where is this Man, the new select Advocate for this
cause? May he not say hereafter, I was ashamed, and therefore hid my self, so
naked does his deformity appear. And yet further you say: A fond insultatio^.
He being pressed with this example out of Scripture (to wit of Saphyra her
speech to S. Peter) is driven into such a vertigo and giddines, that even when
he would defend his art of Equiuocating from a lie, he is by consequence from
Gods word forced to confess, that there is an outward speech, which noe clause
of Reservation can save from a lie: whereby his own Magi, I doubt not, will be
brought to acknowledge, that Digitus Dei est hic, this is the power of Gods
truth.

This is the ado you make, M. Morton, about this example of Saphyra, adding
also presently, that by this, you have obtained your whole cause. But in truth
you have obtained to make your self ridiculous thereby, as you handle it. For
what is there in this matter that should cause me to run away, and hyde my
self, as you do feign, and not dare to appear, when you call so earnestly
upon me? What have you proved? What have you convinced against me? You say that
her words to S. Peter ( I have sold it for no more) was no less an
Equivocation, then to say, I am no Priest. But I deny it, and do say it was a
lie, and no Equivocation. For that she had obligation to utter the truth to S.
Peter that was her lawful Judge, and so has not the Priest, that is demanded
by him, who is not his lawful Judge.

You say that, Preamble. p. 48.
I being pressed with this example out of Scripture from Gods Word^ am forced
to confess an outward speech, which no clause of reservation can save from a
lie. Whereto I answer, that no force of example from Gods Word is needful for
this. For ever it was granted, and so must be, that there be infinite outward
speeches, which no mental reservation ca^ save from lies, if there be
obligation to tell the truth, as in the case of Saphyra there was. And
therefore for you to bring in the Magi wondering here at the power of God
enforcing me to such a vertigo, is both Comicall and ridiculous indeed.

And yet by the way I must further put you in mind^ that you do deliver me
here from a contradiction, and inuolue your self in a falsehood unanswerable
in reciting of these words of mine. For that before in your Epistle to my self
you recite my Confession thus: M Morton taken in an open contradictio^.
That there is a me^tall Equivocation which no clause of reservation can save
from a lie. And here you say: I am forced to confess an outward speech, which
no clause of reservation can save from a lie. Between which two recitalls
there is great difference, as before we have showed, and no less then between
truth and falsehood. So as if you write truly here, you spoke falsely before:
and if truly before, then falsely now. And thus much have I been enforced to
admonish you of at this time, by the peruersity of your own words and manner
of writing.

Many other things I should have to warn M. Morton of, in this point
concerning his manner of style in writing, sed nescio an possit portare modo: I
would be loath to be im^ortune, and he is to hear them afterward in the
co^bat and concertatio^ it self. Only I cannot omit to say a word or two about
his Epistle Dedicatorie to the Earl of Salisbury, and therewith make an end of
this admonition. He begins his narration thus. M. Mort. epistle to the Earl
of Salisbury.
I therefore esteemed it my duty in presence of your Honor, by this Preamble
to sponge out such vile imputations, wherewith my Adversary indeauoured,
through me (alas) one of the least of the Prophets, to distaine both my Mother
and her Sister the famous Universities, and those Honorable Persons, unto whose
care and providence they ^re committed. So he. Whereby you see this little
Prophet will needs interpret the imputations ^f false dealing laid against
himself, by, and through ^im, to fall upon the two Universities, his Mot^er
and Aunt, and other Honorable Persons that ^aue the care and government of
them: which is ^ot needful at all. For that, as the Scripture ^ith: The Son
shall not bear the iniquity of ^^e Father, nor the Father of the Son,
Ezech. 31.
but e^^ry one must answer for himself: let us se^ ^^en, how M. Morton does
perform this point. M. Mort. confidence.
^^en then (says he) when I was in greatest ^^^lousie of mine own
myscarriage, I concei^^d a double matter of comfort. First from ^^ self, that
knowing I durst present my ^^plications unto the Judge of the secret ^^ughts of
all hearts, I doubted not but that ^ng able with true confidence to appear
^ore God, I should not greatly fear the ^^sure of man.

This is one defense more Rhetorical then real. (...) how could he dare with
such confidence appear before God, with the burden of so many ^ntruthes, as
afterward you will see convinced ^^ainst him, especially in the three last
Chapters ^f this our Answer? And if he be not able to ^efend them before man,
how will he justify the^ before God?

Let us see his second defense, for this first stands only upon his own
confidence. Secondly (says he) from my adversary, took I matter of comfort,
presuming that he that would write in defense of mental Equivocation, would be
found to equivocate in writing also. This you see is but a presumption, and
that a very poor one. For as a man may write of war and yet not fight; and
of Agriculture or husbandry, and yet neither plow nor sow: His strong
presumption.
So may he write of Equivocation, and yet not Equivocate, and Equivocate also
and yet not lie. So as this could be but a silly comfort for M. Morton to
presuppose and hope that I would Equivocate in writing of Equivocation, which
was not needful. And if I had; yet might I do it without lying: and so nothing
thereby have relieved his case, that was so deeply charged with that fault. And
finally, if I had been able to be convinced of any point in that kind (as
afterward you will see that I was not:) yet S. Augustines rule is, Quod
societas peccantium auget potius quam excusat peccatum: Fellowship in sin
increases rather then excuses the fault. Though truly it may se^me that M.
Morton would highly esteem this fellowship with me, if he could bring it
about, and think himself well defended, if he could attain it. Which I am
lead to believe, not only by his labor, diligence and solicitude therein, but
by the last Conclusion of his for^named Epistle to my self, which he ends
thus for an vpshoot.

I may think (says he) the Scripture verified upon you, where it is thus
written: Therefore art thou inexcusable (O man) whosoever thou be, that iudgest:
Romans 2. verse. 1.
for doing the same things, by judging an other, thou condemnest thy self.

Out of which text of the Apostle M. Morton would prove, M. Mort. seeks some
association.
that I doing the same things with him (in this point of fraud and false
dealing) I cannot condemn him, without condemning also my self: which
consequence I grant, but deny the antecedent. Which I assure my self M. Morton
will never be able to prove in any one point of moment, throughout this whole
concertation of ours; himself being taken faulty almost at every turn, as
you will see.

And yet does he vaunt, as though his integrity were extraordinary in this
behalf, telling us, that as the Greek Co^maunder being in appa^a^ce mortally
wounded, demanded of his soldiers, whether the City were safe? whether his
^uckler or shield were sound? and being sa^isfied in them, received health, and
after be^ame victorious: So he under so ghastly wounds ^f my pen, having
generally inquired, and ^prightly answered himself, that his cause was ^afe and
his conscience sound, began more resolutely to confront me.

Thus you see, that he has cleared himself, and is become victorious upon a
suddayne by force of a similitude only. And in truth the tale is pretily told
by him in words, but let us come to the substance of the things. If M. Mortons
cause be so safe, and his conscience so sound, how do there stand together
afterward in the sixth Chapter of this my Answer, above thirty untruths, The
multitude of M. Mortons untruths.
pretended to have bin wittingly pretermitted by him in his last Preamblatorie
Reply, as unanswerable? and now above fifty more newly added out of the said
Reply, which are set down in my seventh Chapter? If these can be really
defended by him, he does somewhat. And for diverse of them, he ought to have
done it before. But if they cannot (as I assure my self without making of more
new, they cannot) then is neither M. Mortons cause safe, nor his conscience
sound in this behalf. Nay his shield and buckler is utterly broken, and his
City of refuge quite overthrown.

In the same Epistle dedicatory.
But he promises us a more forcible Encounter to ensue, after he has
discharged his part in another task of more importance, in the Answer of the
Catholic Apology, which, says he, by this calumnious Treatise of P. R. his
Mitigation, as by an adverse tempest, has received some interruption.

And by this you see, that M. Morton is still doing, whether well or evil, God
knows. I marvel he fears not the scratch due to his ytch, whereof he
speaks in his Preamble. For if out of Germany there come that multitude of
scratches, that is threatened by him whose letter I have mentioned in the latter
end of this Answer, and do join themselves with these scratches of mine, both
old and new, that do march together in this my answer against him, they are
like to make a great squadron And M. Morton will have his hands full in
defending himself from them, and in procuring, that of scratches and scarres
they do not be^ome deeper wounds unto his credit. The new Encounter threatened
But indeed I do not exp^ct any such new Encounter as he promis^th. For if he
had reallie meant it, and had seen himself able to perform it, he would have
answered substantially, in this Preamble, some of the chiefest difficulties
that were laid against him, to the end to make his Reader believe, that he
would be able to satisfy the rest in the said promised Encounter. But not
doing this, but showing rather his extr^me weakness in clearing any one point
objected against him, it seems but a jest to talk of a new Encounter to come.

And as for answering the Catholic Apo^ogie, which, he says, he is in hand
withal, as (...) task of more importance, I do easily grant (...), if he can
perform his task well. But M. Morton well knows the Topicall place, a
ma^ori ad minus, and e conuerso: If he have not ^yn able to perform lesser
matters, nor defend the things by himself written either in Latin or English,
but by so many untruths as have bin exhibited against him, what will he be
able to do in another man's work, especially of such moment and difficulty, as
the said Apology is: where he must answer to other men's sayings, especially
Protestants, out of whose testimonies the Author of that Apology does so
clearly con^ute their Religion and con^irme the Catholic, The Catholi^ke
A^^logie entitled by the Author: The Protestants Apology.
if I mistake not the work, as never any book written in our language has
more ^ff^ctually done. And cons^quently the confutation of this book would
r^quire an impugn^r of more substance and strong^r s^n^wes, then those of M.
Morton, though oth^rwise I vnd^rstand, that God be thanked, his bodily
cons^itution be neither weak nor feeble.

But to come to an end, let us see how he con^lud^th his Epistle to the Earl
of Salisbury. If by this brief Preamble it be not manifest (says he) that P.
R. has in this Treatise preuaricated in his whole cause, M. M^rt^ triumphant
c^^culsi^^.
both in the question of Rebellion and Equivocation, betrayed his Countries
State, disgraced the Romish Schools, and strangled his own conscience: I
refuse not, that to the crimes objected against me by him, this may be added,
that I durst affi^me so much before your Lordship. To which Rh^toricall and
flourishing conclusi^n I know n^e better answer th^n to acc^pt of the of^er.
And for trial th^rof to refer me to the Book h^re in hand, which treats
every thing punctually and ^x^ctly: inuiting by this occasion the Honorable
Personage h^re nam^d to the r^ading and p^rus^ng th^rof. For though the
dif^^r^n^e of our cause be disfauourable unto me with his Lordshippe; yet dare
I c^nfide in the equanimitie of his Iudg^m^nt, in a case of such quality, as
h^re is s^t down, about preuaricating in my cause, betraying my Country,
disgracing our Schools, and strangling my own Conscience.

All which depending upon our manner of proceeding in the ensuing points of
this Book, his Lord^hippe will easily discover with the quick ^ye of ^is
Judgment the truth of things, though it were against himself. And therefore I
do willingly ^ay hands upon the last clause of this Challenge of ^. Morton, to
wit: that if he prove not all ^hese things here objected against me, and clear
^imselfe from all imputations of wilful untruths ^yd against him in my
Treatise of Mitigation, (...) is content to have this added also, as the
grea^^st sin of all the rest, that he durst affirm ^^e same unto his
Lordshippe.

Wherein I could convince him pres^ntly, if I ^ould, without further dispute.
For that he ta^^ng upon him in this his Pr^amble to answer ^^ly 14. untruths,
of more then 40. objected ^^ainst him, it is evident, that he ^lear^th him^^^fe
not from the rest that he pretermitted. and then la^ing unto this that in the
said 14. he (...) found not to have cleared himself substantially ^^om any one
of moment, but to have adjoined ^boue 40. or 50. more, as is declared in the
^ubs^quent Treatise, how can he defend himself before my L. of Salisburies
Honor, from open preuaricating in this his Challenge?

But I will not pr^sse him any further here: let the ensuing Combat disc^rne
and try between us. And so returning to talk with M. Morton again, whom for
a time I have left, and spoken in the third person, to the end I might not
seem to object to his face so many important defaultes together: I do say,
Sir, that now you see, that I have bin bold to use the lib^rty that you gave
me in the subscription of your Letter, when you say, that you are mine, to
warn, and to b^ warned: I have r^ceiued your warning and returned mine. I
beseech almighty God, it may^be to his greater glory, and both our goods, or
at leastwise of other men, that shall read or hear the same.

Yours, Wishing you all good, in the author of all goodness, P. R.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
^pist. Dedic. page 6 lin. 4 for he, read we, ^pist. Admon. page 4^ lin. 13
for nor, read not
^ag^ Line Fault Correction (...) 24 in latin in relating (...) 27 hears
hearers (...) 18 use the use (...) 23 impawing impawning (...) vl^. competet
competent (...) 28 stuly study (...) ^ some all (...) Ibid. Equivocation be
Equivocation or lying be (...) 28 said say (...) 31 indeed, though indeed my
father is not dead though and^. (...) 18 evident evidently (...) 26 is in (...)
14 one own (...) 2 had had he had had (...) 34 begin being (...) 35 pertracta
pertractata ^^2 10 Clemens, Alexander, Clemens Alexandrinus ^^7 ^ these are
these ^01 29 Chapters Charges 314 28 quod quid ^^1 28 verue virtue ^01 5
answer Answerer ^11 27 these those 427 25 the law, the new spi- the new law,
the spiritual etc. 434 5 over ever 462 11 which with 477 3 is as 540 7 to do
640 16 objection: others objection of other^ 642 14 Chap. 5. Chap. 3. 648 4
fourth Chap. fifth Chap^

THE FIRST CHAPTER ANSWERING TO THE FIRST OF ^. THOMAS MORTONS three vain
Inquiryes, concerning the Wit, Memory, Learning, Charity, Modesty, and
Truth of his Adversary P. R.
THE PREFACE.
THE very title of this M. Morton^ first Inquiry, about the insufficiency of
his adversary, does plainly show, that he was in choler and passion, when he
wrote it: for that otherwise in so grave and weighty controversies, as are
between us, he would ueuer have rifled so manifestly, as by leaving the matter
to ru^ne ^o the person, and fall a scolding and scratching, ac^ording to his
former threat. For what are these per^onall impugnations, but scratches,
whereof you shall have here store, to wit, some seven or eight whole
Paragraphes; which yet are such, as draw noe blood, nor do scarre any man, but
the scratcher himself, as by further examination it will appear. For first,
what does he gain to his cause, if he could prove indeed, that his Adversary
had scarcity both of wit, memory, learning, Greek, Hebrew, Logike, and
other abilities here mentioned? Were not his victory the less in ouerco^ming
so weak an adversary? And were not his shame the greater, if he should be
overcome by him? Yes truly.

1. Moreover M. Mortons intention being, or ought to be, principally to satisfy
the charges and imputations of falsehood, and untrue dealing, laid unto him in
the Treatise of Mitigation; (for hastening whereunto, for that they raised
great scarres in the readers eye, he omitted to handle any thing at all of the
chief argument of that Treati^e) it seems veri^ impertinent, Holding of from
the matter.
that he should leese so much time, and spend so much paper in premising so
many skirmishes, as are these Paragraphes, about the sufficiency or
insufficiency of his adversary, before the maine battle it self: but the
reason is conceived to be the small comfort he had to come to the said
battle; and therefore as scholars, that are truants, do seek occasions to
loyter and linger, and ^ntertayne themselves in every corner of the street,
thereby to prolong their journey: so M. Morton in this affayre. For albeit he
pretend and profess his purpose to be^ to clear himself from the said
imputatios; yet knowing how little able he is to do it, and how small comfort
he is to receive therein, when he comes to the point, he differreth the matter
as long as he can, which is, to the very last end of his book, spe^ding first
in this first Inquiry eight or nine Paragraphes, as has been said, to inquyre
of my sufficiency: and then some other about the title of my Treatise,
pretermit^ing the whole substance; then many other to prove that diverse
Catholic writers, Popes, and Coun^ells have uttered also some falsities and
contradi^tions; then that Cardinal Bellarmine has done ^he like; and then
that I have my part also in such ^anner of dealing: All which serves, as you
see, to ^^are of from coming to the main point of clearing ^imselfe. And this
course he holds unto the very ^^st cast of his book, to wit, to the 18.
Paragraph, which is next to the conclusion. And finally when he ^^teth upon the
matter, and pretends to satisfy four^^^ne imputatio^s of above forty laid
against him, (...) does it so weakly and insufficiently, as each man (...) see,
why he was so loath to come unto the trial: (...) this will you also see, by
the view of the work (...)lfe, if you please to take the pains to look it
(...).

M. MORTONS Impugnation of P. R. his Wit examined. I.
THis Paragraph is set down by M. Morton in these words: About the sleeping
soldiers of Jerusalem.
An argument of P. R. his kind of wit, ^^^ch may seem to have been in a
slumber, when he made his (...). And again in the table of his Inquiries and
Pa^^^raphes, he frames a title thus; An argument, that ^^ R. his wit was in a
slumber in answering to the point of the ^^^eping soldiers: whereby it
appears that he argues (...) to have little wit (as indeed without folly I
cannot presume of much) and the cause why he ta^eth all wit from me, is, for
that in my Epistle dedi^atory to the Universities of England I reprehended ^s
idle and impertinent in his Epistle, to our deceived brethren (as conte^ptuosly
he called the^) his ce^sure, that it was against common sense, that the
sleeping soldiers of Jerusalem should be able to tell, that our Saviors
disciples had stole^ him away, while they were asleep: to which end he cites
here in this Paragraph my words at length though leaving out some in the
beginning, which make to the explication of the matter, and therefore must
here be added by me. Thus then they lie, which I shall set down by way of
Charge, as M. Morton himself ordinarily does, and thereupon afterward shall we
see his discharge and so frie^dly make up the reckoning.

The Charge of P.R.
3. As for the other (Epistle) say I, which scornefully he directs to our
deceived brethren, it is so short^ fond, and idle a thing, that it deserves
noe answer at all; The treatise of Mitigation in the Epistle to the
Universities. number. 23.
the principal point, whereupon he stands therein, being this, that Catholic
people are seduced by their Priests, who will be Doctors (says he out of S.
Paul to Timothy) and yet understand not what they say, nor whereof they
assirme. But whether this description of fond presumptuous doctors touched by
S. Paul, do agree rather to Protestant ministers, or to Catholic Priests,
will appear in great part, by reading over this book, especially the 5.8. and
10. Chapters, if by Thomas Mortons errors and ignorances, a scantling may be
taken of the rest. But now let us see, how he does go about to prove, that
our priests are such bad doctors as S. Paul speaks of. 1. Tim. 2.


4. This chief proof consists in a certain comparing of them with those
Jewish priests of the old law in Christ's time, who taught the soldiers that
watched at the s^pulcher of our Savior, to say, that ^hilst they were
sl^^^ping his disciples came and stole ^im away. Comm^n s^ns^ (says he) might
have r^ply^d, how could you t^ll ^ha^ was done, when you were all asleep? but
minds enthralled in the opinion of a neuer-erring Priesthood (which confirmed
that answer) could not possibly but err with their priests: such alas, is the
case of all them etc. Do you see how substa^tially he has proved the matter?
Let us examine the particulers: first the story, then the inference.

5. About the story S. Matthew recounteth in the 28. Chapter of his Gospel,
The story of the sleping soldiers. Matthew. 28.
how Christ our Savior being raised miraculously from death to life, with a
great and dreadful earthquake, and descent of an Angel, so as the soldiers,
that kept the Sepulcher were astonished and almost dead for fear, some of them
ran and told the chief Priests thereof: who making a consultation with the
Elders, devised this shift to give them store of money, and to bid them say,
that in the night, when they were asleep, his Disciples came and stole him
away, and so they did. And S. Matthew adds, that this false brute ran
current among the Jews, even until that time, wherein he wrote his Gospel.
This is the narration; what has now Thomas Morton to say against us? for
thereunto is all his drift.

6. First he says, as you have heard, that this devise was improbable and
against common sense it self. Common sense (says he) might have replied (to
the soldiers) what could you tell what was done, when you were all asleep?
See here the sharpness of Tho. Mortons wit, above that of the Priests;
Scribes, and Pharisees. How men may know what is done when they are asleep^
But what if one of the soldiers had replied to him thus: we saw it not, when
we were asleep, but afterward when we were awakened, we perceived that he was
stolen away; what r^ioynder would our Minister make? As for example, if Tho.
Morton were walking with a communion book under his ^^me through a field, and
wearied should lie down to sleep, with his book by his side, and at his
awaking should see his book gone, were it against common sense for him to say,
that his book was stolen from him, while he was asleep? or is not this an
assertion fit for one of those doctors, whereof S. Paul talks, that
understand not what they say, or whereof they affirm? But this will better yet
appear by the second part, which is his inference: wherefore we must a little
also examine that.

7. But minds (says he) enthralled in the opinion of a neuer-erring
priesthood (which confirmed that answer) could not possibly but err with their
Priests: such, alas, is the case of all them etc. The malicious man would
deface Christian priesthood by the Jewish priesthood, and our priests by
theirs: but consider how far he runs from the mark in both. Minds
enthralled (says he) in the opinion of a neuer-erring priestood, which
confirmed that answer. etc. Did the priesthood of Iewry confirm this answer?
who says so? we read that the priests with the Elders did devise this answer,
and they knew they did evil and lie therein: and so did the soldiers also that
published the same.

8. But this was a matter of fact, not a determination of faith. Neither among
the Jews, nor Christians, was there ever opinion that Priests or Priesthood
could not err in matters of fact, life, or their manners. How then is this to
the purpose? Or does not this also prove him to be one of those forenamed
Doctors that understand not what they say, or whereof they affirm? How much
more modesty, and piety had it bin in Tho. Morton to have followed the
example of Christ and his Apostles, who though persecuted by those Priests,
yet both thought and spoke reverently of their Priesthood.

The Reckoning upon the premises.
9. Thus much I wrote in my former Treatise of Mitigation, and this discourse
of mine is the argument whereby M. Morton concludes against my wit, as you
have heard, and in his answer calls this my speech two or three times
wittlesse. But for that I respect not so much wit, as truth in this affair, I
am content to remit my self to the Reader, who perhaps is wyser then us both,
and will see what folly it is so unwisely to contend about the commendation of
our wits. But let us friendly and soberly ( M. Morton) see your discharge and
make the reckoning according to reason: Preamb. page 4. number. 4.
You say that I have showed my self by this inference both shameless and
witles, shameless to impute that for absurdity to you, which I might have
known to be the ^ise and learned inference of ancient Fathers etc. And who ^re
those ancient Fathers Sir? You name only S. Au^^stine in his tenth Tome, Aug.
tom. 10. hom. 36. ad fine^.
whose words are as you al^edge them: O evil and most wicked men, either you
were awake, or asleep, and knew not what was ^one etc. intimating this Dilemma
(say you) that ey^her you were awake or asleep; if awake, then co^^esse what
was done, Christ is risen out of the grave; ^f a sleep, then you knew not what
was done. Thus ^. Augustine.

^0. Whereunto I answer, that S. Augustine ar^ueth well against the soldiers;
that if they were a^eepe when Christ did rise from death they could not ^now by
any certaynty that Christ his disciples came and stole him away, The soldiers
speech was against truth, but not common sense
and therefore they did both fondly and wickedly in auouching and testifying the
same for certain and true. But S. Austine does not say as you say, that the
devise was against common sense, for then it would not have been believed so
generally for so many years after, as S. Matthew insinuates that it was unto
his time when he wrote his gospel; nor would the Priests, Doctors, and
principal Jews of the Synagogue, which had not only common sense but worldly
wisdom also, either have devised this shift, or have given money to have it
published, or would they have suffered the same to have been proposed to their
Governor Pilate for conte^ting him, who being a Roman and a wise worldly man,
would never have harkened unto it or admitted the same, if the proposition had
been against common sense and reason, as M. Morton affirms.

11. Besides this, if some of us, eue^ the wisest among us should imagine our
selves to have been with the Jews and Gentiles in Jerusalem at that time, and
wanting the light of faith, should have heard a company of watchmen affirm
unto us, that a certain man esteemed and followed by many in his life time, and
afterward slain, buried, and watched by them at his Sepulcher, and at the
third day to have been suddenly gone from thence, and not to be found; What
would worldly reason (that never dreamed of resurrection) have suggested in
this case, An evident example.
but that some of his followers amongst so many as Christ was known to have
had in his life time, had come and secretly taken him away? Had not this been
probable in such a case to man's discourse? had this been against common sense
to have alleged this excuse? who will say so, that is endued with common
sense? But (says M. Morton) the soldiers could not know at leastwise if he
were stolen away his disciples had done it; which I grant that they could not
know it for certain, but by probability only, which probability
notwithstanding was very great, for that his enemies would not have adventured
to do it with so great danger, ergo, it is likely they were his friends and
followers, scholars and disciples. And is not this probable? is this repugnant
to common sense and reason, as M. Morton affirms?

12. But it was (says he) a lie: I grant, and that many lies are more probable
then some truths; the question then is, whether it were a probable lie, or
else so absurd, as it repugned to common sense? The former I affirmed, the
later is M. Mortons position, who houldeth me for witless, for saying the
contrary: for so he writes again a little after the former: Howsoever (says
he) it be, sure I am P.R. has showed himself very ^^i^les herein etc. Pream.
page 4.
And a few lines before this again, ^he accuses me for houlding with the
soldiers, and allowing the inference to be good against Christ's resurrection,
and makes this note in the margent, P. R. grossly ignorant in Divinity, and
further says, that (...) hops that my faith is not so far asleep, Diverse
fond absurdityes of M Mortons speech.
as to preiudicate ^he chief article o^ our Christian faith (about the
resurrection of ^ur Savior) by this assertion: All which is strange that (...)
will repeat here again, for so much as my ^ordes are plain in my book
before recyted, affir^ing, that the Jewish Priests with the Elders did devise
this ^^swere, and they knew they did evil, and lied therein; and so ^^^d the
soldiers also that published the same. But yet I hold that this lie was not
senseles, Mitig. in Ep. to the Universities.
or against common sense (...) M. Mort. fondly affirms it to be. Again I
said that (...) is false which he wrote in his other book of full sa^^sfaction
that the neuer-erring priestood of the Jews did ^onfirme this answer, of the
soldiers, as a truth; for that they knew it was a lie as having feigned and
de^ised it themselves, but yet thinking it a probable shift (...) delude the
people withal for the present.

13. Wherefore I come now to the conclusion and vpshot of all this Reckoning
which M. Mort. knytteth up thus: Even so yt falls out (says he) with my
adversary P. R. who has bewrayed his singular sottishness in the inference
wherein he meant to give us a special argument of his wit. This is somewhat
sharp, as you see, but I pardon easily the passion: some words must be allowed
to leesers: let the sum of the Reckoning be this, The vpshot of the reckoning
that whereas we all do agree, that the soldiers speech was false, M. Morton
holds further, that it was senseless and against common reason, and my self
witless for affirming, that it had any sense or probability therein. Let the
prudent Reader judge, where the wit lies.

M. MORTONS Objection against P. R. his Memory.. II.
About the clause of reseruatio^ uttered in Latin.
AFTER the impugnation of my Wit, M. Morton takes upon him to disgrace my
Memory, intituling his second Paragragh thus: An argument of the rare Memory
of P. R. bewraying his free will to lying; and then begins he the said
Paragraph in these words: To make me seem ridiculously cautelous (says he) as
intending wheresoever their equiuocating forgerie was to be spoken of, to keep
the clause of mental reservation under a latin lock, and not Englished, least
weak-ones might learn to practice that Magical art, P. R. says, that Thom.
Morton, though he promised to put it down always in Latin, so as it should
not be understood by the vulgar Reader, yet has he not (to his remembrance)
set down the said clause of reservation in Latin, but once through all his
book of full satisfaction, and that in four words in the second page thereof,
the said reservation being mentioned in English more perhaps, then forty
times. Out of which words of mine, M. Morton indeauoreth to infer many
falsities, and absurdities against me, both of bad Memory and worse Will: for
that, as he says, the said Clause of Reservation is found to have been set
down by him in Latin, not only once, as I say, but more then twenty times in
his Treatises of equivocation. Whereunto I answer, that albeit, that all this
were granted; yet is the matter idle, and of no importance, yea a mere cavil,
for ^o much as I say (perhaps) as presently shall be showed.

15. But first of all before we answer to this charge against my bad Memory,
we must show him to be contrary to himself (which argues noe good Memory) in
that he contradicts in his foresaid Epi^tle dedicatorie to the King, that
which here in his Preamble he writes, to wit, in a^firming here, as ^ou
have heard, that he had no intention to keep the clause of ^entall reservation
under a latin lock, and not English it, least ^eake ones might learn etc.
Preamb. p. 5.
Whereas in his said Epistle ^o his Matie. he promises otherwise, and his
words ^re these: Notwithstanding least that the publishing ^f this cursed art
might in respect of the more carnal^^ minded aedificare ad gehennan, Full
satisfact. Epistle to the King.
edify unto hell (as that ^euerend Bishop of Chichester and learned Father
(...) our Church has said) I have framed this dispute, that it may seem (I
hope) to be like to Aristotle's Books ^f Natural Philosophy, so published as
not published, because the clause of mental reservation (the tail of ^his
serpent, wherein the whole poison lies) is all^ayes delivered in Latin phrase,
to his end, that only ^he guilty party by his sensible conjecture may
per^eyue his error confuted, and yet the ignorant, though ^esirous to touch
pitch, may not be de^iled.

^6. Where you see, Contradictions of M. Morto^ for want of memory.
that he promised to his Majesty (...) deliver always in Latin phrase the
clause of mental reserua^ion, in such sort, as the ignorant of the Latin
tongue should not understand the same, and consequently that he would shut it
up under a Latin lock: And yet now in this his Preamble he says, that I go
about to make him seem so ridiculously cautelous, as to intend to keep the
said clause of mental Reservation, under a Latin lock, least weak ones might
learn etc. Are not these two plain contradictory assertions out of one mouth?
to wit, that he will keep the clause of Reservation under a Latin lock, and
that he never meant to lock it up? Where was his Memory, when he wrote this
to impugn my Memory?

17. But yet further it may please you to note the word ( always) when he
says in his former Epistle to the Kings Ma.^y that allwaies the said clause of
Reseruatio^ was delivered in latin, and yet he confesses in this very place,
that 3. or 4. times he sets it down in ^nglish. And was not this a slipp of
his Memory in like manner, to say and promise to his Ma.ty that he would set
it down always in Latin: and yet presently to confess, that sometimes he
did it in English? Thirdly, he says, as you have heard, that he hops, his
book of Equivocation so to be published as Aristotle's natural Philosophy, to
wit, so published, as not published, in respect, that the unlearned should not
understand him. And how could he think this, if sometimes at leastwise (as he
confesses) he uttered all in English, and this to English men? Can these
things stand together? Where was his Memory, when he wrote this?

18. So as having now showed M. Mortons Memory not to have been good in all
these 3. points, I shall pass to speak of mine, which willingly I confess to
be bad: whereupon he triumphs against me, for that I say (as before you have
heard) that the clause of Reservation to my remembrance was not set down in
Latin, but once throughout all M. Mortons book^, though in English the said
Reseruatio^ were mentioned more (perhaps) the^ forty times. Against which
assertion of mine he stormeth excedingly, and quoteth in his margent for
co^futatio^ thereof, diverse and sundry places where the said clause is set
down in latin, as where it is said, He knows not any thing so, vt teneatur
detegere: or I know it not so, Preamb. p. 6.
vt tibi dicam, vel, vt tibi reuelem etc. and sundry other like places he
alleges, where albeit the external part of the proposition be set down in
English, ^et is the Reservation or mental part, put down by ^im in Latin, and
then presuming to have taken me ^t a great advantage, for that I said I found
it but ^nce, he insulteth exceedingly saing: M. Mortons insultation.
What this so open ^ing might portend, I know not, except he felt his Wit wax
^^mewhat blunt, and therefore meant ^o deserve the whe^stone. ^ut I will not
here examine the coherence of this ^^ason, and whether a blunt Wit be more
apt to lie ^r gayning a whetstone, then a sharp: for if it be not, ^^en used
not M. Morton an apt similitude, nor will I (...) drawn to idle contumelious
speeches, whatso^^er the prouocations be; my purpose in this place be^^g
(according to the title of my book) that this rec^^ning between M. Morton and
me, shall be quiet and ^^^er, what exasperation soever he give me to the ^^^trary.

To the matter then, I say, that albeit in my ^^^tle Dedicatorie to the
Universities, which indeed was ^^itten after the book of Mitigation was sent
away to (...) print, I had mistaken the number of places wherein (...) clause of
Reservation was in Latin, yet had it (...) but an error of Memory, and that
also sufficient^^ excused by that clause by me put in ( to my remem^^^^ce) and
yet more by the other of ( perhaps) where I (...) that it was set down in
English more (perhaps) (...) 40. times: not affirming it absolutely, but by
^^esse. And further I might lay the error upon the ^^ribe or Printer, that
set down 40. for 4. even as ^. Mortons own book (to wit this his Preamble)
^y the same negligence of printer or writer has twice ^n this place ^ourteene
for forty: M. Mortons cavil fully answered.
and yet do I not ^eeke to take advantage against him for it, nor do tell him
of the whetstone, I having more substantial matters, whereby to whet my pen
against his untruths, then these trifles, which have no interest in them to
draw a man to forge or lie. And yet to satisfye the Reader more fully even in
these trifles, that M. Morton obiecteth, I must say:

20. That the truth is, that my speech was according to the meaning of M.
Mortons assertion, The true meaning of P. R. in this matter.
promising that he would always so set down the clause of Reservation in
Latin, that the simple Reader should not understand it, no more then simple men
could understand Aristotle's Philosophy; in which manner I found it put down
but once indeed, throughout his whole book, Confu^at. of ^^ui^oc. page 48.
to wit, in the place before mentioned, that is to say, wholly in Latin; for
thus he writes coming to the said clause of Reservation: Loquor enim Latin,
ne Idiotae ansam sibi accipiant nequiter mentiendi, vt quis teneatur illud
detegere, which words he Englisheth not, and consequently might be some veil
to the ignorant, not to understand him^ but in all other places, though he put
in often times, I knew not this, or that, vt tibi dicam, vt tibi reuelem etc.
yet does he so utter in English all the rest of the cases proposed, as the
simplest man way understand the same; and consequently I hold them for uttered
in English and not in Latin, nor any way to be like therein to the Editio^ of
Aristotle's Philosophy, whereunto for this pretended obscurity and depth, he
compares these his wise Disputes. So as in this his sense, I said truly, that
I ^ound him to utter the matter but once ( to my remembrance) wholly in Latin,
in such sort us the English Reader could not understand him, and above 40.
times ( perhaps) in English: and this is more then needed in so trifling a
cause. Let us come to the conclusion.

21. The Reckoning of this account with M. Morto^ must then be, The Reckoning
or conclusion.
that he having contradicted himself manifestly in three several points of
this Paragraph (as before you have seen) and I in none, that he can prove, my
Memory has not been so bad therein, ^s he would have men believe: and if it
had been; yet ^ere it but error of Memory, and not of Will; and co^^^quently
without any malice or fraud, for that there ^as no interest. And so though M.
Morto^ could prove his error objected against me (as he cannot;) yet is ^e
far from proving any thing to his purpose of wil^^ll and witting falsehood,
whereof is our principal ^^ntention, as after shall appear. And of this
follow^^h again, that it is but lost time and labor to con^^nd about these
trifles, which M. Morton brings in (...) entertain his Reader, as though he
said somewhat, ^heras, in deed, he does but fly the chief matter to handled,
for the small confidence that he has in (...) cause. Now then let us pass to
an other skirmish (...) small importance as this.

AGAINST THE Learning of P. R. especially in Logic.. III.
^HE title of this Paragraph is set down by M. Morton in these words: An
argument of P. R. hi^ (...) of learning in Logic, wherein he has provoked all
Vniuersi^^ in the world to laugh at him, in the point of Syllogizing. A
^^rnefull accusation as you see, and to frame this ar^^ment against my skill in
Logic, About a Logical argument of the co^petency of God.
he has made a ^^pe of above 240. leaves in my book, from the for^er place of
his precedent cavil against my Memory: Preamb. p. 7.
and ^^e very title of the Paragraph it self does show that he was in choler,
when he wrote it, whereby (...) has been drawn to bring that into judgment of
^ll Universities of the world (about a certain false Sil^ogisme of his) which I
remitted only to the judgment of his own University of Cambridge, both for
the matter, and form thereof, neither of them being defensible with any color
of truth; and yet has he taken the matter in hand with such eagern^sse, as he
presumes to make this general appeal: I da^e presume to make a general
Appeal (says he) to Cambridge, Oxford, Rhemes, Rome, and to all Universities
whether of Protestants or Romanists, whether Christian or Pagan, yea unto his
own hi^ling boys and Sophisters, who P. R. says are able to make syllogismes
in one month ( though the text in the Treatise of Mitigation by himself here
alleged says not one, but 4. months) I do challenge (says he) P. R. for his
false syllogism, willing, if he dare, that heerupon we venture our degrees,
which we have taken in the Schools etc. An eager demand
Do you see the man's eagernes and choler? But here I do entreat him, if ever
else where, that he stay himself, and that we make a quiet and sober reckoning
of this matter, and then we shall see, who is like to lee^e or gain by the
account, and where the spirit of truth is found, which is, or ought to be the
principal end of this Inquiry, and not vaunting and challenging.

23. First then that the matter may be understood whereupon the controversy
grew concerning M. Mortons false argument and syllogism (which himself
concealeth for the most part in latin, much less of my speech, then was
necessary for explication thereof) the Reader must know, that he taking upon
him to impugn all use of Equivocation both in speech and oath, sets down
these two propositions, as the foundatio^s of his work: Two false propositions
of M. Mort.
the first, That every equivocation by a mental reservation is not a hidden
truth, but a gross lie. The second, That every Equivocation, whether mental
or verbal, if it be used in an oath ( to any person whatsoever) though it be
no lie in it self, yet is it an abominable profanation of that sacred
institution of God. Mitigat. cap. 11. p. 441.
Of which two propositions the first is refuted largely by me throughout eight
Paragraphes together in my Treatise of Equiuocatio^, and this as well by
evident testimonies of Scriptures as also practice of Saints, and other
manife^t proofs and reasons. The second is discus^ed in the 9. and other
ensu^^g Paragraphes by like authorityes, examples, and arguments. After all
which P. R. comes to examine M. Mortons arguments which he used for
confirmation of his said later proposition, which was ^ound to consist in this
false principle, That every man to whom we swear by God, who is competent
Judge of all, is made also thereby competent Judge over the swearer, The false
ground of M Mort^s syllogi^me
in such sort, as the said sw^ar^r is bound in conscience to swear according
to the intention of him, to whom the Oath is made, he being otherwise never so
incompetent a judge, vio^ent or unlawful examiner: which being proved to ^e an
apparent false conclusion (for that otherwise every thief that forces a true
man to swear, by God, where his money lies, byndeth him also to swear
sincerely and directly to the said thiefes intention) P.R. takes in hand to
examine M. Mortons first and principal argument touching the same. His Words
are these, which I shall set down as before by way of charge, and after we
shall see the discharge, and so peaceably make up the Reckoning, in the most
friendly manner we may.

The Charge given by P. R. against M. Mortons Syllogism.
24. The absurdity and folly of this second proposition (say I) appearing so
manifestly in itself, as it does (by our precedent proofs) what should we
stand to examine the arguments and reasons that may be brought for it, Mitigat.
page 472. nu. 48.
by so fond a disputer, as now Thomas Morton is proved to be? For so much as no
reason can s^rue for vphoulding a paradox so ridiculous as this is, eue^ to
common sense. And yet for that he puts down four arguments, or reasons for
the same as before has been said: let us see briefly what they are.

First argument
25. His first argument for this conclusion is drawn from the form of an oath,
set down by us before, and here again alleged by him out of Tolet and other
Authors of ours (for of his own he seems to have none,) That an oath is a
religious invocation of God, either expressly, or by implication, ^or witness of
our speech, Tolet. lib. 4. ^nstruc. cap. 20.
and the words explicit or implicit, expressly or by implicatio^, are added,
for that when we swear by creatures we swear by them in respect of the truth
of God that is in them, and so by God him self implicit.

26. Now then out of this principle T. M. takes upon him to prove this
proposition; That whenever, or to whomsoever we swear, we are bound in
conscience to answer directly, that is to say, to swear to his intention, to
whom we swear: which we have proved before by general consent of Deuines and
lawyers to be false, A false principle and general proposition.
and Cicero him self has so determined the case in like manner, as you have
heard, when a man should be compelled to swear to thieues: but yet let us
hear how T. Morton will prove this his new and strange Deuinitie. His
Syllogism is this in his own words.

The competency of God (says he) by whom we swear, makes every one
competent Judges, and hears to whom we swear. Page 86: The absurd syllogism
of T. M neither true in form nor matter.


But by swearing by God whom we cannot deceive, we religiously protest that in
sweariug we intend not to deceive.

Ergo, Our deceiptfull Equiuocating is a profanation of the religious worship
of God.

27. This syllogism I leave to be discussed by Ca^bridge Logitians, where I
hear say the man learned his logic (if he have any) for here he shows
very little or none at all, no boy being among us of four months standing in
Logic or Sophistry, which will not hiss at this argument, both for form and
matter. For as for form, it is toto ridiculous, the syl^ogisme having no
medium terminum at all, nor the ^onclusio^ any cohere^ce with the premises,
nor with ^is chiefest purpose that he would prove: nay which (...) most absurd,
whereas according to Aristotle (whom (...) you have heard T. M. terms the
Oracle of Logi^^^ns) a good Syllogism has only three terminos, ^herof the one
is called Mayor extremus, the other Mi^^^ extremus, and the third Medius
terminus, this syllo^^^me of his has six terminos, and whereas the Medius
^^^^inus should be repeated in the Mayor and Minor pro^^^^tions, Arist. lib. 1.
Prior. resolut. c. 1.
and the conclusion should consist only of (...) extremes, as if a man should
say: Every man is a living Creature:

Peter is a man;

Ergo, Peter is a living Creature.

^eere the word, man, is medius terminus, and so repea^ed in the Mayor and
minor propositions; Peter, and living ^^eature are the two extremes, whereof is
framed the third proposition or conclusion by connection of the ^^id extremes,
by virtue of the medius terminus that ^ath part in them both.

^8. But now Thomas Mortons syllogism has no such ^edius terminus, nor any
such connection of his pro^ositions together, The faults of Th. Mortons
syllogism.
but every one of them has his extremes, to wit, his subiectu^ and
praedicatum separatly, ^ot one depending of the other, and consequently it ^s
no syllogysme or argument at all, concluding any thing in form, no more then
this syllogism.

Every man is aliuing Creature:

Every ox is a four-^ooted beast;

Ergo, Every Ass has t^o long ears.

29. Where you see that there be six termini, as in The. Mortons syllogism,
without connection, or dependa^ce one o^ the other. And as much concludes this
as that. And now compare this his skill (I pray you) with that brag of his in
the beginning of this his Treatise against Equivocation, when he said to his
adversary: Dare you appeal to Logic? This is the art of arte^ and the high
tribunal of reason and truth it self, which no man in any matter, whether it
be case o^ humanity, or Deuinity, can justly refuse: who would not think but
that the man were very skillful in that art, Page 53.
wherein he presumes to give such a Censure?

30. But now let us help him out to make his foresaid Syllogism in form. It
should have gone thus, if he would have said any thing in true form.

The co^petency o^ God by whom we swear makes every one competent Judges to
whom we swear:

But in every oath we swear by God, either expressly or implicatiuely:

Ergo, in every oath they are competent Judges to whom we swear.

31. And then by an other inference again he might have argued, The syllog^sme
of T. Mort. brought into form.
that unto every competent and law^ull Judge we have confessed before, that a
man is bound to answer directly, and to swear to his intention, and not only
to his own, Ergo, in no oath to whomso^uer, may a man Equivocate, which is his
principal proposition. And thus had his form of reaso^ing been good, according
to the rules of Logic, though in matter it had been false, as now al^^ it is.
For that his first Mayor proposition can ne^^er be proved, to wit, That the
competency of God by whom we swear makes every one competent Judges ^o whom
(...) swear, that is to say, for so much as God by who (...) swear is
competent Judge of all, this makes ^^ery one to whom we swear by God, to be
our ^^mpete^t and lawful Judge, which is most absurd, ^^en in common sense.
For that a man may swear ^or example) to a thief or murderer by God, for
^^uing of his life, Diverse absurdityes ensuing upon M. Mortons syllogism.
as also to a common queen, yea (...) to the dyuell himself, and yet t^is
m^keth (...) the murderer, the quean^, or the devil to be (...) competent and
lawful Judge, or gives the^ law^^^ jurisdiction, so as the swearer is bound
to answer ^^rectly to whatsoever they demand, or to swear to ^^eir intention,
if he should be compelled by them. and the like in other such examples, whereof
every ^^an may frame infinite store unto himself, at his ^leasure: and the
reason of this is, for that albeit in every oath God be lawful and supreme
Judge, to discern whether I have a true meaning of mine oath in my mind: yet
this does not make the other to whom I swear my lawful Judge, except
otherwise he has jurisdiction over me, for that this absurdity, among infinite
others would follow, that if a King should swear to his kitchin-boy by God, he
should thereby make his said kitchin-boy his lawful and competent Judge, and to
have Jurisdiction over him, both to examine and command him, and bynd him in
conscience under sin to answer him directly; which how great a folly and
ab^urdity it is ^ch man that has reason, will easily of himself consider.
Wherefore having showed this, let us now hear, and contemplate (if your p^ease)
how Tho. Morton himself will prove his said mayor proposition; for it is like
he will do it substantially, it being the foundation of all his whole drift.
The mayor (says he) etc.

The Reckoning upon the Premises
32. This is now the charge, that P. R. makes upon T. M. to prove his very
first and principal argument (out of the co^petencie of almighty God) whereon
all the rest is grounded, to be faulty and ruinous both in form and matter.
In form, for that it is no lawful syllogism in Logical mood or figure: In
matter, for that the first or mayor proposition is manifestly false. The mayor
proposition aba^doned by M. Morton, and the Minor worse defended.
And how does M. Morton now in this his Preambling Reply, endeavor to satisfy
these two charges? Truly unto the last, about the untruth of his mayor
proposition he says never a word, which yet it seems he ought to have done
being the maine foundation of his impugning use of all Amphibologie and
Equivocation: but to the first he makes an extraordinary clamor, as partly
you have heard, appealing and provoking to all the Universities and Schools,
as well of Christendom, as of Heathen countries, and impawing therein not
only his reputation and credit, but degree of learning and schools also, and
to be degraded, if he make not his party good. And yet he that shall examine
what he brings, shall find that in substance of truth he says nothing in
effect for his own defense, but rather less then nothing: for that he
intangleth himself further with affirming other such things, as he cannot stand
unto, they being evidently false^ and mere shifts. As for example, he being
pressed about his foresaid syllogism, answers thus:

33. P. R. calls that a Syllogism (says he) which ^ named only in a more
general term, a Reason, and ^ot a syllogism: Pream. p. 8
now there be many forms of rea^onings, besides syllogismes: neither did I
indeed ^^tend to make an exact and formal syllogism ^ut only such an
argument, which by due inference and deduction might prove my conclusion good.
A mere shift of M. Morton.
^o he. And is not this a strange evasion in him, that ^rofesseth such skill in
Logike, yea to have been a ^ublike reader of Logike? For that the art of Logike
(...) my knowledge, admits but four kinds of ^easoning, to wit,
Syllogismes, Enthym^mes, Inductions and Examples: but this of M. Morton can be
none of the ^ater three sorts, as himself (I suppose) will con^es^e, ergo, it
must be the first, which is a syllogism, and consequently it is a mere shift
to say here, when (...) is taken trippe, that he called it not a syllogism,
^ut a reason.

^4. Secondly let us hear (I pray you) his own ^ords in his book of ^ull
Satisfaction where he brin^eth forth this argument: Full. satisf. p. 86.
Our first argument (says ^e) is taken from the ^orme of an Oath, which is
defined to be ^ religious inuoca^ion (whether it be expressly or
implicatiuely) (...) God, as witness of our speech etc. Hence may we reason
^hus: The competencie of God, by whom we swear, makes ^uerie one competent
judge, to whom we swear: But by swearing by God, whom we cannot deceive, we
religiously protest, that in swearing we intend not to deceive: ergo, our
deceiptfull Equiuocating is a profanation of the religious wor^hip of God. The
Mayor is true: for that our Savior auouching truth, held Pilate as a competent
judge etc.

35. Here now is evidently proved, that which you ( M. Morton) should have
been ashamed to deny that you meant to make a syllogism. For first you
^intitle it. An argument taken from the form of an Oath; the^ you say, hence
may we reason thus, which is as much as ratiocinari in latin, that is, to
r^ason, and is a word p^oper to school disputes, when they will argue in
form. A shamf^ll ^enial of his ^yllog^^me.
Thirdly you set down three distinct propositions in form of an argument with
ergo in the last, which is the form of a syllogism: and fourthly you
con^esse, that the first of them wa^ the mayor, which infers always a
minor, and they both include a conclusion, and so do make up the perfect
nature of a syllogism. How then bl^sh you not to deny this? And thus being
beaten from one defense, you run to another, saying, that P. R. con^esseth of
your argument, that by a do^ble in^erence the rea^oning is made good: Preamb.
p. 8.
wh^r^ore (say you^ I cannot see what cause he had to be more o^^ended with me
(...) delivering that in gross, which being divided into his pa^^^ was good
reason, no^ more then a man may mislike two per^^ because it is not a couple of
single pen^e.

36. And is not this a p^easa^t jest to escape by? But it will not serve: for
P. R. conf^sseth not of this your argument (in the form you frame it) that by
^ double inference it might be made good, but as he re^ormed the same. For that
this of yours being neither in Logical mood or figure, nor having coherence
with (...) self, nor medium terminum, but rather six terminos in place of
three, as has been said, it cannot by any double, triple, or quadruple
inference ever be made good, except we change the form and frame thereof.
Neither did I ever say that it could be made good more then the other absurd
syllogism set down for example of like absurdity, to wit, Every man is a
living creature, Every ox is a ^ourefooted beast, ergo, Every ass has two
long ears: which in every point is like unto the other: Another ab^urd shift.
and if not, why had not you, Sir, for your credit sake at least showed some
one real difference or disparitie in the forms between yours and that, which
indeed you could not do, for that they are like, and each one had three
distinct propositions and every proposition a distinct subi^ctum and predicatum
without medius terminus, and consequently consists of six several termini:
for which cause I never said, nor could say, that this your syllogism could be
made good without the whole form thereof were changed, and consequently this
is now an absurd shi^t in you, to run to my confession, which I never made.

37. My speech of another inf^rence was nothing to this purpose at all, as the
Reader will see, if he consider my words. For I spoke of an inference that
might be further made upon your argument reformed by me, but not as it came
from you: and this I spoke also of the consequence of matter, and of the truth
of the proposition in controversy, but not of the form, which being naught
could never be made good by any inference, and therefore it is very absurd
that you say, that I am offended with you, for delivering the matter in gross,
which divided into his parts, was good reasoning; for that neither in gross,
nor in parts can the argument be defended. And the similitude of two pence and
two single pence, is not worth a halfpenny for saving of your credit in this
behalf, as the Reader will easily perceive.

38. Well then, having thus cleared the Reckoning about this principal point,
M. Mort. presumes not to defend his syllogism.
that you cannot any way defend the form of your syllogism, either by
denial, or by underpropping the same, with any kind of shifts, you bend your
self wholly to find some faults in the reformation thereof by me, as though it
were a full justification of you, if you could find out any oversight in me,
and therefore you note many points of small, or no importance at all; and the
most of them mere cauills or against your se^fe, as now will appear. For
first I meaning to put in some order and form your said syllogism (which your
self here dare not so much as take upon you to defend) rather then to make any
new of mine own, I retained your whole Mayor proposition, which is this as
before has been set down: The competency of God by whom we swear, makes
every one competent Judges to whom we swear; which proposition I do show at
large to be false in matter and substance, as in part you have heard: yet do I
retain it (as I said) wholly for the Mayor proposition as it came from you, and
in this Mayor did I necessarily understand the words (expressly or
implicatiuely) for that your self had set them down expressly in the same
place, within 3. lines before, out of the definition of an Oath; so as the full
meaning of this Mayor proposition is, that the Competency of God by whom
(either expressly or implicatiuely) we swear, makes every one competent Judges
to whom we swear. The reformation of M. M. syllogism.
And then secondly for that your two other propositions of the same argument,
to wit, the Minor and Conclusion, had no coherence at all with this Mayor, and
consequently could infer nothing thereupon, as I did show in my answer; I was
forced to change them wholly for bringing the argument to true form of
syllogism, saying in the Minor thus: But in every Oath we swear by God,
either expressly or implicatiuely; ergo, in every Oath they are competent Judges
to whom we swear.

39. But against this reformation of mine you are so impatient, as makes me
take new compassion of you indeed: For it seems you care not much to wound
your self, so it might be thought that therewith you scratched also me. But let
us hear what you do object. First (say you) th^re be five termini in this new
syllogism of P. R. namely, Preamb. p. 9.
1. Competencie, 2. God by whom we swear, 3. every one competet Judges to
whom we ^weare, 4. in every Oath, 5. either expressly or impli^atiuely, whereas
according to his own ce^^ure ther^ should be ^ut three. Whereto I answer with
remembrance of that story of the envious man, who being offered by a Judge to
have double punishment decreed against his adversary, for any that he would
take upon himself, chose to have one of his own eyes pulled out, so as his
adversary might leese both of his, which how far it may be applied to this fact
of M. Mort. the disapassionate Reader will discern. T. Mort. wounds deeply
himself to scratch his adversary.
For here to find out five terminos of this syllogism (which has in deed but
three) he will needs assign three in the only Mayor proposition, which is
verbatim his own, and nothing changed by me, but set down as I found it in
him; so as if this his mayor proposition have thr^e terminos, as here he
avouches, then did he with all his skill in Logic, yea having been a public
Reader and Master thereof, make a Mayor with three terminos, and a proposition
with more then one subiectum, and one praedicatum, which is the grossest
oversight in Logic that can be ymagined; nor any mean scholar of four
months study in Sophistry indeed would commit the same, Aristotle having
assigned, Arist. l. ^. prior. resosolut. c 2.
that one proposition can have but two termini, which are subiectum and
Praedicatum, in quos terminos (tamquam extrema quibus clauditur) propositio
resoluitur, says he: and this is taught unto Logicians, even at their first
entrance into that stuly.

40. So as to seem to have noted me of somewhat he is content to accuse
himself of a gross error in deed, yea and that falsely also against himself:
for that his mayor proposition had not indeed, nor has three termini, but only
two, as it should have: to wit, one subiecta^ that goes before the verb or
copula, and one praedicatum that follows the same: for that the first part of
his said mayor, the Competency ^f God by whom we swear, makes not two
termini but one, as the other later part following the verb or copula, to wit
(makes) every one competent Judges to whom we swear, is but one
praedicatum. And M. Morton is grossly deceived in appoynting out di^ferent
words, for different termini: A gross error in Logic against him self.
for if there were a dozen words or more going before the verb, and as many
following tending all to one affirmation or negation, they should all according
to prescript of Logic be but two only termini. As for example, If I should
say, Every man in that he is endued with a soul, that is a spirit, adorned
with reason, providence, freewill, and such other qualityes may be compared to
an Angel etc. All these words going before the verb make but one terminus,
and consequently M. Mortons appointing the word Competency for one terminus,
and God by whom we swear for an other, which stand but for one subiectum in
the mayor proposition, and do tend but to one simple af^irmatio^, commits
more then a gross error in Logic: as also he does in that other observation
of his, whereby he notes the last words of the minor proposition (either
expressly or implicatiuely) for a fifth several terminus, whereas in deed they
are but a part of the medius terminus which was the subiectum of the former
mayor proposition, necessarily there understood, and that out of M. Mortons
own words, as before is said. But yet let us hear how he goes forward to
reprehend what he seems not to understand well himself.

41. Secondly (says he) these words (the Competency) being part of the
medium, Preamb. p. 9.
should have been repeated in the minor proposition. Whereto I answer that it
is sufficient that they be necessarily, and vertually included, and understood
by the hearer, as they are in our minor: for when we infer thus, but in every
Oath we swear by God, though we omit to say, who is compe^ent Judge of all,
or, has competency of judgment over all, as in the Mayor is expressed; yet
every man will understand and supply it by himself, as in the forementioned
^yllogisme, Every man as he is endued with a soul, that is a spirit, adorned
with reason etc. may be compared to An^ells: but Peter is a man, ergo he may be
compared to Angels. Is not this a good syllogism? And should it not be so
taken in public disputations, though all the words of the former subiectum,
or medius terminus were not repeated in the minor, but only the word, Man,
that includes necessary relation to all the rest, to wit, as he is endued
with a soul etc? I think yes. And so I suppose all Logicians in Cambridge
would affirm against M Morton in this behalf.

42. Lastly then this third or final quarrel against this reformed syllogism
is proposed by him thus: A third cavil turned wholly against himself. Preamb.
p. 10. Mitig. p. 475.
Thirdly (says he) there should be but one minus extremum; but with this, we
swear by God, he has joined another, to wit, either expressly or
implicatiuely, which words being a part of the minus extremum should not have
been omitted in the conclusion. So he. But M. Morton must be content we tell
him here friendly, that not to speak of skill or learning, he has showed at
least much less attention, then in any other point before about this matter.
For that the words, We swear by God, are not put by me for the minus extremum
or subiectum of the minor proposition, but for a part of the praedicatum, and
consequently for a part of the medius terminus of the whole syllogism^, as also
the words expressly or implicatiuely are another part of this medius terminus,
and therefore by law of a good syllogism are well left out in the conclusion,
which M. Morton inconsideratly reprehendeth. I will pretermitt here many
scurill syllogismes which you ( M. Morton) have delighted your self to frame
out of your own imagination, about dronken penitentes, shaven crowns, and the
like, M. Mort. absurd scurrility
which are not worthy the repetition: only we may not omit for the vpshot
of all, to see how your self do now reform your former own syllogism after
better deliberation had, and my admonition unto you considered. For finally you
frame it thus: Every speech wherein we swear by God, either expressly or
implicatiuely, does by the competencie of God, by whom we swear, make the
judges competent, unto whom we swear:

But every Oath is a speech, wherein we swear by God, either expressly or
implicatiuely:

Ergo, every Oath does by the competencie of God by whom we swear, make the
judges competent to whom we swear.



43. This is the last, and most absolute form, whereunto M. Morton has
reduced finally his former argument: which if you examine well, you shall find
it to be the very same in effect with mine. And first I would have the Reader
to note, M. Mort. brought to confess his error in his former syllogism.
that of the 3. propositions, which he set down in his former old syllogism,
he here casts away two, without so much as mentioning them, to wit, the
minor and conclusion, which had in them, as before has been showed, four
distinct terminos, that is, two subiecta and two praedicata, without any
combination or coherence the one with the other, whereof they being convicted,
M. Morton thinks best now not only not to defend them, but not so much, as
to mention them in this his new and last reformed syllogism, consenting
thereby manifestly to their former reiection, and condemnation made thereof by
me. And then secondly for his first or mayor proposition, which I for his sake
retained wholly in my reformation, as I found it set down by him, he has so
altered the same here in this his last refining, and so charged it with so many
new additio^s of words and clauses, as if his own new rule may take place,
that every distinct clause must be held for a distinct terminus, ^t will not
only have two, but 4. or 5. termim at least: and so will the Reader find by
looking only upon it. And I would prosecute the matter more at large, but I
see we have spent to much time about these trifles: yet could I do no less,
for that M. Mort. would needs take the matter with such eagerness, as you
have heard, and appeal to all Universities both Christian and Heathen, for
trial of the matter, yea impawne his hood, habit, degree and credit therein:
by which occasion I have been forced to say more then otherwise I would, or
thought the matter worthy.

44. The final Reckoning then of this account is found to be this; The final
rekoning of this Paragraph.
that notwithstanding all M. Mort. clamor and outcry in this matter, he has
not been able to defend his former syllogism either in matter or form, but by
shameful denying (in the later) that which he cannot stand unto, nor yet
impugn my reformation thereof, but by setting down the very selfsame in
effect and substance, that I did before; and that the faults which he
deuiseth, do fal^ upon his own syllogism, as you have heard demonstrated,
whereby the Reader will see, in what danger his pawn lies in the University,
if rigor of justice should be exacted. But yet will he not give over nor
cease, but has another assault against me about a certain division or rather
subdiuision of Equiuocatio^ made by me (as he pretends) against the laws of
Logike: which though it be of very little importance in respect of our cause;
yet will we give it also some place of examination among other his trifles
proposed.

ANOTHER VAIN CONtention brought in by M. Morton, about skill in Logike.. IIII.
HOW ardent a desire M. Morton has to find out some probable matter against
me in this point or Logical skill (wherein himself presumes much) may appear
not only by that you have now heard him write about the defense of his
syllogism (which yet he defe^deth not) but also by another trifling qua^rell,
Concerning a division and subdiuisio^ of false equivocation.
which within few leaves after the precedent he picketh at a certain division
and subdiuision I made in the last Chapter of my book of Equivocation,
distributing the same first into two sorts, lawful, Mitigat. c. 12. p. 485.
and unlawful. Lawful when the speaker has a true meaning and lies not,
though he be not always so understood by the hearer; and that this sort only
of Equivocation is used by Catholics upon just occasions: the other is
unlawful, when the speaker lies, and means wrongfully to deceive his
hearer; and that this second sort is practiced every where by Protestant
writers in England, by M. Morton, and his fellows, as I do show by many
examples throughout that whole Chapter, which M. Morton leaving wholly
unanswered, takes upon him only to impugn the manner or form of a certain
subdiuision made by me of this second kind of false Equivocation, Mitigat. cap.
12.
which there, I say, may be subdivided again into other two members of
material and formal, according to the division of a lie in general, which is
so divided, viz. into material and formal lying though differently in some
point. For that albeit ^ome of these sorts of false Equivocation be eu^l; yet
^s the latter (called formal) much worse, for that ^n the material lie, the
liar knows not, that he ^ieth, but in the formal, he does. Thus wrote I then.

46. And upon this discourse of mine, wherein I proved manifestly by many
examples taken out of M. Iuell, M. Horn, Hammer, Cha^k, Fox, Perkins, Sir
Fran^i^ Hastings, Sir Edward Cook, and other Prote^tants in their wrytings,
that they did ordinarily use and practice both these two later sorts of lying
and unlawful Equivocation, whilst M. Morton so eagerly impugned the former
sort of true and lawful Equivocation in Catholics: Upon this, I say, though
he take not in hand to defend any one of the accused, nor so much as
pretends to answer any of the particular accusations of lying laid against
him, yet foundeth he a great quarrel against me, and my skill in Logic out of
this place and matter, no less then before, about my reformation of his
syllogysme, saying in effect, that by my division and subdiuision of
Equivocation, I do come to say, That he who lies, knowing that he does lie,
does lie, not knowing that he does lie. And for the ground of his Charge he
does set down a piece of my discourse, in these words, after my first division
of Equivocation into lawful and unlawful.

The Charge given by M. Morton out of my book of Mitigation.
47. Wherefore ( said I) all our speech in this place shall be about the second
kind of Equiuocatio^, Mitig. p. 484. False and lying Equivocation.
which is false and lying, and thereby also ever vnlaw^ull: which though not
properly, yet in a general manner, may be called Equivocation, as I have said,
for that the hearer is always wrongfullie deceived, or intended to be
deceived by some falsitie, which is known to be such by the speaker, and
consequently is plain lying. And for that lying has been showed also before to
be divided into two sorts, the one a material lie, when the thing spoken is
false in it self, but not so understood by the speaker; the other a formal lie
when the speaker does know it, or think it to be false, and yet speaks it.
This kind of Equivocation, Two sorts of lying Equivocation.
which reallie is a lie, must have also the same subdiuision, so as the one
sort thereof may be called a mat^riall lying Equivocation, and the other
formal, and so much worse, as a formal lie is in it self (which all ways is
sin) then a material (which oftentimes may be without sin of the speaker)
by so much is a formal lying Equivocation worse then a material. We shall
give examples of both, that shall make all plain.

48. Thus far it pleased M. Mort. to cite my words, excepting only the last,
mentioning the examples to make all plain, which he thought best to suppress,
for that perhapps he desired not to much playnesse in this matter. Wherefore I
have thought good to supply them here, to the end that the Reader may see the
whole tenor of my speech, and thereby conceive how little to the purpose this
Cavil is, which M. Morton has sought out to handle in this place. It
follows then in my book.

49. If one should said to me ( quoth I) that my Father is dead, Mitigat. p.
485. n. 5.
thinking in deed that he is dead, though he be alive, it were a material lie,
as before has been declared, for that indeed, though he perhaps that made the
lie may have said it with out sin, for that he thought it so: and I say (
perhaps) for that in some case, ignorance could not excuse him, if it were a
matter whereof he were bound to know the truth, and might with diligence have
^earned the same. But if he should say my Father is dead knowing in deed that
he is not dead, and meaning to deceive me thereby, this is a formal lie, A
material and formal lie, and the difference
and always sinful, either venial or mortal, according to the importance
of the matter, wherein the lie is made. And conform to this may be the division
also (as is said) of lying Equivocation, that the one be material, the other
formal.

50. Examples of the first may be these, and other like. An Arian delivers to
the people those words of Christ, Pater men's mayor me est, my Father is
greater then I, understanding it heretically according to their meaning of the
very God head; this is an Equivocation, Material false Equivocation.
and in his sense is false, and consequently a lie, for that the hearer is
deceived: and yet because the speaker perhaps thinks it to be true, the lie
is but material in the Arian, and not formal, and in that respect less sin
then if it were formal: but yet is it dannable by another way, for that this
error, (as has been said) being willfullie defended against the Church, is not
excusable.

51. The other sort of false Equivocation called formall^ is when the hearer
co^ceaueth any false thing upon the speech of another, which other knows it
also to be false and so utters a lie against his own knowledge, and
conscience. As for example: If a preacher in England who indeed is no
Protestant in heart, Formal false Equivocation what it is.
should preach Protestant doctrine that is false, and himself should think it
also to be false (as diverse perhaps do,) this were to Equivocate both falsely,
and formallie, which is the worst kind of lying Equivocation that may be: and
this is that, which I say, that Thomas Mort. and his fellows, who inueigh
bitterly euerywhere, against true and lawful Equivocation, do use almost at
^uery turn.

52. As for example, when he says, No one iota of Scripture, Formal lying
Equivocation in T. Morton.
^o one example in all antiquity, no one reason in the na^urall wi^ o^ man, no
one author Greek or Latin, no one Father, not any Pope, Christian or
Antichristian, does make ^or equivocation as we de^end it, or any color
thereof, ney^her did ^hey so much as fancy any such thing: Here is first seen
anotorious untruth of the assertion itself, and consequently it is a material
lie, Mitigat. p. 485.
and material Equivocation, for that the matter delivered is untrue: and
secondly it is most probable that Tho. Morton must needs know it to be a
lie, having seen so many authors and reasons alleged for it by the Catholic
Treatise, which he prete^deth to confute: whereof it follows, that it was a
formal lie also, and a formal lying equivocation in the highest degree of
deceit and falsehood.

53. Hitherto did I write before, and my purpose was, as here is, evident to
distinguish only two kinds of lying Equivocation, Two sorts of lying
Equivocation.
the one most grievous, which I call formal, the other less heinous, termed
by me material, and both of them usually practiced by Protestants in their
wrytings. And for so much as both of them are false, and in substance ly^s
(though in different sort,) I said that they might have the same division into
material and fo^mall, which a lie has, albeit it be not neces^arie that the
members diuident be like in all and ^uery point, as now we shall declare after
we have considered of M. Mortons objection, which is this in his own words.

54. There is noe boy I think (says he) in his College, Prea^b. p. 11.
but he can analyze the members of this d^uision thus: A lying Equ^uocation is
that which is known to be such unto the speaker, and this is to be subdivided,
for it is either a material l^e, which when the thing spoken is a lie in it
self, but not so understood of the speaker: or a ^ormal lie, when the speaker
does kno^e it, and think it to be false, where he makes a material lie, M.
Mort. vain insu^tation.
which not known of the speaker to be a ^p^cies or member of that lying
Equivocation, which is kno^ne ^o the speaker: As if he shou^^ s^ie, Some her
knows what ^e speaks, when ^e knows not what he speaks. And could any
say thus ^ut a ly^r? Here inded is Logic, whereat the boys of our University
may hiss, and the boys of his College may blush, yea any ^u^all boy (if of
any mean capacity) may laugh ^y sight of the like. So he. And do you se how
he ^nsulteth over me, as though he had gotten a great ^duantage, and how he
takes here his revenge upon me, for the shipwreck he suffered before, ^n
the matter of his syllogysme?

But let us examine the thing somewhat more particulerly, and you shall find
him to have no better success here, then there, though his animosity in both
places be great and confident, as you see.

The R^ckoning about the subdiuision of false Equiuo^ation.
55. First then where I do say (as you have heard) that this second kind of
vnlawfu^l Equivocation used by Protestants (being always a lie) may be
divided, like a lie it self, into a material lying Equivocation and a
formal, M. Morton omitting craftily the word Equi^ocation in the members
diuident, divides the same into a material and formal lie, as though there
were no difference at all between the^, and thereof frames this inference,
that for so much as a material lie is when the liar knows not that he
lies, as the formal liar does, A manifest fraud.
it follows that a material Equiuocator knows not when he does
equivocate: and yet, says he, have I defined this second kind of Equivocation
common to both members, that it is then when the speaker knows that he does
falsely equivocate, which definition must agree to both.

56. This then is a deceit in M. Morton, that should have divided false
Equivocation into formal and material Equivocation, and not into formal and
material lying, for that albeit between material lying and material
equiuocating (for example sake) there be some points, wherein they agree (as
namely and principally that in the substance of the matter uttered, the speaker
thinks that he says a truth:) yet are there some other points also wherein
they differ, as namely in that a material lie or untruth may be uttered
sometimes without sin or offense, as by the examples before alleged has
been made evident. But a false equivocation cannot, for that albeit the chief
point, which this fa^se Equiuocator uttered, be thought by him to be truth (as
the Arrian before mentioned thinks his heresy to be Catholi^ke and true
doctrine:) yet does he equivocate in concealing some circumstance, as not
telling his hearer, that it is against the doctrine of that Church, which is
commonly called Catholic, or the like. Differences between a material
Equivocation and a material lie.


57. Another example may be, if a stranger not knowing our differences of
Religion in England, should demand a Protestant which he meteth in the street,
where he may go to the Catholic service, and he should send him to S. Paul's
in London, for that he persuadeth himself that to be the true Catholic
service; here the Protestant, if he do err in his judgment and if that be not
the true Catholic service indeed, speaks a falsity, but yet is it but a
material falsity, for that he thinks that he says truth: but yet further
does he falsely also equivocate in one thing, which is in not answering to the
others true intention, for that he knew that the other meant the Roman
Catholic service. And so you see that material false equivocation, has
somewhat more ^n it of malice then a material^ lie, for that it does wittingly
always conceal some circumstance, which ought to have been uttered, and
whereby it may be said to have some knowledge or guilt of de^eipt, which a mere
material lie has not.

^8. Now then I would ask M. Morton whether he ^ad considered this or no, when
he does so revel ^gains^ me with his rural boy? For if he had not, he ^ay
consider it now, with some reprehension of ^is own inconsideration; but if he
had done it, why did he equi^ocate so fraudule^tly with me, as to ^ake me to
divide false Equiuocatio^ into formal and ^at^riall lying? Whereas he should
have said into for^all and material Equivocation, and so out of this fraud ^f
his own, to go about to infer some show of ab^urdity against me. Is this
good dealing? or is not ^his equiuocating in the worst sense?

^9. But it may be he will object my words against me, where I say, that this
kind of Equivocation (...) which really is a lie) must have also the same
subdiuision which (...) lie has: whereto I answer, that it must have the ^ame
subdiuision into the terms o^ material and ^ormall, An objection answered.
for that it is really and in substance a lie; but yet not that the parts or
members diuident must of necessity be altogether the same in the one and the
other, in such sort, as a material false Equivocation may contain nothing
more then a material lie; for which cause my words immediately following are
these, so as the one sort thereof may be called material lying Equivocation,
and the other formal: I do not say a material and formal lie, for that (as
has been showed) a mate^iall equivocation contains somewhat more malice then
a bar^ material lie, for that it contains the knowledge and concealing of
some circumstance that ought to be uttered, which the other does not.

60. But here again may be perhaps objected, that this material equiuocatio^,
if it has any knowledge or malicious concealment (as here seem^th to be
granted;) then is it the same with that which we call forma^l equivocation,
and so consequently both members should be coincident and confounded; and if it
have knowledge only, and no malice, then is it no lie but lawful
Equiuocation^ as he that says to an incompete^t judge, I am no Pre^st
(meaning, as obliged to reveal it to you) knows that the judge is deceived,
but yet without malice or sin of his part, for that he does not any wrong
to the said judge, as not holding himself bound to utter the same to him.

61. To these two objections is answered, first, that material equiuocatio^ is
when the speaker thinks that which he says to be true, as the fornamed
Arian does, Two other objections answered.
though he conceal some circumstance that he ought to utter, which makes it
unlawful though nothing so grievous as the formal equiuocatio^ is, where the
Equiuocator knows that the whole matter is false, which is sufficient
distinction to make two several members or degrees of false equivocation in
general, and herby is my division iustified^

62. To the second I say, that a material false Equivocation can never be
lawful, for that in charity the speaker is bound not to conceal the
circu^sta^ce whereby his hearer is wrongfully and injuriously deceived: as when
the stranger demanding, whither he may go to hear Catholic service, and a
Protestant directing him to S. Paul's Church, though the Equivocation be but
material in him, in that he thinks the service of Paul's to be Catholic
service, yet knowing the other means indeed the Roman Catholic service, he
was bound in charity to have answered him truly to his sense and meaning. Nor
(...) the case of an incompetent Judge, or other injurious ^emaunder, whom we
may lawfully suffer to be de^^yued, like in this point, for that the Judge
of^^reth injury, and the other demands matters not ^^pedient to be uttered:
but here the demand is ^^wfull and honest to inform himself of Catholic
^^uice, and consequently the Protestant answerer should have answered to his
meaning and intention.

^^. And thus much have I been forced to write ^^hough in an impertinent matter)
for satisfying M. ^^rton and his Rural boy about the division of false ^^lying
Equiuocatio^, and whether it may be divided into ^^teriall and formal, or no:
the more importa^t enterprise (...) been to prove, that he and his do not use
both ^^ndes, rather the^ to impugn the form of the di^^sio^. But this we
shall expect of him afterward; for ^^ese are but certain light skirmishes
set out before (...) main battle, whereof there remain yet some ^^ree or
four more to be handled in this Chapter.

^HE CONFVTATION OF what M. Morton obiecteth against the skill of P. R. in
Greek and Hebrew.. V.
THIS Paragraph is set down by M. Morton under this title, An argument of P.
R. his kind of skill (...) Greek and Hebrew, whereby he has gained the opinion
of rare ^^norance. Touching the verse of the Prophet Esaias c. 29. v. 9.
So he. And heerby still it is seen that the good man was much troubled, and
out of temper when he wrote these Paragraphes, and so fell to plain scratching
in deed: for I disputed neither of Greek, Hebrew, nor Latin with him, but only
alleged the common latin text of a verse in the Prophet Esaias (which he had
impertinently cyted for his purpose, and posie of his book) and I said that
the Greek and Hebrew texts were conform to the said Latin text by me
alleged, and fondly applied by him, which thing I might easily do without
ostentation of great skill in Greek or Hebrew; for so much as the late great
Bible set forth in sundry languages has every thing translated into the latin
tongue, so as without any great knowledge of Greek, Hebrew, Chaldy, or Syriake
tongues set there down a man may by only the Latin tongue, see what those
other te^tes do contain, so as this try^ling assault might have been
pretermitted by M. Morton: but yet for that he will needs have the matter
treated here again, and alleges the Charge made against him out of my
book, I shall repeat also the same in this place briefly, which conteyneth
only but a note made by me in the end of a Chapter, in these words.

The Charge.
Mitigat. p. 87.
66. I cannot well pretermit (for ending this Chapter) one little note more of
rare singularity in this man above others, which I scarce ever have observed in
any one of his fellows, and this is, that the very first words of Scripture
alleged by him in the first page for the posy of his Pamphlet, are falsely
alleged, corrupted, and ma^gled, though they co^tayne but one only verse of
Esaias the Prophet: and then may you imagine, what liberty he will take to
himself afterward throughout his whole discourse. His sentence or Posy is
this: The very first text of Scripture alleged by him ^ost corruptly.
Isay 29. verse. 9. But stay your selves, and wonder, they are blind, and make
you blind, which he would have to be understood of us Catholics. But let any
man read the place of Isay it self, and he shall find no such matter either in
^ordes, or sense, but only the word wonder, to wit, ^bstupescite et admiramini,
fluctuate et vacillate, inebriamini, and non a vino, mouemini and non ab
ebrietate. And accor^ing to this are the Greek and Hebrew textes also. ^o as
what shoud move T. M. to set down so cor^uptly the very first sentence of his
book, and cite ^he chapter and verse wherein his fraud may be des^ryed, I know
not, except he observed not the last ^ause of the Prophets precept, Mouemini et
non ab ^^rietate. And so much for this.

^7. To this M. Morton answers, saying, Pream. page 13.
that this (...) more then any man of a temperate sense would ^aue objected.
For let any man read (^aith he) the English translation, and he shall find the
same ^ords set down. Seeing therefore that P. R. does ^ntimate to his Reader
that I forged a new text, and that the words are by me falsely alleged, can
there ^e a more false, yea (and if wilful rashness do not ^ake the upper hand
of impudent boldness) a more ^hameles cavil then this? So he. Where you see
that all goes in choler, exaggerations, and pa^heticall speeches with M.
Morton. For I do not say, that he has forged a text, but that the sentence of
his posy against Catholics pretended to be taken out of this place, to wit,
out of the 29. Chapter, and ninth verse of Isay, is falsely alleged,
corrupted, and mangled, the same not being found there, either in words, or
sense. And upon this let us join issue, and make the recknoing if you please,
and see how he can justify his allegation of this text to the sense he
alleges itaga inst Catholic Doctors.

The Reckoning of this Paragraph.
68. He first for his defense alleges the English translation, to wit, that
the Protestants English Bibles (at least some of them) have it so; but this is
as good as nothing to me. For neither did I see, o^ look for their English
translation (having before me all the other original texts out of which that
English must be taken, if it be true:) nor if I had, could it be of any great
credit in this controversy with me, who had read and se^ne the same Engli^h
translation called in question, and accused of many wilful corruptions by
their own Doctors, as namely by M. D. Broughton their chief Linguist in his
Aduertisme^ts to the Bishops about such corruptions found, Hugh Broughto^ in
his aduertiseme^t of corruptions. page 2.3. etc.
and observed by him in the modern English translation of the Scriptures, and
M. Mort^^ can not deny it; and consequently it had been impertinent either for
me or others to seek after that translation, for so much as the Authors
thero^ might as well be supposed to have framed what ^ense they list out of
this text of Esaias by the same liberty that M. Morton does.

69. Wherefore for your conuin^ment in this place, I mean to stand upon the
original texts them^elues, and the verse by you alleged, to see whether your
poesy against us may be framed thereof. First then the Hebrew has it thus, as
both Pagnin^s, Vatabl^^, and others do set it down^: The original text
examined.
Be astonished and wonder, shut up your eyes, and let the^ be shut, be you
drunk, but not with wine, do you reele but not with sicera. Or otherwise: They
have shouted and cried, are drunk, but not with wine. And in the ^re^k^
Septuagint thus: Do you faint, be astonished, you are drunk, but not with
sicera, or wine. The Chaldean paraphrase has it thus: Be astonished and
wonder, you are ter^ified, and do marvel, you are drunk, but not with wine.
The old latin translation both of S. Hierome, and before him, speaks thus: Be
astonished and marvel, waver ye and reele, you are drunk but not with wine,
you are moved, but not with dronkenesse.

70. These are the ancientest textes both of He^rew, Greek, Chaldy, and Latin,
out of all which (...) would pray M. Morton quietly and soberly without passion
to form and frame this his predominant ^entence against Catholics, Stay your
selves, and won^er, they are blind, and make you blind. Is there any such thing
in this verse? He would feign for show of ^ome defense help himself also of
the next verse fo^^owing which is the tenth, and says thus, as himself
tra^slateth it: Because the Lord mingled for you the spirit (...) slumber, he
will shut your eyes, he will cover your Prophets and chiefe-ones which see
visions. But what is this to the ^urpose? He cyted but the ninth verse, and
ney^her in this nor in the tenth that e^sueth as you see, ^s contained his
sentence, o^ staying our selves, to see b^^nd men make other men blind. And
whereas he runs to S. Hieroms Commentaries, and those of Hector Pintus where
they apply some words of the later verse to the blindness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, it is nothing to our purpose; for they justify not his sentence and
poesy taken out of the ninth verse, and much less do they go about to show
hereby (as he does) that Catholics are blind in respect of Protestants, and
do make other men blind, which is his purpose to prove. And it is to be noted,
that sentences prefixed for posyes ought to be clear, and not so forced and
wrested as this is, which was the cause that I noted it, and M. Morton can no
way justify the allegation thereof in real truth and substance, as now you
have heard. Other contumelious speach^s of his I let pass, as mere
scratchings and scoldings indeed, and shall take in hand the view of another
complaynt against me, noe less feeble and impertinent then this.

WHAT M. MORTON alleges against the Charity of P. R.. VI.
About Vero and Vere in Carerius.
THE title of this Paragraph in M. Morton is laid forth in these words; An
argument of P. R. his kind of charity, attended with a triumphant falsehood. And
this he says for that I had reprehended him in my book of Mitigation for a
place cyted out of a treatise of Alexander Carerius Doct. of the Canon law in
Padua, which he wrote of late de Potestate Romani Pontificis, wherein after
cyting of many other writers, whom he says to be of his opinion, he adds
the testimony of one Celsus Mancinus, saying: Nuperrim^ vero Celsus Mancinus in
tractatu de Iuribus Principatuum etc. But last of al Celsus Mancinus does hold
the same opinion with us in his Treatise of the Rights of Principalityes etc.
Which words M. Morton alleging and making his advantage of them, he was
noted by me, for two differences from the book of Carerius printed in Italy,
by direction of the Author himself: first that after the title de potestate
Romani Pontificis was added in M. Mortons book, aduersus impios politicos et
nostri temporis haereticos, which addition was not in my copy of Carerius own
book.

A slippery shift.
72. The second, that he had Nuperrime vere Celsus Mancinus, in steed of
nuperrime vero, which being contrary to the first edition which I had of
Carerius his book, and seeing no reason why I should suspect it to be otherwise
in any other later impression, I did lay it to his charge, especially for that
I did see him abuse it ^gregiously to his advantage (as has been said) as
though Carerius had ridic^lously exalted his witness Mancinus by naming him
vere Celsus, truly ^^fty, whereas his meaning was but only to say that ^elsus
was his Christian name. And had I not rea^^n to note such a slippery shift
devised by M. Morton (...) a scoff against a Catholic learned Author? that
lack of charity can he find heerin?

^3 But now M. Morton will clear him self, and ^roduceth to this purpo^e
another edition printed (...) Cullen, that has these points as he ^yteth them:
which edition though I have not seen, nor heard (...) before, yet do I think
it meet to give credit to (...) affirmation, nor will I offer him that iniuri^
(...) to doubt thereof, especially for so much as he says, (...) he has showed
the same to many friends of (...), naming also the year and form in which it
is ^^inted. All which being granted, and that in this (...) Cullen impression,
the addition of contra haereti^^s etc. may have bin added, which was not in
mine: (...) does this infer nothing against me, nor my ^haritie. For that,
where I saw a defect, I noted (...), nor could I learn of any other edition,
nor su^pect, that if there were, or might be, yet tha^ ^here would be cause to
alter the title of his first edi^ion, which himself ouerlooked: so as this
has (...) least scratch against me.

74. But now for the second point objected of vere for vero, The Cullen editio^
helps nothing Vere for Vero.
though M. Morton do allege in like manner for his excuse the Authority, or
rather error of his Culle^ editio^; yet can he not so easily discharge
himself thereof; for that the very contexture of speech must needs argue to
his conscience that it should be vero, and not vere, for that otherwise there
should have been no apt sense, nor any coniunctiue particle to connect the
testimony of Celsus Mancinus to the former. The great letter C. also in the
beginning of Celsus (if this be not in like manner altered in M. Mortons
edition from the original) must needs have showed unto him, that it was no
nowne adjective, but a proper name of a man, and consequently must be joined
with vero, and not with vere.

75. And finally if the thing had been doubtful, or might have been (as hardly
it could to any indifferent or judicious reader;) yet ought not he, nor could
with a good conscience use the same for an insultation and s^offe against two
such learned men, as Carerius and Mancinus are, A foolish scornful speech.
for these are his words: Carerius cites another called C^lsus, by
interpretation high or lof^y, and therefore ensigns him with vere Celsus, as
truly so named, and so truly he may be, if we judge him by the loftines of his
style and Conclusion. Thus far his scoff: which for so much as to me it
seemed to stand upon the voluntary mistaking of vere for vero (and so it must
still, albeit he fell upon an erroneous print;) I had just caus^ to repel the
said scorn, as I did with some acrimony of speech, but yet nothing comparable
to the excessive bitterness of M. Morton who condemns me not only of Malice,
but also of madness for my reprehension, intituling his whole Paragraph, as you
have heard against my lack of Charity for the same: yea making this question
in the last lines thereof, How in so manifest impudency, any argument of
modesty can appear? whereby we see the power of anger when it takes
possession of our tongue, what it can do.

The final reckoning^
76. But this tempest of passion being past, you have seen I s^ppose that we
two have quietly and soberly made up this reckoning between us; the total
sum whereof comes to be this in effect, that as I had reason to charge M.
Morton as I did, finding him so different from the Original book: so he,
though he had lighted upon an other edition, had no reason (out of judgment and
discretion) to urge so manifest an escape of the print (for so it must be
taken) to the exprobration of two worthy learned authors as Carerius and
Mancinus are; and consequently that M. Morton (notwithstanding all his d^fence)
must needs be thought to have dealt craftily, and to have equiuocated either
materially or formally in urging so much vere for vero, and bringing the same
in again two or three times aft^rward, as you will see. Let us pass then to
some other point if you please of more importance.

THE OBJECTION OF M. Morton against the Mod^stie of P. R.. VII.
TThe proper title of this Paragraph as it stands in M. Mor^o^s book is
this: An argument o^ P. R. his kind o^ modesty, accompanied with a
presumptuous falsehood, and in the Catalogue of his Chapters, P. R. his
presumptuous falsehood in charging T. M. with falsi^ie in the allegation of the
testimony of Doleman. Touching a false allegation of Dol^a^ by T. M. Preamb.
page 18.
Where you see, that besides falsehood, he charge me with pr^sumption, and
thence belike with lack of modesty, for presuming to charge so upright a man,
as he, with falsitie. Wherefore let us make the account friendl^, and see where
the measure either of modesty, or truth, or want of both will be found.

The charge given by P. R.
78. First I do show in the former part of my Treatise of Mitigation, about
Rebellion that M. Mo^ton leaving the questions of Divinity, and attending
principally to sedition, exacerbation, and matters of mere sycopha^cie against
Catholics in general, in resp^ct of their received doctrine to make them
therb^ diffident and odious to his Matie. of England, s^tteth down this Minor
proposition out of a calumnious syllogism framed by him: Mitig. p. 71. A Very
maligna^t con^lusio^ of M. Morton.
But all Popish Priests upon this pretended Supremacy and prerogative of Pope
and people, do utterly abolish the title of succession in all Protestant
Princes: Ergo, And his ergo is to a good purpose, as you may as^ure your self.
In which heinous slander, you may note first, that albeit he name here only
Priests, yet does he mean it also of all lay-me^, that hold the same doctrine
with Priests, and thereby strik^th at all their throats at once, so ra^ke is his
malice.

79. After this I showed sundry sorts of maligna^t falsities, to be contained
in this minor proposition of his, That all Priests (without exception) upon
this pretended Supremacy, and prerogative of Pope and people, do utterly
abolish all title of succession in all Protestant Princes. For first I show
that Catholic doctrine gives not Supremacy, Mitigat. c. 3.
or prerogative over Princes to the people; but that this is rather the
doctrine of the chiefest Protestants of our time, so taught, and so practiced
by them in all countries, where they have dealt against their Superiors, and
especially in England and Scotland.

80. Secondly I do show that for so much as no such prerogative of people is
pretended by our doctrine it cannot truly be said that upon this pretended
prerogative all Popish Priests do abolish etc. No nor upon the supr^macie or
prerogative, which we ascribe to the Pope himself: for that the right, or not
right of Protestant Princes succession to Kingdoms depends not of the Popes
prerogative, but of the Canons of the Church, and temporal Statutes of
particular Realms and Kingdoms. Thirdly that it is an exaggeration to say as
he does, that all Priests do utterly abolish etc. in all Protestant Princes
etc. And now you know that exaggerations in capital accusations are heinous
crimes, and show great lack of conscience and charity in the accusers.

81. And to prove this to be an exaggeration, that all Priests did utterly
a^olish the title of succession in all Protestant Princes, I alleged contrary
examples in all the protestant Princes that ever succeeded in England, since
the beginning of the world, who are known to be but three in number, King
Edward, Queen Eli^abeth, and King James, who were admitted both by Priests
and laymen, ergo all Priests do not utterly abolish all succession in all
protestant Princes etc. and consequently some moderation must be granted on our
side against this odious exaggeration.

82 Next after this M. Morton brings in no less envious and hateful a
proposition out of Doleman, saying, that Doleman does pronounce sentence, that
whosoever shall consent to the succession of a Protestant Prince, is a most
grievous and damnable sinner; Malicious perverting of the Authors meaning.
Dolman part. 1. p. 216.
but the book is examined, Dolemans words are found to be these only, that
for any man t^ give his help, consent, or assistance, toward the making of a
King whom he judges or belieueth to be faulty in Religion etc. is a most
grievous and damnable sin in him that does it, o^ what side soever the truth
be, or how good or bad soever the party be that is preferred: which last
words do show M. Morton to be a calumniator in suppressing them, and affirming
that to be spoken only against the succession of protestant Princes, which is
spoken as well against Catholics as Protestants, and meant more principally of
election then succession, as may appear by these words, If any man shall give
his help to the making of a King etc.

83. Here now M. Morton runs aside from the purpose, and to avoid the
necessity of defending himself directly alleges out of M. Reynolds D.
Stapleton, and Simancas diverse sentences, whereby they signify, that in
preferring of a Prince, religion ought to have the first place in
consideration, which he applying to us, that do condemn Protestant religion
will needs infer thereof, that, we do utterly abolish all ty^le o^
succession in Protestant Princes.

84. But does not the malicious man see, that the same inference may be made of
all Professors of other Religions in like manner? As for example: If
Protestants were to admit a King in France, and it lay in their hands to
prefer either a Protestant or a Catholic, would any man doubt whom they
would prefer, or whom they ought to prefer according to the rules of their
own conscience? or will any learned, or honest Protestant, deny either that
Religion in general is chiefly to be respected, or that his one religion is
not to be preferred before others if it lay in his power? Let us put the case
that a King of England or France having diverse Princely Children, and one of
them being taken by the Turks or other infidells as he travailed upon the sea,
and brought to Co^sta^tinople, should there be perverted and made a Turk or
Infidel, and that afterward his parents and brethren dying, the right of
succession should justly fall upon him, what learned counsel would M. Morton
give in this case to the common wealth of England or France? A Dilemma to be
answered by M. Mo^ton.
Will he think it lawful to admit him, notwithstanding the diversity of his
religion? It may endaunger the whole state of Christianity round about. Will
he say it is lawful to exclude him? Then will it follow that succession may be
resisted for Religion. I expect M. Mortons answer to this Dilemma.

Mitig. cap. 3.4.
85. Moreover it is showed by me in the book of Mitiga^ion that the Protestants
are not only the first and chief in this doctrine, that Princes may be
resisted for Religion, which I show by manifold testimonies, but are the first
also in practice thereof, ^s all histories do bear witness, as of the wars of
^he Hussites in Bohemia, and Albigenses in France, of more ^ncienter times, and
of the Lutherans in Germany, ^he Zuinglians in Switzerland, the Trinitarians
in Tran^^luania, the Hugonots in France, the Caluinists almost in every place
where they put foot, to wit, in Holland, Zealand, Scotland, Hungary, and else
where. And as for princes debarred by them from their due succession upon
difference of Religion, Protestants most forward in taking arms for pretense
of religion, against their lawful Princes.
the examples of his Maties. Mother, notorious to all men, and the King ^f
Polonia held from the succession of Sue^ia at this ^ay, being his natural
birthright, do bear witness ^o the world.

The Reckoning of this account.
^6. Wherefore to come to knit up this reckoning briefly with M. Morton, we see
first that he has not been able exactly to verify any one of his two former
propositions out of his own syllogism, concerning Dolemans assertion, but
that he has used exaggeration, and calumniation in them both, and that
whatsoever he has urged never so bloudily to incyte his Majesty against us,
may with much more reason and force of argument be retorted against himself,
and his, as well in England (if the Puritans be his) as in other Countries
against all sorts of Protestants. And when for ending of this Paragraph he
frames a syllogism invincible, as he pretends, to conclude against us,
saying, One syllogism will assoyle the whole doubt, he sets down such a
one, as may wholly be turned upon himself, changing only the person of whom it
is made. The syllogism is this.

Mayor Every man is a damnable sinner who admits any to the Crown whom he
thinks faulty in Religon. Minor But every Romish Catholic thinks all
Protestant Princes faulty in Religion; Ergo Every Romish Catholic who
admits a Protestant to succeed in the Crown, is a damnable sinner.
87. All this syllogism, I say, is as well veryfied of Protestants as
Catholics, and consequently the force of his argument concludes nothing at
all against us more then against himself and his. For as for the mayor
proposition, The examination of M. Mortons fond and mali^ious syllogism.
no Protestant of sense I think will but grant, that it is a damnable sin to
admit any Prince (if it lie in his hand to prefer or hinder) whom he
thinks to be faulty in Religion, for that otherwise we must say that
Protestants have no conscience concerning Religion, if they will advance
wittingly any one that will in their opinion destroy the same. And then I make
the minor, But every true Protestant thinks Roman Catholics to be faulty in
Religion: Ergo, every true Protestant that admits a Catholic Prince to
succeed in the Crown, is a damnable sinner. And what then shall we say of the
Dolphin of France, A case proposed about the Dolphin of France.
when he comes to years to succ^ed in that Crown, after the death of the
King his father? will the Protestants receive him or no? And if there were some
such busy seditious spirits among Catholic preachers there, as this of M.
Mort. and some others shows it self to be in England, that would in all
their sermons, and books raise quarrels, and contentions before hand about
this matter, and procure his Christian Majesty to enter into new doubts and
iealosyes, to propose new Oaths to his Protestant subjects; and not to
believe them when they have sworn, but to give care to such clamorous
makebates as these are; should he ever have quiet? Or his subjects
contentment? ^his then may suffice that these wicked, and malig^ant
calumniations against Catholics to set them (...) perpetual iealosy and
diffidence with the tempo^all Prince and state, in regard of their Religion and
^octryne, are both extreme malicious, and foolish. ^alitious, in grating
continually upon this seditious ^^ference of treason from Religion: foolish and
sottish ^^cause the same inf^rence may be made against ^^mselfe, or any
Sectaryes whatso^uer as has been ^^^wed: and the factes of those of his side
are so no^^^ious to the world, and continually in men's eyes, (...) the very
naming of this argument so often, con^^mneth him manifestly of both the vices
before ^entioned of malignity, and imprudencie. Let us (...) pass to another
Paragraph of this his first In^^irie, wherein he seeks most to make some
o^ten^^^ion of reason for himself, though he have less (...) in the former.

AN ANSWER OF M. Mortons calumniation about the Truth of P. R. impugned.. VIII.
THE words containing the title of this last Paragraph in M. Morton are these:
About the authority of Otho Frisingensis abused. Preamb. page 25.
An argument of ^^R. his kind of Truth, full of triumpha^t treachery: but in
^^e several Catalogue of his said Paragraphes, (...) puts it down thus. P.
R. his 4. malicious tricks of ^^lshood in obiecting a falsity concerning the
testimony of Frisin^^nsis. And then he begins his Paragraph with ^hese
words: Though all the former arguments says he) of P. R. his wit, memory,
learning, and ^odesty, conteyne in them the lively characters, and
demonstrations of a liar: yet have I reserved to this last place of truth such
an accusation from whence one would think he had gained a triumph. So he. And
then he sets down my words of Charge against him, for abusing the
testimony of Frisingensis, which presently we shall recite. But first we must
admonish the Reader, that he which in words obiecteth here unto me so many
characters and demonstrations of a liar, has not hitherto in fact showed any
one least sign at all of such proceeding but has been convinced of many
himse^fe, which if it had not been made evident enough, by th^s^ few
Paragraphes hitherto handled, having mat^^rs^ of less moment; yet will it
appear more substantially and abundantly afterward, when we come to examyne
punctually the difference of vntruth^s objected on both sides, especially such
as be witti^g and wilful, and some taste thereof will be given in the trial of
this very Paragraph, wherein he charge me with so many characters of lying.
For if I do not make it here manifest, that M. Morton has dealt shiftingly,
and with no sincere and upright conscience in the matter objected unto him; I
am content that the Reader do condemn me, and ascribe unto me all those odious
characters, which M. Morton before has laid to my charge.

89. And for more clear conceauing the matter, you must know, that M. Morton,
Preamb. page 25.
who in this his preamble would make some show of probable defense in some few
accusations of many great and heinous laid against him for falsity, has
thought good to choose out this example of Otho Frisingensis from the midst of
two other much more greiuous then this, Cunning dealing of M. Mort.
the one of falsifying and abusing Cardinal Bellarmine immediately going
before, and the other of Lamber^us Schasnaburge^sis, immediately following
after; whereof the ^ormer he attempteth not at all to answer, the other he
seeks to shake of afterward, but in vain, ^s you will see when we come to
the place of exa^inatio^. And here this being a special place cho^en by him
for defending his truth, and impugning ^yne, he shoud have touched them
together, as ^hey lie together in my book: but that as one ac^used, and
brought before a Justice for theft or fal^^ood will be loath to have many
matters disclosed ^^geather, but rather to answer one in one place, and
another in another, for that many jointly ^^geather would give suspicion, and
credit the one (...) the other: so deals here M. Morton, not so much (...)
mentioning the first, and the third, A crafty trick.
which are the ^ore greiuous, but singling out that which lay in ^^e midst,
which notwithstanding he can no way (...) truth of plain dealing defend, as
now you shall (...). Thus then lies my Charge against him in ^y former book.

The charge by P. R.
^0. In the very next page (say I) after the abuses ^ffered to Cardinal
Bellarmines alleged testimony, Mitigat. p. 214.
M. Morton talking of the great and famous contention that passed between Pope
Gregory the 7. called Hilde^rand, and Henry the 4. Emperor of that name,
about the year 1070. he cyteth the Historiogra^her Otto Frisingensis, The 7.
example out of Otto Frisingensis.
with this ordinary title, Of our Otto, for that he writes, that he found not
any Emperor actually excommunicated or deprived of ^is kingdom by any Pope,
before that time, except (says he) that may be esteemed for an excommunication
which was done to Philip the Emperor by the Bishop of Rome, almost 1400.
years agone, when for a short time, he was inter poenitentes collocatus,
placed by the said Pope among those that did penance, as that also of the
Emperor Theodosius, who was sequestered from entering into the Church by S.
Ambrose, for that he had commanded a certain cruel slaughter to be committed
in the City of Thessalonica: both which exceptions (though set down by the
author Frisingensis) this Minister of simple truth leaves out of purpose,
which is no simplicity as you see, but yet no great matter with him in respect
of the other that ensues, Fri^in. l. 6. hist. cap. 32. Otto Frisingensis
abused. Ibid. l. 6. c. 36.
which is, that he alleges this Frisingensis quite contrary to his own
meaning, as though he had condemned Pope Gregory the 7. for it, whereas he
condemns that cause of the Emperor, and commends highly the Pope for his
constancy in punishing the notorious intolerable faults of the said Henry.
Hildebrandus (says he) semper in Ecclesiastico vigore constantissimus suit;
Hildebrand was ever the most constant in defending the rigor of
Ecclesiastical discipline. And again in this very Chapter here alleged by
T. M. Inter omnes Sacerdotes and Romanos Pontifices praecipui zeli et
auctoritatis fuit; He was among all the Priests and Popes that had been of the
Roman Sea of most principal zeal and authority. How different is this
judgment of Frisingensi^ from the censure of T. M. who now after five hundred
years past, co^pareth the cause of Pope Gregory, to that of pirates, thieves,
and murderers, and so cyteth our Otto Frisingensis, as though he had favored
him in this impious assertion? Can any thing be more fraudule^tly alleged? Is
this the assurance of his upright conscience, whereof he braggeth to his
Majesty?

The 8. ^xample of Lamb. Schafnaburge^sis.
91. But the next fraud or impude^cie, or rather impudent impiety is that which
ensues within four lines after in these words: Pope Gregory the seventh
(says your Chronographer) was excommunicate of the Bishops of Italy, for that
he had defamed the Apostolic Sea by Simony, and other capital ^rimes; and
then cites for proof heerof Lambertus Schafnaburg. anno 1077. As if this our
Chronographer had related this as a thing of truth, or that it were approved by
him; and not rather as a slanderous ob^ection cast out by his adversaries that
followed the part of Henry the Emperor.

^2. Hitherto I have thought good to recite my words, which are some few lines
more then M. Morton cyteth in his book, for that you should see the connectio^
of things together, to wit, how these objected falsities about alleging af
Otto Frisingensis ^re craftily culled out from between the examples before
cited of Bellarmine and Lambertus; but yet in this place we shall handle only
that which M. Morton has made choice of to be treated, and discussed, to wit;
whether my former Charge against him for abusing the Authority of Otto
Frisingensis be rightful and well founded or not, for that he that shall read
this reply of M. Morton, will think that he has injury offered him, for that
I had guylfully urged matters against him further then truth and reason would
require, and therefore he notes against me in his argument these words, Four
excellent tricks of falsehood in one page, which after we shall discuss, and
show them to be rather frauds and shifts of his, then tricks of mine. Now
then let us come to the examination of this Charge, which of us is to be found
in falsity, and still I must advise the reader that to the end he may receive
some vtility by this co^fere^ce, he have an eye to the spirit of false dealing,
and not so much to errors of oversight, and this he shall easily descry, if he
stand attent to the discussion.

THE EXAMINATION OF this controversy more at large. IX.
Concerning other po^ntes about Frisingensis. Pr^^mb. page 27.
FIRST unto my whole Charge before laid down M. Morton answers thus: In my
full Satisfaction (says he) part 3. cap. 11. page 28. that which was intended
to be proved was this, that not till 1000. years after Christ did ever any
Prelat^ or Pope attempt the deposing of Emperors, and depriving them of their
Crowns. For proof heerof I brought in the testimony of Otto Frisingensis from
the witness of Tolosanus lib. 26. de Repub. cap. 5. in these words: M. Mortons
defense.
I read and read again, and find that Pope Hildebrand in the year 1060. was
the first Pope that ever deprived an Emperor of his Regiment, wherein now have
I wronged my conscience? Is it because Otto Frisingensis is cyted contrary to
his meaning? yet could it not prejudice my conscience, because I cyted not the
author himself, but only Tolosanus a Romish Doctor, who reported that
sentence of Frisingensis.

The Confutation thereof. Full satisfact. par. 3. c. 11. p. 28.
94. This is the first part of his answer, which is so full of wyles,
sleightes, and shifts, as does easily show the disposition of the writers mind
to beguyle. For first in the chapter by him named the intention was not only to
improve the right of deposing Princes in the Pope, but also of excommunicating
them, as appears by the title of the Chapter it self, which is this: That
^or more then 1000. years after Christ the Papal pretended jurisdiction over
Kings has been controlled. Now then this Papal pretended Jurisdiction (as all
men know) contains as well excommunication, as ^eposition, the one being the
efficient cause of the ^ther: so as for M. Morton to run to only deposi^ion
of Princes, is guylfully to slide from his mat^er, and from his own Authors,
for that both Fri^^ngensis, and Tolosanus have as well the words
excom^unicated, as depryued o^ his Kingdom, though M. Morton ^ath cunningly
stricken them out in cyting their ^ords.

^5. Secondly his excuse of having alleged Otto Fri^^^gensis against his own
meaning from the witness (...) Tolosanus cannot stand, or be cleared of
deceiptfull ^^eaning, for in the English text which was writ^en for deceiving
the English common Reader, was nothing said at all of Tolosanus, but thus, in
disgrace ^f Pope Gregory the 7. Ibidem.
I read and read again (says your Otto Frisingensis) and I find that Pope
Gregory the 7. ^^lled Hildebrand in the year 1060. was the first Pope that
^^er deprived any Emperor of his Regiment. And to this ^estimony he adioyneth
Claudius ^sp^nseus a Parisian ^octor, and writer in our time o^ very small
ac^o^pt, whom he calls Bishop, but I never heard ^et of his Bishopric, and
to him he adioyneth ^ambertus Schasnalurgensis against his own meaning, ^s he
did this of Frisingensis. And with this only he ^ndeth all that Chapter
instituted by him to improve all Papal authority of exco^municating and
deposing Princes. Only in the margent he sets down in latin the words of
Frisingensis, with citing ^he book and Chapter, and then adds, vt resert
Tolosanus lib. 26.

96. Here then I would ask whether there were not fraud (supposing
Frisinge^sis to be alleged against ^his meaning) to put down his testimony
in the English text without relation or mention of Tolosanus, A double shift.
and only in the margent, and in latin to make reference unto him? Would the
current English reader ever reflect upon that, or mistrust that the words of
Frisingensis were of doubtful credit, and related only by hearsay? Why had
not M. Morton put down that refere^ce in his English text which most imported?
But the truth is, that it was a double cunning shift, to let it run in the
text as he would have it believed by the Reader, as though Frisinge^sis had
testified against Pope Gregory the 7. and yet in the margent to have some
refuge underhand when he should be pressed with the falsehood of the
allegation, as now he is.

97. I let pass as of small moment the erroneous pare^thesis which he puts
in of the year (1060.) which cannot be true, for that all English men know
that William Conqueror upon the year 1066. entered into Engalnd, Polidore
Holinshed Stow and others in anno 1066.
with a hallowed banner sent him from Pope Alexander the second, who was
predecessor to Pope Gregory the 7. and consequently Pope Gregory could not
excommunicate the Empero^r Henry upon this year assigned by M. Morton, for
that he was not yet Pope for diverse years after, but this I impute to error,
and so insist not upon it, but rather upon other points of willing
deceiptfulnes, which now I am to go forward in noting.

98. I cannot persuade my self but that M. Morton had read Frisingensis
himself, for it were absurd to write books out of other men's notes, as
afterward upon diverse occasions he does confess of himself, when otherwise
he cannot avoid the objection of falsehood used: The words of Frisingensis
curtolled.
but howsoever this were, that either M. Morton related the words of
Frisingensis, as he found them in himself, or in Tolosanus, he has not
faithfully related them, as Tolosanus did: for thus they lie. Frising. in
Chron. c. 35.
Lego (says he) and relego Romanorum Regum and Imperatorum gesta, and nusquam
inuenio quemqua^ eorum ante hunc (Henricum quartum) a Romano Pontifice
exco^municatum, vel Reg^^ priuatum, nisi sort quis pro anathemate hahendum
ducat, ^^od Philippus ad breue tempus a Romans Episcopo inter poeniten^^
collocatus, and Theodosius a B. Ambrosio propter cruentam ^^de^, a liminibus
Ecclesia sequestratus sit. I do read and read ^gaine the acts of the Roman
Kings and Emperors ^^d I do never find any of them (before this Henry ^^e 4.)
to have been excommunicated or deprived of ^^s Kingdom, except perhaps some
man will hold (...) an excommunication, that the Emperor Philip ^as for a
short time placed by the Bishop of Rome (...) og such as did pe^nace, and
Theodosius the Emperor ^as debarred the limits of the Church by S. Ambrose
^^ishop of Millane) in regard of a bloody slaughter co^^itted by his order.

^^. These are the words of Frisingensis related pun^^ually by Tolosanus as
here they lie, but it pleased (...) M. Morton to relate them, either as they
are ^^und in the one or other. And as for the first part ^^erof, the Reader
will see the difference by that which I have already set down, and in one
point ^^e fraud is manifest, that where Frisingensis says, ^^squam inuenio
quemquam eorum excommunicatum, vel ^^gno priuatum: Guilfull omission
I never find any of the Emperors to ^aue been excommunicated or deprived ( by
the Bishop of ^ome,) he leaves out the word excommunicated both ^n latin and
in English, as though it made not to ^he purpose, and secondly he cutteth of
both in la^in and English all exception of the Emperors Phi^^p and Theodosius,
though both his Authors have it. And could this be plain dealing?

^00. But here now you shall hear how he answers this omission, Preamb. page
27.
I left them out of purpose I confess (says he,) otherwise I should have been
like to your self in this and other such cauills, who desire to say much
though nothing to the purpose: for to what purpose I pray you had this been,
seeing our question was not to show what Emperors had been excommunicated, but
who being excommunicated had been deposed from their regalityes. Yea (Sir) and
will you escape so? why then does your Author Frisingensis say that he fyndeth
none excommunicated or depryued of his kingdom before Henry the 4. by Gregoy
the 7? you see that he includes both the one and the other, and so does
Tolosanus relate him also, and you have struck out the former from Tolosanus
his latin text set down in your marge^t because it should not be seen: and
then also both the foresaid exceptions of the Emperors Philip and Theodosius
he cutteth of and suppresseth, as nothing to the purpose: and yet you know that
depositio^ of Princes is an effect of excommunication, and can never happen by
Ecclesiastical authority, but where excommunication has gone before. A
Demand hardly to be answered by M. Morton.
And I would ask M. Morton in good earnest out of his Deuinity, when a
Christian Prince is lawfully excommunicated and shut out from all society of
Christian communion and he persist impenitent, how can he be head of a
Christian common wealth, for so much as he is no member, nor has any place or
part at all in the whole body, the headship being the chief part of all others?

101. Much then it imports to know the authority and antiquity as well of
excommunication as of deposition: from which cause the examples alleged by
Frisingensis ought not to have been suppressed or imbezeled: and Tolosanus here
alleged by M. Morton produces an other example both of excommunication and
deposition above an hundred years before this of Frisingensis, Tolos. de
rep^b. l. 6. c. 13. n. 20.
saying: Antea quidem, Gregorius tertius etc. Before this, Gregory the third
being made Pope upon the year 759. did deprive Leo the third Emperor of
Constantinople, both of his Empire, and the ^ommunion of Christians, for that
he had cast holy ^mages out of the Church, and defaced them, and ^eld a wicked
opinion against the B. Trinity: thus ^e. And that Tolosanus in this says
truth, Two other examples omitted.

Zonoras in vita Leonis Isaur.


is testified ^^so by Zonoras a greek historiographer in the life ^f the said
Emperor Leo Isauricus. And before that ^gaine Pope Innocentius the first that
lived with S. ^ugustine is read to have excommunicated the Empe^our Arcadius,
and the Empress Eudoxia for their (...) just persecution of S. Chrysostom,
though no de^riuation followed thereof, but amendment rather ^f the fault, as is
to be seen in Nicephorus. Niceph. 13. Histor. c. 34.
Here ^en the ^uasion of M. Morton, by saying that the ^atter of
excommunication pertayned not to his ^urpose is wholly impertinent, for so much
as that (...) the only immediate cause of deposition by Eccle^^asticall power.
But now let us pass to the other ^hiefe point to consider, whether
Frisingensis was al^edged wholly against his own purpose, or not.

^02. M. Morton being pressed with my former an^weare, Whether Frisinge^sis
were alleged against his own meaning.

Pream. page 27.82. Full satisfact. part. 3. cap. 11.. 29.

Schafnaburgensis ann. 1077.


wherein I do show that Frisingensis being alleged by him to disgrace Pope
Gregory, alias Hildebrand, ^s much wronged (for that he co^me^deth him high^y
and his doings) seeks this shift now by saying, that he alleged him only in
the question of antiquity, concerning ^he time when first any Pope did take
upon him to depose Emperors. But this is manifestly false, for he alleges
him to both ends, to wit for antiquity and for disgrace but principally to
disgrace him. For having showed (as he persuaded himself) that Pope Hildebra^d
was the first that used such proceeding against Emperors, he adds presently,
that it was a new act, and that it is naught also, will appear (says he) by
the Actor, for Pope Gregory the 7. (as your Chronographer says) was
excommunicated of the Bishops of Italy, for that he had defamed the Apostolik^
Sea by Symony, and other capital crimes. So he. And to this calumniation, he
joins the saying of Claudius Espencaeus in these words. Hildebrand ^as the
first Pope (says your Bishop ^spencaeus) who by making a new rent be^^ene
Kingdom and Popedom, did raise ^orce against the Imperial diadem, arming
himself, and by his example exci^ed other Popes against Princes excommunicate.

103. These two testimonies then of Espencaeus and Schasnaburgensis, See Otto
Fri^ing. lib. 6. Chronic. c. 34.35.36.
being joined with the t^ird of F^isingensis (which are all that M. Morton
alleges) let the prudent Reader consider, whether they be not brought to
disgrace Pope Hildebrand in his action against the Emperor Henry or not; and
yet do the first and last (which are the more ancient Authors) very earnestly
commend the said Pope, and defend his action of deposing the Emperor, and
consequently are brought in by mere preuarication of M. Morton to disgrace him.

104. And as for the third which is Espencaeus, though he were neither Bishop
to my knowledge, nor otherwise of any great estimation among us, The notable
abusing of Espencaeus
yet is he handled here no less injuriously, and fraudulently by M. Morton
then the other two, which I note now more especially then in my first answer,
both for that his authority is named and urged again in this place, and for
that I could not then get any sight of this his second book of disgressio^s
upon the first Epistle of S. Paul to Timothy, though I had other books of his,
Claud. Esp^n^. lib. 2. digress. in Epist. 1. ad Timoth. c. 6. p. 274.275. edit.
Paris. 1561.
but now having found the same, I have discovered withal such fraud as was fit
for such a spirit, as M. Mortons seems to be, that rarely uses exact truth
in citing of any thing; for that these words alleged against the Pope are not
the words of Claudius ^spencaeus himself (as in untruly affirmed by M.
Morton,) but related by him out of a certain angry and impatient Epistle,
written (...) certain schismatic Priests of Liege, that were ^^mmanded by
Pope Paschalis the second to be cha^^sed by Robert Earl of Flanders, and his
soldiers ^^wly come from Jerusalem about the year 1102. ^^r their rebellious
behavior, which Priests with ^enry their schismatic Bishop wrote a very
passio^^te inuectiue complaynt against this act and com^^ssion of Pope
Paschalis, inueghing also against the ^^ing of Pope Hildebrand not long before
dec^ased for (...) like cause, all which M. Morton concealeth, and ^^eth the
words of ^spencaeus himself: Your Bishop ^^^encaeus (says he) writes of
Hildebrand etc. which he should not but know to be false, if he read the ^^oke
and place by himself ci^ed, for that Espencaeus ^oth not only in the beginning
of his citation use ^^is entrance, extat in 2. ^omo Concilioru^ edit.
Coloniensis, ^^leri Leodiensis ad Paschalem secundum querimonia, There (...)
extant in the second tome of Counsels a complaint ^f the Clergy of Liege to
Pope Pascali^ the second, Claudius Espenceus egregiously a^used and that
wilfully.
but (...) the end also of all his speech which conteyneth a ^ong discourse, he
concludes thus. Hactenus Leodi^^sium and verba and sensa. Hitherto have I
related both ^he words and sense of those Priests of Liege, and pre^ently for
himself says, that he will not meddle with the controversy of fighting
between Popes and Emper^rs, though he prove by sundry examples both out of the
Scrpture, Fathers and Councels that in some cases it is lawful for Priests to
use te^porall arms also: so as for M. Morton to come and ^uouch as he did in
his former book of full Satisfaction, that our Bishop Espencaeus affirmed this
of himself against Pope Hildebrand, whereas he must needs know that he says it
not, but relates it only out of others, without approving the same, is to ad
preuarication to preuarication, and never to make an end of wil^ull lying,
especially seeing that i^ this his last Preamblatory reply he is so far of
from amending the matter, Preamb. page 28.
as that he turns upon the same again, saying: I produced Claudius
Espencaeus, their own Romish Bishop, that does plainly auerre that Hildebrand
was the first Pope, who without any example of antiquity made a schism
be^wene Emperors and Popes etc. Good Sir, will you stand to this, that Claudius
Espencaeus does plainly auerre it? Is this true? Is this sincere? And how does
he plainly auerre it, if he do not so much as affirm it of himself, but only
relates what others that were in schism, choler, and passion did utter in
this behalf? Is this good dealing?

The sum of all this Paragraph, about Frisingensis, Tolosanus, and Espencaeus.
105. Now then to gather a brief su^me of what has passed in this reckoning,
it seems M. Morton is so far of from having justified himself in this last
combat, Four malicious tricks objected by T. M. returned vp^on himself.
which he instituted for demonstration of his truth, and for blazing the
characters (as he calls them) of my falsehood, that he has entangled himself
much more then before, as in part has appeared by that we have now discussed.
It remains then that for a conclusion we examine his former four tricks of
falsehood, which he says to have found in one only page of my writing. Let us
hear them as he sets the^ down: He has played me (says he) ^oure
malicious Preamb. page 29.
But my answer is, that if there be any trick at all in this, and much more
any false trick, it must needs rest on M. Mortons part, who to deceive his
Reader concealed those examples of Emperors excommunicate, that were in his
Authors. And in simple dealing he should have ^^yd the^ down, and not
fraudulent^y have cut them (...) has been said, for that they greatly imported
^e matter it se^fe, as before has been declared: but ^ow to the second trike,
which we shall relate in ^is own words. The second caui^^ (says he) is that
^. R. did not acknowledge the commenda^ion of Hil^^brand in Wher^^ I answer,
that you meant to prove the iniquity (...) the said Pope, and of his fact, and
thereby to dis^^edit him: and to that end did you alleadg both ^^isingensis,
^spenc^us, and Schasnaburgensis quite against ^^eir meanings, as has been
showed: so as this second The third trick (say you) in making me so
perniciously envious, as to condemn ^ildebrand without a witness, when as I
produced your own ^ishop Espencaeus to condemn him. But this trick is also
^ours, for that now I have showed, that neither ^o I know him for a Bishop, as
still you call him, ^or does he condemn Pope Hildebrand: but you do ^se a
foul false trick with him in making him to say that which he does not, but
recites only out of other men's passionate speeches, as has been proved, which
is a false trick indeed.

106. The last trick is (says he) in charging me with a wilful perverting of
the meaning of the Author Otho Frisingensis, when as if it had been so
abused, yet not I, but their own D. Tolosanus was the Author of that report.
This now is a Tolosanus related the words of Frising^nsis sincerely, M. Mort.
4. tricks returned upon himself.
and you corruptly, yea you corrupted also Tolosanus his report, and recital
of Frisingensis words, as has been showed, so as if Tolosanus his text had any
error it was your fraud: and how the^ can you for shame lay the fault upon him,
whose relation your self peruerteth? What trick is this?

107. And so, for so much as these four points, which you call tricks, are
grave and serious charges truly laid against you, and so substantially proved,
as you have not been able to avoid any one of them (when now it imported you
most for your credit to do it,) I must infer that all these four excellent
tricks of falsehood, that you mention in your margent (which are but
consequences of the precedent euictions made against you) do remain wholly, and
soly unto your self. And for trial I refer the reader to the proofs partly
before set down, and much more to such as are afterward to ensue.

THE CONCLUSION, and general Reckoning of all this Chapter, or Inquiry.. X.
AND having now passed over all these eight or nine Paragraphes of sundry
matters handled therein, The recapitulation of all the precedent Paragraphes.
you come at last ( M. Morton) to conclude very confidently, as though the
whole account had fallen out for you, and against me, and that I had remained
chargable with much false dealing against you, for these are your last words.
The view of all these, and other formerly mentioned wilful and transparent
falsities of P. R. together with some other like desperate calum^i^ations to
be poynted at in this Preamble, Preamb. page 29.
causes me justly to present him with his own Image, professing unfeignedly
that I never found any writer of any profession whatsoever, who has used such
shameful fraud in writing.

109. This is a grievous charge, as you see, of de^^erate dealing on my behalf;
especially for so much (...) he protests to speak it unfeignedly. A rash and
precipitous censure.
And it should ^equire in reason both of conscience and religion ma^e pregnant
proofs: for that otherwise the stayed ^eader (whether he be Protestant or
Catholic) ^ust needs take the accuser for a light and passio^ate person,
that would come to charge his aduer^^rie with so heinous crimes upon small or
light ^ounds. Let us look back then (if you please) upon ^^l these mine heads
or Paragraphes handled by us ^itherto; for that hereby will appear, whether
M. ^orton had just cause to give this rigorous censure against me, or not,
about matter of false dealing.

^10. In the first Paragraph about the sleeping soul^iers of Jerusalem there
was not so much as any one ^biection made against me for falsitie to my
remem^rance, The sleeping soldiers of Jerusalem.
only this note is in the margent, P. R. grossly ^^norant in Divinity, for
that I hold, that the device ^f the Jewish magistrates, in giving out that our
Saviors body was stolen away (though it were false and a ly, and so known to
themselves) yet that the ^nuention thereof in such a strayte, was neither
against common sense (as M. Morton avouches) nor yet so absurd, as they who
devised it might be esteemed senseless, but rather crafty and guilefull. And
finally in this Paragraph M. Morton professes to deal against my wit only,
and not against my truth, until he come to the last of all: so as here he
seems not to have discovered any such gross transparent falsities of mine^
Let us recall to memory the rest.

111. In the second Paragraph he impugneth my memory, and lays to my charge,
Error in counting objected.
that I erred in numbering the times, that the clause of reservation was
expressed both in Latin and English, which I have answered before. And if it
had been an error, yet an error had it been of memory, or lack of attention,
and not of malice, for that nothing could be gained thereby. And albeit M.
Morton in the heat of his exaggerations do call it a lie, and a multiplied lie:
yet if it had been so, it could not be more the^ a material lie, such a one as
might happen by mistaking without any fault of mind, or sin at all: for so
much as the speaker not having any interest thereby, cannot probably be imagined
to have forg^d it wittingly, I mean the error in counting, if it had been
proved, as it could not.

112. In the third Paragraph he has so much to do to defend his own
syllogism (which yet he cannot do) as little leisure he had or occasion to
object falsehood against me, 3. and 4.
and less means to prove it. He picked quarrels against my reformation of
his syllogism, as also against the division of equiuocatio^ in the fourth
Paragraph, but both were answered, as before you have heard, without any great
charges given ^f falsehood on either side, About his syllogism
the matter not offering occasion; so as neither here can the exaggeration of
desperate calumniations be found, which M. Morton in his heat obiecteth.

113. In the fifth Paragraph concerning the place of Esaias cap. 29. verse. 9.
cited for the posy of his book, 5. and 6.
all the charge of falsehood is against himself for alleging that out of Esaias,
The place of Esaias misalleadged.
which is not there: and his reply to me is against my skill in Greek and
Hebrew, which I professed not, though little might serve to convince him in
that behalf. And the same may be said of the sixth Paragraph entitled, Against
my Charity, for urging so much the difference of vere and vero, Vere for Vero.
out of the text of Alexander Carerius. And albeit that M. Morton in the title
of this Paragraph do name a triumphant falsehood to be proved against me: yet
after when he comes to the proof, he has nothing else to say, but that I did
^harge him wrongfullie for using vere for vero, for ^o much as he found it in a
later editio^ fo Carerius in Cullen print: which suppose it may be true, yet is
it nothing to me that reproved him out of the first and ^riginall Italian
edition. So as here also, he and not (...) was charged with falsehood,

^14. The seventh Paragraph also has a charge ^f falsehood against him, and
not me, for saying that ^olman does pronounce sentence, About Dolman.
that whosoever shall ^^nsent to the succession of a Protestant Prince, is a
most grievous ^^d damnable sinner, which Dolman says not: for then he should
hold it also to be a damnable sin in a pro^^stant to admit a Protestant
Prince; for that the lord ( whosoever) comprehends all sorts of men: ^ut
Dolmans saying is, that it is sinnne for any man to pre^^re one whom in
conscience he thinks to be contrary in re^^gion to the truth, as now you
have heard: and M. Mort. ^ath not been able to clear himself of the charge.

^15. As much less of the other charge about allea^ing the Chronographer Otto
Frisingensis against his ^wne meaning in the eight Paragraph, About
Frisingensis.
where the Reader has seen him so entangled, while he strug^eth to rid
himself of open false dealing, as he makes his matter far worse: but against
me he has ^o^ one thing of moment objected in that kind. and the very same
may I say of the two other last ^aragraphes. 9. and 10.


^16. All which being so, I would gladly see now in very real truth (all
passion set aside) upon what ground M. Morton can infer this heinous
accusation, A real demand to M. Morton.
of so many willful and transparent falsities, desperate calumniations,
shameful fraud, and this more frequent then in any writer, that ever he read
of what profession soever, and that he professes unfeignedly to have found this
to be true: I would gladly know (I say) upon what grounds he makes this so
solemn protestation: For except the examples, which he can allege be
exorbitant, he wounds greatly not only his conscience, but his credit also
with all good men, in running into such superlatiue exces^es of false and
contumelious speech.

117. And for that you protest hear so sollemnely ( M. Morton) and vn^ainedly,
that you never ^ound ^^ie writer of any pro^ession whatsoever, who has used
such shameful fraud, as I have done: you force me besides this ci^^e and
positive defense of my self, to go yet further, and to compare my behavior
in this behalf with some principal men of your profession, The comparison with
some of the Protestant Religion for truth in writing.
as namely with M. Jewel, who, was he not of your prof^ssion? and have you not
read him? if you have, and have been so diligent in noting him, as you would
seem to have been in my book, and of what is observed against him by his
adversaries, as you might have been, then may you remember that M. Doctor
Harding in his first Reioynder to M. Jewels reply has these words to the
reader: D. Hard. in his preface of the Reioynder.
The number of untruths uttered on M. Jewels part, noted and confuted by M.
Doctor Sanders, by the author of Return of Untruths, and by my self
amounts to a thousand and odd, and yet of his 26. articles only 5. have
passed our examination.

118. M. Horn also, was he not of your profession? and have not you found in
D. Stapletons Counterblast 690. untruths, Mitigat. cap. 12. n. 43.
as in my book also I noted unto you? M. Fox in like manner, was he not of your
profession? whom I have showed in the foresaid Chapter of my book to have
innumerable lies unanswerable, and above 120. within the compass only of 3.
leaves: whereof if you were now able to answer but ten for clearing of his
credit after his death, I would say you were a man of great valor. I did set
you down also in the last Chapter of my book of Mitigation many other clear
examples of a ^illful lying spirit in diverse of your profession, and ^^ose so
plain, as noe probable ex^use can be had, M. Morto^ much pressed.
^hy had you not answered them now, as in reason ^ou were bound, or had proved
the like against me before you had avouched so resolutely, that I had ^eeded
all other writers of what profession soever in shameful ^^ud in answering? Or
is your profession to speak, ^^u care not what? Do you respect what you
vt^^^? Or do you not think that other m^n will c^n^^^^r what you speak, and
upon what grounds?

^^9. I have heard of some men to be of such a ^^^ilitie in uttering untruths,
that albeit they did ^^^tainely know, that within few days or hours
^^^erwards their hearers would come to know, that ^^ey speak falsely: yet to
gain that little time, ^^ey would lie so confidently, as if they had been
^^re, that the truth would never come to light. and so it seems to fare with
you: A comparison of a wilful liar.
for that we ^^ing to come within few leaves after in this book (...) examine
what you are able to say against me, ^r matter of untruth, and I against you
(which s (...) principal subject of this book) it will quick^^ be manifest,
how clear I am from any just im^^tation of wilful falsitie, and how guilty
you ^^d yours are: and yet wou^d you nee^es discredit ^our self with the
judicious Reader in this place (...) impawning not only your estimation, but
also ^our conscience, that you never found any so faulty, for lying and
shameful fraud, as my self. But I appeal to the tri^ll, that has allreadie
been made in part, and shall be more fully afterward in the ensuing Chapters,
where I suppose that you will so be laid open before your own face and others,
and my self so cleared, as, if I be not deceived, you will be ashamed of this
your ouerlashing exaggeration.

THE SECOND CHAPTER ANSWERING TO M. MORTONS SECOND INQVIRY, WHETHER P. R. may
be judged a co^petent Advocate in this cause, which he has assumed: and of
some other points belonging thereunto, especially touching the title, and
argument of the Book of Mitigation.
PREFACE.
WHEREAS M. Morton in th beginning of this his Preamble has reduced the whole
subject thereof to three heads, which he calls Inquiryes; the first, What
sufficie^cy there is in P. R? the second, Whether he may be thought to be a
sufficient Proctor in this case or no? the third, Whether he has suffici^ncy
to perform his task? all impertinent and idle matters as you see. And as the
distribution is very vncleere and confused, every member treating of
sufficiency; so is the prosecution thereof much more deforme, for that the first
Inquiry having had thirty pages allowed unto it, the second has but three or
four, and handles no matter at all of any moment, but only a certain feigned
ridiculous conference, or colloquy devised by M. Morton to be held upon a stage
by his two adversaries, the Moderate Answerer, and the Mitigator, Prea^. page 30
decyphering (says he) the disposition of both my adversaries, by way of a
dialogue, bringing them upon the stage.

2. But Sir, is this agreeing to a grave Divine, to take upon him the part of a
stage player, and to answer your Adversaries with scornful fictions instead
of sound arguments? Let us here some few passages of your play, if it like
you. Thus begins the Moderate answerer to fall out with P. R. You have been
altogether presumptuous (says he) to take upon you this Answer, T. M. fo^^
Interlude.
because residing out of England, you cannot be rightly experienced etc. (
P.R.) I have not been arrogant, but thou have been rash, Mitig. pref. n. 10.
and precipitant, for if thou by thy former answ^re might have been thought
sufficient for a Reply, what needed such posting to me beyond the seas etc? (
M.A.) Have patience I pray you, I was enforced to take exceptions to all
Authors out of England. (P. R.) Thou have done well etc. (M.A.) I think Sir,
Scratches threatened by M. Morton.
you are troubled with a disease of some of our Catholic lawyers, of whom you
have said, they itch to be doing in answering M. Attorney, this was also my
disease, but I after sound a scratch, and so may you.

3. Thus goes that Colloquy: and can any thing be set down more in^ulsely in
so grave a matter, as we have in hand? And as for itching and scrathing I have
spoken somewhat before. No man that is of any zeal toward truth, when he
sees most absurd and gross untruths vtterd, can choose but to have that holy
itch in their fingers, to refute or discover the same, for it is an adu^se of
the holy Ghost himself; Prou. 26.5.
Answer a ^oole according to his folly, least to him self he may se^me to be
wise. And this has been done both against M. Attorney, and your self; and
you like a bad Chaplain, and wo^se Champion, have not defended him at all, but
left him in the plain field: only now you seem to threaten scratches, which
commonly amongst bad women is the end of scoulding: but your nails I suppose
are so pared, and will be before this account be ended, as they will draw
little blood, or hurt any but your self.

4. And so not meaning to loose any more time in this vain Interlude of yours,
wherein your self would seem to play the Vice, spending your whole second
Inquiry in this babble (^or no other matter of moment do you touch:) I for
covering your nakedness, or rather idleness heerin, have thought good to do you
this pleasure, as to handle some other points contained under your third
Inquiry, appertayning unto the title, and contents of my book of Mitigation,
impugned by you, to the end, that the second Inquiry of yours might not seem
to too ridiculous, and contemptible to the Reader.

WHAT M. MORT. ANSWERS in effect to the former part of my Treatise about
Rebellion, and against the Title thereof. I.
FOR that my book is entitled A Treatise tending to Mitigation toward
Catholic subjects in England, wherein is declared that it is not impossible
for sub^ectes of different religion (especially Catholics and Protestants)
to live together in dutiful obedience and subjection etc. M. Morton takes
upon ^im to play ingeniously, as he thinks, upon this word impossible, set
down in the title of my book: ^ut, as I think, ridiculously, saying, Preamb.
page 34.35.
that I promise no ^ore for my Clients the Catholics, but that it is not
impos^ible for them to live in obedience. But this is a mere ca^ill of a
seditious spirit, casting in iealosyes upon every occasion, to a malicious
turbule^t end: for that my title answers directly to the purport of his
former virulent books, that it was impossible in regard of the difference of
our doctrynes for Protestant and Catholic subjects to live quietly together
under his Majesty in England, The question whether it be possible or impossible
for Catholics and Protestants to live together in civil obedience.
by which he meant to ^et an unquenchable fire of discord between those two
sorts of people; not only in respect of their Religion, but also of their
civil life, and fidelity toward their Prince. My answer then being
co^tradictory to the assertion of M. Morton, conteyneth so much as was needful
to be said to his negative, he saying that it is impossible, and I, that it is
not impossible, which albeit, it contain but a generality, yet does it suppose
all necessary conditions that are to be required, for performance: As for
example, if a noble woman persuaded by some such unquiet spirit as M. Morton
seems to be, should resolve to part from her husband saying, it is impossible
for me and you to live together, the difference of our natures and conditions
being considered, and that her husband should answer again, it is not
impossible; does he not answer surficiently, and to the purpose? for he
understands the other circumstances included, if you bear your self like a
wife, have respect to both our honors, and the like. A compari^on.
Vain then and impertinent is the cauillation of M. Morton, that here is
nothing proved but a possibility: for so much as this possibility was denied by
him before, and is here again upon sundry causes and presumptions, as now we
shall see: and consequently my proving this union, and concurrence in temporal
obedience not to be impossible, overthrows directly his whole drift both in
his former two books, and this other Preamble, wherein he houldeth that it is
impossible. Let us here his reasons whereon his imaginations are founded.

His first reason of Impossibility
6. His first reason of Impossibility, and that confessed (as he says) by me,
is, for that Catholic subjects do believe, that in some cases there is power
left by God in the Church, and head thereof the Bishop of Rome, over Princes to
use not only spiritual Censures for restraint of exorbitant excesses, Preamb.
page 36.37.
but temporal remedies also, either directly or indirectly, Mitigat. prof.
page 24.
when urgent necessity of the Commonwealth should require, and no other
sweeter means could prevail. Whereof M. Morton will needs infer, that our
combynation in civil concord and obedience to our temporal Prince, can not
stand, no more (says he) then Jews and Iebuzites in one kingdom, Isaac and
Ismael in one house, Jacob and Esau in one ^ombe: and then a little after, that
our concord stands of no more possibility, then Pope, and no Pope, Kings
Supremacy, and not Supremacy, which opposites (says he) can never be
reconciled together. Whereto I answer, that in belief and doctrine they
cannot be reconciled, but in cyuill life and conversation, and practice of due
temporal obedience they may be no less (for any thing touching this point)
then if they were ^ll of one Religion, i^ such make-bates as these would ^ease
to set sedition: for that all Catholic subjects also of other Countries do
hold and acknowledge this doctrine, without any prejudice at all of their
fidelity, affection, or dutiful Allegiance toward their Sovereign Princes,
and liege Lords, though there be sundry cases, wherein their said Princes may be
ob^oxious to the execution of this doctrine, besides difference of Religion,
which one point of different Religion this Stickler does only urge in this our
ca^e, as most odious.

7. But i^ all those Christian Princes that have bin censured by the Church,
from Christ's time downward were laid together, whether Emperors Kings, or
others, the far greater part of them would be found to have been chastised, and
pursued, not so much for any difference of Religion, as for other causes and
crimes. Most Protestant Princes neu^r censured ^y the Sea Apostolic.
And if we look upon our times since Protestant Religion has been named in the
world, we shall find only two to have been proceeded against by the Church, and
many other never touched, as the King of Denmark, the Intruder of Suetia, the
Duke of Saxony, the Count Palatine of Rhene the Marquis of Brandeburge, and
diverse other Princes and States, as also those of Holland, and Zeland, and
lastly his Majesty that reigned above 30. years in Scotland, professing
Protestant Religion, and now some good number of years in England, without
that any Pope has gone about to use that authority against them which is here
made by M. Morton so perilous, and pernicious, as though it were impossib^e for
his Kingdom and Crown to be in safety while this doctrine is believed, or
extant in books, which being throughout all Christendom, and received by the
whole Catholic world, will be hard for the Minister to remove or extinguish,
and co^seque^tly he labors but in vain, or rather far worse then in vain,
endeavoring to entangle his Princes mind with a perpetual, restles, and
remediles iealosy, suspision, and solicitude, impossible ever to be cured as
himself strives to prove by those his impossibilityes, though they prove not
indeed the point it self, which he would persuade, that there is no mean of
civil quiet union in life, whilst this doctrine of the Popes authority is
believed of his subjects.

His 2. and 3. reasons.
8. His other two next reasons of impossibility (for he has four in all) are
so obscurely and intricately set down, as if he understand them himself, it is
much in my opinon: for as for me, I confess, I see not what inference can be
made out of them, though I have perused them over with much attention more then
twice: and the same I suppose, the common Reader will say, when he has in like
manner considered of them. For they concern only the excommunication of Q.
Elizabeth, and of King Henry the fourth of France; which Censure was
promulgated by two several Popes of this our age, and consequently the
doctrine is dangerous, says he. But I have showed now, that more then three
times so many Protestant Princes were tolerated by other Popes: how the^ do
these two examples infer so general a necessity of disobedience in all
Catholic subjects? yea and an impossibility of the contrary, that they can
be obedient?

^. His fourth and last reason of impossibility ^ wherein, says he, His 4.
reason.
may be observed a sport^ull, or rather ex^crable impostureshipp of P. R.)
consists in this, that whereas I do write in my Treatise of Mitigation,
Preamb. page 39.
that ^ut of Catholic doctrine concerning Papal au^hority in some cases (to
wit, when we talk what ^opes may absolutely do) M. Morton argues, Mitig. c. ^.
p. 95.
and will ^eedes infer, that such and such great dangers may ^^sue to Princes
thereby; I do answer him thus, that all this arriueth but to a may: so as the
questi^n being but de fu^uris contingentibus, of things continent and to come
(whereof the Philosopher says, ^^ere is no^ s^ie^ce) all remains in doubtful
vncer^^inty, but only the suspision, envy, and hatred, which ^^e Minister would
raise against us. But on the con^^ary, what the Protestants doctrine has
done, and ^oth at this day against lawful Princes in their ^^almes, their
armies do show etc. This in effect I ^id then, and upon this M. Morton enters
now into ^reat choler, saying not only that this my answer (...) an execrable
impostureshipp, as before you have heard, ^ut also he further breaks into
these patheticall ^ordes of ridiculous exaggeration: I cannot laugh, says ^e,
for wonder and horror, Pream. page 40.
to see any English man conceyt so basely (...) the wits and worth of his
Countrymen, as to imagine they could (...) del^ded with so senseless, so
shameless, so pernicious, so impi^^ a mitigation, as this is: to be persw^ded
therefore not to ^^bour ^or preuen^ing ensuing dangers, because they be
contin^ent, that is, such as may happen: what can be more senseles? M. Mort.
fooli^h insultation.
Do you see this man's heat? and do you mark how ^ocond and prachant he is,
when he gets a little matter, whereat he may make a show to speak somewhat
probably.

10. Here then he inueigeth and insulteth against me, as though I did hold,
that there were no providence or care to be had of future perils, that are
contingent, saying: Does not nature in beasts, reason in man, precept of God,
teach us the law of providence? even th^rfore to ^eeke to prevent ensuing
dangers, because they are contingent, and may be hera^ter? But M. Morton does
either wilfully mis^ake me, Will^ull mistaking.
or else I cannot conceive so well of his wit and worth; as he would have me, if
he understand me not. For I do not dispute against providence in general in
things that are contingent, and may fall out: for I know and con^esse, that
providence is a principal part of the high virtue of prudence surnamed
Cardinal, whereby man is likned to God, and surpasses all other terrene
cre^tures; yet say I therwithall, that it must go accompanied with judgment,
discretion, and moderation, which are other branches also of the same most
excellent virtue of prudence. For if they be wanting, they do make prudence
unprofitable: yea oftentimes pernicious, turning it into malignant suspicions,
mistrustfullnesse, frights, fears, iealosies, and other like effects, which do
work the greatest infelicitie, that in the world can be imagined. And of these
pestilent effects, The pestilent effects of flatterers.
are efficient causes, for the most part, in Princes, the cunning sycofancy,
subtility and malicious informations, suggestions and eggings of flatterers,
and makebates about the^, who for their own gain and private ends, care not
what seeds of iealosyes they sow in Princes heads against others, so they may
reap favors the^ selves, by seeming to be provident and ben^uolous: no^ do
they weigh, what eating and consuming cares, and sollicitudes they plant in the
minds of their Masters, so themselves may rest at ease, as one said well of
Dionysius the King of Sicily his spy, when after supper he had secretly filled
his Princes head with many false imaginations and iealosies, himself went
merrily to the tavern, and after liberal drinking he slept sou^dly all that
night, but his Lord going to bed could sleep nothing at all.

11. But to return to our present case, I do not deny, nor ever did, that
due providence and provision ought to be held for ^uture cases, as M. Morton
does here most untruly affirm, and thereon fraudul^ntly does found his whole
discourse: but my saying is, that it must have due limitts, least it become
hurtful, to wit, a vain and vexing iealosie. I say morcouer that every may
be, is not a m^st be, and to fill Princes ears with possibilities only of
dangers without some particular circumstances of probabilities or
credibilities, is an officious wounding them under pretense of fawning good
will. As for example if one should do nothing else, Suspitio^s without ground
only vexations.
but lay before his Majesty that now reigns, the disasters and perils, that
have happened to his nobl^ aunce^^ors in our Land, without ^urther particular
ground of likelihood against himself, but only that they have happened, and
therefore may happen again; it were an importune babbling. King William Ru^us
was slain in hunting; and his elder brother Richard, as also his nephew of the
same name, son of Robert Duke of Normandy had like disasterous ends in
hunting; therefore his Majesty must hunt no more. The children of King Henry the
first were drowned on the sea; therefore no more Princes children must pass the
seas upon no occasion. Some Kings of England were pursued by their own
Children, as King Henry the second, and ^dward the second, and the last also by
his wife the Queen; therefor his Majesty must stand in iealosie of his own
blood. King Stephen, King Richard the second, Edward the second, Henry the 6.
and some others are thought to have been betrayed by some of their own
Counselors, and King John was pursued by his own Barons, and Nobility;
therefore his Majesty at this day must rest in iealosie both of the one and
other sort of subjects: do not you see how far this lies open to injurious
calumniation and sedition?

12. But I will give an example more proper yet to the matter. If a seditious
fellow in England that had great authority with the people, and small affection
toward the Prince, should continually cry and beat into their heads, that they
look well about them, and stand upon their guard, for that their King may
abuse his Authority and become a Tyrant, The case of a turbulent fellow against
his King under color of providence
and may oppress them at his pleasure, when they think not of it, alleging
no other probabilities, and arguments of likelihood, but only that he may do
it, or that some such thing has fallen out before, as here M. Morton does,
against the Popes authority and Catholics that acknowledge the same: and when
any one should say to that turbulent fellow, pretending to be so studious of
the Commonwealth, and jealous of the Kings proceedings, that he urges only a
may be, and that there is no great likelihood of any will be, or that such
events will follow as he threatens, and draws into suspicion, he should fall
into choler, and rage as M. Morton does, saying: that he cannot laugh for
wonder and horror to see any Englishman conceyte so basely of the wits, and
worth of his count^eymen, as to imagine that they can be deluded with so
senseles, so shameless, so perniciou^, so impious a Mi^iga^ion as this is, not
to prevent ensuing dangers etc. And yet further, that this is a stupi^ying
receipt, casting the state and people into a slumber of not regarding ensuing
dangers etc.

13. This exclamation I say of this troublesome fellow that would put in
iealosie the people and Commonwealth against their King or Monarch only upon a
may be, or possibility, were it not justly to be reprehended? Were not the
party to be cast out as a tumultuous makebate? But he will say pe^hapes, that
there is more then may be in this our case: there want not probabilities, and
nearer arguments of intended troubles. These then if you please let us examine
briefly, and see of what weight or worth they are.

14. And truly in this point I see not what probabilities there may be in
reason to persuade his Majesty, that his Catholic subjects would not live
quietly and confidently under him, Reasons why greatest dangers are not
imminent by Catholics.
if they might ^e used as subjects, and have that Princely and Fa^herly
protection from him, which both laws do ^llow to freeborne subjects, and they
may hope and ^xpect from his benignity, where no personal or ^ctuall delict
shall have made the^ unworthy thereof. There are now no quarrels or differences
of titles, no ^ed Rose or white, no Lancaster or York within the ^and to draw
men into parts or factions, or passionate courses: his Majesty has united
both Realms ^ogeather; is the son and heir of the most dearest Princess
unto English Catholics, that ever li^ed in many ages; has goodly issue of
his own, which our Lord bless; is settled in his Crown, ioy^ed in friendship
and league with all Princes in Chri^tendome round about him, both of the one,
and ^he other Religion, has been hitherto beloved and highly esteemed for
many years, Motives of special love toward his Majesty i^ Catholics.
though a Protestant Prince, even by the very spiritual Head himself of
Catholic Religion; what cause then, what reason, what motive, what hope, what
probability may English Catholics have to seek, or attempt alte^ations in
State, if any tolerable condition of Christian subjects may be permitted unto
them?

15. I will not add the experience of so many ages throughout Christendom,
and of ours that is present, nor the comparison, or antithesis between the
doctrine and practice of Catholic and Protestant subjects in this behalf,
which I have handled more largely in my former treatise tending to Mitigation,
and well known, and experienced also by his Majesty in sundry points and
occasions; only I must say, that M. Morton here has dealt very partially, in
that he taking upon him to lay before his Majesty's eyes, and those of the
State, so many dangers imminent from Catholics as he pretends, both in
respect of their doctrine, multitude, auersion of minds, and other like
causes, he leaves out the other opposite part of the Puritanes, that have
far worse doctrine without comparison in this behalf, as I showed out of
their own books, and he should have yealded, or answered the same (if he had
dealt indifferently:) they are more also in number, g^eater in ability, in
respect of their offices which they bear in the Commonwealth, and of their
combination with those of Scotland, Holland and other places nearest at hand;
Why the Puritans (...) is not considered.
their arms more prompt and ready, their wealth better known, their practices
more dangerous, and their auersion more impati^nt: and yet I say not this to
accuse them of evil intent, but only that they have as great ( a may) and
greater, then Catholics, which M. Morton ought to have seen and noted, if he
would have been the common watchman and explorator. But his malice was to the
Catholics, and so upon them he lays all: but yet with so silly a discourse
as shows rather will then skill to hurt them, crying out as you have heard,
and going about to prove that imminent dangers in law of providence are not to
be neglected, which thesis as it is not denied by us, and very poorly proved
by him, so for the hipothesis, that such dangers are imminent by Catholics to
the State, no one argument of moment is alleged at all.

The Reckoning of this Paragraph.
16. So as, if we will now make up briefly the Reckoning of this Paragraph, we
shall find by due account, that M. Morton of all those things that I wrote in
my book about the matter of Rebelli^n, clearing the Ca^holickes both in
doctrine and practice for diverse Chapters together, and showing the
Protestants to exceed them far, to the worse, in both points, he has thought
good to handle no one point at all (as reason would that he should have done)
in this his last Reply, but only in general that which you heard of certain
impossibil^yes for Catholic and Protestant subjects to live in union and
common due obedience to his Majesty: of which impossibilities the fourth and
chiefest is, His fifth devised reason of impossibility.
that which you have heard discussed of may be, and the fifth and last is, for
that we hold it lawful to equivocate, or not to answer directly before an
incompetent Judge, that injuriously inquireth; and that we hold the lay
Magistrates of England incompete^t Judges to examine Priests: which may be as
good an argument to prove that lay men, and Priests cannot live together in
Spain, Italy, and other Catholic Countries, for that there also the said lay
men are incompetent Judges in Clergy men's causes, and so are Clergy men
themselves if they have not lawful jurisdiction, or proceed not lawfully. So
as this is the most trifling Impossibility that possibly can be devised.

17. To conclude then, The proper state of the question between M. Mort. and me.
the Case is thus: M. Morton and I would gladly each one of us persuade his
excellent Majesty in this point of confidence or diffidence toward his
Catholic subjects: I for confidence do allege, that albeit such due
providence and circumspection be to be used both toward the^ and others, as
all dangers may sufficiently be prevented: yet that so great, and remarkable a
multitude of his natural borne subjects as they are spread and dispersed, not
only throughout the bulk and body of the whole people, but also by one vein
or other extending it self to most of the Nobility and Gentry in like sort,
should not for cause of their conscience be put to extremity of despair; but
held at least in some reasonable and moderate terms of civil equity, though
otherwise disfauoured for their Religion. M. Morton seems to run the quite
contrary course, with his opposite desires and reasons, to have all diffidence
increased, impossibilities urged, that they cannot live together; despaires
confirmed of any tolerable condition whatsoever, except they force and change
their judgment and belief in religion, with never so much repugnance of their
conscience; detesteth any mitigation, or moderate interpretation of matters;
that all must go by way of extremity.

18. And now which of these two courses do ru^ne to a more sure, soft, and
milder end, the prudent Reader will easily conceive. My considerations are the
union of hearts within the Land^ Considerations to benignity.
the avoiding of extremities, the strength of our Country at home, the honor
and estimation abroad, the quietness of his Majesty's mind, the universal
affection of all his people though different in religion, the avoiding of the
odious name of persecution, example of foraine Protestant Princes that use it
not, the continuance of high estimation that foreign Catholic Princes have
had hitherto of the benignity, prudence, and bounty of his Majesty's nature,
the preventing of clamors, writing of books, and odious speeches throughout
all Courts, Countries, Cities, Provinces, and Realms that will most
certainly ensue upon the contrary course of violent rigor and cruelty,
engendring every where hatred, detestation, and malediction abroad, suspicions,
execrations, and auersions at home.

19. These are my considerations: and whether my adversary M. Morton have
better for his contrary persuasion I know not: we shall expect the coming
forth of the body of his book, for this his Preamble is but the head thereof,
though a great head, being of above three score leaves in 4. and of little wit,
as partly has appeared by that which already has been perused, and will do
much more by that which is to ensue.

WHAT M. MORTON answers about the later part of my Treatise concerning
Equivocation.. II.
IN the precedent Paragraph you have heard what M. Morton had to reply about
the first main point of Rebellion: now comes he to the second of
Equivocation, writing some 3 petty leaves thereof, but with so great an
ostentation and vaunt at his first entrance, as if he would do great matters
indeed, for thus intitleth he his Paragraph. Preamb. page 43.. 12.
That P.R. has flatly overthrown his whole defense of mental Equivocation,
which is made so evident, as that no wit of man can possibly excuse him. A fond
vaunting entrance to the impugning of Equivocation.
This, you see, is confidently spoken, and very magnificently of himself and
his wit, that he has made things so plain and evident against my Treatise,
as no wit of man has possibility either to defend or excuse me. Here then the
Reader will take some examen of wits: for albeit I desire not to render words
for words, yet must I needs foretell, that he will find as great want of wit
and discretion in this brag, and in the medium here chosen to overthrow my
whole Treatise, as ever, perhaps, he found in any man prefessing wit, and
learning.

21. And yet the good man goes forward in those his oftentations, stir^ing up
attention to the view of his own weakness and folly: for that having laid sorth
in few words my assertion concerning lawful Equivocation, to wit, that it is
a speech partly uttered in words, and partly reserved in mind, but yet ever
true, and no lie, for that the speech agrees always with the mind of the
speaker, and is true in his sense etc. he begins his confutation thus: True
Equivocation.
How now would my Reader hear this noble Equiuocatour con^uted? Ibid. page 43.
By Fathers? Or by his own Doctors? or by sensible reasons? this will be no
hard matter to perform, as I hope (God willing) to avouch in due time. So he.
And this as you see is no otherwise then if a bare and broken debitour having
been long called upon to pay his debts, should step forth at length in a vaunt
before a multitude saying to his creditor: Come Sir, what sort of gold will you
be paid in? will you have it in Spanish Pistolets? Portugal Cruzadoes? French
Crowns? Zechines of Venice? Dallers of Germany, or English Angels? and his
creditor should answer him, The case of a bragging banque-rupt debitour.
Sir any kind of coin would content me, although it were but halfe-faced
groates, or single-pence, so I might have it. And that then the other should
reply as M. Morton does here: Well, I hope, God willing, to pay you in time;
and so leave him with less probability of payment then ever before. And were
this now substantial dealing for satisfaction of his creditours? And does not
M. Morton the very like, that asking here the reader, whether he will have
Fathers, Doctors, or reasons for proof against me, produces never a one, but
faith, that he hops to do it in time? And was it not now fit time to allege
some one or two at least, if had had such store as he vaunteth, and those of
such force and euidency, as no wit of man can control them? Surely it would
have delighted the Reader to have read one such example in this place for a
taste, though he had expected for the other the longer after. But now he must
needs suspect the art of Monte-banks in commending their wares so far beyond
their worth, and refusing to affoard any sight thereof.

22. But let us come to see what supply M. Morton deuiseth to make, Ibid page
43.
in lieu of those former pretermitted proofs of Fathers, Doctors, reasons etc.
Here (says he) is offered unto me a briefer course, more fit for a Prea^ble,
and for the triumph of truth more glorious, M. Mort. glorious triumph.
which is to see (as politic Achitophell hanged in his own halter, so) this
doctor of the art of lying, confounded by his own assertion. I desire every
child of truth to lend me attention. So he. And all this is by way of preface
before he come to his triumphant and glorious victory. And if he do nothing
afterward but shame himself, and show his own folly in mistaking the chief
point of the question, and not understanding wherein consists the principal
force of the controversy, will not all this vaunting prologue prove a halter
of Achitophell to hang himself? Achitophels halter.
And the styrring up of every child of truth to attention, make every man
witness of his own disgrace? Let us then join issue upon the matter it self.

23. The means that he takes here to overthrow, as he says, my whole Treatise
of Equivocation, is the example of the woman Saphyra in the Acts of the
Apostles, whom he will needs defend to have used Equivocation with S. Peter,
when she being demanded by him, Weather she sold her land for so much, Act. 5.
she answered yea; which being an unlawful answer, and punished by the holy
Ghost with death, he would inf^rre fondly thereof, that all Equiuocatio^ is
vnlaw^ull. But I think bent to set down my whole charge in that behalf as it
stands in my Treatise, and then shall we see how thereby M. Morto^ will
overthrow (as he says) my whole defense. Thus then I did write in my former
book.

The Charge given by P. R.
24. First to begin with his examples out of Scripture, I say, Mitig. page 458.
that he might better have said example in the singular number: for whereas we
of our part have alleged so many, and so great variety of examples in our
former discourse to the contrary, he (poor man) out of all the body of the
whole Bible has alleged but one, and that nothing to his purpose, as
presently shall appear. His example is out of the Acts of the Apo^tles, where
it is recounted how Ananias, and Saphyra his wife, having sold a certain
field of theirs, The fact of Ananias and Saphyra discus^ed.
and bringing a part of the price, and laying it at the feet of the Apostle,
as though it had been the whole price, were miraculously punished by S. Peter
for defrauding the Community, of that which they had promised, or would pretend
to give. An act (says Thomas Morton) proper to the infancy of the Church, Act.
5. Page 64.
to bring their substance, and tender it to the Apostles for the common good o^
Saints. By which words if he allow that fact, as a form of perfection in that
purity and integrity of the Christian Churches beginning; why then now is the
imitation thereof in religious men of our days impugned by the Protestants? And
if by the word Infancy he mean weakness or imperfect on in the sense of S.
Paul, saying; Cum essem paruulus etc. when I was a child or infant, I spoke as
a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I came to the
years of a man, I cast of those things that belonged to a child: If this (I
say) be Thomas Mortons meaning to note the act of imperfection, the ancient
Chrysostom. hom. 12. in Acta Apostoloru^. Hier. Ep. 8. ad Demet. August. Sermon. 27.
de verbis Apost. Fulgent. ep^de debito coni^gali c. 8. Gregor. l. 1. ep. 33. ad
Vena^t. Oecumen.

Arator, Rabanus, Lyra, and alij in hu^c locum.


Fathers do stand wholly against him, and do allow it rather for great
perfection, and that it was a vow of voluntary poverty to live in common, which
those first Christians had made by counsel of the Apostles, and consequently
do interpret those words ( Nonne manens ^ibi manebat etc. did it not remain
in your power to give it, or ^ot to give it?) to have been meant by S. Peter
before their vow: which if it be true, and that S. Peter did ^iue so dreadful a
sentence upon the first vow-brea^ers of voluntary poverty, even for detayning
som^hat of their own, how much may Thomas Morton, and some friends of his,
fear the like sentence, for ^eaching it to be lawful to take away that from a
Religious co^munity which themselves never gave.

^5. But let us come to the application of this ex^mple against Equivocation,
which he has cho^en to use principally about the woman's speech. The ^oman is
asked (says he) sold you the land for so much? Her ^nswere is^ Page 65.
yea, for so much, meaning but one half, and concea^ing the other, in which
dissimulation it is impossible (says M. Morton) but that your reserved clause
must have come into her mind, The woman's examination by S. Peter.
to think, but so much to give in common, or to ^^gni^ie unto you. Thus he
teaches that poor woman ^o Equivocate, after his manner of Equiuocatio^, that
^s to say, to lie: for now I suppose he has learned ^y that which has been
setdowne in our precedent Chapter, that so speak an untruth, or to conceal a
truth, or to use any Equivocation when we are justly demanded by our lawful
Superior, and when no injury, or violence is used unto us, is a greiuous
mortal sin in our Catholic doctrine, and consequently she being lawfully
d^maunded by S. Peter in a lawful cause touching her own vow and promise, no
clause of reservation could save her speech from lying, as our Minister does
foolishly imagine.

26 Wherefore S. Peter as most lawful Judge, and governor of the Universal
Church under Christ, and the holy ghost in him, did worthily punish that
dissimulation, and lying both in her and her hu^ba^d for example of others in
that beginning, and for manifesting the great and special assistance of the
holy ghost that assisted him, and should be in his successors to the worlds
end, in that their government, to the terror of wicked men that should impugn
it, or otherwise deserve by their demerits to be punished by the same. And thus
much of his examples out of Scriptures, which is but one as you see, and that
much against himself and his own cause, if I be not deceived, for that it
proves all Equivocation is not law^ull, as he will needs suppose us to hold.

27. This was my discourse then. Now let us s^e how M. Morton does overthrow my
whole Treatise of Equivocation out of this speech of mine, and that with such
euidency, as no wit of man can possibly excuse me. He begins his impugnation
thus: The supposed Equivocation of the woman Saphyra (says he) was this,
Preamb. page 44. and 45.
I have sold it but for so much, reserving in her mind ( for ought that you
shall know,) which is agreeable to their own example of Equivocation I am no
Priest (meaning to tell it you.) This later P. R. has defended throughout his
whole book: and now of the other he is enforced by the word of truth to say,
that it is a lie, and that no clause of reservation could save it from a lie:
from whence it shall inuincibly follow, Fo^d bragging.
that Priests Equivocation is a Satanicall lie, these two speeches being so
semblable in themselves, as if he should say they differ, then must the
difference be either in respect of the spea^ers, or in respect of the hearers.
This is his discourse ^alking much of the word of truth, and the child of
truth, and continuing still to promise what he will do, and what he will prove:
but as yet he proves nothing. He says it will follow inuincibly, that to
answer I ^m no Priest to an incompetent Judge (if I be a Priest) ^s a
Satanicall lie, for that such was the answer of ^aphyra unto S. Peter, I have
sold my possession for so much, ^ith this reservation of mind ( to tell you, or
to confer ^n common.) But first how does he prove that she had ^his meaning
of reservation in her mind? It is but ^. Mortons imagination, to ascribe it
unto her; for it ^ay more probably be thought that she had never any such
cogitation, to make her speech lawful by ^eseruation, but absolutely to lie.
Which is most con^orme to the text it self of holy Scripture, where it ^s said
by S. Peter to Ananias: Cur tentauit Satanas cor tu^m mentiri Spiritui Sancto?
Wherefore has Satan tempted thy heart to ly unto the Holy ghost? And again,
Thou have not lied to men, but to God. Act. 5.
Whereby it is evident that his and his wives intention was to lie, and to
defraud the co^munity of a part of their lands, and that they had no cogitation
at all of speaking a truth, and avoiding of lying by Equivocation, as the
Priest has, and so have all those that mean lawfully, and with a good
conscienc^, to cover a truth which they are not bound to utter, which properly
we call equivocation: so as whosoever has not this intention, as it is to be
supposed that Ananias and Saphyra had not, he does not equivocate, but lie.
Which being so, it is very great simplicity, to abstain from a worse word, for
M. Morton to found his whole discourse upon this matter, and especially so
vain and vaunting a discourse as this is, only upon his own supposall, that
the woman Saphyra had intention to equivocate: which if I deny, as justly I
may, all this glorious building falls to the ground. But yet not to cut him
of so short, and put him to a non plus upon the sudden, I am content to do
him this pleasure, as to suppose with him, that the poor woman might have some
such reservation in her mind, as M. Morton imagines, to wit, that as the
Priest says truly, I am no Priest (with obligation to tell it you:) so she
might mean, that I have sold it for no more (to acquaint you withal:) and
then I say, albeit we should admit this supposall, it is denied by us flatly,
that these two examples are alike, as now I have declared; the one being
unlawful the other not. And what invincible argument has M. Morton, think
you, now to prove that they are all one? And that of the Priest to be as
unlawful as the other of the woman? You shall hear.

28. If you say (quoth he) that they differ, then must the difference be either
in respect of the speakers, or of the hearers? The example of Saphyra makes
against him.
We answer, that of both; for in the behalf of the speaker, there was
obligation in Saphyra to answer the truth, and in the hearer lawful authority
to demand it, for that he was lawful Judge: but neither of these two things
are in the Priest that is unlawfully examined by the inco^petent Judge. For
that as the said Judge is no Judge, and consequently has no authority to
demand matters prejudicial to the party examined: so has the other no
obligation to answer directly to his intention or interrogatory. And what has
now M. Morton to reply to these so evident and important differences, that make
the one answer lawful, the other a lie?

29. Surely it is a pitiful thing to see how he is puzzled in this matter, and
would feign say somewhat, and can find nothing whereon he may subsist, or rest
himself. For first, he begins with the person of the woman, that is the
speaker, that did unlawfully equivocate unto S. Peter, comparing her to the
person of the Priest that lawfully says unto ^n incompetent Judge, I am no
Priest, and finds no ^reater difference between them, Faltering in the
principal point.
but first, that she (...) a woman, and he is a man, and then, that it is as
possible ^r a Priest to lie, as for a woman to tell truth. But he dissem^leth
the maine difference now mentioned, that she ^ad obligation to tell the truth
without equiuocatio^, ^ he not, which is the substantial difference indeed.
Here the^ is no plain dealing to falter so manifestly ^n the very principal
point that most imported.

^0. Secondly he passes to the person of the hea^er or Judge, and says, there
can be no difference ^etweene the two cases in that respect, whether ^hey be
competent or incompetent, Whether co^petency and inco^pete^cy of the Judge may
al^er the truth of the speech.
and this he pretends ^o prove out of my words: which point for that he will
needs have the whole substance of this contro^ersy to depend thereof, saying
further, Preamb. page 46.
that I cannot ^biect any difference in this behalf without gross and stupide
con^radiction to my self, throughout my whole Treatise, we shall severally
examine his arguments heerin.

M. Mortons first argument discussed, about a competent and incompetent Judge.
31. His first argument is taken from my words, where in my treatise of
Mitigation I do say thus: Preamb. p. 46.
That in mental reservation the speech agrees to the mind, and meaning of the
speaker, for that when I do say to an incompetent Judge, Mittig. c. 8. number. 54.
p. 344.
that I am no Priest, I do truly and really mean, that I am no Priest in the
sense that I speak it, which may be any that pleases me, or that I list to
frame to my self. So I. And hitherto M. Morton cyteth my own words, though
somewhat brokenly, but yet cutteth of wholly the other that immediately do ensue
and make all plain, to wit, ( seeing I have no obligation to respect any thing
what the demander speaks, or asks, for so much as he demands me against
law and equity). Well this is no plain dealing, as you see. But what argument
will M. Morton frame out of these my words? Mark (says he) The truth of
Equivocation is not suspended upon the understanding of the hearer, who may
conceive, or misconceaue the speech. so he. But what is this to the purpose? I
grant that the truth of any answer made unto a Judge depends not upon the
understanding, conceit, or capacity of the said Judge, but upon the meaning of
the speaker, which meaning notwithstanding is to be measured by the compete^cy,
or incompetency of the Judge. How the truth of a speaker may depend upon the
competency of the Judge that hears or demands.
For if the Judge be competent, then is the answerer bound to answer to his
intention, and to have that meaning in his answer which the Judge has in his
demand: but if he be not competent, then all this obligation cease, and the
speaker is free to have what meaning h^ list in his answer (so that in his own
sense it be true:) and this, for the reason now touched. So as here no
inference at all can be made by M. Morton that the difference of competency of
Judges in the cases of the woman and Priest does make no diversity in the truth
of their answers, and yet will he needs conclude with this consequence (having
said no more then I have touched) that for so much as I said in the Treatise of
Mitigation, as before you have heard, that no clause of reservation could save
the speech of Saphyra from a lie (for that it was to her lawful Judge, to
whom she was bound to answer directly to his intention) ergo, I do condemn^
my self and all other Equiuocatours for fantastical liars.

32. But I would ask him why? or by what consequence of reason this comes
about? He says for that there is no difference in effect between this speech
of Saphyra, I have sold it for no more, to tell it you, and of the Priest, I am
no Priest, to tell it you. I say that suppose Saphyra had that reservation
(which yet depends only of M. Mortons fiction,) yet that there is ^ great
maine difference between them, in that the one party was bound to tell what
she was demanded, the other was not bound; he replieth that I confess that the
truth of the answer depends not of the understanding (...) the hearer, but
of the meaning and intention of the speaker; which I also grant, but yet that
this meaning and intention of the Speaker must be governed and di^ected by the
lawfulnes and competencie of the ^earer or Judge to whom we speak, or by
whom we are demanded. For if he be lawful and compe^ent, then does he thereby
impose an obligation upon the speaker, to answer to his meaning and ^ntention,
otherwise not, which makes a great ^aine difference, and the cases far
unlike, if M. Morton had will to see it (for to want of understanding I will not
ascribe it) and sincerity to utter it. So as this his first argument proves
nothing but against himself. Let us see his second.

His second argument examined.
33. Secondly (says he) as we here find a woman ma^ing a lie to S. Peter a
competent Judge, Preamb. page 46.
so do we read that S. Peter made a lie unto a woman (an examiner inco^petent;)
so that the di^ference of the hearers does not alter the nature of ^he speech.
So he, and his meaning is (by the diffe^ence of hearers) that it imports not
whether the judge be competent or incompetent, for so he wri^eth within few
lines after. Preamb. p. 46.47.
Truth is truth (says he) though it be uttered to man or woman, whether to
Prince or people, to Simon Peter, or to Simon Magus, yea whether to Archangell
or to Satan, Judge competent or incompetent, it cannot free a lying speech
from the nature of a lie. And the reason hereof confessed by P. R. is, that the
essence and formality of a lie requires, Mitig. c. ^. number. 49.
that the speech disagree from the mind and understanding of the speaker. Thus
M. Morton.

34. And all this proves nothing at all to his purpose. How co^petency or
incompetency of the hearer causes truth or falsity of the speaker.
For albeit we grant that the essence of a lie consists principally and
immediately in this, that it does disagree from the mind and understanding of
the speaker: yet does the respect of competency in a Judge that demands, put
obligation, as now has been said, upon the speaker to have this or that mind
and meaning correspondent to his, that demands, which is not in a Judge
incompetent. And albeit these respects of competencie or incompetency may seem
but circumstances: D. Thom. 1.2. q. 18. art. 10. and q. 72. art. 9.
yet as in moral matters it often falls out, circumstances do alter the
nature and species of the virtue or vice it self, qui^ transeunt in
conditiones obiecti, as Scholemen do use to speak.

35. So here the self same answer, made to a competent or incompetent Judge
is made lawful or vnlaw^ul, true or false, by that circumsta^ce of his
competency, or incompetency, that lays or not lays the said obligation upon
the speaker, to speak directly to the Judges meaning. So as when M. Mort.
shufleth up so many things together, saying, that truth i^ truth, whether it
be uttered to man or woman, Prince or people, Symo^ Peter or Simon Magus,
Archangel or Satan, Judge compete^t or incompetent; he either understands not
the differences that be in these examples handled together, Crafty shufling.
or would not have his Reader to mark the same. For albeit the simple
difference of persons themselves to whom we speak alters not the truth or
falsity of our speech: yet some respect or relation in those persons ( but
especially of being a lawful or unlawful Judge) may, and does alter the same
wholly, making the one speech truth, and the other falsity.

36. And thus much for answering the force of M. Mortons second argument which
in effect is nothing at all. For that albeit all diversity of persons, to whom
we speak, does not alter the truth or falsity of the speech: yet some may,
when the hearer has authority to oblige in conscience the speaker to answer
directly to his meaning, and to utter truth, as has ^yn declared. And with
this we might end, but that we may not let pass a contradiction or two, which
offer themselves in this his speech. For in the ^eginning of this argument as
you have heard he writes thus: As we here find a woman making a lie to S.
^eter a competent Judge: so we read, that S. Peter made a lie ^o a woman an
examiner incompetent. And for this he ci^eth Matthew. 26. and yet in his former
book of Full sa^isfaction, Full satisfact. part. 3. chap. 15.
he wrote thus, if you remember; that the maid ^o whom S. Peter swore was
co^petent enough to hear a true oath, ^f he had bin as ready to swear truly.
The contradiction of M. Morton about the maid that examined S. Peter.
So as there he made ^er competent, and here incompetent: which of them he
will stand unto now, I know not, although ^t seems that he is more bound to
stand to the first, that she was S. Peter's co^petent Judge, or examiner; for
that he brings it for a proof of his mayor propo^itio^, in that famous
syllogism of six termini, which ^hen he made, and now cannot, nor so much as
at^empteth to defend, as before you have seen, in which the mayor was this:
Supra cap. 1.
The competency of God, by who^ we swear, makes every one competent Judges
and hearers, to ^home we swear. Whereunto if we would adioine ^his minor, but
S. Peter swear by God unto this maid, the conclusion will follow in good
form: ergo she was a competent Judge, and consequently also a competent
examiner, for that every competent Judge has likewise lawful authority to
examine. So that you see that M. Morton there did not only affirm it, but
prove it also by syllogism, Full satisfact. page 86.
that she was S. Peter's lawful Judge: nay he held it for so certain, that he
did set it down for a proof of his said mayor proposition thus: The mayor
(says he) is true, for that our Savior in auouching truth, held Pilate for a
competent Judge, although he did not i^ridice, but falsely proceed. S. Paul in
his cause appealed to Cesars Tribunal seat, who was a Pagan. Jacob did
covenant ^ith Laban an idolater. And the maid to whom S. Peter swore, was
co^petent enough to hear a true oath, if he had been as ready to swear
truly. In which words you see, that he affirms the maid to have been
competent, by that S. Peter did swear by God unto her, and thereby pretends
to prove his mayor proposition, that the competency of God, by whom we swear,
makes every one co^petent Judge, to whom we swear: And yet within two lines
after, he says again: but she was no lawful examiner, and Pilate was a
partial Judge: so that, denying her to be lawful examiner, and yet to be
competent Judge, is a plain contradiction in it self. The maids case very
troublesome to M. Morton.
For that (as has been said) whosoever is competent Judge, has power also
thereby to examine: for that otherwise he could not judge of the truth, whereof
he has no^ authority to examine: so as the maids case seems very
troublesome to M. Morton, no less then she was importune to S. Peter. But let
us see the residue of the examples, how they make to M. Mortons purpose, for
proof of his mayor.

37 The point which they should prove, is this: that, whosoever swears to
another by God, does thereby make him or her, to whom he swears, his lawful
and competent Judge. The fondness of which assertion, though we have
sufficiently laid open before in our Treatise of Mitigation by sundry reasons
and examples; Mitig. cap. 11. nu^. 53. page 476.
yet shall we here again take the pains to examine severally in a word or
two, his other three examples as we have done now that of the maid. His first
is of Pilate: Our Savior (says he) in auouching truth, held Pilate for a
competent Judge. But now what of this? Did our Savior make Pilate his
competent Judge, by swearing to him by God? How can he prove it? Or who would
suppose or infer this but M. Morton? His second example is: S. Paul in his
cause appealed to Cesars Tribunal seat. But this is less to the purpose then
the Jacobs covenant with Laban, which was an idolater; and is most of Three
instances examined.
and little less indeed then ridiculous: for that neither Jacobs covenant with
Laban, nor Labans with Jacob (for the covenant was reciprocal) did make either
Laban to be competent Judge to Jacob, nor Jacob to Laban; Genesis 35.22.
but both of them remained ^as before, though bound in faith and promise the
one to the other for perfourmance of that mutual friendship, which they had
promised, but yet without any superiority of being Judges the one to the other,
as every man in common sense does see: and consequently M. Mortons mayor
proposition ( that every man is made our Iudge^ to whom we swear) is not
proved to be true by any of these four instances, nor by the^ alltogeather.
Let us pass then to his third.

His third Argument confuted.
38. Thirdly, says he, in mental Equiuocatio^ P. R. says, that the clause of
reseruaton mixed with the outward speech makes but one proposition which is as
true in the mind of the speaker, Preamb. page 47.
as if it were wholly delivered in the outward speech. As for example: I am no
Priest, mixed with this clause conceived in mind, to tell it you; is as true in
the Judgment of P. R. as if it had been without reservation fully expressed
with the mouth, saying: I am noe Priest to tell it you: Now then, say P. R.
(for I mean to fetter you in your own shackles) the woman when she said to S.
Peter; I have sold it but for so much, if she had reserved in her mind this
clause, to give it to you, either had it been by virtue of reservation, ^
truth, or else (notwithstanding that reservation) it had been a lie. If the
clause of reservation might have made it a truth, then has not P. R. said
truth in concluding, that no clause of reservation could save it from a lie: If
contrariewise the trick of reservation could not save it from a lie, then does
not the reserved clause to tell it you, being mixed with the outward speech, I
am no Priest, make up one true proposition, and consequently it must be
concluded of the Preistly Equivocation, as is here by P. R. confessed of the
woman's, vz. that noe clause of reservation can save their speech from a lie.
For if she had said unto S. Peter in plain words: I ^aue sold it but for so
much, ^^ give it in common, or such like, this every one knows had been a
true speech: yet she saying, I sold it for s^ much, with mental reservation,
reserving in her mind, to give it in common, or to tell it unto you, was,
notwithstanding this reservation, even by the judgment of P. R. a flat lie.

39. This is his last and greatest argument, whereof, as presently you shall
hear, he vaunteth exceedingly, conquering me first in his margent, writing
there: An evident conviction of P. R. And then again: A plain demonstration,
to say no thing of the fetters and shackells in the text it self. The fetters
and shackells that M. Morton uses.
And I have thought best to lay forth his whole discourse, as it lies
together in his book, that hereby you may see, with what manner of substance
he fills up paper, and what sort of shackells he has to fetter men withal,
which are as strong, as the netts of cobwebbes: for that in this place his
whole discourse and argument is founded upon a manifest false ground and
principle, to wit upon the me^re mistaking, or fond supposition, that the two
answers of the Priest and the woman, viz. I am no Priest with obligation to
tell it unto ^ou, and, I sold it for no more, with obligation to give unto
you, are of equal falsity, which still we deny, and he cannot prove: and yet
himself does often here repeat, that I do hold the answer of the Priest to
be true, and hers to be false, for that his was made to an in^ompetent Judge,
and hers to a competent, so as she was bound to have answered directly to S.
Peter's meaning: Childish mistaking or false supposing
which being so, what needed all this long obscure speech of M. Morton, which
might have been ^poken in 4. lines? For I grant that the answers of ^he Priest
and the woman do make each of them in ^hemselues, being mixed with their
reservation, a whole perfect proposition, as if they had been vt^ered without
reservation.

40. It is evident also, that the woman's proposition, that she had sold her
land for no more, with obligation to give it to S. Peter, or to be spent in
common (this being the true effect, and substance of her answer) was a lie,
whether it had been uttered wholly together in plain words, or part in
speech, and part in mental reservation. And M. Morton does childishly suppose
and affirm, that every one knows that it had been a true speech. For albeit
the words of S. Peter in the text of the Acts of the Apostles be, Tell me,
woman, if you sold the ^eild for so much? and her answer was, Act. 5.
Yea for so much: yet is it evident by the drift and circumstance of the place,
that S. Pe^^r^ meaning was, whether they sold it for so much, and no more, and
therefore if she did Equivocate as M. Morton will have her, her secret meaning
must needs be, that she sold it for no more, so as she was bound to utter it,
or give it unto him, or bring it to the common purse. All which was false, and
a lie, in respect both of ^er vow to bring the whole to the common purse, and
for that S. Peter was her lawful, and competent Judge, and she obliged thereby
to tell him the truth.

41. Now then we see after so many vaunts, and braggs, what M. Morton has
been able to effect by these his arguments: It shall not be perhaps amiss to
add his confident conclusion wherein he does recapitulate as it were the sum
of all, comparing these two answers of the Priest and the woman together. Let
us (says he) for conclusion, Preamb. page 48.
parallele both these examples which are very near a kin. For if we do
compare speaker with speaker, that is, the woman and a Priest, both will be
thought to be Votaryes. If outward speech with outward speech, that is, I have
sold it but for so much, and I am no Priest, both are negatiues. If reservation
with reseruatio^, as ( to tell it unto you) or [ to give unto you] both are
mental. If the form with form, both equally ananswerable to the mind of the
speaker. If finally, end with end, both are to deceive the hearer. Wherefore P.
R. granting, that no clause of reservation could save her specah from a lie,
must by irrepugnable consequence be forced to confess, that his [ I am no
Priest] uttered by a Priest, to whomsoever it be spoken, notwithstanding any
mental reservation of [ to tell it unto you] is a Satanicall and damnable lie.

42. The words of Satanicall and damnable are very frequent with M. Morton, as
you see. God send him salvation, and us all freedom from Satan, and
Sathanicall spirits; which in no one thing are more discryed then by the
facility of wilful lying: but to the matter. His collection in his conclusion
is like the making of a latin without the principal Verb. The principal verb
wanting in M. Mortons latin.
For whereas he gathers in the said conclusion, sundry points of likeness,
and neernes of kin (as he calls them) to make the speeches of the Priest
and the woman to seem semblable; he pretermitteth of purpose the chief and
essential difference indeed of competent, and incompetent Judge, and
obligation ^rising thero^, wherein we principally do insist, for their
difference and diversity: and yet he says, as you have heard, that I granting,
that no clause of reservation ^ould save the woman's speech from a lie, must by
irr^pugna^le consequence be forced to grant also the same of the Prie^^s
answer. But whereon I pray you is this ir^epugnable consequence grounded? Have
you seen any demonstration alleged by him for it, besides his ^nly
imagination, and fond ^upposition? And yet, ^s though he had done wonders
indeed, he in^ul^eth exceedingly in the very last lines of this Para^raph,
which are these.

^3. And where is now ( says he) P. R. his boast of ^criptures, Fathers,
Reasons? Where is his Chal^enge of Canonists and School-deuines? Where is ^^s
apeale unto both our Universities? Nay, where (...) this man P. R. himself,
the new select Advocate ^or this cause? may he not say hereafter, I was a^amed,
and therefore I hid my self? So naked does his ^eformity appear. He has
said, That his Aduer^ary T. M. is like one, who when the game is des^erate,
well notwithstanding play it out, and see the ^^st man borne. Here he himself
has made such a ^lot, as cannot but be the infallible loss of his ^hole game,
who being pressed with this example ^ut of Scripture, Act. 5.
is driven to such a vertigo and giddi^esse, that even when he would defend his
art of Equiuocating from a lie, Extraordinary vaunting.
is by consequence from Gods word, forced to confess an outward speech, which
no clause of reservation could save from a lie, whereby his own Magi (I doubt
not) will be brought to acknowledge, that digitus Dei hic est, this is the power
of Gods truth. And thus being contented, for this present, to have my whole
cause in both questions, of Equivocation and Rebellion so iustifyable, that my
Adversary his own confessions may free me from his imputation of sla^der; I
do with better alacrity proceed unto his next challenge. Thu^ goes this
solemn vaunt.

44. And truly he has great cause to proceed with alacrity indeed, if with so
little labor and less learning ^e can make himself so victorious, in both the
main questions of Rebellion and Equivocation, as here he paynteth out
himself. I have heard of some Cocks of the game that when they were so
pricked and wounded by their adversaries in fight, M. Mort. vaunt.
as both their heads did run with gore blood, and both their eyes almost out,
yet with any least pause given them, they would crow in the cockpit in sign of
courage: and it may be that my Adversary is of some kindred to that courageous
race. But here I must auswere him to some of his demands.

45 Where is now (says he) the boast of P. R. for Sriptures, Fathers,
Reasons? To ^he first demand.
I answer, they are in my book set down in great numbers, and have expected
that you should have satisfied at least some one or two of them in this place.
And whereas they are so many, so manifest, and so potent against you, and no one
of them attempted to be answered by you; it seems a poor evasion, and simple
Rhetorical shi^t to crow so coldly, as to ask where they are when so many do
lie before you. But let us hear your second interrogation. To the second.
Where is (say you) his challeng of Canoni^^s, and Schoole-Deuines? Whereto I
answer, that they are in the same places of my former Treatise, where they
were before; and you could not but see them, yet no one of them has been
examined or touched by you in all this your reply, so far as I can see. To
the third.
But you go further. Where is (say you) his appeal unto both Universities? I
answer, it is in the same ^^ate that it was before, and in the same lines that
I l^ft it, without any repeal of your part hitherto made. And finally you
demand in great bravery; To the fourth.
Where is this man P. R. himsel^e, the new select Advocate ^or this cause? may
he not say hera^ter, I was ashamed, and hid my self? whereunto I answer for
him, that if he seem to have been hydden before; now he does appear again in
this new Treatise, and you have heard him speak, and felt him strike in his
defense, and more you are like to do afterward before this combat be ended,
though friendly and quietly according to the title of his book. And so this
being to much time to leese in these tryflinges, I shall in few words make up
the reckoning of this Pa^agraph.

The Vpshot of this Reckoning.
^6. Wherefore now to turn my self to M. Morton ^n friendly and quiet manner, I
cannot but wonder (...) Sir) that you would enter into this matter of
^uerthrowing my whole defense of Mental Equiuoca^ion, established by so great
variety of appare^t proofs ^ut of Scriptures, Fathers, Reasons, and other
ar^umentes, as my former book lays before you, and that with such confidence
as, to affirm in the very ^ytle of your paragraph, Preamb. p. 43.. 12.
that no wit of man could stand against you, that you would promise to your
Rea^er, a glorious course to the triumph of truth: that I should be ^ettered in
my own shackles, hanged in Achitophels halter, as a ^atanicall and damnable
liar, a gross and stupide contradictour ^f my self, driven into such a
vertigo and giddines, upon your ^pressing me with one only example out of
Scriptures, as when I would faynest defend my art of Equivocation, am forced by
consequence from Gods words to confess, that their is an outward speech, which
no clause of reservation could save from a lie, whereby mine own Magi should be
brought to acknowledge (as the Magi of Egypt were) that digitus Dei hic est,
this is the finger of God, that has made M. Morton so miraculou^ly glorious
against me, as having said nothing, has notwithstanding gotten the victory,
and so overcome me, as all the wit of man can not defend me.

47. And I do add here miraculously of my self, for that, M. Mort. miraculous
Victory.
in my reason it is the greatest miracle that can be devised, that a man
without saying any thing at all to the purpose, should so flatly overthrow so
large a defense, so grounded, and so fortified as mine was, concerning
Equivocation, and the lawfullnes thereof, and this by alleging one only
example of a poor woman that did make a lie to S. Peter her lawful and
competent Judge, whiles she pretended to Equivocate (if she had any such
meaning as you will needs sign her to have had) and thereby you will conclude,
that all other Equivocations whatsoever, (though to never so incompetent a
Judge) must needs in like manner be a lie: which seems not only a fancy, but
also a very phre^sy in law of good dispute, and argumentation. For if we
consider your precedent arguments, whereon your whole bragging confidence does
rely, no one of them, nor all together are worth a rush, to prove any jot of
that you pretend, as now largely and manifestly has been proved. Wherefore I
must needs say that it sauoureth of a strong humor of vanity in you to frame
unto your self so full and glorious a victory as you do, which I assure my
self will cause more laughter then admiration in any discret Reader: and with
this alacrity, you may proceed to that which insueth.

48. But yet before I end this Chap. I must needs take you once by the sleeue
again, A new lie co^uinced against M. Morton.
and tell you, that whereas you do often times serve your self in this Reply,
of my confession, or rather concessio^, that no clause of reservation could
excuse the speech of the woman (Saphyra) from a lie; for that she spoke to a
competent Judge, which obliged her not to equivocate: you to make semblance of
some contradiction, and absurdity in me, about the same, do in the very
entrance of this your Reply, (to wit, in your Epistle to P. R.) falsify my
words manifestly, affirming me to grant that, there is a mental equivocation
(meaning of the speech of Saphyra) which no clause of reservation can save from
lie; which is a lie indeed, for that this is not my saying, but yours: for that
my saying is, that the answer of Saphyra to S. Peter, could not by any
reservation o^ mind be defended from a lie, ^or that he was her lawful Judge;
and consequently, I do prove, that her said speech was no equiuocatio^ at all^
and yet are you not ashamed to say, yea and to stand upon it, and to urge the
matter in sundry places, as granted by me, that there is a mental
equivocation which no clause of reservation can save from a lie, whereas I do
hold, auerr, and prove the quite contrary, to wit, that such a speech cannot
be truly equivocation, for that it is a lie. This then may increase your
alacrity (M. Morton) that this assertion of yours is found to be so plain, and
evidently false, as no equivocation or mental reservation can excuse it from a
lie, nor any wit of man possibly defend you therein.

49. And this is all in effect that M. Morton has thought good to handle of
the two large subjects of my former book, The conclusion of this chapter.
touching Rebellion and Equiuocatio^, beginning first with the title (as you
have h^ard) and auo^ching, that to call it a Mit^gation, was very ominous and
unlucky to them whom specially it labors to de^end, whero^ yet he
alleges no one proof in the world, but only the ( May be) before mentioned:
to wit, that I said, that albeit dangers may fall out, as in al^ other
Commonwealths; so yet may Protestants and Catholics live together in
cyuill vnio^, and dutiful obedience, if they will, and be permitted. And then
from this assertion he leapeth presently to another, saying; that my foresaid
Treatise of Mitigation, has betrayed my whole cause both in the one, and the
other question, of Rebellion and Equivocation: for proof whereof he has no
other argument, as now you have heard, but only for the former of Rebellion,
certain fond devised impossibilityes against the said may be. And for the
other question of Equivocation he has only the case of the poor lying-woman
Saphyra, which yet he esteems so highly to make for him, as he dares
pronounce, that it overthrows my whole defense of mental Equivocation, and
that so evidently, as no wit of man can possibly excuse the same. Which
vehement hyperbolicall asseueratio^ of his, I assure my self will seem to the
judicious Reader, that has taken a view of the trial past, to proceed of so
little wit of man, as it may scarce possibly be defended from plainfolly.

50. Well then this being all that is answered to the substance of my book, we
must pass to certain accidents thereof, which are sundry grievous imputations
of false dealing laid to M. Mortons charge, which I did obiter, and as it were
by the way, lay open in my Treatise, thereby to show the weakness, and misery
of his cause, which forced him (a man otherwise much loving truth, as himself
every where protests) to fall into such inexplicable labyrinths of gross
absurdities, as few men before him have done. And for that these accidents did
seem perhaps to touch him more nearly, then the substance of the controversy
it self (for that they are more sensible in the Readers eye and ear:)
therefore he has principally adressed himself in this his Preamblatory-reply
to euacuate or infringe some of these imputations, but with what success, the
event it self will show in the ensui^g Chapters.

THE THIRD CHAPTER ANSWERING TO M. MORTONS THIRD INQVIRY, CONCERNING falsities
objected by him (though falsely) against Catholic writers, but especially
against Card. Bellarmine: whereof no one can be proved.
PREFACE.
IN the former two Chapters the ^eader has now taken a view of their several
subjects and arguments: and in the first, what light skirmishes M. Morto^
thought best to make for some trial of his valor in answering (upon sundry
small quarrels picked ^ut here and there from different places of my who^e
Treatise,) and with what success the same has been by him performed. In the
second he has seen two short assaults, about the two main matters in
controversy o^ Rebellion and Equivocation, which being contained but in two
small Paragraphes, and treating only two single objections, do easily show how
little store of substantial reply M. Morton has to so large a Treatise as
mine was. But we must expect the residue of full complement in his promised
larger Reioynder.

2. Now in the mean space we are to examine three or four other points
which he handles in this his last Preamble-Reply, especially about his own
defense: for that he being deeply charged in my book for manifold untrue
dealing in his writings which oftentimes was such as could not proceed so much
of error, or mistaking, but sauoured of wilful, and witting deceiptfullnes,
that commonly is called malice: which point for that I noted, and urged often
both against himself, and against many other of his profession, Three general
heads to be handled.
and this by great number and variety of examples, and i^^tances; he feeling
himself touched not a little in credit with this matter, as it may seem,
thought good after due deliberation to take this course of remedying the
matter. First to object by way of recrimination diverse falsityes (though far
unlike) against sundry Catholic Ca^d. Bellarmine. And then again, the same
against me. And in the

3. And first for an entrance to this matter, he indeauoureth at the beginning
to excuse himself from malice against Catholics in these words: From the
imputation of malice against the persons of men (says he) if I should need the
testimony of man, my adversaries may acquit me, who have acknowledged in me
better measures by their own experience, D. VVri. M. Constable. M. Ga. I have
half injured the^, with half naming them, but I hope they will pardon me this
wrong, knowing that it is not spoken in exprobration to them, but for
justification of my self etc. So he. But I see not why he needs to excuse
^imselfe from exprobration, which ever supposes ^rue merits and benefits truly
objected: which how ^arre M. Morton may object to these Catholic men ^y him
here named, I know not. But howsoener (...) be, it little makes to the
purpose, for that the ^^putation of malice was not in respect of his hatred
against this or that particular man, as to their per^^ns, but against their
cause, and that in such a bloody ^^rt of sycophancy, M. Mort. measure in malice
toward Catholics.
as included all the persons of that ^eligion: and therefore his fawning upon
two or ^^ree in external words and countenance, either in ^erson, or else
where, whiles in his chamber he sought (...) writing his spiteful, infamous,
and virulent ly^^g books to oppress them all, and cut their throats; ^^^is
measure was not good, but may justly be called a ^alicious measure: and yet was
this M. Mortons measure, ^r so much as no man did ever write so maliciously
(...) my knowledge as he, nor in so odious an argument, ^^d jealous a time.

^^ Moreover malice does not only consist in ha^ed to particular persons, as
here M. Morton would ^eme to insinuate by his answer, but in crafty and
^eceiptfull dealing against charity, conscience, and ^eason; especially in
cyting false witness of Authors against Catholics and their Religion, as he
is con^inced often to have done. And therefore whereas in ^he end of this his
defense from malice, he says, that he must expostulate with Catholics
according to the Apostles example saying: Am I your enem^ because I tell you
truth? Gal. 4.
(which sentence liked him so well as he would needs put the same also for his
poesy in the first front of his book:) the Catholics will answer, no, Sir,
You are not our enemy ^or telling truth, which you do very seldom in any
matter of controversy betwe^ne us and you; but for making many a false and
pernicious lie. Catholics answer to M. Mort.
And so the note of malice, and malicious dealing remains still with you
unpurged, until you blot it out by contrary deeds, and not only words: and
this may serve by way of Preface to this Chapter.

OF WILFVLL falsehoods objected by M. Morton in sundry Catholi^k^ writers: and
namely his abuse offered to Franciscus Costerus.. I.
NOW then to come to the matter it self: the occasion o^ this labor of M.
Morton to seek out some errors, or shows of falsities in Catholick^ Authors,
was, for that I having pressed him very sore in the last Chapter of my book of
Mitigation, with great multiplicity of untruths uttered by him, A sign
distinctiue between Protestant and Catholic writers.
and his consortes, which seemed to me both witting and wilful, I said that
it might well be assigned for a sign distinctiue between us and the^ to have
the spirit of uttering wil^ull untruths, and thereby also might be determined
the difference of our causes, which is good, and which is bad. For as in a good
cause there is no need of lying, and a bad cause cannot be defended but by
lying: so no man willingly of any good nature will choose to lie, but upon some
necessity. The words of my former discourse in the book of Mitigation, are
these.

6. And for that (say I) this matter is of great importance for the reader well
to conceive in these days of controversies between us, Mitig. p. 488.489.
I mean to stay my self somewhat in this Chapter upon this point and to show,
that indeed it is a substantial sign di^tinctiue between all sectaryes and
us, at this time, and that in matters of controversy, our writers shall ^euer
be found guylty in these kinds of false lying and malicious equivocations,
where not only vn^^uth is uttered, but it is wittingly also uttered, the ^riter
knowing that he writes untruth, as often ^ow has been said: which manner of
dealing in^^rreth two points; the one that such a writer or ^^eaker has no
conscience, that utters things against his own knowledge, and which God
sees (...) be false, and falsely meant in his heart; and the ^her, that his
cause has no ground of substantial ^uth, which cannot be defended without
such ^ilfull lies.

^^ In this then if you please let us insist a while, and (...) Tho. Morton
bring forth any Catholic Authors ^hatsoeuer, A very just demand and
reasonable offer.
that wrote against Protestants since ^ese heresies began, that has been taken
in this ^piety; I mean, that has set down in print any ^^^h falsity, as
cannot be excused, either by igno^^nce, oversight, negligence, error of print,
transla^^^n, diversity of editions, or the like; but that it ^ust needs be
presumed that he knew the untruth, ^^d yet would set it forth: of this kind (I
say) let ^im show me but one example among all Catho^^cke writers of our time,
and I will in my consci^^ce greatly mistrust, and discredit the Author, ^hether
it be an other, or my self. But if he show ^e two or three in any writer of
this kind, I shall hardly be able ever afterward to believe him more. And
whereas the number and variety of Catholic writers is so great as the world
sees, it were no great ^abour to show it in some, if that spirit did reign
among them, as it does in Protestant writers.

8. To this speech of mine does M. Morton now in this his last Preamble frame a
rhetorical answer in these words. Preamb. page 50.
Does the man (who makes mention of his interruption by sickness) know what
he has now said? Whet^er he spoke this being in his feauer-fit, or in temper?
Whether in a dream or a wake? Whether in his right mind, or in distraction?
For sure I am, that this ostentation will prove in the issue as unfortunate
unto P. R as ever was boast either by Thraso on the stage, or by Goliath in the
Camp, or by Gorgias in the schools: A strange manner of boasting where no
substance is at a^l.
by the which he must be driven unto so miserable and shameful a palinody, as
ever herafter utterly to discredit his own friends, and work a perpetual
discontent within himself, as presently will appear. So he.

9. And to this appeara^ce I am content to remit me^ only I desire the reader
to stand attent to the condition he^re put down, that the fa^shood objected
must be wilful, and not excusable either by error, ignorance, oversight or
the like, as many of those were not, nor could possibly be defended which in my
book I brought against M. Morton and his, and more shall I do in this his
Reply. And surely it is worth the noting, that he being to begin a list of
falsities against Roman writers, as he pretends, should in the very first
lines s^t down a notorious wil^ull untruth of his own, against that grave and
learned man Franciscus Costerus, as pr^sently will appear. For whereas I had
said in m^ former alleged discourse, Let Thomas Morton bring forth any
Catholic Aut^ours whatsoever that wrote against Protestants since these
heresies began that has been taken in this impiety, he makes this an^were:
Preamb. page 51.
I may not deny even this my Adversary his due com^endation of modesty, who
being ashamed (we may think) of the Romish frauds, and falsifications of
former times, will insist only upon such men's examples, as have professedly
written of late against Protestants. It were to be wished, that his f^llow
Jesuit Costerus had kept himself within the same precincts, but he makes a
more general challeng thus: Coster. Ies. En^hi^id. c. desumm^ Pontif.. Constat.
Nemo hactenu^ vel Princeps, vel Praesul, vel Scriptor fuit, qui mendacij, vel
malae fidei Romanos arguerit: that is, Never yet (says he) did any Prince, or
Prelate, or writer accuse the Romanists of falsehood. So he.

10. And here now I must demand of the Reader what he understands M. Morton
his purpose to be in this place? Is it not to show that Costerus was less
modest then I, for so much as I said, if in any one Catholic writer of
controversies of our age, there might be found but two or three examples of
wilful lying, I would never trust him more, but that Costerus went further
saying, that no Prince, Prelate, ^r writer had ever hitherto accused any
Romanists o^ falsehood? Is not this M. Mortons plain meaning (think you) as
both his words and drift do show? Yes truly. Which being so, I would ask him
first, why he did clippe the latin words of Costerus (being so few as ^hey are)
for that he says, Atqui vero nemo hact^nus fuit Catholicus, vel Princeps, vel
Praesul, vel Scriptor etc. Costerus notably abused.
but nevertheless there was no Catholic man hitherto (to wit, unto the time
assigned when Bishops of Rome were Saints and Martyrs) either Prince, Bishop,
or writer etc. why did he cut of the words, but ^euerthelesse and Catholic
man, and those both in latin and English, whereas they be in Costerus?

11. Why was this paring think you, but that they being s^t down truly as they
stand in the Author, they would have b^wrayed his falsehood; for that the words
( but nevertheless) do show a refere^ce to somewhat going before, and the words
( no Catholic Prince or Prelate) do demo^strate that Costerus spoke not of
Catholic or Roman writers, for it had been ridiculous ^or him in that sense to
say, that no Catholic of the Roman Religion did ever hitherto accuse any
Romanists (that is, Roman writers) of falsehood, for it had been most absurd: and
therefore if we imagine Costerus to be a man of common sense, we could never
think that he would write so absurdly, and therefore this word (Catholic) was
guilfully left out by M. Mort.

12. Well then what was Costerus his meaning? truly himself does set it down
both at large, and perspicuously in the very place, and Paragraph by M. Morton
cyted, so a as ignorance or error can not be pleaded: for that he treating of
the Authority and succession of the Bishops of Rome, and proving the same out
of the ancient Fathers, and historiographers of the primitive Church, Costerus
vbi supra ^ap. 3.
S. Iren^us, Eusebius, Augustinus, Optatus, and others, he in the next
Paragraph, cited here by M. Morton, proves the same in like manner out of the
Acts, Gests, Decrees, and letters yet extant of the ancient Popes themselves,
even in time of persecution, when in human power they were weak, and expected
nothing but affliction, death^ and martyrdom, and yet did they take upon them
the care of the whole world (says Costerus) confirming Bishops, depriving
Patriarchs of communion when need required: as restoring also others to their
Seas when by violence they were i^iustly oppressed, and so for this he cites
many examples, even before the time of Constantine the great, upon which
enumeration he makes this argument.

13. Hi sane qui vitam cum sanguine pro Christi confessione profuderunt, nihil
sibi arrogasse^t alienum etc. The argument or inference of Costerus.
These godly Bishops of Rome that spent their lives and blood for the
confession of Christ, would never (of liklihood) have arrogated to themselves
that which was not theirs, nor would they have usurped any thing contrary to
the will of Christ, except they had well known, and been sure that such an
office was left, and commended to them by Christ. And if any man will imagine
that they had been of such impudency, as not to fear to do it: yet would there
not have wanted some others, either Bishops, Princes, or Doctors, who by their
authority, power, and writings, would have repressed this attempt of those
Roman Bishops. And yet nevertheless hitherto there was n^ Catholic, either
Prince, Prelate, or writer, that ever argu^d those Roman Bishops of lying, or
false dealing, but rather Bishops, and Patriarchs of the first and principal
churches when they were oppressed by their aduers^ries, did fly unto them.

14 Thus far Costerus. And now let us consider how faithfully M. Morton has
dealt here, even the^ when he principally pretends to deliver himself from
vnfaithful^es, like as he that being arraigned at the sessions for stealing,
does not abstain to steal ^uen in that place and presence of the Judges
themselves: who can excuse M. Morton here? he saw the whole drift of Costerus
to be, to show that if those ancient Popes before Constantine, who were Saints
and Martyrs had presumed any thing beyond their lawful authority, some
Catholic Prince, Prelate, or writer of that time would have resisted, or
reprehended them of false dealing: but no such Prince, Prelat, or writer was
found unto that day, but rather Bishops and chief Patriarchs did make their
refuge unto the^: therefore it is a sign that they were held for lawful
Superiors.

15. And what now is there here in Costerus his speech about the lying of
Romanists or Roman VVriters? Can there be any defense of this so apparent
abuse? will M. Morton say that he saw not Costerus his meaning, M. Mort.
convinced of egregious fraud
or that he had not a ^alse meaning himself to deceive his Reader? Why then
did he suppress all the precedent clauses that do declare Costerus his
purpose? why did he cut of the other words immediately following, of Bishops,
and Patriarchs recourse unto ^opes, which did properly appertain and cohere
to the said former words and meaning of Costerus, and no way to M. Morton? why
did he translate ( Romanos) Romanists, as though it pertained to Roman writers
even at this day, whereas the whole contex and immediate precedent words do
manifestly show that Costerus meant Romanos Pontifices, ancient Roman Bishops
in time of persecution, and not Roman writers? And if all these inexcusable
frauds discovered in the allegation of this one little sentence of Costerus be
not sufficient to prove M. Morton not to mean sincerely, nor out of a good
conscience (notwithstanding all his protestations to the contrary) I am greatly
deceived: let him produce but one such against us, and I will say he does
somewhat indeed: and now whether he be able to do it or no, we shall presently
take the view, for his list of objections against our writers does immediately
follow out of this his fraudulent Preamble, as full stuffed notwithstanding
with protestations and vaunts of upright dealing, and sincere proceeding, even
then, when he falsifieth egregiously, as ever perhaps you have read before.

HIS FIRST EXAMPLE of voluntary falsehood falsely objected against three ancient
Popes.. II.
I hope the reader will remember what M. Morton is bound to bring forth, if he
will bring any thing to the purpose, and true state of the question: ^o wit, he
must let us see some 2. or 3. examples of ^itting and wilful falsehood in any
one Catholic ^riter of our time, that has written against Pro^estants, which
presently afterward he will at^empt to do against Cardinal Bellarmine, and
some others. But now he begins with three ancient ^opes, Zozimus,
Bonifacius, and Celestinus, that lived in ^he time of S. Augustine, August. l.
2. de gratia Christi c. 2. and 6. and co^tra duas epistolas Pelag. cap. 4.
Council. African. epistola ad B^nifaciu^. See Baronius tom. 5. in vitis e^^^m
Po^^tificum.
and were much commended ^y him for holy men, but are accused by M. Morton ^r
falsaryes, as though they had forged a Canon of ^he first Council of Nice, in
favor of their own Su^remacy, to prove thereby the lawfulnes of appea^es to be
made to them, and to their Sea from the Bishops ^o Africa, which Canon was not
found in ^he ordinary copies then extant of that Council.

^^. But first of all, howsoever this matter passed, ^t appertains little or
nothing at all to our purpose ^or to the question now in hand of modern
Catho^icke writers, nor does it prove wilful falsehood in those three ancient
Popes, if they cyted the Canon of one Council for another of equal authority
(as indeed they did,) for that it might be ascribed either to variety of copyes
(when no print was yet extant) or to oversight, forgetfulness, or to some other
such defect, rather then to malice, and voluntary error. So as for M. Morton
to begin his impugnation with an example, that has so many disparityes from
the case it self, and state of the question, shows that he has little indeed
to say against us to the purpose, notwithstanding his dreadful threat before
set down^ against me, that I should be driven unto a miserable, and shameful
palynode etc. for if he had had wares of any importance, it is likly that we
should have seen some part thereof now in this beginning of his onset.

18. Especially for that upon want of better matter, as may be presumed, he was
content to have a snatch at Gratian, Gratian 2. q. 6.. Placuit.
the compiler or gatherer together of the Canons of old Councels, who cyting
the 22. Canon of the Council of Meliuet in Africa, in which S. Augustine was
present, and where it was decreed in these words, Placuit, vt Presbyteri,
Diaconi, vel inferiores Clerici etc. It is decreed that Priests, Deacons and
other inferior Clergy men, if they will appeal from their Bishops, they shall
not appeal but unto the Counsels of Africa etc. Gratian after the whole Canon
set down, The question about Appeals in the Council of Meliuet.
does by way of commentary adioyne this exception, in a different distinct
letter, saying, except they do appeal to the Sea of Rome, which exception
Cardinal Bellarmine in that matter allows not, for that the Council of
Meliuet did principally inte^d to restrain the Appeals of inferior Clergy
men, from going to Rome against their own Bishops, though not the appeals of
Bishops themselves, a^ presently shall be showed.

19. But now what has M. Morton either against us, or for himself out of this
case? You shall hear him speak. Preamb. page 52.
What can be said (says he) for the defense of Gratian their public Compiler
of the Decrees of Popes, who as Cardinal Bellarmine witnesses citing a Canon
of a Council of Meliuet, wherein it was decreed that none should appeal beyond
the sea, did add of himself this exception, Except it be unto the Apostolic
Sea of Rome: when as that Council in forbidding appeals beyond the sea, did
especi^lly intend to forbid appeals to Rome? Many such ^ike falsehoods might be
alleged. So says he.

20. Whereto I answer, that if they be no better then this, they are not worth
the alleging, but only to intertaine time, and to show your fraud in dea^ing.
For first Gratian did live diverse hundred years gone; Diverse false shifts in
accusing of Gratian.
but we talk of writers of our time, and of ^uch only is our question and
co^trouersy; wherein you ^inding your self barren, would now extend your
^o^mission to all Catholic writers of all ages past, which is a miserable
shift. Secondly there be so many other shifts and tricks in cyting these few
words, ^s do make demonstration that you can cite nothing in simplicity of
truth, without some wil^ull corruption, as here where you say, it was decreed
(in the Council of Meliuet) that none should appeal beyond the sea, you cut of
craftily the first words before cyted of the said Canon, inferiores Clerici,
the inferior Clergy men, as though the prohibition had been for all (as well
Bishops, as inferior Clergy men) which presently we shall show to be false.

21. Thirdly where you say that Gratian did add o^ himself this exception to
the Canon, you would make ^our Reader think that he had added these words ^s
the words of the Cano^ it self; Bellarmin. lib. 2. de R^man. Po^^ c. 24.. 3.
which he did not, but as a commentary or explication of the Canon in a
separate place, and so is now extant in a distinct letter: and consequently
your note in the margent that Gratian is a falsificator, falls upon your self,
which do falsify his meaning. For that the most that can be objected to
Gratian in this place, is, that which Cardinal Bellarmine says, he mistook
the true meaning and intent of that Canon of Meliuet, as though it had been
meant of Bishops, as well as of in^eriou^ Clergymen, which is far ^ro^ the
proof of wilful ^a^se meaning, which may very probably be objected to M.
Morton in this and many other places. For that it cannot be well thought, but
that he must know that he dealt in^uriously and ca^u^niously with Gratian in
this place.

22. But now to the former old, idle, and worne-out objection against the
foresaid three Popes, for counterfaiting not one only (as M. Morton accuses)
but three Canons of the said Council of Nice, not only the Madgeburgians, but
Calvin also in his Institutions, and after them both^ Jewel at large in his
fourth article, and after him every Protestant have employed their pens and
tongues to exaggerate the same, Calvin. l. 4. Instit. c. 7. Mag^eburgens^s
C^n^. 5. c. 9. Jewel in his 4. article of Reply.
upon no other ground, so much as it seems, as upon stomach, and exacerbation
of hatred against the Roman Sea, seeking to slander and defame three so
notable and ancient Bishops of Rome, that sat within the compass of 7. or 8.
years, upon the point of a thousand and two hundred years past, which is
far without the compass of modern Catholick^ writers, as you see, and
consequently from the state of our question. And albeit the matter has been
answered both largely, M. Mort. cauil about 3. Popes six times ^nswered ^lready
and clearly by diverse learned men, as well of our nation as others, and showed
to be a mere cauillation: yet nothing will serve these men, but still is it
brought again, as though it had never been answered before. Which false
dissimulation is here also used by M. Morton, Hardings detection. l. 4. fol.
249.
who says not a word of any answer that ever he saw thereunto, and yet could
he not but have seen five or six at least (and four very famous of our own
nation) if he be but meanly conversant in the writers of our time. As that
first of D. Harding, in his detection against M. Jewel, showing among other
arguments, that no ^riter of all antiquity from that time, wherein these ^oly
Popes lived unto this age (these Protestants ex^epted) was so shameless as ever
to call them falsaryes, ^r that they had corrupted, or forged any Canon of ^he
Council of Nice, though the Canons by them ^yted, were not found in some
Copies, as they were in theirs of Rome, by the reason that presently shall be
showed.

^3. The Second is of D. Sanders, D. Sanders de visib. mon. l. 7. p. 356. and
deinceps in Zozimo.
in his Visible Mo^archy of the Church, who much more largely discus^eth the
point, and finally concludes the whole matter by five several arguments, that
no such thing was ever meant by the African Fathers to forbid all ^ppeales of
the Bishops to Rome, as Illyricus, Calvin, M. Jewel and other Protestant
writers have devised and published

24. The third answerer is Doctor Stapleton, Stapl. Return of untruths. art.
4. p. 29.
who refuteth the whole tale, and calumniation of the Protestants in this
affayre, in his Retu^ne o^ Vn^ruthes, and fourth article, throughout twenty
whole leaves together against M. Jewel, and conuinceth him of 38. several
untruths uttered in that one matter, which in reason M. Morton should either
have acknowledged or confuted: but the one he would not, and the other he could
not. The fourth answerer is Alanus Copus otherwise Doctor Harpsfield,
Harpsfield Dialog. 1. cap. 6. and 7.
very large, exact, and le^rned, in his Dialogues, who handles every member
thereof with like observance of multitude of lies used by the Protestants in
that matter.

25. The fifth is Cardinal Bellarmine, Bellar. l. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 24.
and 25.
who in his books of the Bishop of Rome, has largely, and learnedly discussed
the same, and answered all objections brought to the contrary with great
diligence, conuincing both Illyrcius, and the rest of his fellow- Centuriators,
together with Calvin, for so many falsehoods, shifts, errors of history,
malicious fictions, and other like abuses, as is a shame to read. And finally
not to name more authors for this point, Cardinal Baronius as last of all,
Baron. tom. 5. ann^ 419. non long a fine.
so with more exact examination historical the^ any of the rest, has cleared
the whole matter in his fifth Tome of his Ecclesiastical History, upon the
year 419. to whom I remit the studious Reader.

26. Well then, in all these six Authors at least I do suppose, that M. Morto^
as a learned man had seen this objection discussed, and answered, though not
perhaps to his contentment, why then if he had meant plainly, as often he
protests, had not he either mentioned these Authors, or refuted them, or at
leastwise told his Reader, A simile well showing M. Mortons insincere dealing.
that there had been some such answers before, though not sufficient to
overthrow the objection, whereby the said Reader might have sought to have a
view thereof? For if a Merchant that professes much sincerity, and upright
dealing, should offer coin for good and cu^rant that himself had known to
have been six times at least rejected for cou^terfait by skillful men, and yet
he should obtrude the same again the 7. time, without saying any one word that
it had been called into question, and refused before; none would say that this
man's sincerity is worth a rush. The application I leave to M. Morton himself.

27. Wherefore in a word or two, to answer the substance of the matter, The
true state of the question.
thus it passed. A certain Priest of Sicca in A^rick named Appiarius having a
controversy with his own Bishop Vrbanus, after diverse disagreements passed
between them, wherein he thought himself hardly dealt with all, he appealed to
Rome to Pope Zozimus, bringing with him co^mendatory letters from the Primate
of all Africa. Zozimus having heard his cause, thought best to send him ^acke
again into Africa, and with him two Legates, ^ith instructions that they
should see and procure not ^nly this man to be restored to his right, but
more^uer that 3. Canons of the Council of Nice, the ^^rst about Appeals of
Bishops, the second of Priests, ^^e third of Bishops following the Court, to be
ob^^rued. Whereupon the African Bishops gathered a ^ationall Co^ncell at
Carthage of 217. Bishops about ^^e satisfying of the Order of Pope Zozimus.

^8. But when this Council had examined their ^^pyes of the Council of Nice,
they found not those (...) Canons therein. Whereupon they sending into the ^ast
parts to seek other Copies, they received both ^om S. Cyrill Patriarch of
Alexandria, and Atticus of ^onstantinople other Copies, which in like manner
^^anted these 3. Canons, as also they did want diverse ^ther Canons cyted by
sundry ancient Fathers to ^aue been made in the Council of Nice, as by Praef.
in Iudi^h.
S. ^ierome, Epistol^ 110.
S. Augustine, Epist. 82.
S. Ambrose, and diverse later ^ouncels: which Canons notwithstanding were ^ade
and decreed in the first Council of Nice, though ^ot extant in the Copies,
that were in Africa; which ^oth D. Harpsfeild, and Bellarmine do particulerly
prove ^t large, and it appears plainly that these cop^ies sent out of the
East, had 20. Canons only of ^he said Council of Nice, which Ruffinus in his
story ^oth recount: Ruff. l. ^. Histor. Athan. Epistola ad Marcu^.
whereas both S. Athanasius and many ^ther Fathers that were present in the same
Council of Nice, do testify, that there were more, which are ^et down in the
first tome of Counsels, as transla^ed out of the Arabian language, though not
found in the Greek.

29. But indeed ^ll the error or mistaking was this, that there begin a
general Council gathered together at Sardica very soon after that of Nice,
which Sardicense Conciliu^ contained more Bishops in number then were in that
of Nice (for that in thi^ there were 3OO. out of the West only, and 70. fr^^
the East, as both Athanasius, Athan. Epist. ad ^olitariam vitam age^tes and
Apol. 2. Socrat. 2. hist. cap. 15.
Socrates, Zozomonus, Zozo. l. 3. cap. 11.
and other Authors do affi^me) and for that the most of these Fathers were the
self same, that had been in the Council of Nice, and had determined nothing
concerning faith, differing from the Nicene Council, but only seem^d to be
called ^or better manifestation and confirmation of the said Nicene Council,
it was held (especially in the West Church) for a part, or appendix of the said
first Nicene Council: in which regard S. Gregory, and other Fathers, when
they do mention the first 4. General Counsels, do leave out this of Sardica,
The general Council of Sardica.
though it were as General and more great then the first Nicene, as has been
said.

30. Wherefore this Council of Sardica having set down the foresaid three
Canons, as conform to the decrees of the first late Council of Nice, and
going under the name of the said Nicene Council as a member thereof in those
copyes that Pope Zozimu^ in the West Church had, he did name them Canons of the
Nicene Council, as made by the authority of the self same Fathers that sat
at Nice, and the naming of one for the other was no greater an error in
effect, Matt. 27.
then when S. Matthew does name Hieremy the Prophet for Zachary, for so much as
the thing it self was true: and so was the allegation of Pope Zozimus, for
that in the Council of Sardica these three Canons are extant: The mali^ious
clamours of Protestants against three ancient renowed Bishops of Rome.
nor ever was there any least suspicion or speech of forging used in the Church
by either Catholics or Heretics for so many ages, before the Lutheranes and
Caluinists upon mere hatred and gall of stomach began those clamours in this
our age, against so holy a^cient Fathers as those 3. Bishops of Rome were (to
wit, Zozimus, Boni^acius, and Celestinus) by the testimony of Saint Augustine,
and other Fathers that lived with them, who also (I mean S. Augustine) at that
very time when the controversy was in treating about the Copyes of the Council
of Nice, August. ^pist. 26^.
and matter of appellation, did appeal himself to the later of these three
Popes, to wit to Celestinus in the cause of Antonius Bishop of Fessala, as
appears out of his own Epistle, about that matter. And so this shall be
sufficient, and more then was necessary, to answer unto ^his stale impertinent
objection of counterfaiting the Canons of the first Nicene Council, which is
nothing ^o our purpose in hand as has been seen, and yet ^nco^bred with so
many untruths, as would require ^ several Treatise to display them. Let us
come then ^o his second instance.

HIS SEC0ND EXAMPLE of wilful fraud falsely objected against sundry modern
Catholic writers, about the Council of Eliberis in Spain.. III.
BEFORE he comes to set down this instance about the Council of Eliberis,
Premb. p. 53.
he falls again to boast and brag exceedingly, saying: P. R. is more
merci^ull, requiring three sensible insta^ces, as it were 3. witnesses against
any one of his writers ( before he be condemned:) and yet this also is horribly
vnmerci^ull on their part. I wish he had but named any one, whose credit he
valueth most, that I might have answered his challenge in that one. Howsoever,
it will be no more easy a task for me to find one falsehood in many, then many
in one. So he. And ^aue you heard this craking? We may say with Horace, Quid
dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu?
What strange effect will so great words bring forth? But here I must again,
What this bragger is bound to do.
and in every place advertise the Reader, what this Boaster should and ought to
prove, if indeed he can prove any thing at all: to wit, that he lay forth
clearly and perspicuously some two or three plain insta^ces out of any one
Catholic writer of our time (as I have done many against him and his, whereby
he and they are convinced of witting and wilful falsehood,) and this so
manifest and apparent, as the Author himself must needs know that it was
false when he wrote it. Well then, what can M. Morton bring forth in this kind
against our writers, out of this his second example or instance, about the
Council of Eliberis in Spain?

32. In the controversy about Images (says he) the Protestants appeal unto
antiquity both of Counsels, and Fathers. The first Council is that of
Eliberis about the year of Grace 305. which Protestants urge, Preamb. page 53.
as forbidding that there should be any Images in the Church. Now let us try
the spirits of the answerers. Well Sir. And what trial will you make of their
spirits here? The state of your question in controversy requires that you
should try them for wilful lying spirits, and that they lied voluntarily, as
has been proved against you and yours. What have you to say against them in
this kind out of this place? You do accuse them that they have diverse, and
different expositions upon the said Canon of the Council of Eliberis? some
thinking it to be understood one way, and others another: and for this you
alleadg the different expositions of Card. Bellarmine, D. Payua, Alanus Copus,
Sanders, Turrian, Vasquez, Six^us Senensis, and others; and you play merrily
upon their diu^rsityes of expositions about the decree of ^he Council: but how
proves this your principal ^roposition, that they did err wilfully, yea
wit^ingly also, themselves knowing that they did err ^or this is the only true
question? And if you prove ^ot this, you prove nothing. And now I would ask
^ou, When diverse ancient Fathers in their Co^men^aryes upon the holy Sciptures,
do set down diffe^ent expositions of hard places, M. Morton taken in a great
absurdity.
every one thinking that he goes nearest to the truth, may you by this
^ondemne them of wilful falsehood, and make try^ll of their spirits as of lying
spirits for this respect? ^s not this absurd and impious? Are you not asha^ed
to come forth with these ridiculous proofs after so great ostentation of
words, that it is as easy ^r you to find out many wil^ull falsehoods in one, as
one in many? ^hy had you not alleged one at least? But let us ^xamine in a
word or two the reason of diversity of ^xpositions of our Doctors about the
Canon, and ^ith this you will be wholly downe-dagger.

^3. The Council it self of Eliberis in Spain was a ^rouinciall Council of
19. Bishops, held somewhat before, or about the time of the first general
Coun^ell of Nice, and some Controversy there is among ^iuers Authors of what
authority this Eliberian Cou^^ell is, The story of the Eliberian Council in
Spain.
or may be held; and whether ever it were re^^yued by the Church or not, in
respect of some Canons therein found, that are obscure and hard to be ^ightly
understood: as namly those which seem to deny reconciliation to some persons
even at the hour of death. But howsoever this be, certain it is, that there
be sundry Canons in that Counsel, which Protestants may not admit, as namly
the 13. which says, Virgins quae se Deo dedicauerunt, si pactum perdiderint
virginitatis etc. Virgins that have dedicated themselves to God, if they break
their promise of virginity, if they repent, and that they fell by infirmity of
body and do penance all the time of their life etc. they ought to be admitted
to communion in the end. A hard case for Protestant-Nunnes.

34. Those other two also, viz. 23. and 26. which are about set fastings upon
Saturday, and other days may not be admitted by Protestants, and much less
the 33. which forbids all Priests, Bishops, Deacons, and Subdeacons to have
the use of wives, or generare filios, to beget children, under pain, vt ab
honor Clericatus extermine^tur, The Eliberian Council contrary to Protestants.
that they be cast out from the Clergy. And yet further Can. 38. that Bigamu^,
or he that has been twice married, may not baptize any, no not in time of
necessity, which infers a fortiore, that such a one could not be Priest in
those ancient days. And here then, how can M. Morton say so confidently as he
does of this Council of Eliberis, We Protestants appeal to the antiquity of
Counsels, and first to that of Eliberis etc? And do you think that he will
stand to these Canons now alleged? If he do, it must needs be very
prejudicial unto him, and mar his marriage at least, if he have any
inte^tion to marry, and yet to lead the life of a Clergyman, according to the
prescript of the Council of Eliberis: as also to be some other punishment unto
his body to be bound to so much fasting, as those Canons of the Council of
Eliberis do ordain and prescribe.

35. But to return to the reason why he alleges this Council. M. Mort. art
in answering. Preamb. p. 53.
We Protestants (says he) do urge this Council, as forbidding, that there
should be any images in the Church. Whereunto he brings in D. Payua to answer
one way, Bellarmine another, Sanders and Alanus Copus a third, others a fourth,
fifth, or sixth (a thing very usual among learned men to have diverse
expositio^s even upon the Scriptures themselves,) and then by way ^f scoffing
(though very insulse) to make sport unto ^imselfe and his Reader, he frames,
as it were, a Comedy or interlude, one saying one thing, and another another
(though all against him:) and in this ^onsisteth a great part of his manner of
answering, ^s by frequent examples you will see, if you consider ^t.

^6. But let us examine, what the Canon it self ^ath: The words are these:
Placuit, in Ecclesia picturas ^sse non debere, ne quod colitur, aut adoratur,
in parietibus de^ingatur. It is decreed by us, that pictures ought not ^o be in
the Church, least that which is worshipped or adored, be painted upon the
walls. Which Canon for that it contains not only a decree, The decree of
the Eliberian Council examined
as you ^ee, but also a reason of the decree, and seems con^rarie both to the
use of the general Church at that time, and afterward, as is proved out of
other ancient Fathers, Counsels, and Historiographers, and seems to be
opposite to the determination and public decree of a famous General Council,
that ensued some years afterward, to wit, the second of Nice, diverse authors
do allege diverse reasons for the right understanding, and verifying of this
Cano^: so as it may agree with the truth of the Counsels meaning, and with the
reason it self alleged by the Canon: which variety of answers or expositions
in a coniecturall matter, as has been said, are no wilful contradictio^s, as
M. Morton fondly supposes, but multiplicity of expositions. The most general
is, that the true meaning of the Council was, that for more reverence of holy
images, and to the end the thing which was proposed to be worshipped and adored
in them should not suffer indecency, they should not be painted upon walls of
the Church where by the corruption and moisture thereof, they might come to be
corrupted and defaced, but rather that they should be made upon tables, veiles,
and such other moveable matter, whereby they might both the better be preserved,
and removed also more conveniently from the injury of Infidells in time of
persecution: which in effect was the very same reason that moved the ancient
and Christian Emperor Theodosius to prohibit, Lib. 1. Cod. tit. 8. leg. Cum
nobis sit.
that the image of Christ's Cross, which he carried in his banner, should not
be engraven upon the ground, or pauement, and so trodden upon by men's feet.

37. And here also the consideration of learned Vasquez is worth the
observing, A weighty consideration.
who being a Spanyard, writes, that this decre of his Country-Cou^cell of
Eliberis makes so little against the Catholic modern use of Images, as that
the greatest enemy, that ever they had one of them in the world, Claudius
Taurinensis, Vasquez l. 2. de cultu and ador. disp. 5. n. ^26. and 135.
a Spanyard in like manner, and a chief head of the Iconoclasts, or
Image-breakers, almost 800. years agone, seeking all the arguments that he
could any way scrape together against the^, and the pious use thereof; yet did
he never allege this Cano^ of his own Countrey-Councell (which now Calvin and
Caluinists do so much urge,) well foreseeing that it made nothing at all to
his purpose, or against the Catholic use of Images. For if it had been
otherwise, either he, or some other of that sect after him, would have cyted
the same before the Protestants of our time.

38. I do willingly pretermitt the pageants and childish plays, which M.
Morton does make to him self in comparing, and opposing the variety of our
writers answers, and interpretations together, and the one against the other
(as before has been said) proposing them as poppetts to make himself pastime,
which he may do also upon the grauest Commentaries that ever were written upon
Aristotle, or ^ther author, yea and upon the Scriptures themselves: ^ut I can
not let pass the last assertion of all set ^owne by M. Morton in a different
letter, Preamb. page 55. Sixth. Sene^. l. 5. Bibl. annot. 247.
that whatso^uer the occasion of forbidding might have been (in the Canon) this
is a confessed conclusion of Senensis, that the Coun^ell of Eliberis, did An
absolute lye^
absolutely forbidd the worshipp of Images. And so he makes the Latin text of
Senen^is to speak in like manner, Omnino vetuit Synodus Eli^ertina imaginum
cultum. But in Senensis you shall not find the word omnino or absolutely,
wherein stands all the force of the matter. And the fraud cannot seem but
wilful, nor can it any way stand with the intention of Senensis, who says
and affirms only (according to the interpretation, which he best allows of
among many other) that the meaning of the Council was this, to forbid the use
of images for a time, least the new converted Spanyardes, not being well
instructed, seeing images upon the walls, should think there were no difference
between them, and the heathen Idols. For avoiding whereof it seemed good to the
Council for a while to remove the use of images, M. More taken in a manifest
false trippe.
which of it self they held for lawful and pious. This is the opinion of
Senensis. And now let the discreet reader judge, whether this were his
confessed Conclusion, that the Council of Eliberis did absolutely, or not
rather secundum quid, forbid the worship of images. Surely I am ashamed of such
shifting in M. Morton, even then, when he prete^deth to charge his adversary
with that crime, and cannot prove it. Let us pass to another instance of his,
noe better then this.

HIS THIRD EXAMPLE OF like deceit objected against the same Catholic
Authors, about the Council of Frankford in Germany.. IIII.
AFTER the former variety of expositio^s about the Canon of the Council of
Eliberis, M. Morton passes to another difference in judgment among our
Catholic writers, concerning the Provincial Council of Franckeford, which
being held about 800. years past, presently after the second general Council
of Nice, wherein the Catholic use of images was defended and established
against the foresaid heresy of Iconoclasts, Cent. 8. c. 9. cita^tur Ado in
Chron. an. 795. Vrsperg. in chron. anno. 793. Hin^mar. l. co^tra Episc. Iandun.
c 20. and alij.
sundry Authors, alleged by the Magdeburgians, do write, that the said Synod
of Frankeford did condemn as well the said doctrine of images, as also the
Authority of the Council of Nice that had allowed the same: which if it were
true, yet were not the matter of any great doubt, whether a Provincial
Council (such as was that of Frankeford) were rather to be obeyed then a
general, as was the other of Nice. But for that there is great obscurity, and
many contradictions in the history it self, therefore diverse Catholic writers
do answer, and expound the matter diversely, alleging sundry excellent
coniecturall reasons, proofs, and probabilityes each one for themselves, as may
be seen in the places of their works here quoted, but yet all agreeing in
the principal point against the Protestants, that the Council of Frankeford
indeed did not condemn either the Council of Nice, or the doctrine of Images
in the sense (at least) and meaning that the said Nicene Council had approved
the same. And what is this to the purpose then, to prove that th^se Authors did
err wittingly against their conscience? Do you not see, that still the poor
man runs quite from the purpose, All from the purpose.
and has nothing to say to the effect he should say?

40. But let us stay our selves a little upon the matter it self, and give
some brief notice to the Reader of the diversity of opinions in our Catho^icke
Authors about this matter, that is so obscure ^y relation of others; for that
no Canon or Decree ^f that Council was ever extant about the same to Three
opinions about the Council of Franckford
The whole controversy is reduced ^o three opinions, the first is of Surius in
praefat. ad Council. Francof.
Surius, Dialo. 4. and 5.
Alanus Co^us, in l. de Imagine.
Sanders, and others, who think probably, that albeit diverse Historiographers,
upon the credit of certain books, called falsely Carolini, or of Charles the
great, refuted by Pope Adrian the first then ^yuing, have left recorded that
the Council of Frankeford did reprove the seventh General Coun^ell about
images (which is known to be the 2. of Nice:) yet was it not so indeed, but
another false Council of Constantinople was condemned by them of Frankeford as
held by the heretical Image-breakers a little before, and was called the 2. of
Constantinople, and by themselves that held it, the 7. General Council. So as
according to this opinion the error was in mistaking the second Council of
Nice, to have been condemned by the Council of Frank^ord, instead of the
second Council of Constantinople.

41 The second opinion is of Cardinal Bellarmine, Gene^^ard, and some others,
who think that the error was Bellar. l. 2. de imagine. 14.
as fact for fact, for that some Iconoclastes, and especialy those that wrote
the forsaid forged books, named Carolini, in Franckeford, during the time of
the said Council, had falsely informed the Council in two points of fact,
against the Council of Nice. The first, that it was not gathered, nor
confirmed by the Bishop of Rome: the second that it had decreed, Images to be
worshipped with di^ine honor, and the same that was due unto the blessed
Trinity: upon which two false suppositions the Council of Nice being far of,
and the Treatises and Decrees thereof written only as yet in Greek, and not
much published to the world and latin Church, the Council of Franckeford
condemned the doctrine, as also the Authority of the Council upon the foresaid
two misinformations: which was error of fact, as has been said, and not of
faith. And M. Morton does fondly insult, when he bids his adversary P. R. to
tell him in good earnest, Preamble page 58.
if the Fathers of the Council of Frankeford, judging that the second Council
of Nice, confirmed by the Pope, did err in defending the use of Images, did
they err in faith or no? Whereunto I answer, that they erred in fact and not
in faith, as has been said, being informed that the Council of Nice had
determined that, which it had not indeed: to wit, divine honor to be given to
image^. For if they of Frankeford had known the truth as also been certain
that the other of Nice had decreed, and established only due and reverent
worship, such as had been used in the Church, the Council of Fra^kford would
not have contradicted it: as neither, if they had known that the Pope had
confirmed that Council, A wilful vntrruth.
would they ever have doubted of the Authority thereof, as is evident by the
Caroline books themselves. And it is witting error here in M. Mort. to say,
that they of Frankeford knew that the Council of Nice was confirmed by the
Pope, for that the Caroline Books themselves, even as they are set out by the
Centurians do use that for a principal argument ^n the behalf of the Council
of Frankeford, to im^ugne the Nicene Council: for that they supposed that said
Nicene Counsel was not confirmed by Adrian ^he Pope, wherein they were deceived
by false infor^ation, I mean those of Franckeford: but M. Morton ^ould deceive
us by craft and subtility.

^2. The third opinion is of Vasquez and other Lib. 2. de cultu im^gin.
that this determination against the ^se of Images, was not at all made by the
Council ^f Franckeford, but by some other Conciliabulum of Ico^clastes, that
at the same time were at Franckeford, or ^e^re about: especially the Authors of
the foresaid ^ookes Carolini, which being craftily dispersed came (...) the
hands of Pope Adrian, who sent them back ^gaine confuted to Charles, that was
not yet Empe^ur, but made within few years after by Pope Le^ ^^e third, who
would never have yealded (says ^asquez) to that advancement of his, if he had
^hought him any way spotted with the heresy of I^^oclastes, condemned by his
predecessor, and the ^ouncell of Nice so lately before.

^3. These three coniecturall opinions then being ^eld by sundry Catholic
writers upon different ^rounds; how does M. Morton out of such variety of
^udgments infer, that they speak wilful untruth (...) their own
consciences, or are guilty of witting, ^^d voluntary falsehood, as he is bound
to infer, ^r else he says nothing to the purpose. Can there be any greater
absurdity then this, to promise wilful falsehood, and then to allege only
diversity of opinions? Surely if his Reader blush not for him, I do, and so
will pass to an other example.

HIS FOVRTH example of like falshoodes vainly objected against the same
Authors: about the Epistle of S. Epiphanius, touching Images.. V.
FROM these two shadows of some scrappes out of two Provincial Councels, he
leapeth to a place of S. Epiphanius in a certain Epistle of his, where he
writes of himself, Preamble page 59.
That entering into a Church at a place called Anablath to pray, and perceiving
a curtain wherein was a picture, as if it had been the Image of Christ or some
Saint, he took the Curtain, and rent it, as being a thing contrary to the
authority of the Scriptures. This is the story as M. Morton sets it down:
M. Mortons manner of stickling between our Authors.
and then presently for answering thereof, he puts all our writers into a
great war among themselves, bringing them in, forth, and back, this way, and
that way, the one opposing, the other answering, the third moderating, the
fourth crossing: and himself stickling between them by interlacing some words
here and there, will needs make himself the head of the fray.

45. And this is so fond a thing as every Gra^merscholler might do it: for he
needs but to go to Bellarmines works, and especially to Vasquez, who wrote
after him of the controversy of Images, and there shall he find all variety of
opinions set down with their Authors and places quoted. And from these has
M. Morton furnished himself to make the muster that here he does, without any
further studdy or labor, then to go to our foresaid Authors, and of their
objections make affirmative assertions, and of their assertions for us, make
objections against us.

46. But here again is to be noted as before, that whatsoever difference of
opinions there be, or may be among Catholic writers of controversy, about the
true meaning of S. Epiphanius in this place: yet is it nothing at all to M.
Mortons purpose, who is bound to prove that they wrote against their own
knowledge, and conscience, which I suppose were hard to do, for that every man
must be presumed to have written according as his judgment gave him, and
consequently that all this which M. Morton has so studiously gathered
together, is nihil ad rhombum, nothing to the purpose^ and therefore I could
not but laugh, when I read his conclusion of this instance saying, Preamb. page
61.
That if P. R. shall desire ^yue hundredth (instances) of this kind, I bynd my
self (says he) unto him by a faithful protestation, in a months warning to
satisfy him. Which I believe, A fond offer of M. Mort^
yea if it were five thousand in a weeks warning, for he needs no more but
to go to the foresaid books of our Catholic authors, opening them and laying
them before his adversary, and they will furnish him at large, when the state
of the question is such, as it admits variety of opinions, or diversity of
judgments about any point, or circumstance thereof.

47. As for the controversy in hand about S. Epiphanius fact and meaning,
related in the end of his Epistle to John of Jerusalem, that seems to make
against Images, though diverse learned men do expound the matter diversely, some
thinking that it was a clause added by some heretics amongst the Iconoclastes,
whereof both Bellarmine, Valentia, Suarez and last of all Baronius do yeald most
evident probabilityes, and others that admitting it for the speech of
Epiphanius, do very sufficiently answer the same otherwise: yet that in deed
it makes nothing at all against the Catholic use of sacred Images, is so
evident by conferring their answers together, as nothing can be more.

Baronius and others do prove abundantly out of Paulinus, Baron. tom. 4. anno.
392. in fine.
Venantius Fortunatus, Euodius and other ancient authors, that the use of
images was ordinary and frequent in the time of S. Epiphanius: and Suarez
confirms the same out of old holy Fathers and Doctors of the Greek Church
his equals to wit, Suar. tom. 1. in 3. par. disp. 54. sect. 1.. ad 3.
S. Chrysostom, S. Basil, S. Gregory Nanianze^, Gregory Nissen and others,
whereof is inferred that it is not probable that S. Epiphanius would set down a
thing so contrary to the common received doctrine, and practice of his time, or
if he had, it would have been noted and contradicted by some.

49 Secondly it is proved out of the second Nicene Council, that the disciples
of S. Epiphanius did set up his picture publicly in his Church of Cyprus
soon after his death, which they would never have done, S. Epiphanius in his
life time had held it for an abuse, Synod. Nic. 2. act. 6.
contrary to the authority of Scriptures to have the picture of any man set up
in the Church.

50. Thirdly S. John Damascenus that lived very Damas^. Orat. 1. de Imagine.
that the said Church of S. Epiphanius in Cyprus had continued from that time
to his imaginibus exornata, adorned with images, and thereupon infers, that
whatsoever is found in him sounding against the pious use of Images is
counterfaite and thrust into his works by the Iconoclast Heretics. And in the
foresaid Council of Nice it self, which was held in his time, one Epiphanius
a Deacon did show two other like places to have been thurst into his books by
the same Heretics.

51. Fourthly it appears by the said Council, S. John Damascen in his
forsaid Oration, that this place of S. Epiphanius in his Epistle to John of
Jerusalem was never objected against Images, either in the Council it self,
or by Claudius Taurinensis, or any other Iconoclast at that time, which they
would not have omitted to do, if in those days such a testimony had been extant
in so grave an author, as was S. Epiphanius.

52. Fifthly S. Gregory the Great obiecting to a Massiles, Greg. l. 9. Epist. 9.
called Serenus, somewhat the like fact of breaking Images, says unto him (as
is extant in his own Epistle:) Dic, Frater, a quo factu^ Sacerdote aliquando
est quod fecisti? Tell me, brother, of what Priest was it ever heard, that he
attempted a fact like unto this of yours? Which he would never have said, if
the other might have answered, I have heard and read the same done by the
great, and holy Archbishop S. Epiphanius.

53. Lastly, to omit diverse proofs which our S. Epiphanius had held for an
error and abuse against the Authority of Scriptures to have Images in the
Church, A very strong argument, that S. Epiphanius impugned not the doctrine of
image^.
as our modern Protestants will needs force it upon him; then is it likly
that he writing so large a work against all the heresies, and erroneous
doctrine, and perilous abuses that had sprung up in the Church of God, from
Christ until his time, he would not have omitted to warn men also of this,
that was so dangerous and prejudicial to the honor and service of Almighty
God: but no word is to be found of this amongst all his heap of heresies, and
consequently we may for certain infer, that he did not think this doctrine
or practice or setting up Christian Images in Christian Churches to be
unlawful, or against the authority of Scriptures.

54. And this for the matter it self which is more then was necessary for me
to say, considering that whatsoever diversity of Judgments there was, or is
about the exposition, answer, defense, or impugnation of this place of
Epiphanius: New Interludes brought in by M. Morton.
yet is there no one jot to be inferred thereof that any of them did wittingly
or willingly write false against their own conscience, which is the question
in hand, and which we are ready to prove against our adversaries. Nor yet do I
mean to stand upon the examen of the Interlude brought in by M. Morton of our
Catholic writers differences of opinions, wherein again he delights him
self: only I wish the Reader, that whereas Cardinal Bellarmine is here
calu^niated about Epiphanius Epistle translated by S. Hierome for denying the
last clause thereof to be his, he repair for the solution thereof unto Cardinal
Baronius, Baron. tom. 4. anno 392. fin^.
who more largly detecteth the fraud, then is expedient for me at this present
to relate: especially for so much as I am to pass to other particular
calu^niatio^s against Cardinal Bellarmine, in his very next example or
instance.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS CHAPTER.
OF INSTANCES AGAINST CARDINAL Bellarmine in particular, touching imputation
of old heresies.. VI.
IF you have seen how little able M. Morton has been to perform his promise
before, for wilful falsityes committed by any of our writers hitherto, much
more shall you see it now, when leaving the multitude of other Authors, he
singleth out Cardinal Bellarmine alone to deal withal: who as he has
written much, so were it not great marvel, if in so many books he should
have left some things, whereupon his adversaries might probably wrangle: M.
Mortons inte^tion by singling out Bellarmine.
but as for wilful untruth, it is so far from his known, and confessed
integrity, as M. Morton could never have made choice of an unfitter match for
that point. Nor can it be thought that he chose him upon hope to find any such
advantage in him in deed, but only to honor himself somewhat by contending
with such an adversary, and to cast some clouds, at least in the minds of the
simpler sort, upon the shining beams of Cardinal Bellarmines estimation, by
obiecting the name of wilful falsityes unto him. But as when the said clouds
are driven away from the air, the force of the sun is more sensibly felt: so
Card. Bellarmines works being cleared here from M. Morto^s calumniatio^s,
will be more highly esteemed by every judicious Reader, as not lending any
least true advantage unto any impugnatio^ of the adversary: and this is all the
hurt that he is like to receive by this assault.

Preamb. page 62.
56. And yet, as if M Morton had some great matters in deed to lay against him,
and that the proofs were prompt, certain, and evident, he according to his
former excessive vain of vaunting, falls into the some again, writing thus:
P. R. requires an example of any one, who has been found so grossly false, that
in the eye of man he may not be acquitted either by ignorance of translation
etc. which demand if it proceed from vnfeynednesse, Strange craking and
boasting.
it seems unto me so intollerably reasonable, that now I am driven to a two
fold trouble in yielding satisfaction. The one is that I know not with what one
to begin first, the falsificators be so many. The second is, when I shall begin
with any choice of one, how to make an end, so manifold are their
falsificatio^s. Therefore in respect of the falsifyers, I would require of P. R.
to propound unto me any one of his Doctors, in whom he has best assurance of
integrity, whether Greg. de Valentia, Stapleton, Bellarmine, Coccius, Suarez,
Turrian, Campian, Gretzer, Feuerdentius, the Rhemish Translation in their
annotations, or any (I say) of those which have been publikly authorized of
their Church, and I will not doubt but to give him thrice three examples of
their fraud. In the mean time I think it requisite to single out of all, such
an one, as is commended of all, to wit, Cardinal Bellarmine, that P. R. ^ay
not repyne, saying: he has chosen a David, the ^^ast in his Fathers house: but
confess that I have ^referred a Saul, one higher by the head and shoulders
^hen any of the rest: not a dead man, who cannot ^^terprete his own meaning
whether he had falsi^^ed upon ignorance, negligence etc. but one which now
^uing is able to answer for himself, whose credit ^. R. does tender, and with
whom he may con^^lt to know, whether I do him injury, or no. (...) he.

^^. And have you ever heard more confident ^each? This now may be called
present desperate in^^ed, if presently it be to be proved, The true ground of
my moderate Challenge.
that he has (...) one instance of any one falsity against Cardinal
^ellarmine, throughout all his works, as here is re^^ired. And may not then
his own words be re^^rned upon him, that neither Thraso on the stage, nor
^oliath in the field, nor Gorgias in the schools, did ever use such ^asting? My
boasting, if any were, was out of the ^^ctitude of a good conscience, este^ming
no good ^hristian man to be so wicked, as to lie so wilfully (...) before has
been set down: and therefore estee^ing all our writers to be free thereof, I
said, and ^ust say still, that if in any one of them there should (...) found
that deplored and inexcusable fraud, I should ^^uer believe him afterward, as a
man, not regar^^ng truth, nor speaking out of conscience, but of ^ilfull fraud:
which speech M. Morton calls pro^^gall and prodigious, as you have heard. And
thus he ^ust do, either in regard that he esteems it not ^or so great a crime
to lie wilfully (as Catholics do ^steeme it) or that he can prove it to be
used also by ^ur men. The first I suppose he will be ashamed to ^onfesse: the
second I expect how he will be able to ^roue; and so I pass to the examen it
self. And by the trial of his success with this one Antagonist, that he has
chosen out, the Reader may make a guess, what he were able to do, if he should
enter combat with so many of our writers, as here he has named. And for
better understanding of the matter, it is to be observed, that he endeavors
to condemn Cardinal Bellarmine of wilful ^alsities in two points. His
pretenses against Cardinal Bellarmine.
First in imputing certain heresies to Protestants, which (he says) they do
not hold: the second in falsifying other men's testimonies, alleged by him.
Both of them were grievous, if either of them by any one example could be
proved in Bellarmine. Now then to the trial.

THE FIRST Objection against Cardinal Bellarmine, of fals^ imputation of the
Pelagian-heresy to Protestants.. VII.
Preamb. p. 63^
LET P. R. (says ^e) for a while take Cardinal Bellarmine into secret
confession, and first ask him, Bellarmin. l. 4. de Eccles. militant. c. 9..
Pelagiani.
with what conscience he has charged Calvin with the heresy of the Pelagia^s,
who denied that there was any original sin in Infants, especially in the
children of faithful Christians? For he could not be ignorant, that this
doctrine of denying original sin was (as their own Greg. de Valent. l. de
orig. peccat. c. 2. initio. etc. 8. and in to^. 2. disp. 6. q. ^^. punct. 1.
L. Jesuit confesses) the proper heresy of the Pelagians. And not so only,
but says furthermore, that Calvin and all other Protestants are so far from
denying original sin, that they do monstrously extend the nature thereof,
even unto persons regenerate. This is the charge, which he pretends (as you
see) to prove, that Gregorius de Valentia (whom it pleases him to style here
L. ^esuite, though I know not why) disagreeth from ^ellarmine in ascribing the
Pelagian heresy, about ori^inal sin, to Calui^. Whereto I answer, first, that
it is well, that M. Morton permits Cardinal Bellarmine to ^e demanded his
faults in secret confession: but ^imselfe, who I presume scarce goes to any
se^ret con^ession at all, must be driven to confess his ^aults in public,
with greater worldly shame, as in ^his place. Who would not think, that after
the ^^ate of the question so often set down, M. Mort. perpetual wandering from
the purpose.
and so ma^y bragging promises made on his part to produce ^reat matters
against Bellarmine, he would not have ^ene ashamed to come forth now with this
poor and idle objection in the very first front of his charge, wherein if all
should be granted to him, that he ^biecteth, to wit, that Bellarmine and
Valentia had not ^ully agreed in charging Calvin with the Pelagian he^esy about
original sin; yet does not this infer wilful untruth in either of them.
For it might have been only difference of judgments, in understanding
differently the doctrine of Calvin, each man persuading himself, that he had
understood him rightly, and so still nothing had been brought to his purpose of
witting and wilful untruths known to the vtterer to be such. And is not
this then mere trifling?

^9. But now the matter stands not so well: for that there is no
contradiction at all between Bellarmine and Valentia, Shifts to make Bellarmin
and Vale^tia seem contrary.
as presently shall be showed. And M. Morton does guil^ully corrupt them both to
make them seem contrary. And let the Reader look upon it, and know him and
his cause by these tricks; who to frame some show of fa^shod in others, where
none is, uses the same intolerably himself.

60. The Reader then must know, that Cardinal Bellarmine in the 9. Chapter of
his fourth Book de Ecclesia, The true opinion and discourse of Card. Bellarmin
about Pelagianisme in Protestants.
handling the notes of the Church (which book and Chapter are here cyted by
M. Morton) taking upon him to show, that one principal note of the Church is,
to agree in doctrine with the ancient Fathers from time to time, and of the
contrary false Church, to participate with heretics; he recounteth twenty
several heads of heresies held by twenty different Heresiarches, with sundry
branches thereunto belongi^g, condemned by the ancient Christian Church, which
also are defended by the Protestants of our time, some more and some less.

61. And this h^ proves so substa^tially, as nothing in effect can be said
against it: which M. Morton having perused, and desirous to pick some matter
against him, that might seem to have some show of probability, he begins
with the Pelagians, as you have heard, which is the fourtenth old condemned
heresy, showed by Bellarmine to be revived again in diverse points by
Protestants, thinking best to ouerskip thirteen at on leap. As for example,
Bellarm. l. 4. de Eccles. c. 9.. Pelagiani.
whereas the Pelagians did hold two principal heresies among other, says
Bellarmine, the one, That every sin though never so little is mortal, and
depriueth us of Gods grace: That there is no original sin in man, especially
in Infants of faithful parents, Zuing. l. de baptism. Bucer. in c. 3. in Matt.
Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 15.. 20.
he auerreth that the Protestants of our days do concur in both points. In
the first all generally, that there is no sin Venial of his own nature: in
the second with some distinction, for that Zuinglius (^aith he) denies
Original sin in all, Calvin and Bucer in Christian Infants only. This is
Cardinal Bellarmines assertion, his latin words be these.

62. Zuinglius negat simpliciter peccatum originale in quolibet homine, Bucerus
autem and Caluinus solum in filijs ^idelium, quos dicunt sanctos nasci, and
saluari etiam sine baptismo. Zuinglius does absolutely deny original sin to
be in any man, but Bucer and Calvin do only deny the same in the children of
the faithful, whom they say to be borne Saints, and to be saved also without
baptism. So as Bellarmine is guilfully abused by M. Morton, in setting down
his opinion, as though he had said that Calvin had denied with the Pelagians,
that there is any original sin at all in Infants, though less in the
children of the faithful, citing his latin words in the margent peruersely
^hus: Pelagiani docebant non esse in hominibus peccatum ori^inale, and
praecipue in filijs fidelium, idem docent Caluinus and Bucerus. Injurious
dealing.
The Pelagians did teach that there was not original sin in men, and
especially in the chil^ren of the faithful, the same do teach Calvin and
Bu^er. Thus he. Whereas he says differently, as you ^aue heard, that Calvin
and Bucer denied it only in the ^hildren of the faithful, granting it in the
rest: and ^his could not M. Morto^ but see and know, and conse^uently is taken
in a witting formal lie that know^th one thing and yet writes the contary.

63. And herupon, whereas he willed me to ask of Cardinal Bellarmine in secret
Confession with what conscience he had charged Calvin with the heresy of the
Pelagians, that denied original sin in all men, I must ask him in open
confession, with what conscience he could so ^alsify Bellarmine in making him
to say that which he ^id not: for that he does not say also absolutely, that
Calvin denies all original sin in all Infants, Vale^t. tom. 2. disp. 6.
pun. 2. Zuing. lib. de bapt. Calu. l. 4. Inst. c. 16^
but only in the childrin of the faithful, and this does not the L. Jesuit
Valentia any way contradict, as falsely here is insinuated, that he does; but
rather to the contrary he expressly auouch^th the same, and this in the very
place here cited by M. Morton, saying: Zuinglio and Caluino visum est filios
^idelium non contrahere peccatum originale; It seemed to Zuinglius and Calvin
that the children of the faithful do not contract original sin, and he
quoteth the places where it is to be found in their works: and the same he
does in his 4. Tome upon S. Thomas, Tom. 4. disp. 4.. 3. Caluinus.
ci^ing other places of Calui^ where he houldeth the ^ame doctrine. So as in
this point Bellarmine and Valentia have no more contradiction between them,
then it pleases M. Morton to devise of his own head, and to publish in their
names, contrary to their own apparent words and meaning.

64. But he cites a place of Valentia that may seem to make to the contrary,
where he says: Preamb. p. 63.
Calvin and other Protestants are so far o^ from denying Original sin,
that they do monstrously extend the nature thereof, even unto persons
regenerate, Valen de peccat. Orig. c. 2. initio. etc. 8. and tom. 2. disp. 6.
q. 11. punc. 1.. Qua^ quaestionem.
and for this he quoteth certain places o^ Valen^ia (as he might also have
done diverse of Bellarmine ^or he relates of Calvin the very same) and sets
down the latin according to his own English, though not a little differing
from the words of the Author: but that which most imports, is, that he
wittingly and deceiptfully abuses the Reader with this citation, as though
Valentia did contradict both himself and Bellarmine, Bellarm. l. 5. de amiss.
gratiae c. 5. etc.
and said, That Calvin and Bucer were ^arre of from denying Original sin in
the children of the faithful: Whereas he says not so, but that, they do not
absolutely deny all original sin, as the Pelagians did, and as Zuinglius
before is charged to have done, together with the Anabaptists, as Melancthon
witnesses, and before them again the Armenians, Albanenses, and others, but
only denied the same in the children of the faithful, as has been said, and
in the rest they granted it: and not this only, but monstrously also do the
said Calvin, Luther, and other Protestants extend the nature and guylt of
original sin, eue^ unto such as are regenerate and christened, which is to
be vnders^ood in that they hold, that the very motions of concupiscence called
( fo^es) are sins in themselves, even without the con^ent of our minds,
which is an other extreme op^osition to Catholic doctrine, that teaches
these ^otio^s not to be sins at all, without some consent ^ealded unto them:
but yet this assertion of Valentia ^s not contrary, nor contradictory to that
which ^ardinall Bellarmine, and himself affirmed before of ^aluin; to wit,
that with the Pelagians he holds that the Infa^ts of faithful people are
deuoyd of ori^^nall sin, for that those motions of concupisce^ce which he
calls original sins in Christians a^^lt, are not in infants and thereby he
denies origi^all sin in Christian Infants, and grants it in ^^em that be
of age, in both which he is oppo^^te to the Catholic Church. Let M. Mort. see
how (...) can defend him from contradiction to himself, (...) I have defended
Cardinal Bellarmine, and Gregorius de ^alentia.

^5. There remains then only to examine the ^eason alleged by M. Morton why
Bellarmines charge ^f Pelagianisme against Calvin could not be true, Preamb.
page 63.
for that ^saith he) this doctrine o^ denying original sin was the pro^er
heresy of the Pelagians, out of which confession of ^he L. Jesuit Valentia,
Valen. l. de Orig. pec^. cap. 2.
M. Morton would infer, that ^or so much as this was the proper heresy of the
Pe^^gians, therefore it could not be of the Protestants: which reason is so
wise, as it can serve to nothing, ^ut to make the reader laugh. For alb^it the
Pela^^ans were the peculiar Authors of this heresy; yet ^ight the ^ame be made
common by participation, and ^o does Valentia expressly say, that this heresy
was taken up afterward both by the Arm^nians, Albanenses, Anabaptists, citing
Castro and Melancthon for the same. So as to cite this reason or a proof, that
Calvin did not deny orgina^l sin in Infants, ^or that our own L. Jesuit
Valentia does say, that it was the proper errors of the Pelagians (which yet
are not his words but S. Augustines cited by him for the same) is as ridiculous
an inference, Aug. l. 6. contra Julian. c. 2. and 3. and l. 4. ad Bonif. c. 2.
and 4.
as if a man should say, it was the proper error of Arius, and his fellows in
old time to deny the equality of the Son of God with his Father, ergo, it
cannot be that the modern Arians of Transiluania, and other places, do hold
the same now: and it was the peculier doctrine of Berengarius, and his
adherents to deny the Real Presence, ergo, the Protestants of England at this
day cannot be charged with that doctrine. And does not every body see the
vanity of this inference? Wherefore his conclusion is to be noted, I let pass
(says he) a doze^ such criminations, cast by him upon Protestants, which by
the testimonies of his own Doctors may be proved to have been lewd and
intolerable slanders. Whereto I answer, that hitherto he has not been able
to show any one: we shall see what he will say afterward. But in the mean
space I leave it to the modest Reader, to judge where the lewdness does
remain, if any be.

66. And to this consideration I add another, that whereas Cardinal Bellarmine
did charge Calvin, and Caluinists with two principal errors of the Pelagians,
the one, that which now has been handled, of denying Original sin in
children, and Infants of the faith^ull, Hierom. l. 2. contra Pelagian.
and the second, of denying the difference of Venial and Mortal sins, and
holding that by every least sin we leese our justice, and consequently that
all sin is mortal, Bellarmine citing for the same the testimony of S.
Hierome, who ascribes that for heresy unto the Pelagians: and whereas in like
manner he proves the same heresy, not only to be held by Luther, and
Melancthon, but also by Calvin in diverse parts of his works, as lib. 2.
Instit. cap. 8.. 85. lib. 3. cap. 4.. 28. etc. M. Morton taking upon him to
clear Calvin in the former charge ^^out original sin, though so vnluckely
as you ^^ue heard, says never a word against this second ^^out the distinction
of venial and mortal sins; Calvin granted vnderha^d to hold one point of
Pelagianisme.
^herby is ^uident in all probability, that he admit^^ed that for true, and
consequently yealded secretly, ^^at Caluinists do agree with the Pelagians in
this he^^sy, though he storm sharply as you have heard a^^inst Bellarmine for
charging Calvin with any point (...) Pelagianisme at all. And this fraud or
frailty he co^^itteth commonly in all the rest of the heresies ^^iected,
denying the one weakly, and by his silence ^^anting the other, as now by
experience you shall (...).

THE SECOND INIVRIOVS ^^i^ction, against Cardinal Bellarmine, for false
imputation of the Nouatian-heresy.. VIII.
FROM the fourteenth heresy, wherein Cardinal Bellarmine shows the
Protestants to participate ^ith the Pelagians, as you have heard, M. Morton
star^^th back to the sixth, Preamb. page 63.
of participation with the No^^tians in these words. He ( that is Bellarmine)
makes ^rotesta^ts guilty (says he) of the heresy of the Nouati^^s in taking
from the Church all power of reconciliating men vn^^ God, when as his own
Castro de haeres. l. 12. haer. 3 tit. de poenit. Vega l. 13. de Instit. c. 2.
page 486. Maldon. co^m. in Joan.
Authors do note, that the ^eresy of the Nouatians was this: videlicet, to deny
any man, that should sin after Baptism, all hope of remission (...) sins,
although he should repent. Yea, and also Bellar^ine himself in behalf of
Protestants confesses ^lse where, that they require repentance and faith in
Chri^tians, that they may be justified, and obtain remission of sins. Nor
this only, but there is no difference between us (says he) and Protestants
about repentance, as it is a conversion unto God, Bellar. l. 3. de Iustif. c.
6. Bellar. de poenit. l. ^. c. 1.. Vt igitur.
wi^h detestation of sin, or as it consists in outward signs of sorrow,
weeping, conf^ss^on, and outward chasticements^ yea and almost all o^ them
allow an outward rite of absolution. But the only co^trouersy between us is,
whether Penance be properly a Sacrament. ^he contradiction is this, to impute
unto Protestants an heresy, which takes away all manner o^ repentance and hope
of remission for sin past, and yet to acknowledge in the^ a contrary
orthodoxall truth, which is to pro^es^e a necessity of repentance, and
reconciliation, and remis^io^ of ^^nnes. Thus far he.

68. And if we stand attent in this place, we shall see no less fraudulent
dealing then in the former, if not more, to make apperance of contrariety and
difference between Cardinal Bellarmine and other Catholic Authors, Nec^ssitie
of lying in M. Morton.
about the heresy of the Nouatians: which though it could be proved, yet does
it not infer as every man may see, the principal conclusion o^ the question,
that there were wilful malice. But all is full of fraud, as you will
perceive, and the reason is not so much, I suppose, for that he delights
himself in lying wilfully, as before has been touched, as the necessity of his
cause, which drives him to use the help of these shifts, or else to say
nothing. And this am I forced often to note to the Reader, for that it is
lightly a perpetual observation in him.

69. His dri^t then is, if you mark it well, to argue Cardinal Bellamine of
falsity, in that, he affirms the Protestants of our days to join with the
old heretics the Nouatians, Lib. 12. de haer. ^erb. Paenite^tia. ^ertia
haeresis.
in taking from the Church all power of reconciling men unto God, for those are
Bellarmines words, though curtally rec^ted by M. Morton out of his latin text,
as presently you shall see: and to con^radict the Cardinal in this, he cyteth
the words of Alphonsus de Castro, that says, that the heresy of the
^^uatia^s, was to deny any man, who should sin aft^r Baptism (...) hope of
remission of sins, although he should repent. Ep. 52. ad Antonianum.
But ^ow these two are neither contradictory, nor con^^ary, if they be well
considered. For that the Noua^^^ns are held to teach both these points, Lib. 1.
c. 1. and 2. S. Chrisost. de reparat. lapsi
first and prin^^pally that there was no power left in the Church ^^to Priests
to reconcile and remit sins, to such as ^^ll after Baptism, especially into
grievous sins (...) testifies S. Cyprian in a special Epistle against
No^^tianus, and S. Ambrose in his book de Poenitentia, and others. And this
first part of their error was contra^^ues Ecclesiae, against the keys of the
Church, or power ^^ Priests to remit sins: and heerin all authors do ^^ree.
But the second part of their error went fur^^er, as some do gather out of the
ancient Fathers, (...) testifyeth Suar. disp. 16. de poen. sect. 1.
Suarez (though Bellar. l. 1. de poen. c. 9. initio. Valent. in 3. par. disp.
7. de poen. q. 9. pu^. 2. sect. 2.. respo^deo, esto.

Idem Hasselius Ruardus and alij.


others be of different ^^inions) which was to deny furthermore besides ^^e
Sacrament, all virtue of Pe^nance whatsoever, whe^^er private, or Sacramental,
especially in great sin^es, as by the words of Alphonsus de Castro here
recited ^ay seem to appear.

^0. Of these two errors then, the first and not ^^e second is ascribed by
Bellarmine to the Protestants, ^o wit, that they deny the power of Penance,
as (...) is a Sacrament, that is to say, as it contains not ^nly a private
detestation of sin in the sinner, but ^^so the absolution or remission thereof
by the Priest (...) the public Minister of the Church. The other ^^rour of
denying all use of private repentance, ey^^er inwardly, or outwardly by sor^ow,
sighs, tears and the like, is not ascribed to Prot^st^nts by Bellar^ine: so as
for M. Morto^ to bring in the one as contra^ictory to the other, that for as
much as Alphonsus de Castro says, that the Nouatians did deny all power of
^e^nance, therefore Bellarmine says not truly that they denied the Sacramental
use thereof: Or for so much as Protestants do not concur with the Noua^ians in
the one, they do not in the other, is a most absu^d kind of reasoning called by
Logitians a dispara^i^, for that both may be true, and one excludes not the
other. For it is most true which Bellarmin says, that Nouatianoru^ error
praecipuus erat etc. The principal error of the Nouatians (which word [
principall] importing that they had other errors besides, is craftily cut o^ by
M. Mort.) was, that there is not power in the Church to reco^^le men to God,
but only by Baptism: which last words also bu^ only by Baptism) were by M.
Mort. and by the same art shifted ou^ of the text, for that they have relation
to the Priests of the Church, to whom it appertains by public, and ordinary
office to baptize: and in this the Protestants are accused by Bellarmine to
concur^^ with them in denial of pe^nance, as it is a Sacrament.

71. And together with this it may be true, that besides this praecipuus
error, A strained and counterfeit co^tradictio^.
the principal error, the Nouatians, some, or all denied the fruit of all
kind of private, and particular penance, as sorrow, tears, punishment of the
body, and the like, wherein diverse Protestants do not agree with them, nor yet
are accused thereof. Whereby it appears that all this counterfeit contradiction
which M. Morton has so much labored to establish here between Bellarmine on
the one side, and Castro, Vega, and Maldona^e on the other, comes to be right
nothing at all, for that Bellarmine speaks expressly of Penance, as it is a
Sacrament, and in that sense only says, that the Protestants deny it,
together with the Nouatians, as they do also the use of Chrisme in the
Sacrament of Con^irmation, which was an other error of theirs objected by
Bellarmine to Protestants, as much as the form^r, but wholly dissembled by M.
Morton. The other three Authors, as they do not exclude but rather include the
Sacrament of Penance: yet do they m^ke ^ention of the other part of the
Nouatian error, ^^at seemed to deny all penance in general, whe^^er
Sacramental or not Sacramental: and of this ^^e not Protestants accused by
Bellarmine, Bell. 3. de Iustisic. c. 6.
but expre^^y rather exempted by the words, which here M. ^orton sets down
of his. So as for him to play ^^on his own voluntary Equivocation, and
mista^^ng of the word Pe^nance, and Nouatian heresy about the ^^me, is toto
gross an illusion. Wherefore if you ^^ease, let us briefly see how many false
tricks he ^^eth in this place.

^2. The first of all may be, that whereas Cardinal to prove that our modern
Protestants do ^^mbolize and agree with the old Nouatian heresies, Five
several false shifts and voluntary corruptions.
^^leageth two particular instances, the one in deny^^g the power of the Church
to remit sins by ^^e Sacrament of pe^nance, the other in denying the (...) of
holy Chrisme in the Sacrament of Confirmation, ^. Morton having nothing to say
to the second, reply^th only to the first by an Equivocation as you have ^^ard:
and yet if the second only be true, Bellarmine (...) justified in noting the
Protestants of Nouatianisme: and therefore to deny the one, and dissemble the
other, ^ust needs proceed of witting fraud, granting that which is chiefly in
controversy, to wit, that Pro^estants do hold in somewhat Nouatianisme.

^3. The second fraud is, for that in reciting Cardinal charge against
Protestants, he cut^eth from the latin sentence of Bellarmine, being very small
and short in it self, both the beginning and end, to wit, Praecipuus error,
and post baptismum, as you have heard, and that for the causes which now I have
declared.

74. Thirdly he does bring in guylfully the foresaid Castro, Vega, and
Maldonate, as contrary to Bellarmine: whereas they speak of an other thing, to
wit, of pe^nance in another sense: and b^syde^ this do all expres^y set down
the two errou^s o^ the Nouatians, to wit, that they did deny as wel^ the
Sacrament of Penna^ce, as also the private use ther^f as it is a particular
virtue: and that the Protes^an^^ of our days do concur with them in the
fi^st^ though not in the second: and that he could not bu^ evidently see and
know this, and so did write it against his conscience to deceive the Reader.

M. Morton does allege B^llarmine lib. 3. de Justice. cap. 6. to confess that
Protestants do require repentance in Christians, that they may be iu^tified, he
well knew that this was not contrary to that which he had said before in his
accusation lib. 4. de Notis Ecclesiae cap. 9. that Prot^stants did join with
the Nouatia^s in denying all power of the Church for r^conciling men to God:
for he knew that in the former Bellarmine meant of private penance as it is a
virtue which every man may use of himsel^e, but in the second he meant of the
Sacrament, and keys of the Church, which require absolution of the Priest.
Here then was wil^ull and malicious mistaking: and so much the more, for that
in the very next words here set down by him both in English and latin out of
Bellarmines first book de po^nit^ntia cap. 8. the Cardinal does expressly
declare, that only Controversy between Catholics and Protestants in this
matter, is about the sacrament of pe^nance with absolutio^ of the Church, and
not the private pe^nance which every particular man may use of himself. So as
under the cloud of private, and sacramental pe^nance he craftily endeauoreth
to make some show of a contradictio^, which is none indeed.

M. Morton to make Cardinal Bellarmine contrary to himself, or very
forgetful, he alleging here his latin words, makes him to say, first,
that Protestants require faith and repentance to iustifica^ion, and then
presently in another place, Luther reiec^eth penance, as though Luther were no
Prote^^ant: whereas this is no contradiction in Cardinal Bellarmine, but in
Luther himsel^e, and anoto^ious fraud in M. Morton, so pa^pably to d^ceaue his
Reader: for that Cardinal Bellarmines words are these: Bellarm. l. 4. de
notis cap. 9.. Quae sententia.
Lutherus lib. de Captiuitate Babylonica, tria tan^um agnoscit Sacramenta,
Baptism^m, Poenitentiam and Panem; tamen infra cap. de extrema Unction,
reij^it Poen^tentiam. Luther in his book of Babylonicall Captivity (in the
Chapter o^ the Eucharist) acknowledges only three Sacraments, Baptism,
Penance, and Bread, Luthers inconsta^cy.
and yet afterward (in the same book) and in the Chapter of Extreme Unction he
rejects pe^nance. These are the words of Bellarmine which M. Morton could
not but have seen and considered^ and yet to make some little show of oversight
in Bellarmine, he was content against his conscience to set down, Lutherus
reijcit Poeni^entiam, and to conceal and dissemble all the rest of the
sentence alleged. When will he be able to produce one of our Authors with so
manifest a wilfulnes.

77. Let us conclude then, that M. Mort. is in a poor case, when he is driven
to all these shifts to seek out contradictions amongst us, and to find none:
and yet let us hear and mark his Conclusion, and see what manner of
contradictio^ he frames against Bellarmine, Pream. p. 64.
for it will be substantial (I warrant you) out of these premises. M. Mort.
Conclusion out of false premises.
The contradiction is this (says he) to impute unto Protestants an heresy
which takes away all manner of repentance, and hope o^ remission of sin
past: and yet to acknowledge in them a contrary orthodoxall truth, which is to
profess necessity of repentance, reconciliation, and remission o^ sins
Whereto I answer, that here is no contradiction at all, as Bellarmine sets
it down, both these propositions being false in themselves. For first
Bellarmine does not impute unto Protestants that they do take away all manner
of repentance, and hope of remission for sins in their sense, but only that
they take away and deny the Sacrament o^ reconciliation by penance, and
absolution of the Church^ and secondly Catholics are so ^ar o^ from
acknowledging an orthodoxall truth in Protestants, about repentance,
reconciliatio^, and remission of sins, that albeit they grant that
Protestants do in words confess, and prescribe unto their followers
repentance, faith, newness of life, and such other points, uttered and
practiced after their fashion: yet are they little auaylable, and much less
orthodoxall, but a private manner and form of their own, rejected and
condemned by the Catholic Church, for that it excludes the Sacrament, and
absolution of the Priest, without which after baptism, either in voto, or, in
re (as Deuines do distinguish) in Christian Religion, no pardon, or hope of
remission of sins, can orthodoxally be conceived. And thus much for this
second objected falsity to Bellarmine.

THE THIRD OBJECTION against Cardinal Bellarmine, for false imputation of the
Manichean heresy unto Protestants.. IX.
HIs third objection against Cardinal Bellarmine, of unlawful dealing,
concerning the imputatio^ o^ some points of the Manichean heresy unto
Caluinists, he sets down in these words: Belarmine attri^^^eth (says he)
unto Calvin the heresy o^ the Manichees^ who ^^d condemn the nature of men,
depriving them o^ freewill, Pream. p. 64. Bellar. l. 4. de notis Eccl. c. 9.. 8.
(...) ascribing the original and beginning o^ sin unto the nature (...) man,
and not unto his freewill, seeing he has himself ^^serued, that Calvin
Bellar. l. 1. de gratia primi hom. cap. 1.. In eodem principio.
teaches, that man in his first crea^^^n had freewill, whereby in his integrity
he might, i^ he would, ^^^e attained unto eternal life. This contradiction in
this point (...) ^o more then this to charge Calvin with that which he did not
^^^e^ue. Is not this singular falsehood? and yet behold a more noble then this.
Whereunto I answer, that if it be more ^^table in folly the^ this, or else in
fraud, it is notable ^^deed: Let us here the folly. This co^tradictio^ in this
point ^aith M. Mort.) is no more the^ this, to charge Calvin with that which he
believed not. So he. Whereof I infer that it ^as no contradictio^ at all. For
to accuse a man to ^ould that which he holds not, has no contradi^tion in
it, but a false accusation: nor is it always ^^lshood, for it may be upon
error: and this for ^^e folly. Let us pass to consider the fraud.

^9. I do suppose that M Morton would have said, ^r should have said, that
Cardinal Bellarmine was ther^ore noted by him of a contradiction: not so much
^or cha^ging Calvin with that which he did not be^eeue, for this is no
contradiction (as has been said,) as for that Bellarmine accusing Calvin of
concur^ing with the Manichees, Three notorious f^audes about the Manichea^
heresy.
in denial of Free Will unto ^an, does notwithstanding in another place
confess, that Calvin granted Free Will to have been in man in his first
creation: but neither in this is any contradicton at all. For that Calvin
granting Free Will to have been in man at his first creation, and lost a^terward
by the fall and sin of Adam, may concur with the Manichees in this, that
after the fall of Adam, and as now we live, C^l^. l. 2. In i^. c. 2.3. and 4.
we have no Free Will: and so does Cardinal Bellarmine take him, and prove it
out of his own words in sundry Chapters o^ his book, that he does hold
indeed, and concurreth fully with the very sense of the Manichees therein, which
authorityes of Calvin M. Morton ought to have answered in some sort, if in
earnest he had meant to have defended him.

80. This then is one egregious fraud, and the chief in this place, to delude
his Reader with the ambiguity, and Equivocation of different times. The
Manichees taught, that man after Adams fall had no free will, as both S.
Hierome and S. Augustine do testify in the sentence of M. Morton here set
down (though craftily he covered their names) and Bellarmine proves Calvin to
hold the same, out of his own words and works. What answers M. Morton?
Calvin (says he) is con^essed by Bellarmine to grant free will in man before
the fall of Adam in his first cr^^^io^: Yea but the question is, after that
fall. How then does M. Morton answer to the purpose? And how does he allege
Bellarmine as contradicting himself, in that, in one place, he says that
Calvin confess^th Freewill, and in another says, that he denies it, for so
much as it is in respect of diverse times. For I would ask M. Morton in his
Logic, is it a contradiction to say that Calvin confesses Freewill in man
before his first fa^l, and denies it afterward, seeing they are distinct times,
and import distinct estates? and if this be not any contradiction, as any child
will confess that it is not, why does he seek to abuse his Reader with such a
fallacy?

81. Another fraud, though somewhat less^ perhap^ then the former, The second
^^aud.
is, that in setting down the charge of Bellarm^ne against Calvin, he
recounteth the same as in Bella^m^^es own words, thus: He attribueth unto
C^lu^n the heresy of the Manichees, who (says he) d^d co^^^mne the nature of
men, depriving them o^ free will, and ^s^^i^ing the original and beginning o^
sin unto the nature of man, and not unto Free Will. This sentence (...) say,
though M. Morton put down in a different ^etter, as Bellarmines words, and
affirms him to ^peake the^; yet indeed they are not his, nor set down ^y him
as his own, but are the words of S. Hierome, and S. Augustine with some
inserted by M. Morton himself, for thus are they related by Cardinal
Bellarmine: ^anichaeoru^ ^inquit Hi^ronymus) est hominu^damnare na^^ram, and
liberu^ auferre arbitrium. Hierom. praef. Dial. contra Pelagianos.
Et Augustinus: Peccato^um originem non tribuu^t Manichaei libero arbitrio. S.
Hierome ^aith it is the heresy of the Manichees to condemn the nature of men,
and to take away Free Will. And S. ^ugustine says, August. de haeres. haer. 46.
that the Manichees do ascribe the ori^en of sin not to Free Will. And why
think you ^id M. Morton conceal these two Fathers names? The ^auses are
evident. First for that he was loath to ^ublish, that the denial of free will
in man, (...) ^o generally taught and defended by the Prote^tants of our days,
should be pronounced for an ^eresy, and a Manichean heresy, by two such grave
Fathers, as S. Hierome and S. Augustine are. Second^y, for that if he had
uttered the matter plainly, ^s it lies in Bellarmine, he had marred his
sleight of ^unning to Free Will, granted by Calvin in the first ^reation of
man: for that it is evident, by these ^wo Fathers, that they speak of
Free Will after ^he fall of Adam: Therefore it was necessary for him ^o conceal
their names, which yet was fraudulent.

^2. The third fraud is, The third fraud.
that whereas Cardi^all does allege two points wherein ^he Protestants of our
time, but especially Cal^in, do concur with the Manichean heresy; the one,
that which has been said, of the denying of Free Will, the other in
reprehending and condemning Abraham, Sampson, Sara, Rebecca, Judas Machabaeus,
Sephora etc. and other Saints of the old Testament, as S. Augustine
testifies, that the Mani^^eans did, Aug l 22. co^t. Fa^st. and duobus lib^is
cont^a ad^ers. l^gis and P^o^het.
and Bellarmine shows that Calvin does hold the very same, proving by
multiplicity o^ place^ quoted out of his C^l l. 3. Ins^^. c. 2.. 3. etc. 5.. ^.
etc. 14. ^. 11 etc. 20. ^. 15. and l. 4. c. 15.. 22.
works; M. Mort. passes ever with silence this latter proo^e as unanswerable,
and yet will have us think that Bellarmine did iniure Calvin in noting him
with the Manichean heresy: which is as much, as if a man having two writings to
show for a suite in Law, the Attorney of the adverse part, should suppress the
one which is most plain and evident, and cavil about the other. And this
shall suffice for this third objection. Now let us pass to the other more
notable, which was promised before.

THE FOVRTH OBJECTION against Card. Bellarmin^, about pretended false
imputation of Arianisme unto Protestants.. X.
BELLARMINE (says he) accuses M. Bullinger of Arianisme, because of the
sentence ( tres s^nt. (...) statu, Preamb. page 64.
sed gradu etc.) notwithstanding he knew this was the very sentence of
^ertullian, and is therefore ^ls where expounded as orthodoxall and iustifyable
by himself. If this be so notable an objection with M. Morton as before he
va^ted, it is asigne, that he has great penury of notable ones, for that this
is so notable, as it is indeed nothing, but that only necessity and penury did
drive M. Morton to produce it: and so it seems, that himself did esteem of
it, by his obscure propounding t^ero^, as though he would not have it well
understood; albeit he term it never so no^able.

^4. For better conceauing whereof, the Reader ^ust know, that Cardinal
Bellarmine in the Preface to ^is five books de Christo, proposing diverse
sorts of ^duersaryes among our modern Protestants, that ^^ther openly or
secretly did impugn the divinity ^f Christ, or some article thereunto
belonging, after ^e naming of many others, he writes thus of ^ullinger:
Henricum Bullingerum (says he) non puduit ^ibere etc. Henry Bullinger (that
was the Successor (...) Vldericu^ Zuinglius) was not ashamed to write in ^is
book of the Scripture, that there are three persons (...) the Godhead, non
statu sed gradu, non substantia sed (...), non potestate sed specie
di^^erentes, di^^ering not in ^ate but degree, not in substance but in form,
not (...) power but in kind: which truly (says Bellar^ine) the Arians
themselves would scarce have durst (...) avouch.

^5. Thus wrote Bellarmine: and what now says ^. Morton against it? He knew
(says he) that this was ^e very sentence of Tertullian. Tertull. l. aduersus
Prax.
True it is, but every thing that is in Tertullian, who wrote before the
Council of Nice, wherein matters and forms of ^peach about the persons of the
blessed Trinity were ^^ore exactly discussed, is not fit, nor secure for a
^euyne of our times to follow. And if M. Morton had ^onsidered well o^ the
paradoxes of Tertullian gathe^ed together by learned Pamelius in his last
edition (...) wherefore this is one and the last of all and censured ^or
dangerous by the said Author and other learned men; See Pamel. in parad. 31.
and annot. 316 in Apol^geti. and 29. in l contra Prax.
) it is likely that he would not so ^ashly have objected the same to
Bellarmine, for reprehending it in Bullinger.

86. But M. Morton brings a twofould argument for ground of his challenge,
the one in latin out of Gregorius de Valentia, as though he had alleged the
foresaid sentence out of Tertullian, with approving or at least wise not
improuing the same. For thus is the matter a^^ aged by M. Morton in his margent
out of ^alentia: Sic (...) ^ertullianus in libro aduersus Praxe^m, tres sunt,
non statu sed gradu, non substan^ia sed ^or^a. non potestate sed sp^cie.
Gregor. Valentia Iesuita l. de Vnitate and Trinitate cap 9. And then in the
English text, he says as you have now heard, that Bellarmine himself else
where in his works, expounds the same sentence of Tertullian, as orthodoxall
and iustifyable.

87. But in both these instances are frauds on M. Mortons behalf, and no such
sincere dealing as were requisite among men that handled good causes. For that
first, there is no such narration o^ Tertullians sentence in Valentia, as here
is set down, without reprehension thereof: nor is Tertullian so much as named
by him in the place alleged, but a greiuous reprehension is used by him
against Bullinger, for using the said sentence as orthodoxall. Greg. de Val^nt.
l. 1. de unit. and trin. c. 9. ^. Item Bulling.
Bullingerus Sacramentarius (says he) tres in Diuinitate personas differ
dicit, non statu, sed gradu etc. Bullinger the Sacramentary affirms that
there are three persons in the Deity, which differ, not in state, but degree,
not in substance, but form, not in p^^er, but kind: by which words he does
not only overthrow the Godhead of the Son, but even the whole mystery of the
most ^oly Trinity. So Valentia. And this was his Judgment of that sentence,
which M. Morton would have his Reader think, that Valentia had allowed of, as
of an orthodoxall sentence of Tertullia^. Can there be any more wilful and
witting fraud, then this?

88. Now as for the allowance thereof else where by Cardinal Bellarmine
himself, M. Morton does o^^er him great abuse, for he never allows any where
of that sentence, as it stands wholly in his book against Praxea, or as it is
accepted and used by Bullinger, but only taken in hand in his first book de
Christo, to interpret in good sense certain speeches of Tertullian, objected
by Arians and Trinitarians against the Godhead of Christ, Valentia and
Bellarmine grossly abused.
as though he had favored them therein, and coming to a place cited out of the
same book, against Praxea, where he says, Dum sili^m agnosco, s^cund^m a
Patre desendo, for so much as I acknowledge the Son, I do defend him as
second after the Father (whereby the Heretics would prove the Son not to be
equal to his Father,) Cardinal Bellarmine answering to this place, says,
that the Son is called second (by Tertullian) not because he is inferior,
Tert. l. ^on^. Hermog. long ante medium.
or not equal to the Father, but only according to the order of beginning or
origin, for that the Son is originally of the Father: and by this occasion he
expounds also the first two words of the foresaid sentence, statu et non
gradu, saying, that, per gradum intelligit ordine^ personarum: Tertullian by
degree in this place understands only the order, of the three persons among
themselves, but not a different degree in perfection. For that Tertullia^ in
another place has these words: Diuinitas gradus non habet, vtpote vnica: the
Godhead of the three persons has no degrees, as being only one.

89. Thus then did Cardinal Bellarmine seek to expound in good sense the
first two words of the sentence, by another place of Tertullian himself: but
the whole sentence he never defended, nor admitted, but held it rather for
erroneous in Tertullian, and heretical in Bullinger. And now you see what
notable advantage M. Morton has gotten out of this his so notable objection,
which is nothing else, but the discovery of two or three notable shifts, and
fraudulent tricks of his own. And yet do you consider how he insulteth as if
he had proved somewhat against Bellarmine indeed. For thus he continues his
speech for his fifth instance.

THE FIFTH OBJECTION against Cardinal Bellarmine, for false imputation of
heresies unto sundry Protestants.. XI.
THOUGH P. R. require (says he) but three examples o^ f^^ shood, yet may I not
envy him a further choice, B^ll^r. l. 1. de Be^^. Sanct. c. 4. p^^l^ post
i^^ium.
because I know not the curiosity of his palate. Therefore let him again
consult with Cardinal Bella^mine in another taxation of Prote^^^t^ saying in
one place that, they teach that the soul of ^aithful men departing this li^e,
do not go directly unto heaven. In another place he hims^lf^, Bellar. l. de
Purg. cap. 12 Valen. de P^rgat. cap. 8.
togeat^er with his fellow Jesuit, have publicly recorded^ that it is a
common objection of Protestants proving from Scr^ptur^ against the doctry^e of
purgatory, that the souls of the ^aith, all pre^e^^ly after death go di^ectly
unto heau^n. So he.

Bellar. l. 1. de Beat Sanct. c. 1.
91. And truly it seems strange to me that M. Morton in this his peculiar
^tryfe for sinceritv, cannot set down any one thing sincerely, without some
admixture of fraud. Let him consult (says he) with Bellarmine in another
taxation of Protestants, Tert. l. 4. con^^a Marcion. Hi^^om^ in Vi^il. (...).
Armeni apud G^idone^ in su^m^ de ^aere^i^is.
that they teach, that the souls o^ the faithful departed do not go directly
to heaven. I have consulted with him, at leastwise with his book, and he
answers, that the word Protestants twice here re^eated is not to be found ^n
him, in the place by you cited. For that he ascribes not this heres^ unto all
Protestants in gene^all, but only unto three in particular of our time, to with
Luther, Cornelius Agrippa, and John Calvin, after diverse o^d heresies named by
him, as of ^ertullian, Vigilantius, Armenians^ and the like, that held the
same; his words a^^: Eundem errorem habet Caluinus etc. Calvin has the some
error, that souls of the faithful do not enter into heaven, nor enjoy the
vision of Almighty God, before the day of Judgment, but Christ only is
admitted thereunto, reliquos omnes residere in atrio, ib.que expectare vsque ad
mundi consummationem, that all the rest besides Christ, do not enter the
Sanctuary of heaven, but do expect without in a certain porch (or entry)
until the consummation of the world. And this opinion of Calvin, Bellarmine
proves out of his own clear words in sundry places of his works, as namely
lib. 4. Instit. cap. 20. and. 24. and 25.. 6. So as in setting down this
assertion of Cardinal Bellarmine, M. Morton has made him to tax all
Protestants, and to say, they do teach etc. whereas he taxes only three
particular men. Neither have I yet read any other that defends the same. Let
us see now how he makes Bellarmine to contradict himself, for herin stands
the principal drift of M. Morton, in this place, to seem thereby to say
somewhat against him.

92. First then he brings in these words as of Bellarmine: It is a common
objection of Protestants proving from Scriptures against the doctrine of
Purgatory, that the souls of the faithful presently after death, go directly
unto heaven Out of which words M. Morton infers it cannot be, that
Protestants should hold the foresaid contrary doctrine of expecting in the
porch. Calvin entangled about his atrium or porch.
Whereto I answer, that for this, to frame this little show of contradictio^ M.
Morton has concealed craftily the name of Calvin in all this objection, and
turned it into Protestants, whereas the assertion is ascribed by Bellarmine
namely and chiefly unto Calvin, and not to other Protestants: and therefore we
grant that Calvin (supposing his former assertion to be true) cannot use this
objection against Purgatory, that souls go directly to heaven, except he
would say, that his foresaid atrium or porch, and outward place of stay, is
also heaven, or a piece of heaven different from that Sanctuarium Caeli, into
which, he says, that only Christ is admitted until the day of Judgment.

93. But other Protestants that hold not this fond opinion (as few or none
perhaps do) may use their former argument still, if it were true, that souls
go directly to hell, or to heaven. And it is to be noted how cu^ningly M.
Morton has borne himself in this matter, not once uttering the name of
Calvin, but Protestants in common; whereas Calvin chiefly is meant, yea only
perhaps for the Porch: A sly Foxlike trick about co^cealment.
for that it seems to have been his own particular devise, whereby the sly
dealing of M. Morton is discovered in every thing, and yet (forsooth) will he
be still A Minister of simple truth, and convince Cardinal Bellarmine of
wilful falsehood. But let us go forward, and search further into his
simplicity.

HIS SIXTH, AND last objection, against Cardinal Bellarmine, for false
imputation of the Sarcame^tary heresy to Protestants.. XII.
BELLARMINE rests not here (says he) but once again challenges Calvin,
Pream. p. 65. Bell. l. 4. de notis Ec^l. cap. 9. in fine.
for (as he ca^leth it) an ancient heresy alleged by Theodoret, affirming,
that there is only a figure of Christ's body in the Eucharist. And yet Bell. de
Euchar. c. 1. in initio. ib.. Secu^d^ docet
in another place affirming both, that, that opinion is not ancient, nor yet
now to be found in Theodoret; and also that the forsaid doctrine of Calvin does
teach, that in the Eucharist there is to be exhibited unto the faithful, not
only a sign of Christ's body, but also the body and blood it self, by which
men's souls are nourished unto eternal (...). Or as another Jesuit testifies
for Calvin, that our soles communicate with the body of Christ substantially.
Greg. de Valent. tom. 4. dis. 6. q. 3. pu^ct 1.. Item.
Here (...) no more odds in this accusation, then ancient, ^^d not ancient,
heresy and not heresy. All these con^^^dictions do certainly euince, that
Bellarmine has (...) public imputations slandered those whom in (...)
conscience he did acquit. And shall we think at this conscience could be
sincere in alleging her men's testimonies, and witnesses, who is found ^^us
perfidiously unjust in exhibiting his own? I (...) are to produce multitudes
of this kind, which I ^^ue in store, and will be a debtour to P.R. for ma^^ of
this sort, ready to pay my debt as soon (...) this my promise shall be
exacted. Thus far M. ^^rton,

^^. And here now I answer, that it is suffici^^tly seen by the payment he
has already made, ^^w ready or able he is to pay his debt for any thing
^^omised against Cardinal Bellarmine, whose estima^^on is like to be highly
increased, with all indiffe^^nt men, by this assault, both for conscience,
sincere ^ealing, and learning, and M. Morton greatly blemi^^ed in them all: for
that commonly no one instance ^ath he alleged of fraud in his adversary, but
with ^ome fraud in himself, and none perhaps with more the^ in this sixth and
last objection in that kind, concerning the testimony of T^eodoret for the
Real Presence, ^or that here be so many foul faults and wilful cor^uptions,
as truly after so many admonishments, if ^ should use the same, it would make
me ashamed to ^ooke any man in the face.

96. He indeauoureth to frame a contradiction ^^out of Bellarmine in that he
charge Calvin with an ancient heresy recorded by Theodoret, which heresy ^
did affirm, that there is only a figure of Christ's body in the Sacrament, and
then will he prove out of Bellarmine himself for contradiction of this: first
that the said heresy is not ancient: Three points wherein M. Mort. is taken to
have falsified.
then that it is not to be found at this day in Theodoret: thirdly that Calvin
does not deny the Real Presence: and so he concludes, as you have heard,
here is no more odds, then between an^^^^^ and not ancient, heresy and not
heresy. But if in all and every one of these three points M. Morton be
convinced wittingly to have falsified, and that he could not but know that he
did so, what excuse then will he make, or what will the discreet, and honest
Reader say, or think of him? Now then to the particulers.

The first point of falsitie.
97. The charge which Cardinal Bellarmine makes upon Zuinglius and Calvin (not
Calvin only as M. Mort^^ text imports) is taken from the last of those 20.
old heresies before signified to be objected by the Cardinal to the
Protestants of our time, in his book of the Notes of the Church, Bellar. l. 4.
de Ecclesia cap. 9.
and by him is set down in these words: The twentieth old heresy (says
Bellarmine) wherein the Protestants of our time do participate with old
heretics, is of them, that denied the Eucharist to be truly the flesh of
Christ, and would have it to be the figure or image of the body of Christ. So
it is related in the seventh General Counsel, and sixth Action, Tom. 3. and
long before that Theodoret in his Dialogue, entitled, Impatibilis, does relate
the same out of S. Ignatius Scholar to the Apostles. Card. Bellarmine his
assertion about the antiquity of the Sacramentarie heresy.
And this heresy is taught in these our days by Zuinglius in his Book De
verbis Coenae Domini, and by Calvin lib. 4. Instit. cap. 17.. 12. And so we
have laid forth the heresies of 20. Archeretickes that were condemned by the
Church within the first seven hundred years after Christ, which heresies
being ^^lden by us for such, and by our Adversaries for (...) articles of their
faith, it follows that our doctrine does agree with the doctrine of the
ancient Church ^^d the doctrine of our adversaries with the anci^^t heresies.
So he.

^^. And this is Cardinal Bellarmines charge. Let ^^e Reader now mark how
broke^ly it is set down (...) M. Morton. Sundry false tricks.
For first he mentions only Calvin to (...) challenged for this last heresy
of the Sacramenta^es against the Real Presence (as now I have said) ^auing out
Zuinglius, who is equally charged by the ^^rdinall for the same thing, which is
one trick. ^hen he omitteth wholly the mention of the 7. Ge^^rall Counsel,
which so long ago related and confu^^d the said heresy, and this is another
trick. Further^ore he co^cealeth in like manner the name and autho^^tie of old
S. Ignatius, who in his time (which was ^^mediatly after the Apostles) held the
denying of (...) Real Presence to be an heresy, and this is a third ^icke. All
which points could not be pretermitted (...) M. Morton (nor any one of them
indeed) but by vo^^ntary deliberation: and consequently he must be ^^esumed to
have done it of set purpose to deceive. ^ut let us come to his two heads of
contradiction, which he will needs find in Bell^rmine.

^9 The first is, that Cardinal Bellarmine is affirmed ^y him to say that, The
first false contradiction objected to Bellarmine out of Theodoret.
that heretical opinion (cited ^^fore against the Real Presence out of
Theodoret) is (...) ancient, nor yet now to be found in Theodoret, and ^or this
he cites Bellarmines own words, as he says ^^b. 1. de Euchar. cap. 1.
initio, and that in latin, to wit, ^uae sententia cita^ur a Theodoreto in
Dialogo, vbi tamen nunc ^on habetur. Which sentence of S. Ignatius against old
^eretiks is cited by Theodoret in his dialogue, where ^otwithstanding now it is
not to be found. So he tel^eth us out of Bellarmine both in Latin and English,
^ut corrupts him egregiously in both lauguages. First in allegation, and then
in translation, as now shall be demonstrated. For first the true words of
Cardinal Bellarmine in latin are these: Quae sententia ci^atur a Theodoreto in
30. Dialogo ex epist. Ignatij ad Smy^^^ses, vbi tamen nunc non habetur. Bellar.
l. 1. de E^char. cap. 1. initio.
That is to say: This sentence (concerning old heretics denying the Real
Presence) is cyted by Theodoret in his third dialogue out of S. Ignatius his
Epistle (to the Christians) of Smyrna, where notwithstanding it is not now
found: meaning expressly, that it is not found at this day in that Epi^tle of S.
Ignatius, but in Theodoret it is found, and is extant both in Greek and latin,
as every man may see that will read the place quoted^ A shameless falsification
of Theodoret and lie against Bellarmine.
So as here again M. Morton corrupts Bellarm^^^ both in Latin and English
leaving out not only the mention of S. Ignatius his Epistle ad Smyrnenses, and
then making his Reader believe that the testimony of Theodoret was not to be
found at this day in him: but also upon this falsification of his own, will
needs frame a contradiction in Bellarmine. Theod. dial. 3.
And can there be any more witting and wilful falsehood then this? Can this
dealing stand with the solemn and extraordinary protestations which he makes
of sincerity in the end of his book, even against hi^ own infirmityes.

100. But let us see yet further, how he proves that Bellarmine, Bell. ibid.
having said before, that this heresy of denying the Real Presence was very
ancient, contradicts himself, and says in the very same place that it is
not ancient, for which he alleges these words of the Cardinal: Ne autem
glorientur Caluinistae etc. And to the end, that the Caluinists may not glory,
that their opinion (against the Real Presence) is very ancient, it is to be
noted, that those most ancient heretics (mentioned) by S. Ignatius) did not so
much impugn the Sacrament of the Eucharist, as the mystery of Christ his
incarnation. For so much as therefore they denied the Eucharist ^o be the flesh
of Christ (as S. Ignatius does signify in ^he same place) for that they deny
Christ to have ^lesh etc.

^01. Which testimony if you consider it well, ^oth not prove at all that the
denial of the Real ^resence was no ancient heresy, The ancient heresy against
the Real Presence declared.
but only that it was not altogether the same with that of the Pro^estants at
this day, and had an other foundation or ^otiue: to wit, for so much as those
heretics did ^ot believe that Christ had taken any flesh at all, ^hey
consequently believed not, that he gave it in the ^acrament. But the
Protestants though they believe that he took true flesh: yet do they not
believe, that ^t is really given in the Sacrament, for that they be^ieue not
these words, Hoc est Corpus meum, in the ^ense that the Church does: so as
these do formally ^mpugne the Real Presence, and the other but by a
^onsequence drawn from another heresy, which ^s the cause that they cannot
properly be called Sacra^entaries, as ours are, but most ancient they are: and
^o in this he contradicts not himself about their ^ntiquity.

102. The last point of objected contradiction in ^his place, is, that
Bellarmine confesses Calvin to hold, The second point of imagined
contradiction in Bellarmine.
that together with the Sacrament of the Eucharist, God does exhibit unto the
faithful, not only a sign of Christ's body, but also the body and blood it
self, yea, and as Valen^ia adds further that Calvin confesses that our
souls do communicate with the body of Christ substantially. Val^ntia tom. 4.
dis. 6. q. 3. p. 1. Item.
Whereto I answer: true it is, that in words Calvin does affirm as much in
some parts of his works, but denies it again in others, and thereupon do
both Bellarmine and Valentia convince him of most evident and palpable
contradictions in this matter, he seeking to say something different not only
from Luther, but also from VVickli^^e and Zuinglius, thereby to make a sect of
himself, but yet not finding indeed, wherein to subsist, or be premanent in any
devise that he could find out, for proof whereof B^ll^r. de Eu^har. lib. 1.
cap. 1.
Cardinal Bellarmine does set down seven s^u^r^ll propositions of his about
this matter, and proves the same substantially out of his own words and
discourses, and each one of them different from the other, and some of them so
contradictory, as by no possible means they may be reconciled or stand
together: Calu. in sine. cons^n. (...) Pas^^^. Tigu^in.
As first, that the flesh o^ Christ is only in h^au^n, and that in so certain
and determinate a place, as it is as ^istant from the bread, as the highest
heaven is from the earth: and then, this no^withstanding, he says (as here is
cyted by M. Morton) C^lu. i^ 26. Mat. and ^ib. 4. Ins^it. cap. 17.. 5.
that in the supper the true body of ^h^ist is exhibit^d unto the faithful,
and not only a sign: yea, that the very substance o^ Christ's body is given.
Next to that again he says, that notwithstanding the distance b^tweene the
(...) of Christ, and the lib. 4. In^tit. cap. 17.. 7.10. and 32.
Sacramental signs, yet are they joined ^o^^ather by so miraculous and
inexplicable means, as neither ^^^gu^ nor pen can utter the same. And then
further, tha^ (...) must not believe, that this conjunction is by any real
com^^g down of Chr^stes body unto us, but by a certain substa^^ial force
derived from his flesh by his spirit. Lib. 4. Ins^it. cap. 17.. 5. and 31.
Where he seem^^^ to s^y, that the conjunction is made, not in the substance,
but in some essential quality. And so in the fifth place more clearly he
says, that it is made by apprehensi^n of faith only, whereby he contradicts
all that he said before of real and substantial conjunction. Ibid.. 33.34.
And in the sixth place he confirms more the same by saying, that wi^ked men
receive not the body at all, quia corpus Christi solo ore fidei accipitur,
I^id.. 2.5. lib. de c^^n^ cap. 3.
for that the body o^ Christ is only received by the mouth of faith. And in
the^. and last place he concludes, that this Sacrament does not give the body
o^ Christ, or faith unto any that has it not already, but only does testify,
and confirm that now it is there, and so it is, but as a sign or seal (to
use his words) of that which is th^re already. And this being the variety of
Caluins opinion, it proves no contradiction in Bel^armine, but in Calvin
himself. And so many corruptions having here been proved against M. Morton,
do convince that in him which he would prove in Cardinal Bellarmine, but
cannot, as how see, and yet ^e concludes so confidently as before you have
heard, saying: Preamble page 66.
All these contradictions do certainly euince, that he (the Cardinal) has by
public imputations slaun^ered those whom in his cons^ience he did acquit:
and shall we ^hinke, A vain confident conclusion.
that his conscience could be sincere in alleging other ^^ns testimonies, and
witn^sses, who is sound thus persidiously ^^iust in ex^ibiting his own? Thus
he. And I remit me to ^he Reader, whether he has seen hitherto any one point
of perfidious dealing proved against the Cardinal, among so many as have
appeared on the part of M. Morton. But yet now he will go forward, as he says
to another subject, to wit, to show some examples o^ falsifications out of
Cardinal Bellarmine in allegation of other men's testimonies. Let us see
whether he perform any thing more then in the rest he has done.

103. But first before we enter into this other examen, there occurreth unto me
a consideration worthy to be pondered by the Reader, which is, that all these
six obiectio^s made against Cardinal Bellarmine for imputing old heresies to
Prot^stants, are taken out o^ on only chapter of his, which is the 9. of his 4.
Book Of the no^^s of the true Church, in which 9. Chapter (as before you have
heard) he charge the Protestants of our time with different heresies of
tw^nty several condemned old Heresiarches, or chief Heretics, and thereof
in^erreth, that as the union and agre^ment in doctrine with the ancient
Catholic Fathers is a note of the true Church, and of true Catholics: so to
participate with ancient heretics in any one condemned heresy, is a damnable
note of the contrary: A markable point.
which Chapter M. Morton perusing, thought good to set upon six only for
clearing Protestants of them, to wit, the Pelagians, the Nouatians, the
Manichees, the Arrians, and other two particular heresies: Aug. lib. de
heresib. ad Quod-vult-deum in fine.
whereas in reason he should have either cleared all or none, for so much as
according to S. Augustines sentence, and other ancient Fathers, the holding of
any one condemned heresy, is sufficient to everlasting damnation. So as M.
Morton picking out only a few, leaves all the rest as not excusable, and under
hand by his silence grants, that they are held by the Protestants: which how
markable a point it is, I leave it to the Reader to judge, and so shall pass
to examine the other head of objections, that he has against Cardinal
Bellarmine.

THE ^HIRD PART ^F THIS CHAPTER,
CONTAINING ^THER OBJECTIONS against Cardinal Bellarmine, for falsifications
in alleging of other men's authoriti^s: and first about S. Cyprian.. XIII.
MASTER MORTON passing from Cardinal Bellarmines accusations and imputations
against Protestants for heresies, unto his allegations of their testimonies
(corruptly as he pretends) ^andled by him; Preamb. p. 66.
he begins his accusation with a ^entence of S. Cyprian about traditions in
these words: Cypr. Ep. 10. ad Pomp.
S. Cyprian (says he) has this qu^stion (he going about to refute (...)
tradition:) Whence is this tradition? It is derived from the Lords Authority,
or from the pr^c^pt of the Apostles? For God will^th that we ^ho^d do those
things which are written. From whence Protestants conclude, that the Scriptures
are of sufficiency for our direction in all questions of faith. Bellarmine
answers, B^ll^r. lib. 4. de v^^b. D^i. cap. 11.. profert Cyprianus. Aug.
contr. Donat. cap. 23^
that Cyprian spoke this, when he thought to defend an error, and therefore i^
is no marvel, i^ he erred in so reasoning, for the which cause S. Augustine
(says he) did worthily re^ute him. The question is not, what error Cyprian
held, but whether his manner of reasoning from the sufficiency of Scripture
were erroneous or no. Bellarmine pretends, that S. Augustine did worthily
reprove him. But whosoever shall consult with S. Augustine in the Chapter
specified, shall find, that this point by him is excellently commended, That
Cyprian warns us (says S. Augustine) to run unto the ^ountaine, Aug l. 5.
de Bapt. cap. 26.
that is, unto the tradition o^ the Apos^les; from thence to derive a conduct
to our times, it is chi^fly good and doubtless to be per^ormed.

Preamb. p. 66.. 16.
105. This is M. Mortons whole objection, wherein we must examine what wilful
deceit to falsification he finds here in Cardinal Bellarmines allegation of
Cyprian. For if he find not this, then finds he nothing to his purpose, he
having entitled this his Paragraph of B^lla^mines falsi^ications: but if he
find no falsehood nor falsity at all, either wilful or not wilful, then is he
more in the briers: but most of all if finding nothing in his adversary,
himself be taken in manifest falsehood, both witting and wilful. Let us examine
then this point more particulerly.

The State ^f the question concerning S. Cyprians rebaptizing.
106. And first I do note, that he proposes this objection very obscurely, and
that for the cause, which will presently be se^ne, for he does not explicate
upon what occasion these words of S. Cyprian were uttered by him, nor alleged
by Protestants as an objection against unwritten traditions. Wherefore the
Reader must know, that the holy man S. Cyp^ian h^uing conceived an infinite
auersion from heretics and her^sies of his time, did upon indiscreet zeal
^all into this error, that as their faith was not good^ ^o neither their
baptism, and consequently that ^uch as left them, and were converted to the
Catho^icke religion should be baptized again after the Catholic manner: and
having found some other Bishops also of Africa, upon the same grounds, to
join with him in the same opinion, for that it seemed to them to be most
conform to Scriptures, that detested every where heretics and heresies, he
wrote thereof unto Stephen Bishop of Rome, who standing upon the contrary
custom always used in the Church, not to rebaptize such as were converted
from heresy, misliked S. Cyprians opinion, and wrote unto him against the
same: wherewith the good man being somewhat exasperated, wrote a letter unto
Pompeius Bishope of Sabrata in Africa, cited here by M. Morton, wherein amongst
other sharp speeches he has this interrogation here set down: Vnde est ista
traditio etc? From whence is this tradition ( of not rebaptizing heretics?)
Is it derived from our Lords Authority? etc. upon which form of arguing in S.
Cyprian, M. Morton says, that Protestants do lawfully argue in like manner,
this or that tradition is not in the Scriptures, ergo, it is not to be admitted.

107. But says Cardinal Bellarmine, this was no good form of arguing in S.
Cyprian, Whether S. Cyprians form of argument was good, or no.
nor ever used by him, but in this necessity for defending his error as
Protestants also are driven to use the same for defense of theirs, and this he
proves by two ways. First, for that S. Augustine does of purpose out of the
sense of the universal Church of his days refute that inference, and form of
argument: and secondly, for that S. Cyprian himself in other places where he
was not pressed with this necessity, does yeald, and allow the authority of
unwritten traditions, which later proof as the most conuincent, M Morton does
suppress with silence, in reciting Bellarmines answer, and says only to the
first, that S. Augustine is so far of from condemning S. Cyprians mann^r of
reasoning from the sufficiency of Scriptures, as he does excellently commend
the same: this then is briefly to be examined out of S. Augustines own words.

108. And first I grant (as S. Augustine also does) that when any Tradition,
or doctrine, can clearly be showed out of the Scriptures, optimum est, and si^e
dubitatione facie^dum, A^g. l. 6. co^tr. Donat. c. 26.
it is the best way of all, and questionles to be observed. And for that S.
Cyprian in that his error did certainly persuade himself to be able to prove
the same out of holy Scriptures, as appears by the many places alleged by
him to that effect (though wrongfully understood) especially in the said
Epistle to Pompeius, and else where, which places of Scripture S. Augustine
does particulerly ponder and refute, and show not to be rightly applied by S.
Cyprian, who seeing the general custom and tradition of the Church to be
contrary unto him, in this cause provoked to the Scriptures alone, as the
Protestants do in as bad a cause. But now let us see what S. Augustine teaches
in this behalf, and how he confuteth S. Cyprians prouocatio^ to only
Scriptures, in this case of controversy between them, A^g. l 2. d. ^^pt. (...)
Don^tis^. ^. 7.
notwithstanding he allowed for the best way to have recourse to the
fountaynes, when things from thence may, as I said, clearly be proved.

109. Let us hear (I say) S. Augustine recounting the case between S. Cyprian
on the one side, and himself with ^ll Catholic me^ of his days on the other.
No^d^^^r^t ^^aith he diligent^rilla Baptismi qu^stio pertracta etc. The
question of Baptism (or reb^ptizing heretics was not in S. Cyprians time
diligently discussed, albeit the Catholic Church held a most wholesome custom
to correct that in Schismatiks and Heretics which was evil, and not to iterate
that which was given them as good: which custom I believe to have come down
from the Apostles tradition, as many others which are not found in their
writings, S. Augustines learned censure for unwritten traditions.
nor yet in the later Councels of their successors, and nevertheless are
observed through the whole universal Church, and are believed not to have
been delivered, and commended unto us, but from the said Apostles. This most
wholesome custom then S. Cyprian says that his predecessor Agrippinus did
begin to correct, but as the truth it self being more diligently after
examined did teach, he is thought more truly to have corrupted the^ corrected
the same. Thus S. Augustine of the state of the question, and of the authority
of Customs and Traditions unwritten. Now Let us see what he says to S.
Cyprians manner of reasoning, from the sufficiency of Scripture as M. Morton
terms it.

101. Ad Pompeium (says S. Augustine) scribit Cyprianus de hac re etc. Aug. l.
5. de Bapt. contra Donatist. cap. 23.
S. Cyprian does write to the Bishop Pompeius about this matter, where he does
manifestly show, that Stephen, whom we understand to have been Bishop of
Rome at that time, did not only not consent unto him, verum etiam contra
scripsisse atque prae^^pisse, but also did write and gave commandment to the
contrary etc. S. Cypryan did object Apostoli nihil quid^m exinde praeceperunt,
the Apostles did command nothing (in the Scriptures) about this matter. It is
true, says S. Augustine: Sed consuetudo illa, quae opponebatur Cypriano, ab
eor^m traditione exordium sumpsisse credenda est, s^^u^ sunt multa quae
Vniuersa tenet Ecclesia, and ob hoc ab Apost^^^s pr^c^pta been creduntur
quamquam scripta non reperiantur: But that custom which was opposed to S.
Cyprian by the Church, is to be believed to have taken beginning from the
tradition of the Apostles: as there are many things which the Universal Church
does hold, and they are therefore rightly believed to have been ordained by the
Apostles, though they be not found written. Thus S. Augustine.

111. Whereby we understand, first, his full meaning about the Authority of
traditions in the Church, though they be not found written in the holy
Scripture: and secondly that albeit in some cases it is good and law^ull to
run to Scriptures, when the matter may be clearly by them decided; yet is it
no good argument always to say, It is not in the Scripture, and therefore we
are not bound to believe it, which was the argument of S. Cyprian when he was
in error, and for maintenance of the same, as M. Morton cannot deny: M. Morton
convinced of evident f^aud in cyting S. A^gustins meaning.
nor dares reprove S. Augustine and the Church of his time that condemned this
manner of reasoning in S. Cyprian. And what now does there result against
Bellarmine in all this objection? Is he found false in any one thing which
here is said? Nay is not M. Morton co^uinced of evident fraud in setting down
this accusation? First for concealing the true state of the question^ then for
that S. Augustine does not reprove, but excellently commend the manner of
reasoning in S. Cyprian; pretermitting all that I have alleged out of S.
Augustines express words to the contrary, which he could not but know and have
read? Thirdly by cutting of the words immediately following in Bellarmine,
containing his second reason, which was that S. Cyprian in other traditions
besides this of not rebaptizing heretics (which erroneously he thought to be
repugnant to Scripture,) he allowed and urged also the force of Traditions in
the Church of God, though they were not written^ whereof Ca^dinall Bellarmine
himself alleges two evident examples, Bellarm. l. 4. de verbo Dei. cap. 7.
the one about the necessity of holy Chrisme or Unction, urged by S. Cypri^n
out of only Tradition lib. 1. Epist. 12. and the offering wine together with
water in the Sacrifice, which he urges as Dominicam Traditionem, a Tradition
of our Lord lib. 2. Epist. 3. whereas notwithstanding nothing is found written
in the Scriptures of either of these traditions. S. Cypria^ stands much upon
unwritten traditions
And if I would allege other traditions allowed by him, though not written in
the Scriptures, I might be large heerin: as for example, that of renunciation
accustomed to be made in the Church before baptism, whereof he treats in his
7. and 54. Epistles, and in his book de disciplina and habitu Virginum: as
also of the demaundes, and answers accustomed to be made in the Church, about
the articles of the Creed, Epist. 70. of Exorcismes to be made before baptism,
Epist. 2. and 72. and lib. con^ra Demetrianum.

112. The tradition of baptizing Infants, Epist. 59. which S. Augustine holds
to stand only upon unwritten tradition, and the like. This second argument then
of Bellarmine being craftily left out, and his former from S. Augustines
authority wittingly perverted, M. Morton instead of an objection against the
Cardinal, has brought in a flat condemnation of two notable frauds against
himself. Let us see another of like sort and suite, if he can have patience to
hear it.

HIS SECOND OBJECTION against Cardinal Bellarmine, touching false allegations
about Anacletus. ^ XIIII.
SECONDLY (says he) Bellarmine to establish the authority of the Pope, Preamb.
p. 67.
does give this prerogative to S. Peter, to wit: That S. Peter was the only
Bishop, and that other Apostles took their Orders from him; which he labors
to euince from the testimonies of Anacle^us, Clemens, Alexander, Eusebius, and
Cyprian: B^^lar. lib. 1. de Ponti^. Romans c. 23.
where he is refelled by his own doctors: One F^^n^. de Victor. (...). 2.
con^l^s. 1.. quod.
saying, that indeed those Fathers mean no such thing: Another, that Card.
Cusanus de Con^ord. Cathol. lib. 3. cap. 2
the Epistles of Anacletus are counterfaite, which many urge more then is
meet, to the end they may advance the authority of the Sea of Rome.

114. Thus far the objection in his own words. Wherein I marvel what
wilful falsehood may be found, such as the writer himself must needs know it
to be so, except it be on the behalf of M. Mor^o^, who enters presently with
a shift at the first beginning, saying (as you have hard) that Bellarmine
gives this prerogative to S. Peter: that he was the only Bishop, and that
other Apostles took their orders from him, whereas Bellarmines saying is, some
authors to be of opinion, quod solus Petrus a Christo Episcopus ordinatus
fuerit, caeteri autem a Petro Episcopalem consecration^m acceperint, A false
tri^k.
that only S. Peter was ordained Bishop immediately by Christ, and the other
received their Episcopal consecration from S. Peter. So as in so little a
sentence he leaves out first, that S. Peter was ordained Bishop alone by
Christ, and then changes Episcopal consecration into holy Orders, as though
they had not been made so much as Priests by our Savior himself, but only by
S. Peter, whereas all authors agree that Christ in making them Apostles, made
the^ all Priests though some do doubt, whether immediately by himself he made
them all Bishops. So as no one thing is sincerely handled here by M. Morton
without some nippe or other, as you see.

115 Secondly, whereas he says that Bellarmine labors to euince from the
testimonies of Anacletus, Clemens Alexa^drinus etc. the proof of this
prerogative, he abuses him egregiously, for that Bellarmine does alleadg this
opinion, that Christ having made all his Apostles Priests, did make only S.
Peter Bishop, Whether S. Peter were only made Bishop by Christ.
with authority to consecrate the rest, as the opinion of Turrecremata,
alleging diverse manifest reasons and proofs for the same: as namely one,
that either Christ did ordain none of his Apostles Bishops, or all, or some
certain number, or one only. The first cannot stand, for that if Christ had
ordained none, Turrecr. lib desummae. 2. Ecclesia c. 32^
then should we have at this day no Episcopal authority among us. Nor can it
be said that he ordained all immediately, for that S. Paul was ordained by
imposition of hands by the Ministers of the Church, as appears Act. 13. and
by S. Leo Epist. 81. ad Dioscorum, as also by S. Chrysostom. in hunc locum. S.
James in like manner is recorded, not only by Anacletus Epist. 2. but by
Clemens Alexandrinus Eusebius lib. 2. hist. cap. 1. and by S. Hierome de Viris
Illustribus in Iacobo, to have been made Bishop by S. Peter.

116. The third point also, that Christ ordained some certain number, he
refuteth, for that it appears by the Evangelical History that all the
Apostles were equal, save only S. Peter, in whom he proves 25. several
privileges to have been given by Christ above the rest, whereof this of his
being ordained Bishop alon^ immediately from Christ is the 22. and the second
reason alleged by Turrecremata of the Appellation of the Mother Church, given
above all other Churches to Rome, by testimony, as he proves, of all
antiquity, seems to confirm greatly the said privilege, though
notwithstanding it be a matter not so determined by the Church, but that there
may be diversity of opinions, as in effect there are amongst learned men about
the same, in which number is Franciscus de victoria here cyted: Victoria rel.
de pot^state Eccl^si^e. 8.
who albeit he confess this opinion to be grauissimo^u^ Virorum, of most grave
Authority: yet thinking the contrary assertion more probable, that Christ
himself did ordain immediately all his Apostles Bishops, does answer the
arguments of Turrecremata, saying, that the Fathers cyted for the same reuera
non significant id quod Auctores huius sententiae volunt, that in truth they do
not signify so much as the Authority of this sentence or opinion would have
them. And to like effect does Cardinal Cusanus here cyted, being of a
different opinion, endeavor to answer the said arguments: but yet not saying
absolutely that the Epistles of Anacletus are cou^terfaite, as here is
alleged by M. Morton, sed ^ortassi^ quaedam scripta Sancto Anacleto attributa
apocrypha sunt, but perhaps certain writings attributed to S. Anaclete are
Apocryphal, Many abuses of^fered to Card Cusanus and others.
which two moderatio^s of fortassi^ and quaedam, M. Morton craftily left out
both in English and Latin; as he does in like manner diverse other things that
make against himself, and namely these words of the same Cusanus, In quibus
volentes Romanam Sedem omni laud dignam, plusquam Ecclesiae Sanctae expedit
and decet, exaltare, se penitus aut quasi fundant, that some men intending to
exalt the Roman Sea worthy of all commendation more then is expedient, or
decent for the holy Church it self, do found them^elues either wholly or for
the most part upon these ^pocryphall and uncertain writings. And then again:
Non opus foret diuinam ipsam, and omni laud super excellentissimam Romanam
primam Sedem etc. it shall not be needful that the divine Roman Primate Sea
most eminently excelling in all praise, to help herself with doubtful
arguments taken out of those Epistles, whereas the truth may be proved
sufficiently, and more clearly by undoubted records etc. All this and much more
is in Cusanus in the place cited by M. Morton, which he partly imbezeling,
partly corrupting, and plainly falsifying, has brought forth the broken
sentence which here you may see both in English and latin, far different from
the Originalls.

1^^. And this is his common trick never lightly to allege any one sentence
either in English, or latin, as it lies in the text, but still with some
helping of the dye (as his own phrase is) some crafty cogging must always
enter, which I desire the learned Reader to take the pains but alitle to
examine: and if he find not this fraud very ordinary, I am contented to leese
my credit with him.

118. And finally let him note for conclusion of this objection, that all this
which M. Morton alleges here, if it were granted, as it lies, conteyneth
nothing, but two different opinions between learned men in a disputable
question: Whether Christ did immediately, and by himself, consecrate all or
some of his Apostles Bishops, or one only with authority to consecrate the
rest, Turrecremata and Bellarmine do hold the one for more probable, but
Victoria, Cusanus, and some others do allow rather the other: What wilful
falsehood is there in this? Or is it not singular folly to call it by that name?
But let us see an other objection, no wiser then the rest.

THE THIRD OBJECTION against Cardinal Bellarmine ^or false allegations about
Platina.. XV.
HIS third obiecton against Cardinal Bellarmin^ begins in these words:
Preamb. page 67. B^llar. lib. 4. de Rom Pont. c. 13.. Extat.
Again (says he) where Bellarmine cites the testimony of Pla^ina for the
commendation of Pope Hild^brand: And in another place finding Platina objected
in the question of Confession, answers for the disabling of the Author,
saying, that Platina had no public authority to pen the lives of the Popes
from public Records. Which is notably false, Platina himself in his Epistle
dedicatory unto the then Pope writing thus: Bellar lib. 3. de po^nit. c. ^..
Sed neque.
Thou (o Prince of Deuines, and chief of Bishops,) have commanded me to write
the lives of the Popes. Whose history is therefore greatly commended by Ballus,
as being true, and taken out of public Monuments. I could furnish P. R. with
infinite such like delusions, and will also whenever my Adversary shall renew
his demand: Pl^tin. in prafat. (...).
for such a multitude of examples I could bring, that I find it a greater
difficulty for me to subtract, then to multiply. So he.

Hieron. ^^l^us de co^onatione. ^. Post mortem C^nstantini.
120. And I answer, that the more he multiplyeth in this kind the greater store
of testimonies and suffrages he produces of his own folly, and impertinent
dealing: for that Cardinal Bella^mine his denying of Platina to be of absolute
credit and public authority in all matters touched by him in his history, does
not prove wilful malice in the Cardinal but rather a true and prudent censure
concurring with the judgment of diverse learned men of our time, especially of
Onup^rius Panuinus, who writing obseruatio^s upon the history of Platina
concerning Popes lives, About the authority and credit of Platina his history.
does oftentimes note the said story of diverse defects both in the Chronology
of times, and truth of matters set down by him: and I doubt not, but whosoever
shall have read the works of Onuph^ius and of Balbus here cited in
commendation of Platina, will greatly prefer the iudgm^nt of the first,
before the later in matters of history. But let us see, what Cardinal
Bellarmine says of Pla^ina, and upon what ground, and to what effect, and so
shall you see also how weak a calumniation M. Morton has taken in hand in
this objection.

121. The occasion of censuring Platina, was in the confutation of a certain
manifest lie avouched (as the Cardinal says) by Calvin, who affirmed that
there was never any certain Ecclesiastical law extant, binding men to
Sacramental Confession, before the Council of Lateran under Pope Innocen^ius
the third, some 300. years past, and for proof of this, Calvin cites the
story of Platina as affirming the same with this preface of his own to
authorize more the writer, Eorum Annals narrant, their Annals, or public
histories (of the Catholics) do declare. And again: Calu. l. 5. Instit. cap.
4.. 7.
Ipsis testibus nond^m cl^psi sunt anni trecenti, themselves being witnesses
(to wit the Catholics) and their public histories, there are not 300.
years yet past since the law of Conf^ssion began. Which manifest untruth
Bellarmine co^futing by great store of antiquityes, Plat. in vita Zepher.
Pontif.
comes at length to Platina who in the life of the Popes Zephe^inus and
Innocentius, writes that the decree that was made by Zepherinus for receiving
the communion, at least once a year about Easter, was extended also to
Confession by Pope Innocentius, which only is found written by Platina, says
Bellarmine, and not by any other Ecclesiastical historiographer: adding
further these words: Sed neque Platina etc. But neither Platina did write
those lives of Popes by public authority, Bellar. l. 3. de poenit. c. 13.. Sed
neque.
nor out o^ public records in such sort as they may be called our Annals: and
oftentimes is he reprehended by our Historiographers, for that he fell into
diverse errors in his history, by following of Martinus Polonus: and yet does
not Platina say, Cardinal Bellarmine clearly defends himself.
that which Calvin says, that there was no law extant about the necessity of
Conf^ssion before the time of Zepherinus and Innocentius, but only that the
certain time, when, and how "often a man should confess and commun^cate, was
then prescribed more in particular.

122. So as here you see Platina does make nothing for M. Calvin, and less
for M. Morton, who dealt fraudulently according to his fashion, and never
commonly does otherwise, when reciting in his margent the latin text of
Bellarmine, he cut out the words immediately following, Vt annals nostri dici
possint, Platina did not write the lives of Popes as they may be called our
Annals. And albeit Pla^ina says in the Preface of his history unto the Pope
Sixtus 4. who lived somewhat above 100. years past, that he had commanded him
to wri^e the Popes lives, yet this proves not, that his collection is an
Authentical history of our Church, or so well performed by him, as all things
therein contained must be held for exact truth, and we bound to accept of the
same, which is all in effect, that Cardinal Bellarmine avouches. And who
would have brought in this for an example of wilful falsehood but only M.
Morton? Nay who would have made oftentation therof^ saying, that he finds
greater difficulty to subtract, then to multiply such examples, but himself,
that seems not to disc^rne between saying somewhat in words, and nothing in
effect? But yet we must pass a little further to see an impertinency or two
more.

THE FOVRTH Objection against Cardinal Bellarmine, touching, false allegations
about Purgatory.. XVI.
AFTER long prying upon Cardinal Bellarmines books, being above 60. in
number, and the notes therout gathered, which before you have heard, M. Morton
comes at length to seek some quarrels at that which the Cardinal has
written in defense, Prea^. p. 68.
and demonstration of the doctrine of Purgatory, and says that he will end
with that matter. His words are these: I will now (says he) confine my self
within the precincts of but one only controuersye concerning Purgatory, where
Bellarmine distinguishing of the diverse acceptions of the word B^^lar. lib. 21.
de Purgat. cap. 1.. vocatur.
Fire in the writings of ancient Fathers, concludes that, Bell. l. 2. de Purg
cap. 1.. Add.
when the Fathers speak of the Fire of the day of doom, when all the world
shall be of a flame, they mean not Purgatory-fire, which souls suffer
immediately after death. After this he alleges Bell. lib. 1. de Purg. cap. 6..
Deinde.
most plain places (as he calls them) out of the Fathers for proof of
Purgatory. Amongst others in his first book ( de Purgatorio) S. Ambrose sermon.
20. in Psalm. 118. for proof o^ Purgatory-fyre, which he himself confesses in
his next book not Bell. ibid. Add.
to be meant of Purgatory. So he deals also with Bell. l. 1. de Purg. c 7..
Hilarious.
S. Hillary, urging his sentence upon the Psalm. 118. as an evident place for
Purgatory, which by his own judgment, seems not to signify Purgatory. And
yet B^ll. l. 2. de Pu^g. cap. 1 Idem videtur.
again, among his manifest places of the Fathers ^or Purgatorie^ he alleges
the testimonies of Origin, Basil, Lactantius, Hierome, Ambrose: all which are
acknowledged expressly by Sixtus Senensis, Bell. l. 1. de Purg. c. 6.. Deinde
sunt.
from the evidence of the contexts to have spoken only of the fire of the day
of judgment, and consequently as Bellarmine has taught us, not of the fire of
Purgatory. Lastly he pro^esseth to confirm the doctrine of Purgatory out of
most of the Greek and Latin Fathers. Sixth. Sen. Bibliot. l. 5. annot. 171.
And another Jesuit ^^ith more largely Salm. Jesuit. Com. in 1. Cor. 15. disp.
25. in fine.
of all the Greek Fathers: which is an assertion as false as peremptory, even
by the confession of their own Roffen. art. 18. aduers. Lutheru^.
Bishop saying: That there is very rare mention of Purgatory in the Greek
Fathers: Bell. l. 1. de pu^g. c. 6.
and that the latin Fathers did not all at first apprehend the doctrine thereof.
Thus far he.

124. And now let the Reader note how many impertinent points (to say nothing
of their falsity that jointly also will be discovered) are here couched
together, that i^ ^o say, all that are here handled, for that all conjoined
together do not convince any one wilful, or witting untruth in Bellarmine,
though there should be found any oversight, as there will not be; but rather
you will discover the most cunning dealing in M. Morton (if iugling be cunning)
thereby to make Bellarmine seem to have some contradiction in him, that ever
perhaps you read. Bellarm. l. 1. de Purg. cap. 1.. Vocatur and c. 4.. Superest.
and l. 2. c. 1.. Add.
For first, where the said Cardinal writes, that when the Fathers speak of
the ^yre of the day of doom, when all the world shall be in a flame, they
mean not Purgatory ^yre, though the thing it self in some sense may be
granted: yet in the places by him cyted, Bellarmine has no such thing, but
only treating of that fire mentioned by the Apostle 1. Cor. 3. Vniuscuiusque
opus quale sit, ignis probabit: Fire shall prove what every man's work is, he
says: Aliqui Patrum per ignem non intelligunt ignem Purgatorium, sed ignem
diuini Iudicij, per quem satendum est omnes etiam Sanctos, Christo excepto,
transire. Some Fathers do not understand by this fire (that must try every man's
works) the fire of Purgatory, but the fire of Gods judgment, through which we
must confess that all Saints also must pass, except Christ himself.

125. And for this opinion he cyteth S. Hilary and S. Ambrose upon the Psalm
118. as also S. Hierome, Hilar. in illa verba Psalm. 118. Concupiuit anima mea.

Ambr. in psalm. 118. sermon. 20.


who seem to understand by this prouing-fire mentioned by S. Paul, not the
purging-^yre of Purgatory, which is mentioned presently after in the same
place of the Apostle, when he says, ipse tamen saluus erit, sic tamen quasi
per ignem: which later fire to be understood of Purgatory after death,
Bellarmine proves by the plain exposition of S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S.
Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Gregory, and others.

126. Now then M. Morton seeing this discourse of Bellarmine would needs pick a
quarrel thereat, and frame unto himself some show of co^trariety in him, by
voluntary mistaking of the fire of Gods judgment and trial, due to every
soul immediately after death, for the fire of doomes day when the world shall
be in a flame, whereof Bellarmine neither speaks, Bell. l. 1. de Purg. c. 5..
Quarta difficultas
nor had occasion to speak: nay he does expressly deny, and show, that the
prouing-^yre of Gods judgments mentioned by S. Paul, is not the fire of the
conflagration of the world: and then does M. Morton frame to himself a
contradiction in Bellarmine, as though he had said, that S. Ambrose, and S.
Hilarie in the self same places of their works, had held for Purgatory, and
not for Purgatory, to wit, upon the Psalm 118. which may be true in different
senses, and sentences of theirs, and in different acceptions of the word fire,
as has been showed, for that by the former words of S. Paul, Ignis probabit,
Three fires mentioned by S. Paul.
fire shall prove every man's works, they think that Purgatory fire is not
understood, but rather the examen of Gods judgments as has been said, through
which examining fire both Saints and not Saints must pass: but by the other
fire that follows in the said Apostle, Damnum patietur, ipse tamen saluus
erit, sic tamen quasi per ignem, he shall suffer loss or punnishment, but yet
he shall be saved as by fire, all the forenamed Fathers do hold that the
purging fire is understood, through which only imperfect men shall pass, so as
they understanding of different fires, in the self same sentence of S. Paul,
no maruayle though they affirm of the one, and deny of the other, without all
note of true and real contradiction: for that a contradiction must be in the
self same thing, and in the same respect, otherwise it were a contradiction to
say, that Christ was mortal and immortal, passible and impassible, which are
not contradictory, but most true in different respects, and other such like
speeches: yet let us see how M. Morton frames his contradictories here more
in particular.

Bellar. l. 2. de Purgator. cap. 1.. Add.
127. Among other Fathers (says he) Bellarmine cyteth S. Ambrose ser. 20. in
Psalm. 118. for proof of Purgatory fire, which he himself confesses in his
next book not to be meant of Purgatory. Mark here the fraud. A place of S.
Ambrose is alleged by Bellarmine for purgatory out of his Co^mentary upon the
36. Psalm, after which he says: S. Ambrose and Bellarm. delivered from a
cavil of contradiction.
Vide etiam eundem, sermon. 20. in Psalm. 118. See also the same S. Ambrose in
his 20. Sermon upon the hundred and eyghtenth Psalm, signifying, that in this
place the said Father has somewhat more, worthy the consideration to the same
effect of proving Purgatory, and then in his second book, Bellarmine cyting a
place out of the forsaid 20. Sermon, where upon the words of Genesis the 4.
God placed before paradise a sword of fire, says: that S. Ambrose affirming
that fiery sword to be ignem Purgatorium, by which all must pass, both good
and evil, seems rather to understand the proving fire of Gods judgments to
every soul immediately after death, both good and bad, then the payn^ull
purging fire that is to ensue after, whereby the bad or faulty do only pass.
And what contradiction is there now between this reference of the Reader by
Bellarm. (for he says but Vide) to the sermon of S. Ambrose, and this other
place cyted out of the same sermon? may not there be in the self same sermon
different sentences, and different senses upon different occasions, and to
different purposes? Who would wrangle thus but M. Morton for lack of better
matter? If he had showed Bellarmine to say that the self same sentence or
discourse of S. Ambrose had been alleged by him for Purgatory, and against
Purgatory, he had performed somewhat: this other picking of quarrels is poor
and miserable, and shows his wantes in the midst of his braggings: we have
delivered S. Ambrose from the calumnation of contradiction, let us pass to S.
Hilary.

128. So Bellarmine (says he) deals also with S. Hilary, Bellar. l. 1. de
Purg. c. 7.
urging his sentence upon the Psalm 118. as an evident place for Purgatory,
which by his own judgment (in his next book) seems not to signify
Purgatory, but rather Ignem diuini iudicij, lib. 2. c. 1.
by which our B. Lady and Saints must pass, which cannot be understood of true
Purgatory. Whereto is answered, that both are contained in the discourse of S.
Hilary upon the 118. Psalm, to wit, the proving fire of Gods judgment after
our deaths, and purging fire of Gods justice after our judgment, S. Hylaries
words are these upon that Verse of the Psalm, My soul has desired thy
judgments: Hilar. in Psalm. 118.
Meminit Propheta etc. The prophet David has recounted unto us how hard a
thing it is to desire the judgments of God: S. Hilaries censure of purging fire.
for as no man living is clean in his sight, how may a man desire that
judgment of his, in which that indefatigable fire is to be undergone by us, in
which those greiuous punis^ments of purging our souls from sins, are to be
sustained, the B. Virgin Mary's soul was passed with a sword to the end that
the thoughts of many hearts might be revealed. If then that Virgin that was
capable of God, must come into the severity of Gods judgment, who will dare to
desire to be iudg^d by God? So far S. Hilarie.

129. In which discourse it is evident, that he comprehends both the fire of
Gods judgment, when he says, that our Lady must undergo the severity of that
judgment, as also the other purging fire in which he says so greiuous
punishments must be suffered for purging of our soul, which may both well
stand together, as acts of the self same justice, to wit, the examination of
our life, and punishment of our defects therein found. And how impertinent then
is it for M. Morton in these two things to frame a contradiction? but let us
pass to a third.

130. And yet again (says he) among his manifest places of the Fathers for
Purgatory he alleges the testimonies of Origin, Ibid. p. 69.
Basil, I acta^tius, Hierome, Ambrose, all which are acknowledged expressly by
Sixtus S^n^nsis from the evidence of the contexts to have spoken only of the
fire of the day of judgment. Whereto I answer, that here are many delusions
together. For first suppose that Syxtus Senensis that lived somewhat before
Bellarmine were of a different o^inion from him, about some Authoryties
alleged of these f^ue Fath^rs, conc^rning the fire of Purgatory, does not
Bellarmine allege almost fifteen^ besides these ^iue? and does not he cite
sundry other places out of these very same authors which Syxtus Senensis has
not censured? Nay does not Doctor Coccius in his Thesaurus allege upon the
point of 60. ancient Fathers, Iudoc. Co^cius lib. 7. Thesa^ri art. 5.
Greek and Latin within the compass of the first six hundred years next
after Christ, who held the same doctrine? And for the first of these f^ue, to
wit Origin, does he not besides the place here except^d against by M. Morton
out of Sixtus Senensis his Censure, to wit, Hom. 6. in Exodus does he not (I
say) alleadg five other mani^^st places out of the same Author confirming
Purgatory, About threscore ancient Fathers alleged for Purgatory within the
first 600. years
to wit, Hom 14. in Leuit. hom. 25 in Number. hom. 2. in Psalm. 38. hom. 12. in
Hier. lib. 8. in Epist. ad Romans cap. 11.? And the like I may say of S. Basil,
S. Hierome, and S. Ambrose, who have not only the single places against which
M. Morton so triumphantly excepteth out of Senensis, but diverse other that
sufficiently declare their judgment in that behalf.

131. Secondly I would demand of M. Morton why we should ascribe more unto the
judgment of Senensis in censuring these places of the Fathers then unto other
learn^d, that think the contrary: They are all acknowledged (says M. Morton)
expressly by Syxtus Senensis ^^om the evidence of their contextes to have spoken
only of the ^ire of the day of Iudgem^nt, and consequently not of Purgatory.
This now is properly to help a dye in deed, for that Senensis does not talk of
any such evidence of the contextes, Sixth. Senensis l. 5. Bi^lo^h. Annotat. 17^.
in fin.
but speaks rather doubtfully, and by coni^ctu^e, saying of Origin, that his
opinion (that both good and bad should be purged by f^re) is confuted by S.
Aug^stine in his books de Ci^itate D^i, but yet for excusing the same from
error he says: Aug. l. 21. de ciuit. Dei. c. 26. and 27.
Tu vide an Origenis verba interpretari queant de igne vl^imae co^flagrationis.
Do thou (Reader) consider whether the words of Origin may be interpreted of
the fire of the last co^flagration or ^ot? So as he did not expr^sly
acknowledge from the euidenc^ of contexts (as M. Mort. shifting and lying
words are) that these authorityes must needs be understood of the last
combustion of the world; Origens plain testimony for Purgatory.
but rather leaves it as uncertain to be considered by the Reader: and there
are diverse of them, that cannot be so understood, as that of Origin upon the
Epistle to the Romans: haecipsa purgatio quae per poenam ignis adhibetur etc.
Orig. lib. 8. Epist. ad Romans
This purgation of sins which is applied by the punishment of fire, how many
years, and how many ages it shall afflict sinners, only he can tell to whom
his Father gave power of judgment: which words cannot well be understood of
the last conflagratio^ of the world, which no man can affirm to be likely to
endure many ages together.

132. And many like sentences may be observed in the other Fathers speeches,
which he expressly alleges to the sense of this of Origin, whom he says they
do imitate and follow in holding, that both S. Peter and S. Paul, and other
Saints shall pass also through this fire, though without hurt, Expurgabit
Jerusalem (says S. Basil) Dominus in spiri^u iudicij, and spiritu ardoris,
quod ad ^am probationem sieve exam^^ refertur, quod per ignem fiet in suturo
saeculo. God shall purge Jerusalem in the spirit of Judgment, and the spirit
of burning, which is referred to that probation, and examination which shall be
made by fire in the world to come. And this I think Sixtus Senensis, Basil. in
c. 4. Esaias.
or M. Morton for him will hardly apply from the evidence of the context it
self, unto the last co^flagration of this world, which indeed is but a mere
conjecture of his, and for such he wills the Reader to consider of it, as now
you have heard. But M. Morton does magnify the same, as somewhat helping him in
his opinion to divert the authorities of these Fathers from inferring the true
fire of Purgatory: but the truth is that they may include both, as before we
have noted, to wit, the fire of Gods judgment in examining sins after their
deaths, and the fire of Gods justice in purging and punishing the^ temporally,
that were not purged before. Of which later execution of Justice, and purging
sins, the last conflagration of the world may be a member or part for those
that shall live until the last day of judgment. Whereunto S. Ambrose in the
very place here alleged seems to allude, when he says: Ambros. i^ psalm.
118.
Cum vnusquisque nostrum venerit adiudicium Dei, and ad illos ignes quos
transituri sumus etc. When every one of us shall come to the Judgment of God,
and to those fires through which we must pass, then let every man say as the
Prophet did, respect my humility, and deliver me. Where it is evident, that S.
Ambrose speaks of more fires then one. And so this third contradiction of
Bellarmine is found to be nothing at all.

133. His fourth and last contradiction framed out of B. Fisher against
Bellarmine, to wit, that there is very rare mention of Purgatory in the Greek
Fathers, is understood by him as well of the name of Purgatory not then so much
in use, as that the most ancient writers next after the Apostles time, when
many things were not discussed so exactly, (as in process of time they were)
did not so clearly handle that matter: Nemo iam dubitat orthodoxus (says he)
an Purgatorium sit, de quo tamen apud priscos illos nulla, vel quam rarissima
fiebat mentio. No rightly believing Christian does now doubt, whether there be
Purgatory or no, of which notwithstanding, Roffens. art. 18. co^tra Lutherum.
there was none, or very rare mention made among those most ancien^ Fathers.
Whereof he gives diverse reasons, and indeed the same may be said of sundry
important other articles of Catholic Religion: for so much as in the first
primitive Church when the said Fathers were under persecution, and occupied in
other weighty affairs against heretics and persecutors, they had not time,
nor occasion to discuss many things, which the holy Ghost afterward did make
more clear unto the Church by success of time: and yet does not Bishop Fisher
say, that there was no knowledge of this article of Purgatory in the very first
Fathers; but only his meaning was, that the name, nature, and circumstance
thereof was not so well discussed, and consequently the thing more seldom
mentioned by them, then afterward by the subsequent writers.

134. Wherefore coming afterward in his 37. article to answer Luther, that
said, that Purgatory could not be proved by any substantial argument, he uses
this demonstration against him: The opinion of B. Fisher about the antiquity
of Purgatory.
Cum a tot Patribus (says he) tam a Graecis quam Latinis Purgatorium
affirmetur, non est verisimile, quin eius veritas per idoneas probationes illis
claruisset. Whereas Purgatory is affirmed by so many Fathers, as well Grecians
as Latinists, it is not likly, but that the truth thereof was made clear unto
them by some sufficient proofs. And then after the citing a multitude of
Fathers of the one and the other Church, he comes to prove Purgatory first by
Scripture out of both testaments, and then by great variety of testimonies and
authories of the said Fathers. And if this will not suffice M. Morton, let him
see the threescore before mentioned by me out of Coccius, whereof 30. or
therabout were of ancient Greek Fathers within the first 600. years after
Christ.

MASTER MORTONS conclusion and observation about the article of Purgatory
examined.. XVII.
MASTER MORTON having played his prize as now you have heard, in charging
Cardinal Bellarmine with contradictions, and absurdities about the doctrine of
Purgatory, he makes this conclusion. If any (says he) shall but observe in
this one controversy the number of witnesses brought in for the confirmation of
this their new article in the name of ancient Fathers, which are by confession
of our adversaries merely counterfaite, Preamb. page 69.
as Clemens his Constitutions, Clemens Epistles, Athanas. in quaest. Eusebius
Emissenus, Josephus Ben-Gorion, Hieron. in Proverb. August. ad Fratres in
Eremo. the Liturgies of James and others: all which as they are urged for proof
of Purgatory, so are they rejected by their own men (I desire to be challenged
for proof heerof) as forged, or corrupted, or Apochrypha: and indeed no better
witnesses for truth, then the Knights o^ the Post be fit men for a Jury. If
further he shall mark how true Fathers, and Scriptures are instanced in for
proof of the same article, whereof (when I speak of Fathers) most of them
(when I speak of Canonical Scriptures) all of them are found by the judgment
of their own doctors to be tortured, wrested, and forced, as it were to say
that which they never meant: if he, lastly, consider how almost every one of
the^ indeauoring the defense of the same doctrine, is in his own assertions
contradicted by himself, which may be in this one controversy concerning
Purgatory, a late article of their faith, most plainly discerned. So ^ar he.

136. And this his conclusion, or repetitio^ in the end of this last objection
about Purgatory, seems to me a recapitulation and brief repres^ntation of
all his former vnsyncere dealings concerning the same; and that he cannot be
trusted in any thing he says, though he struggle still to say somewhat. For
first of this number of witn^sses which here he says to have been brought in
as Knights of the Post for confirmation of this new article of Purgatory, to
wit, Cl^mens his Constitutions and Epistles, and the other six or seven
authorities here cited, they, and the rest, under the names of ancient
Fathers, Twenty ancient Fathers brought by Bellarmine for Purgatory.
are not so much as named by Bellarmine (except only the two first in a word or
two) and much less are they brought in for principal authors in the Catalogue
of ancient Fathers, whose testimonies and authorities he sets down for
proof of Purgatory: so as this is one deceiptfull untruth to make his Reader
beli^ue that these are our chief Authors, whereas Bellarmine besides these,
does allege twenty, viz. ten of the Greek Church, and as many of the Latin,
as namely S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Basil, S. Ephraim, S. Epiphanius, S. Cyrill,
S Chrysostom, ^usebius, Theodoretus, Theophilactus, and Damascenus, all
Fathers of the Greek Church: and Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S.
Hi^rome, S. Paulinus, S. Augustine, S. Gregory, S. Isidorus, Victor Vticensis,
and S. Bernard of the latin Church. All which twenty Fathers, are without the
number of those other against which he excepteth here, and consequently are so
many good and lawful witnesses (and not Knights of the Post) for a complete
Jury against M. Mor^on.

137. Secondly it is another manifest untruth, that he says his adversaries
(to wit Catholic writers) do confess, these seven or eight Authors, and
aut^orities by him mentioned, to be merely counterfaite. For albeit some of
them be excepted against, or called in question by some writers, whether they
be the true works of the Authors whose names they bear, or not, and thereof
all reputed Apocryphal, A second gross untruth about Apocryphal writings.
that is hydden and obscure: yet it follows not that they are merely
counterfaite, for that they may be ancient works, and not to be contemned,
though not of those Authors. As for example, that work entitled: Opus
imper^ectu^ in Matthaeum, ascribed to S. Chrysostom, and the Sermons ad
Fratres in Eremo, ascribed to S. Augustine, the Homilies also attributed to
Eusebius Emissenus, proved by Baronius to have been written by S. Eucherius
Bishop of Lions, that lived above eleven hundred years gone, all these works
cannot be denied to be ancient and learned, Baron. anno. 441.
though Apocryphal, hidden, and doubtful, for so much as concerns their
true Authors, which yet our writers do not call merely counter^aite, as here
M. Morton does falsely affirm.

138. His third manifest untruth is, where he says, that, of Fathers, the most
of them, and of Canonical Scriptures all of them, are found by the judgment of
our own Doctors to be tortured, wrested, and forced to say (for Purgatory)
that which they never meant. Ib. p. 70^
This now whether it be not such a wilful and witting lie, as before I
described, for a formal malicious lie, such as the writer did know to be a lie
when he wrote it, I am content to remit my self to any judicious, and civil
Protestant in the world. For if our own Catholic doctors that make profession
to believe Purgatory, do find in their own judgment, as here is said, that
of Fathers alleged ^or the proo^e thereof the most of them, and of Scriptures
all of them, are tortured, and ^orce^ to say that which they never meant; A
third notorious and intolerable lie.
how then do these doctors believe the doctrine of Purgatory to be true? Why do
they not change their opinions, and become Protestants? Is it credible, that
they will believe that for truth, and for an article of faith which all
Scriptures, and most Fathers in their own judgments do impugn? Can M. Morton
answer any thing to this so lewd and wilful absurdity? And did not he know,
that he lied when he wrote this? And that it was impossible to be true?

139. Mor^euer I have now showed that Cardinal Bellarmine in setting down the
Fathers opinions about Purgatory, besides those excepted against by M. Morton,
has twenty others, and Coccius in his Thesaurus has near threescore within
the compass of the first 600. years after Christ: and will any Catholic
doctor or writer (think you) say that the most of these Fathers are found in
their judgments to be ^orced to speak against their own meaning? And yet
says M. Morton, I desire to be challenged for proof hereof. And to the end
that he may have somewhat to do, I do earnestly challenge him herein, M. Mort.
sore pressed and challe^ged for wilful lying about Purgatory.
requiring at his hands, that of those first threescore mentioned by Coccius,
within the first six hundred years he do really and sinc^rely prove thirty
one at least, which is the mayor part, to be so tortured, and so granted to be
by the Judgment o^ our own writers, or else he falls wholly in his cause.

140. And again let him prove that all Canonical Scriptures alleged by
Bellarmine and others for Purgatory, are found also by the judgments of our
own doctors to be so tortured, wrested, and forced, and he shall prove himse^f
an admirable man indeed. But in the mean space, let us examine a little the
probability of this fond vau^t, to wit, what he will be able to do, when he
comes to the proof. Bellarmine does allege ten s^u^rall places out of the
old ^estament for proof of Purgatory, with the expositions of the ancient
Fathers upon them, and all a^e confessed by Protestants themselves to be taken
out of Canonical Scripture, Bellar. l. 1. de Purg. c. 3. and 4.
except the first two out of the books of Machabees and ^oby, which ^ere
notwithstanding accounted for Canonical in S. Augustines time, as appears by
the third Council of Carthage, in which himself was present: and out of the
new Testament he alleges other five places, with the expositions in like
manner of the ancient Fathers upon the same that understood them to m^ane of
Purgatory: Con^. Carth. Canon. 47^
and will our own doctors think you, say, that these fi^teene places are all
tortured and forced against their meaning? and all the Fathers expositions
violented against their own judgment? If our doctors will say so, they must
be M. Mortons doctors and not ours.

141. And finally it is the repetition of a fond vau^t, when he concludes
thus: Lastly (says he) almost every one of the indeauouring the defense of the
same doctrine, is in his own assertion contradicted by himsel^e etc. For what
one example has M. Morton been able to bring hitherto to prove this? Preamb.
p. 70.
All his assaults against Cardinal Bellarmine have been sagittae paruuloru^,
arrows of children, weak in force, Psalm. 63.
and returned commonly upon himsel^e. All which notwithstanding, let us see how
peremptory he is in the end of this Chapter, Preamb. p. 70.
in justifying of himself, and condemning his adversary.

142. These observations (says he) may give our Reader such a scantling of
their dealing, A notorious foolish vaun^ about tretrip.
that we may justly pronounce P. R. his censure upon themselves, Not to be
believed hereafter. So desperate has his demand been, when he required any
one overtaken in a triple ^alsitie, as though he would venture all the credit
of all the Annotations upon the Rhemish Testament, all the Volumes of Baronius
his Annals, all the Monuments of Counce^s in their Binius and Surius, all the
disputes of Bellarmine, o^ Greg. de Valentia, o^ Co^cius, and all other their
late doctors, upon (as I may so call it) only tre-trippe, a triple falsity, and
then never to be cr^di^ed aga^ne. I am persuaded that no Protestant, who has
been conversant in reading and examining their Authors, but he will stand
astonished to hear this grant our Mitigator makes, as being as I have said)
intolerably disadua^tagious unto the Romish part: but he will easily cease to
marvel when he perceyueth by whom it is made, to wit P. R. the Author of
the Book of Mitigatio^, who himself is guilty of thrice three palpable
falsityes, so that none shall hereafter need to wonder, why he has been so
lavish in hazarding other men's credits, seeing he is so desperately prodigal
of his own. So far he.

143. Whereunto that I may answer briefly, I say, that for my self if there
may be found thrice three palpable falsities, such as before we have described,
and agreed upon, to wit, as cannot be excused by any oversight or error, but
must needs be judged malicious, and wittingly untrue, I do not demand any
pardon or relaxation from my first offer, that I be never credited more, yea if
it be but thrice, which is the measure that I offered to others. Hitherto we
have seen no one alleged and proved: and truly I do confess, that if I did
persuade my self or doubt that M. Morton, or any other could prove any such one
untruth uttered by me, I should be much troubled in conscience therewith: but
for that I am sure I never had such meaning, I stand very confident that he
will never be able to bring any one example, and much less thrice three, as he
braggeth.

144. And wh^ras he se^meth to accuse me of lack of prouid^nce in adu^nturing
the credit both of my self, How detestable wil^ull lies are to honest men.
and all other Catholic writers upon only tre-trip, as he calls it, or
triple ^alsity; I do not lay any thing thereon, ^or that falsities may p^oceed
of diverse cau^es, and in diverse degrees, and with sundry circumstances of more
or less ^ault, so as there may be a falsity without falsehood, whereof my
meaning is not in this place: but whosoever shall be found in a wilful and
witting falsity, or rather falsehood, such as often before has been spoken of,
that is known to be such by the vtterer, I do think it to abhor so much
from the nature it self of an honest civil man, as of what religion so^uer he
be of, he will not commit it once, and much l^sse thrice. And upon this
tre-trip I think I might adventure the credit of all those that would be
accounted honest in both religions. And it seems to me, that except M. Morton
and his fellows were much interessed therein, and mistrusted their own parts,
See before in the prea^. p. 50.
he would never so often and so earnestly mislike the same offer, calling it
despe^atly prodigal, which notwithstanding I hold to be so just and
reasonable, yea strictly nec^ssary also to be exacted, as no man that has care
of his consci^nce or estimation, can repine against it, or seek exemption
therein. And so much of this.

THE SVMME And Reckoning of all this whole Chapter.. XVIII.
NOW then M. Morton to join friendly with you, and to make up the Reckoning
quietly of all this Chapter, wherein you took upon you to prove, that our
Catholic Authors were to be convinced of manyfold witting untruths, ^o
uttered by them, as they must needs be presum^d to have known that they were
untruths, when they wrote them: you see what poor success you have had in
the enterprise, M. Mort. success with Popes and other Cath. Authors.
in that you have been able to prove no one thing of any moment, either
against Popes, or Popish Authors by you impugned, and much less against
Cardinal Bellarmine, whom you singled out in particular: but much has been
proved against your self in that kind, whereof you wrongfully accused him. The
three Popes Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus, have been cleared from the
slander of falsifying the Council of Nice: and Costerus and Gratian, have
complained of your wilful falsifying their words and meaning, and with evident
arguments have justified their complaint. Your objections of different Eliberis
in Spain and Franckeford in Germany^ Supra 11.
and further also entangled with d^uers ^als^ties of your own: and the like
Epiphanius concerning the same controversy of the Catholic use of Images.

146. And when you come to join with Bellarmine in both the heads by you set
down, first of wilful falsities, His success with Bellarmine.
and slanders euicted (as you say) by his own confession, and then of
falsifications in the allegation of other men's testimonies, though you stretch
your self far, I mean not only your wit, but your conscience also, to
charge him with somewhat that may seem probable against him, for which you
have threescore books of his to offer you variety of matter: yet are you so
far of from having produced any one thing of substance, whereunto the name or
nature of a witting and wilful untruth may agree, as you have wonderfully
established the credit of his works, by these your vain assaults made against
the same, and disgraced your self with the note of many witting and wilful
untruths, so uttered by you, as they make you in every indifferent man's
judgment inexcusable; in that obiecting falsely such untruths to others, have
so exceedingly multiplied the same your self.

147. And as for the last matter handled by you here against Purgatory, and
the testimonies produced for the same, I cannot but lay before you a certain
friendly consid^ration, In important and friendly consideration laid by P. R. to
T. M.
tending to your eternal good. You and I, that are now so contrary in this
point one against the other: you in den^ing, and I in believing the truth of
that dreadful purging fire, cannot but assure our selves, though our age
perhaps be unequal, yet that shortly w^ shall both come to try the matter by
experience, and thereof will depend our everlasting good or evil. Preamb. page
70.
You have noted me of indiscretion ^or venturing (as you call it) all the
credit of the Annotations of the Rh^mish Testament, all the Volumes of Baronius
his Annals, all the monuments of Councels, all the disputes of Bellarmine etc.
upon only tre-trip, or triple wilful falsitie. But you do adventure a far
greater matter, the eternity of your own soul, upon a far worse chance then
tre-trip, for that you have the whole dice of Christian antiquity against you.

148. I have showed before how that Cardinal Bellarmine has produced 15.
several places out of the old and new Testaments with expositions of ancient
Fathers upon the same, ^ell^. l. 1. de Purg. c. 6.
whereby the use of Purgatory is proved from the beginning of Christian
Religion, and the same he proves out of diverse ancient Councels, both of
Afrike (wherein S. Augustine was present) as also of Spain, of France, of
Italy, of Greece, which give their testimonies to the same effect. I have
showed also, that he alleges almost twenty different Fathers of the ancient
Church, testifying the same in their days. And that Coccius produces upon the
point of threescore within the compass of the first 600. years, that confirm
the common faith of the Church in those days, to have held Purgatory, and
prayer for the dead for Catholic doctrine, and for the practice also of
praying for souls departed, used in all ancient forms of Mass, Christian
Sacrifices, and Lyturges, throughout all Nations of the Christian world, the
same Coccius alleges ten several Lyturges, Coccius tom. 2. titul. de
Poenitentia art. 5.
as that of Jerusalem, that of Rome, that of Alexandria, that of A^thiopia,
that of Constantinople, Syria, Milan, Arabia, Gothia, and Armenia: all which,
or the most of them were in use in the Churches of those Christian Countries
for above 1000. years gone, and in each one is there express order prescribed,
to pray for the souls departed, which necessarily supposes Purgatory. He
produces also the large testimonies of five or six and twenty learned Doctors
of the Hebrew Jewish Church, some living before Christ, and some after: all
which do testify the conformity between Christian doctrine and theirs, in this
behalf.

149. And finally John Calvin himself treating of this matter, Call. lib. 3.
Instit. cap. 5.. 10.
confesses that the use of prayer for the dead (which supposes Purgatory)
was practiced in the Primitive Church above thirteen hundred years gone. Ante
mill and trecentes annos (says he) vsu receptum fuit, vt precationes fierent
pro defunctis: It was received into use above a thousand and three hundred
years past, that prayers should be made for the souls of them, that were
departed. Whereunto I do add, that never any Father since that time will be
found to have reproved, or written against the same, or to have accounted it
for an error or heresy, but rather have condemned the opposite doctrine for
impious, and heretical in Aerius, and other heretics.

150. All which being so, consider I beseech you, even for the love of your
own eternal good, upon what tre-trip or hazard you do cast your soul in,
standing so resolutly upon this denial, which here you do. Upon what manner
of tre-trip.
For if all this Senate of Antiquity, and consent of the Christian world, for
so many ages, ^aue not been deceived, you are gone everlastingly. If they be
saved, you must be damned. M. Mort. does hazard his salvation.
If any of them went to the fire of Purgatory, you must needs go to hellfire.
And this is another manner of tre-trip, then to adventure the credit of
Annotations, Books, Treatises, and Authors which you name.

151. For as if a man being prisoner for a greiuous criminal case of life and
death in a strange Country, should find all the ancient lawyers thereof from
time out of mind to have been of uniform opinion, that except such and such
course ^e taken in his defense, he must certainly be condemned, and put to
execution: and that these should leave diverse and sundry records for the same;
and that some younger lawyer or two of a boulder spirit, but of far l^sse
learning, and authority, should laugh and make light thereat, encouraging the
said prisoner to contemn, as threats and vain fears, all that which the
ancients said, or had left written in that behalf, as John Calvin does in the
former place cited, A comparison of much consideration.
where after his confession of the received use of prayer before 13. hundred
years, says, Sed omnes fat^or in errorem abr^p^i ^uerunt: But all of them, I
confess, were carried away with error: C^lu. vbi sup^a.
If this case (I say) should fall out in a matter of temporal life or death, I
doubt nothing, but the prisoner would stand in fear to follow the younger
lawyers venturous opinions, with so great danger and doubtfullnes of his
temporal death and utter destruction to ensue thereby. And yet is M. Morton
content in this matter, concerning the everlasting loss or peril of his
soul, to adventure against all the said Antiquity, yea glories therein to make
an opposition to them all, for that Calvin and Beza, and some yonger-Deuines
have put him in that gogge. And is not this to play his soul upon less then
tre-trip? But now let us pass to other matters that are to ensue, for that he
having made this vain assault against Cardinal Bellarmine, and other
Catholic authors before mentioned, he comes now to set upon his adversary P.
R. with all the forces he can gather together, though with no better success
indeed, then in the former skirmishes, as by experience you will prove:
whereunto I remit me.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER CONTAINING CERTAIN IMPVTATIONS OF FALSITIES and falsehoods,
falsely objected by M. Morton against his Adversary P. R. which are showed not
to be such; but that the obiecter falsifieth also in obiecting them.
PREFACE.
BY little and little we draw toward the substance of our chief point of
controversy: which is, whether M. Morton can deliver himself and his from
those imputations of witting and willing ^alshoods, which in the Treatise of
Mitigation we produced against them, and that in so persp^cuous and palpable a
sort as seemed impossible to avoid the same. Unto which prejudice M. Mort.
endeavoring to lay some ^enitiue salve, Ch^p. 6. and else where.
came forth with this his Prea^ble; wherein it seemed that he ought presently to
have gone to the question about his own defense: but he thought best to d^f^r
that to the last place of his book, and first to molli^y somewhat the Readers
acrimoni^ of judgment with some small skirmis^es cast out against his
adversary. As first against his wit, m^morie, skill in ^ogike, Gree^^ and
H^brew, mod^stie, truth, and the like, as you have h^a^d in his first Inquiry,
and in our first Chapter: and then he singled out a point or two of the two
maine subjects of the book of Mitiga^ion, to wit, about Rebellion and
Equivocation. Thirdly he objected falsities against Catholic writers, both in
general and particular: and now he continues to do the same against me, to
the end, as he pretends, that having weakened somewhat our credits, himself
may in the last place either escape Scot-free by our condemnation, or at
leastwise say to us with the good thief, in eadem estis damnatione: you are in
the same condemnation of lying with me. But I doubt this Reckoning will not
fall out just. M. Mort. slight for escaping.
For if we can justify our selves openly (as hitherto has been done) from any
least conuincement of any one malicious and wilful untruth, and he not; then
will his condemnation be much more singular and notorious. For that as the
Philosopher says: Contraries laid together do manifest one the other much
more: so as he being evidently co^uicted of many witting falsities, as in the
sequent Chapters will appear, and his adversary not able to be touched with
any one such, as will be showed in this place, the difference between them will
rest evident, clear, and manifest, nor can be avoided by any slight or
tergiuersation. Let us come therefore to the point it self.

2. The thing that seems most, or one of the most, to have stong M. Morton in
my Treatise, that was directed to Mitigation, was, that out of my detestation
of wilful ^alshood in writing about matters of truth, I said in diverse parts:
that if any man could bring forth but two or three examples out of any
Catholic writer of our days, Mitig. page 489. n. 11.
that had in print used that wit^ing and wilful manner of lying in such sort,
as the fault could not with any reason or conscience be excused, by in^irmitie,
or error of the o^^ender, negligence, ouer-sight, ignorance, fail of memory,
or the like; but that it must be presumed, that he did lie wittingly and
maliciously for the advantage of his cause, knowing it to be a lie when he
wrote or printed it: in this kind I said, that if he could bring me forth but
two or three clear examples against my self, My just offer.
or any other Catholic author of ours (as I had done many in my Treatise
against him and his, that in my judgment cannot be denied to be such) I would
never wish that author to write more, or to be trusted afterward.

3. With this speech of mine (though not only indifferent and reasonable, but
necessary also in my opinion) M. Morton seems to be much grieved, inueighing
against the same in sundry parts of this his Preface, calling it presumptuous,
hypocritical, prodigal and prodigious, as before you have heard, saying first
in the title of his Paragraph, Prea^b. ibid. p. 71.. 17. Mitig. in Pref. p. 28.
that he is to lay down such a discovery of my notorious falsehoods, as will
enforce me by virtue of my own promise, never hereafter to credit my self:
and then bringing the same in again in his very first lines of this assault
against my self, says: P. R. among others, is bold to insert himself, saying:
If any have set down in print any such falsitie, so as it must needs be, he
knew the truth, and yet would set it forth etc. I will in my conscience greatly
discredit that Author, whether it be another, or my self, if two or three such
falsities may be showed. So the Mitigator. Whereby it appears he would seem
to have a conscience, and so I doubt not but he has, but so miserable (if it
be lawful to judge by probability) as it were a kind of happiness for him,
to have no conscience at all. Let our Reader witness between me and him,
according to the evidence of testimonies which shall be brought against him: most
of them sh^lbe so apparent, that any one understanding English may presently
discern them.

^^^ter a ^ad con^^^^nce, th^^ n^^^^t a^^.
4. Thus ^ar M. Morton, censuring most grievously, as you see, my conscience,
for that I said: That in conscience I would discredit such a liar, as should be
found to ly wittingly. And in reason I do not ^ee with what grounds he has
pronounced this sentence against me, that it were better for me to have no
conscience, then so miserable a one, as I have. For either by a miserable
conscience he means an erroneous conscience, or ouerscrupulous, or two large:
but either of these must needs be thought to be less evil, then no
conscience at all. For that every one of them may be reformed, terrifyed,
stirred up, or better instructed, which cannot be hoped where no conscience is
at all.

5. Secondly, it may seem in reason a good conscience that so much detesteth
wilful lying as mine does: and therefore for M. Morton to take an argument
from thence that I have so miserable a conscience, as it were a happiness to
have none at all, I see not out of what topycall place (though he prof^sse
himself to have been a Reader of Logic) he c^n probably deduce. But perhaps
he will say, that his meaning is (^or charity will that we interpret to the
best sense that may be, so lavish and vncharit^ble a speech) that the misery
of my conscience consists in that, I knowing in conscience both my sel^ and
other Catholic writers to be chargeable with such sort of wilful lying, yet
made this offer for a vaunt only, which Allmighty God is my witness, was, and
is far from my cogitation, but that simply, plainly, and in sincere truth
without all exaggeration, I so thought, and do at this hour, and shall be most
ready to yield to the performance of my promise, whenever M. Morton shall be
able to convince me to the contrary, as I expected that he would have done in
this second Reply of his, for so much as he so greatly misliketh the offer,
and threatens so much repentance to me for the same. But you have seen now
that hitherto against other Catholic writers he has been able to effectuate
nothing to the purpose: Now shall we examine what he is able to do against my
self. Fourteen different charges he frames against me, but all so idle,
light and impertinent, as I doubt me, the Reader will enter into some disdain
afterward to have lost so much time in perusing them; yet such as they are, you
shall have them set down in his own order and method.

HIS FIRST obi^cted falsehood against P. R.. 1.
HE enters into this first accusation of me with a Rhetorical figure, About
Thomas Mortons name.
saying that he will not urge me with my own contradiction, and yet he does.
His words are these: I will not urge him with his own contradiction, who in
his p. 28.
preface to his Reader in the end thereof says: Prea. p. 71.
To return to the Treatise of T. M. (for more of his name we cannot yet find
out) entitled: An exact Dis^ouerie of Romish doctrine etc. and yet had he in
his epistle dedicatorie unto both the Universities, Number. 5. and 25.
which is set before the preface, mentioned T. M. in his express name, Thomas
Morton, five several times: but this fault were very pardonable, were it not
in him, who will think no fault pardonable in his adversary. So M. Mort. And
then he plays upon me further saying: In this co^tradiction I think rather,
that P. R. his pen did run before his wit, and so will he excuse himself,
except he had rather be accounted lyingly witty, then witless rash etc.

7. And do you see, how M. Morton triumphs at his first entrance, as though
he had convicted me of some great matter: yet he confesses that the fault were
pardonable in any other, but not in me. So as in it self and in his own
nature he grants it to be pardonable, and thereby also he must needs
acknowledge it to be impertinent to our purpose, and to the argument in hand,
which is of unpardonable faults, to wit, of wilful and malicious lying,
whereunto noe pardon may justly be given; for that it is voluntary and not of
error or infirmity: and this if the fault were confessed, or could be proved
against me.

8. But now, what if this be noe fault or contradiction at all in P. R. either
pardonable or not pardonable? Yea, and that M. Morton did well know it to be
so, and yet would object it here for a co^tradictio^, and that in the first
place, and play upon me for it, as you have heard, what will you say the^ of
his conscience, who holds mine for so miserable, as it were a happiness for
me to have none? May not every man then (to use his own words) understanding
English presently discern the same? Let us come to the proof.

9. He affirms me to write in the end of my Preface to the Reader, that
having spoken all that by way of Preface, Preamb. fol. 71. Mitig. Pref. page 28.
I would return to the particular Treatise of T. M. adding further by a
parenthesis (for that more of his name then those two letters I could not yet
find out) and yet (says he) in the Epistle dedicatory to both Universities,
that goes before the said Preface, I called him by the name of Thomas Morton
five times. But if I show that the said dedicatory Epistle was written after
the Preface, then is there noe contradicton at all: and if M. Morton must needs
know it to be so, then has he either a miserable cause or conscience, or both,
that is driven thus to abuse his Reader for some little show of matter against
me. First then that the Dedicatory Epistle of every work is wont to be the
last thing that is written or printed, and that by order of nature and good
method it should be so, to the end the Author should know, what he presents
and dedicateth, A very vain cavil about the understanding of the letters T.M.
M. Morton I think can hardly deny: and he that shall read either his
Dedicatory Epistle to the King in his first Reply called A ^ull satisfaction,
or this to the L. of Salisbury prefixed before his Preamble, will easily see,
that they were both written and printed after the Treatises themselves: For
that in both Epistles is set down briefly what is handled in the Treatises
themselves: and the like he could not but see and acknowledge in my Dedicatory
Epistle, that it was written after the common Preface and Treatise, and
consequently that I might know his name distinctly, when I wrote this, and be
ignorant thereof when I wrote the other.

10. Secondly I do expressly signify in the very first lines of my said
Epistle Dedicatory to the Book, that the said Epistle was written after the
Treatise and Preface thereof. For thus I do begin my speech to the School
Divines and Lawyers of both Universities: It was no part of my purpose (learned
Countrymen) when I took this Treatise ^^rs^ in hand, either to wade so far
therein, as now I have been compelled, nor yet to prefix any other Epistle
Dedicatory before the same, then the large common Preface it self that does
ensue, which may partly appear by the argument, and namely also and
principally by that which we have set down in the third Chapter of this
Treatise etc. Which words of mine do evidently show, that my Dedicatory
Epistle was written after the common Preface and Treatise: and therefore well
might I come to know M. Mortons name, when I wrote the Epistle, though I knew
it not, when I wrote the other, as now has been said: and these words also must
needs M. Morton have seen, and so not to have erred, A plain conuictio^ of
witting falsehood.
if his will had not been obstinate to error Whereunto may be added, that if I
had written the dedicatory, and printed it with the common Preface, the Printer
would have begun the numbers of the pages and register of Alphabet with that,
and not with the said Preface, as he does.

11. But thirdly to convince him indeed and most appara^tly of witting and
willing fraud in this point^ I must tell the Reader I did in the place here
cyted of the third Chapter of my Treatise, set down clearly and
perspicuously, when, and by what occasion I came to understand, whom the two
letters T. M. did signify, which before I understood not: and the occasion was
by the coming forth of the first reply of M. Morton, entitled, A ^ull
satisfaction: whereunto he thought best, being pressed to it by his Adversary,
to put his name at length, diverse months after I had travailed in answering
his first Inuectiue of Discovery, that had only the bare two letters for his
name, my speech in that place was this: But yet after diverse months again,
seeing the said Reply to appear, Mit. c. 3. n. 1. page 90.
and that the said Minister had now resolved to manifest his name, to wit, of
Thomas Morton, which before went cyphered with the two letters only of T. M.
that might as well have signified Thomas Malmesbury, or Montague, or Montebank,
or any such like Syrnames, as Thomas Morton, I was moved as well of my self as
by others exhortation, to resume the thing into my hands again.

12. So wrote I at that time: and now would I have the Reader to judge between
us, as M. Morton also requires, whether it be likely that he knew that my
Dedicatory Epistle, wherein I take notice of his name, were written after the
common Preface, and first two Chapters of the Treatise or no: and if he knew it
(as needs he must in any man's judgment, both by the words before alleged out
of the beginning of my Epistle Dedicatory, and the same avouched by me again
in the 6. number of the said Epistle,) and yet would object that for a witless
contradiction in me, that has no more contrariety then to say, for some
months I knew not whom the two letters T. M. did signify, but a^terward I
did come to know it by M. Mortons own exposition: let the discreet Reader, I
say, judge what furniture M. Morton is like to have of substantial matter to
prove wilful and malicious lies against me, when he begins with this poor
and idle objection, wherein only his own wilfullnes is convinced. Let him
consider, what reason M. Morton had so to insult over me, for contradicting my
self, and saying: that my p^nne did run before my wit, except I would be
accounted rather lyingly wit^y, then witless rash. Are not these ingenious
jests? But now, says he, I come to note such his falls, as may seem to be
recouerable by noe excuse. Let us examine them.

HIS SECOND objected falsehood against P. R.. II.
About the ^lause of re^er^ation in Latin.
and consequently is brought in here by M. Morton only to make up a number, it
having been produced by him, and confuted by me before in the first Chapter,
and therefore is fondly here called a fall irrecouerable by any excuse.
Preamb. p. 5.. 3. See sup. c. 1.. 3.
It concerns only how many times the clause of reservation is mentioned by
him in Latin or in English, which having been alleged by him before to
discredit my memory, Preamb. p. 72.
as he pretends, here he urges it as a witting falsehood. His words are
these: I have already mentioned (says he) how peremptorily he affirmed that
the clause of reservation was not by me set down in latin throughout my whole
Treatise against Equivocation above once. Whereto the Reader may answer for me,
that it is set down in latin above twenty times: What excuse can he pretend?
Ignorance? Oversight? Negligence? Why the book was present before his eyes,
even in those places, which he particulerly discussed. Could that error be by
error of print, diversity of translation, or difference of editions? (for
these are all the pretenses which he will allow:) not one of all these (he
knows) can redeem him from guilt. So he.

14. Whereto I answer, that small guilt can be found (though the error were
granted) where no malice or interest can be presumed. For to what end or
profit should P. R. err willingly in a matter that imports him and his cause
so little? See above cap. 1.. 3.
Wherefore the most that can in reason be presumed here, though the objection
were admitted, is, that he erred in memory and nu^bring: which is nothing to
the argument in hand of wilful error. But now you have seen before in the
place here quoted of the first Chapter that in the sense and meaning of P. R.
the clause of reservation was set down but once in latin, that is to say,
entirely, and so as it might not be understood by the vulgar Reader, as M.
Morton had promised to do: in which promise also he is showed to have failed,
in that telling his Reader that he would always deliver the same in latin,
confesses notwithstanding, that sundry times he puts it down in English:
which I am far of from ascribing to malice, but rather to oversight or
forgetfullnesse, it little importing our cause on either side. But this rather
may import much to consider the great poverty of M. Morton against his
Adversary for sound objections: The great poverty of M. Mortons proofs.
for so much as he has brought in this trifle now twice, making a special
Paragraph thereof before, as you have heard in the first Chapter, and now
another here, the thing it self objected being both false, as has before been
proved, and vain, if it were true.

15. It shall not need to ponder the light and ridiculous insultations of M.
Morton, which he uses commonly, to mak^ up some weight unto every pretended
charge that he gives, saying: What excuse can he pretend? Ignorance?
Oversight? Negligence? Could it be error of print? Diversities of translation
etc? Whereto I answer, that neither of these are need^ull, for that both the
thing is justified in it self: and if it were not, yet makes it nothing to
the purpose: for that no wilful and witting error can be probably supposed,
where no interest can be gained thereby. And how then is this called a fall
recouerable by no excuse? does he think of what he writes?

HIS THIRD objected falsehood against P. R.. III.
VVHERAS M. Morton in a certain Epistle of his to the seduced brethren,
calling themselves prefixed before his Reply of Full Satisfaction, writes of
his Adversary, that he was of those doctors, Presumptuous Doctors mentioned
by S. Paul.
whom the Apostle described, when he says: They will be doctors, and yet
understand not what they say, nor whereof they a^firme; I taking his meaning to
be general of our Catholic Priests, teachers, and Doctors, as evidently may
be gathered by his whole discourse and by the title it self, 1. Tim. 2. Epist.
Dedic. nu. 23.
Of deceived brethren, thought best in my Epistle Dedicatorie to the
Universities, to answer the same, and to compare somewhat their Doctors with
ours, saying among other things: But whether this description of fond
presumptuous Doctors touched by S. Paul do agree rather to Protestant
Ministers, or to Catholic Priests, will appear in great part by reading over
this my book, especially the 5.8. and 10. Chapters, if by Thomas Mortons
errors and ignorances, a scantling may be taken of the rest of his Doctors.

17. At which words of mine M. Morton is so grieved, as he will needs here
frame a special accusation against me, of a wilful falsehood for applying that
to our Priests and Doctors in general, which he says that he meant of his
p^rticuler adu^rsary (the Moderate answerer) but I remit the Reader for trial
of this to the ponderation of the text it self of his said Epistle to our
deceived Catholi^ke breethren, M. Mort. contemptible opinion of our Catholic
Priests.
where within two lines after the words of S Paul recited, he names our
Priests in general, comparing t^em with the blind Priests and Doctors of the
Jews. And then again, for what insufficient Doctors he holds our Priests
in respect of his Ministers, may appear by his own ensuing words, which are
these: But minds enthralled in the opinion of a neuer-erring-priesthood, could
not possibly but err with their Priests: and such (alas) is the case of all
them, whom God in his justice delivers up to lies etc.

18. And here now I would demand M. Morton in sincerity, did he mean of our
Priests and doctors in general, or not? does he think that only his
Adversary the moderate Answerer is such a deceived Priest, as S. Paul points
at, or not? And if prob^bly we cannot presume that his meaning could be only of
that one, whom he named, but that under his figure he would disgrace and
discredit all the rest, so far as he was able, why might not I speak that
which he meant and intended?

19. But hear, I pray you, how he takes me up for this matter instead of
better. What excuse (says he) may P. R. now use to free himsel^e from
falsehood? Whereto I answer, that I need none. Will he allege ^saith he)
editions, translations, prints? Here is only one edition, and that only in
English. P. R. answers, that this our English edition is sufficient to
justify him, that you meant to disgrace all Catholic Priests by the instance
and example of one. Will you say (says he) that it is an error of Ignorance,
oversight, negligence? Noe, nor any error at all, but a true explanation of
your meaning, with a clear confutation and reiection of the same, and
consequently these Rhetorical shifts are idly brought in by you, nothing
n^edfull for me. For P. R. took you in your true meaning, wherein you desire to
make Catholic Doctors contemptible in general for their blindness, though
to some you will seem to grant the opinion of learning, but yet with such
restraint, and limitation, as you make it not better for instruction of
Christian souls, then the learning of the Devil himself. For this is your
wise and grave conceit. Let them be as greatly learned (say you) as they are,
and would seem to be: yet must there be a con, I mean an heart zealous of the
truth, to be joined with science, to make up a perfect conscience: which is the
true Doctor indeed: otherwise we know that the serpent by being the most
subtle of all the beasts in the field, will deserve no better commendation^,
then to be accounted the skillfullest seducer. M. Mort. conceit of Con and
science.
By which discourse of yours a man may easily see, whether your meaning were
general in your former speech about ignorant Doctors, or no, and how
impertinently you bring it in here for an argument of wilful falsehood against
me, for that I understood you in your own sense. I will not discuss your
concept of your science with your con, which was borrowed of John Reynolds, and
of others before you: and though I be loath to tell it you, least it may seem
to savor of revenge, yet I must say it for your better information, that many
men think very little of the one or other to be in your self, as they should
be, either science or good conscience, alleging your writings for testimony
of both.

HIS FOVRTH objected falsehood against P. R.. IIII.
NEXT unto this he produces for a falsehood in me, that I say in my book of
Mitigation, About justifying of Goodma^.
for their seditious doctrines and practizes against Princes, who please them
not: and among others M. Goodman in particular, that wrote the most scandalous
book against the Regiment of women in Q. Mary's days, and assisted Knox,
Buchanan, and others in troubling and turning vpside down Scotland: Page 73.
Mitig. p. 100.
whereas M. Morton says, that he condemned him, and consequently that I dealt
injuriously with him. Thus he cites my words in a different letter, as though
they stood so in my text: He (Thomas Morton) does particulerly justify Goodman.

21. But first you must understand, that it is his common use, never lightly to
allege truly and sincerely any text, that he will use to his profit, either
in Latin or English, and let the Reader make proo^e of it if in twenty places
alleged by him, he find four without all alteration, let him say, that I do
offer him injury. Mitig. page 99. n. 14.
My words talking of the parts of M. Mortons Reply called the Full
satis^action, were these: Secondly he takes upon him yet more fondly in the
second part of this his Reply to make a public justification of all
Protestants for rebelling against their Princes in any country whatsoever, but
more particulerly and especially in England, and therein does so justify
Cranmer, Ridley, Sir Thomas VVyatt, and others that conspired against Q. Marie
in England: Knox, Buchanan, Goodman, and like Ministers in Scotland, turning
vpside down that State against their Sovereigns; the rebellions raised in
Suetia, Polonia, Germany, Switzerland, France, and other countries, as his
justification is a more condemnation of them, and their spirits and doctrine in
that behalf, then if he had said nothing at all, as partly shall afterward
appear by some instances, that we shall allege thereof.

22. By which words of mine you may see, that I did not single out Goodman
alone, as particulerly justified by M. Morton, as he would make the Reader
believe by his crafty and corrupt manner of citing my words: A fraudulent
citation.
but that among many others he did go about also (so far as he durst) to
excuse and justify him, saying as presently you shall hear, that albeit he
approved him not (for this he durst not do, my L. of Canterbury having written
so terribly against him in his book of Dangerous positions) yet that the
examples alleged against him by the Moderate Answerer, might excuse him,
which were of most intolerable speeches of his against Princes, and here
again in this his Preamble, that in respect of Romish Priests he might be
thought excusable: whereby a man may see his inclination to justify him and his
writings if with security he might have done it. How then is it such a falsity
in me to say, that among so many others before named, whom he cannot deny, but
that he seeks to justify them, he sought also to excuse and justify
Goodman, though not in so absolute a manner, as the other Saints of his, yet in
some degree convenient to his estate and merit. Let us see what I do write
afterward more about this justification of Goodman: my words these.

23. The moderate Answerer (say I) alleges first the words of Goodman in his
book against Q. Mary, Mitig. ^. 114.
wherein he writes expressly, that it is lawful by Gods law and man's to kill
both Kings and Queens, Mother. Ans. c. 4.
when just cause is offered, and her self in particular, for that she was an
enemy to God, and that all Magistr^ts and Princes transgressing Gods laws
might by the people be punished, condemned, deprived, and put to death, as well
as private transgressors: and much other such doctrine to this effect, cited
out of the said Goodman. Goodman p. 94.119.203. etc. cap. 1.
All which the Bishop of Canterbury his second book of Dangerous positions
has much more largely, both of this Goodman, and many other English
Protestants, chief Doctors of their primitive Church, residing at that time
in Geneua. And what does T. M. now reply to this? You shall hear it in his
own words: Full satisf. part. 2^ page 103.
If I should justify this Goodman, (says he) though your examples might excuse
him, yet my heart shall condemn my self. But what do you profess to prove?
all Protestants teach positions rebellious? prove it: here is one Goodman,
who in his public book does mantaine it. I have noe other means to avoid
these straites which you object by the example of one, to conclude all
Protestants in England rebellious, then by the example of all the rest to
answer, there is but one. So he.

24. And this is his Full satisfaction and faithful reply, as he calls his
book: but how poor satisfaction this gives, and how many points there be
here of no faith or credit at all, is quickly seen by him, that will examine
them. For first how do the examples alleged against this Goodman by the
moderate answerer excuse him, as here is said, seeing the words he alleges
against him out of his own book are intolerable, and my Lord of Canterbury
alleges far worse; as for example: that it is most lawful to kill wicked
kings, Dang. Posit. l. 2. c. 1.
when they fall to tyranny, but namely Queens: and thereupon that Q. Mary ought
to have been put to death as a tyrant, monster, and cruel beast; alleging for
confirmation thereof diverse examples out of holy Scripture; as that the subjects
did lawfully kill the Queens Highness Athalia: and that the worthy Captain
Iehu killed the Queens Majesty Iezabell, and that Elias, though no magistrate,
killed the Queens Highness chaplains, the Priests of Baal: and that these
examples are left for our instruction etc. And now tell me, how may these
examples excuse M. Goodman, as our minister Morton avouches? So in my other
Treatise.

25. Whereby you will see that I did no injury to M. Morton, See Full satisf.
part. 2.
nor used falsehood in saying, that he sought in some sort to justify also
Goodman, as well as the rest, according to the title of his Treatise, which
was: A justification of Protestants in case of Rebellion, without excepting of
any: but he used falsehood in alleging my words in the fashion he did, setting
them down in such sort, as might seem, that I affirmed him to justify
absolutely both Goodman and all other Protestants, especially Cranmer, Ridley,
Wyatt, and others there mentioned, whereas my words are, that he does so
justify the^ as his justification is a more plain condemnation of them and
their spirits and doctrines in that behalf, then if he had said nothing of them
at all. Here then is evident falsehood and treachery in alleging my words and
sense, as you see.

26. And yet as though he had taken me at a great advantage, he runs to his
accustomed ridiculous interrogations: Mitig. page 100.
What excuse now shall P. R. make? shall it be edition? print? translation?
there is no difference in these kinds. Was it negligence, or ignorance? the
words are plain and all in English. Thus he plays with himself and his
Reader, and answers all but that he should, to wit, that it is plain that
he desired to justify Goodman so far forth, as he might or durst, though his
justification indeed be a more condemnation of the^, as then I said, and now
must, both repeat and confirm.

HIS FIFTH objected falsehood against P. R.. V.
THIS objection is but a piece or parcel cut out of the former to make up a
number: to which end he stretches out matters by all means possible, About
Knox and Buchana^.
as before you have seen in the second objection, about the reservation in
latin, and after will appear in many other points, and here, and in other
ensuing objections he takes parcells of that, which had been handled before.
For that in the precedent objection you have heard how Cranmer, Ridley, Sir
Thomas, Wyatt, Knox, Buchanan, Goodman, Gylby, VVhittingham, and other
Protestant Ministers were accused in matters of rebellion for their writings
and practyses against their lawful Princes, and how slenderly M. Morton
defended the same: you have also seen and heard how he picked out the person
of Goodman, as not defended or justified by him. Now he comes in with two
more, Knox and Buchanan, saying: Preamb. page 71.
To the objected examples of Knox and Buchanan, as Doctou^s and Actors of the
rebellion in Scotland, my answer was, that their seditious doctrine was
condemned in Scotland, noting them to have been worthy of all condemnation:
and yet does P. R. object neuer^h^l^sse against me, as though I have iusti^ied
them.

28. VVhereto I answer first by the very words of his defense in the former
objection set down about Goodman, he seeks to clear all other saying: ^^ll
s^ti^f. part. 2. p. 103.
If I should justify this Goodman (though your examples might excuse him) yet
my heart shall condemn my self: but what do you profess to prove? All
Protestants teach positions reb^llious: prove it: here is one Goodman etc. By
the example o^ all the r^st I answer, there is but one. By which answer it is
evident he clereth all the rest: and if you look upon my L. of Canterburies
book of Dangerous positions, you shall find as bad or worse positions
gathered by him out of Knox, and Buchanan, then out of Goodman, though all be
most pestilent. Not only then one Goodman alone is there that holds this
position according to my L. of Canterburies book, which authority I persuade
my self made M. Morton, together with some fear of his Majesty's mislike, to
answer so cautelously, Cautelous answering
as here he sets down, that their seditious doctrine was condemned in
Scotland, saying, that he answered so before in his full Satisfaction. But
indeed not fully so, but only that there was an act of Parliament in Scotland,
upon the year 1584. to call in that Cronicle of Buchanan, censuring all such
attempts and innouations: which is somewhat less, if you mark, then, that
their seditious doctrine was condemned in Scotland.

29. Let us see then how I impugned this his shift in the book of Mitigation.
Mitig. p. 119.
These are my words: For Knox and Buchanan their assertions he answers us:
you might have added, that there was in Scotland an act of Parliament to call in
that Chronicle of Buchanan, censuring all such attempts and innouations. And
then cites in the margent anno 1584. which was almost thirty years after the
said doctrine had been taught, preached and practiced in that Kingdom by those
first ghospellers. And is not this a full satisfaction trow you? What if the
Chronicle of Buchanan were called in, that recounted with approbation and
insolent triumph the attempts made upon their lawful Princes by incitation of
this doctrine. Does this take away the doctrine it self? Or does it prove that
these first ghospellers held it not? What became of the other books of Knox?
and namely his Chronicle (for he wrote also a Chronicle of the same matters,
and of his own acts therein, as Caesar did his Commentaries) were they
abolished heerby? Or do not the same things remain in Holinshed, Hooker,
Harrison, Thyn, and other writers, as well English as Scottish? Or does all this
prove that this was not their doctrine? See then how full or rather fond this
Satisfaction is.

30. Thus I wrote then, showing that M. Mortons evasion was insufficient, to
say, that there was an act of Parliament in Scotland to call in the Chronicle of
Buchanan: for here is nothing spoken of Buchanans other Books, nor yet of any
books of Knox: nor do I find that M. Morton did use these words of co^demning
them then, which now he does: that their seditious doctrine was condemned in
Scotland. Nay, as I noted before, by saying that only one Goodman had held
positions seditious, he thought to justify and clear both these two, and all
other their companions from just reprehension. Whereby you see, how idle an
objection against me this is of wilful falsehood, for that I said he
endeavored to defend generally all Protestants from seditious doctrine and
practice: which indeed he does throughout all his second part of his said full
satisfaction. Full Satis. part. 2. p. 97.98. and deinceps.
For proof whereof it is sufficient to allege the very title written over every
page before mentioned: which is: A justification of P^otestants in case o^
rebellion, both for doctrine and practice etc. and is not this then a worthy
objection? And may he not fill up books, if he will, with such toys? Let
these be compared with the real charges given against himself afterward, and
let the discreet Reader note the differenc^ in weight and substance.

HIS SIXTH objected falsehood against P. R.. VI.
Bellarmine for Campian in a certain quotation of his in the margent
concerning the heresy objected to Calvin and Beza, to wit, of the Autotheans,
About Caluins Autotheisme, and mispla^ing of Card. Bellarmins name in the
margent.
that affirm Christ to be God of himself, and not of his Father: For whereas
it was avouched by the Moderate Answerer against T. M. that sundry English
Protestants and namely M. Willet and M. Fulke did deny Christ to be God of
God, light of light, according to the ancient form of speech, prescribed in
the first Council of Nice: M. Morton in his full satisfaction answered the
matter thus: But can you find (says he) no more Protestants of that opinion?
your Jesuit reck^neth up Calvin and Beza etc. Thus he answers, and in the
margent quoteth Campian Jesuit. rat. 8. and immediately after Bellarmine lib. 2.
de Christo, cap. 19. and th^n go^th forwards showing how grievously this
position is censured by the papists, the one of them calling it a monstrous
opinion, Full Satisf. pa^. 1. p. 20.
another heresy, a third heinous heresy, a fourth Atheism, and a fifth
Blasphemy: and yet says he, notwithstanding all this the doctrine it self in
the judgment of your famous Bellarmine does seem Catholicall, because they
deny not the Son to be from the Father, but they deny the essence of the
Godhead to have any generation.

32. And for that upon the words, your Jesuit, he placed the letter R. for his
reference in the marge^t unto Campian, and for the next Author puts the
letter T. upon a quotation of Bellarmine to the same effect of referring the
opinion of Calvin and Beza in this matter, the letters being very small, A very
impertinent cavil.
the one was taken for the other, and the name of Bellarmine set down in the
text instead of Campian, the difference importing nothing in the world: for
that both of them do relate the said heretical speech of Calvin and Beza;
Campi^n as of himself, and B^llarmine from the testimony of Genebrard, Lindan
and Canisius: yet does M. Morton make a great matter about this, as though it
had been done of set malice, by a nimble slight, as he calls it, thereby to
make it seem, that he did put a contradiction in Bellarmine against himself,
as accusing Caluins speech for heretical in one place, and yet granting it to
be Catholicall in another: whereas M. Morton said, he meant to put an opposition
only between Campian and Bellarmine, the one ^ccusing Caluins speech as
heretical, the other allowing it, as Catholicall.

33. But all this is a mere trifling cavil. For first, what could it import
me or my cause wittingly to have changed these two names of Campian and
Bellarmine, for so much as it was all one to me, for M. Morton to prove that
Bellarmine was contrary to Campian, Genebrard, Lindan, and Canisius in this
matter, as to himself? And therefore for me to change voluntarily these names,
Cui bono? what interest could I have by it? And so much of the n^mes.

34. But now for the thing it self, albeit Bellarmine in the place here quoted
do show, that according to the exposition of Josias Symlerus a Caluinist, the
words of John Calvin in a certain sense may have a true meaning, yet simply
and absolutely does he condemn the same, as heretical, saying: Caluinum
existimo, Bellar. l. 2. de Christo, cap. 19.
quoad modum loquendi, sine dubio errasse. I do think without doubt, that
Calvin did err in his manner of speech. And a little after he begins a new
Treatise against him with this Preface: Restat, vt modum loquendi Caluini etc.
It remains that we do demonstrate Caluins manner of speech, Caluins manner of
speech condemned by Be^larmine.
that says the Son to have his essence of himself, is simply to be rejected,
and that we must speak in a quite contrary manner, to wit, that the Son has
not only his person, Mitig. p. 231.
but essence also from the Father, and so is God of God, and light of light, as
the Council of Nice declared, and this he proves by four ways: First, quia
pugnat cum verbo Dei, For that Caluins manner of speech is opposite to the word
of God etc. Pugnat secundo cum Concilijs, and secondly it is repugnant to the
manner of speech of ancient Counsels, as the Nicene and others: pugnat tertio
cum doctrine Patrum, thirdly i^ is contrary to the doctrine of the old Fathers:
fourthly, it agrees with the speech of the old Arians, and other such proofs,
which Bellarmine does prosecute at large confirming each one of these members
by diverse examples and instances, and that Calvin spoke heretically in favor
of the Aria^s in this behalf.

39. Thus far of Bellarmines opinion, and thus much I did set down in the
book of Mitigation upon this place: whereby it appears that Bellarmine
neither is contrary to himself, neither to Father Campian and other Catholic
writers before mentioned: for that all of them do agree, that the manner of
Caluins speech is heretical, dangerous, and to be avoided, though in some
streyned sense it may pass. But I did show besides this in my foresaid Answer,
that M. Morton in reciting Bellarmines Latin words in his margent, did
wittingly and wilfully corrupt the same for his advantage, by turning illum
into illos, and hoc errore into errore only, cutting of the word, hoc, which
made or marred all the market about clearing of Calvin: for that Bellarmin said
only (talking o^ the heresy of the Autotheans,) Non facile audeo pronunciare
illum in hoc errore fuisse. A nimble sleight of M. Mort.
I do not easily presume to pronounce him ( Calvin) to have been in this
error, refuted by Genebrard of the Autotheans; M. Morton cites him thus: Non
facile audeo pronunciare illos in errore fuisse. I do not easily presume to
pronounce the^ ( Calvin and Beza) to have been in error, that is to say, in
any error at all: wherein Bellarmine should be contrary to himself, having
said of him a little before, sine dubio errasse, without doubt he erred in this
manner of speech: and so you see, that this h^ynous fault, which here M.
Morton obiecteth unto me, that I by a nimble slight would make him seem to
produce Bellarmine as contrary to himself, is done by him, without any sleight of mine, but only by a sleight of his own, in voluntary corrupting of
Bellarmines text: so as going about to accuse me iniustly, he falls himself
justly into the trap, and yet he runs finally to his former accustomed
interrogations. Preamb. page 75.
What excuse may be admitted in ^his place? Ignorance? Negligence? why P. R.
looks upon the place, understands English, and yet ^alsely obiecteth to me
a sleight of deceyuing my Reader, himself by a fine slight abusing both me and
the Reader etc. See a^te^ cap. 5.
These are words: let the discret Reader look, where he finds substance,
albeit of this we shall have more again afterward, for that he brings it in
upon diverse occasions.

HIS SEVENTH objected falsehood against P. R.. VII.
THIS objection he begins in these words: P. R. in his Treatise of
Mitigation cap. 4. nu. 14. Thomas Morton framed a second part of his book ( Of
full Satisfaction) for justification of Protestants: The iustif^ing of
Protestants from Rebellion.
and yet in effect he confessed all that his adversary opposed (about seditious
doctrine, and practice of mutinyes and rebellion:) let P. R. learn what this
means, Preamb. p. 75. and 76.
littera occidit, and then let him come to be tried by my ^ooke etc. Thus far
he. But in my opinion it had been good, that M. Morton had expounded unto us
himself, what his littera occidens, or killing letter does mean, that we might
have learned the mystery at his own hand. For as in the Apostles speech that
used the same phrase, 2. Cor. 3.
we know his mind to have been, that the only literal understanding of the law
of Moses does kill without the quickening spirit of the internal meaning, so
how M. Mort. can apply it to his Book or my Answer, I know not, or in what
sense either of them may be called such Kill-cowes.

37. But let us come to the point it self in controversy. I do say indeed in
the place by him quoted of my Treatise, that whereas his first adversary the
Moderate Answerer had alleged great store of proofs against him, out of
Protestant writers themselves, to convince both their doctrine and practice in
matter of sedition, far to surpass that of the Catholics, and that M. Morto^
in his Book of Full Satisfaction made a show as though he would answer the
same, one by one: yet that his answer was such, as cleared nothing the case,
Mitig. p. 113.
but in effect con^^ssed all, whereof I gave this second ensuyng reason as is to
be seen in my Treatise of Mitigation.

38. And indeed (quoth I) what other Answer can be framed to most plain
assertions out of their own words and writings, as of Calvin, Beza, Hottoman,
and so many other French Caluinists, as I have mentioned in the first Chapter
of this Treatise? Goodman also, Gilby, VVhittingham, Knox, Buchanan, and others
nearer home unto us? All the forenamed collections in like manner of him that
is Archbishop of Canterbury, of D. Sutcliffe and others in the books entitled
Dangerous positions, Survey of the pretended disciplinary Doctrine, and the
like: wherein their positions are most cleeerly set down concerning this
matter. And albeit this Minister T. M. in his reply does use all the art
possible to disemble the same, by telling a piece of his Adversaries
allegations in one place, and another piece in another, altering all order both
of Chapters, matter and method set down by the Answerer, so as never Hare
when she would sit, did use more turnings and windings for covering her self
(which the Reader may observe even by the places themselves quoted by him out
of his adversaries book:) yet are his answers such, where he does answer (for
to sundry chief points he says nothing at all) as do easily show that in
substance he con^esseth all, and cannot deny what is objected. And where he
seeks to deny any thing, there he intangleth himself more, then if flatly he
confessed the same. Some few examples I shall allege, whereby conjecture may be
made of the rest.

39. So far then. And in proof and prosecution of this matter I do spend
there a dozen leaves at least, Nothing can in truth be answered for excusing
Protestans in matters of Rebellion.
refuting all the Answers and shifts, that he uses to yield some, not full but
faint and feeble satisfaction, to the testimonies alleged, whereunto for
breuities sake I remit the Reader, not to make here an unnecessary repetition.
And so much of this objection. And yet noting by the way how many different
dishes of meat M. Mortons Cookery does furnish out of one thing only, which is
the iusti^ying of Protestants from Rebellion, having made already one
Paragraph of Goodman, another about Knox and Buchanan, and after will follow
Sir Thomas Wiat, and in another, Calvin, Beza and others. And this last has
been of all Protestants, and out of all which he frames several falshods
against his Adversary P. R. as dishes of different dressing, only to make a
show and o^tentation, as though he had somewhat to produce and lay before his
Reader, whereas indeed he has nothing at all.

HIS EIGHT objected falsehood against P. R.. VIII.
THIS objection consists principally in a certain M. Morton suffered himself
to fall (as often otherwise he does) for that he was reprehended for a certain
dissimulation of his, when knowing and having seen that his adversary had set
down before many grievous accusations not only against the doctrine, but also
the seditious practices of the Protestant Geneuian Ministers Farellus, Calvin,
Beza, Hottoman etc. About dissembling the wicked practices of Calvin Beza and
others.
against the B. of Geneua their rightful Lord, both spiritual and temporal,
the King of France and others, yet was he not ashamed to make this conclusion.
Thus is Calvin justified (says he) concerning his Doctrine, and in him also
Beza. We have heard of their opinion, have you any thing to except against
their practice? Whereof I did infer as the words did import, that he would
have men think, that there was nothing to be objected nor excepted against
their practice. Now he says that, that question was not made by him in way of
flat denial, as though his adversary could not charge Calvin and Beza with any
practice of Rebellion, but after the manner of Rhetorical art and common
speech by way o^ translation, Preamb. p. 77.
to show more orderly and empha^ically (to use his own words) what was by the
moderate Answerer objected against their practice.

41. Thus he says, and would escape by this: and I am so equal and easy to be
entreated in this matter, or rather so indulgent, as I am content to accept of
his own interpretation, protesting sincerely notwithstanding, that I
understood him in the other meaning when I wrote by Book, the words themselves
leading me thereunto. But how soever it be, there can be no least matter of
wilful malice framed hence against me, Preamb. p. 49.
notwithstanding that M. Morton cries out: O impotency of malice! it is not
unlike unto the blindness of the Sodomits, who after that they had seen Lotts
house, M. Mort. falls into great imapatie^ce.
yet groped for the door. Which comparison I grant that I understand not, no
more then before I did his Littera occidens: for that the men of Sodoma that
came to Lottes house saw the same when they had their eyesight, and would have
broke open the door, but being stricken blind by the Angels, they could not
see the door: what great point of mystery is this to grope at the door when
they were blind? Ibid. Mitig. p. 132.
Or wherein may this be like to my cause? P. R. (says he) a little after
discusseth some of my answers to this objection o^ practice, and yet now will
not acknowledge the beginning. So he. And let the judicious Reader judge, how
aptly this is applied: yet to the thing it self I say, that true it is, that
he indeauoureth both before and after to answer to diverse proofs of seditious
practices objected by his adversary against Calvin and Beza, but weakly,
Godwot, as may be seen by my Reply, and yet out of his own confidence, or
that courage rather which before I mentioned of a Cock of the game, Vbi supra.
he would make that crowing vaunt, Thus is Calvin justified (says he)
concerning his doctrine, and in him also Beza: you have heard their opinions,
have you any thing to except against their practices? Would not you think that
he meant that we had none at all to object, no more against their practices
then their doctrine? And that as he held the one for justified, so did he hold
the other for justifiable, and that herin there was no exception to be made?
Wherein then stands this wilful malice of mine? Yea this intolerable
impudency or impotency of malice, to use his own words? But for that they were
spoken in impatience, I will not greatly urge the same, nor yet seek to
recompense them, least I should go against the title of this Treatise, which is
A quiet and sober Reckoning; the moderate judicious Reader shall be the judge
of all, where passion, and where modesty is found.

HIS NINTH objected falsehood against P. R.. IX.
HIS ninth objection is a strange one, and Of Mitigation two or three manifest
untruths, uttered volu^tarily by him, in going about to defend the Rebellion
of Sir Thomas Wiat, and the Duke of Suffolk, About Sir Tho. Wiats rebellion
and the Duke of Suffolk and others.
in Queen Mary's time, and so convinced the same, as there was no place left
of probable defense, M. Morton upon mere necessity comes here now to handle
these points again, and in part to excuse himself, by the feeble means, which
presently you shall hear: concluding nothing more against me, but this, which
are the last words of all his discourse. Wherefore (says he) these two lies
which P. R. would have bestowed upon me, he by virtue of his place and Patent
may keep to himself. Pream. p. 79. and 80.
And is not this a great inference, when he should convince me of wilful
falsity? But you shall hear upon what grounds he obiecteth these two untruths
to me, for that I convinced him of four.

43 First then my speech upon his weak defense of the foresaid Rebellion was
this in my Treatise of Mitigation. Mitig. c. 4^ p. 127. nu. 36.
To that of Sir ^homas Wiat, the Duke of Suffolk and others (quoth I) he
answers diversely. First he says that the History relates the pretense of
Wiat thus: A Proclamation against the Q. marriage desiring all Englishmen to
join for defense of the Realm etc. Then, that in Q. Mary's Oration against
Wiat there is not to be found any scruple concerning the cause of religion.
Thirdly, that no Minister of the gospel was brought in question as a
co^motioner in that cause. Lastly, that is inte^^ might (...) for Protestants
accused in that name, the is it plain (says M. Morton) that it was not
Religion; Four untruths convinced against M. Morton
is for Wiat and his follo^ers it is plain it was not against the Queen or
State, but for both. So he, that is to say, M. Morton in his Full Satisfaction.

44. But in all these four different clauses I then said, and now do repeat
again, that there is not Full Satisf. pa^. 2. p. 102.
For as for the first, though the history of Holinshed does relate the
pretense of Wiat to have been against the Q. marriage, con^^aling and
dissembling the point of Religion in that place (which else where he confesses,
as after shall be seen) yet John ^ox a more ancient and authentical
Historiographer then he, does plainly set down, that together with the
pretense of the marriage the cause of Religion was also pretended, Fox Acts and
Monum. an. 1554. p. 1289. nu. 30.
in these words: The mention of marriage with Spain (quoth he) was very ill
taken of the people, and of many of the Nobility, who for this, and for
Religion, conspiring among themselves made a Rebellion whereof Sir Thomas Wiat
knight was one of the chiefest: And again. They said, that the Q. and the
Counsel would by foreign marriage bring upon this Relme miserable servitude,
and establish Popish Religion. So Fox. And it cannot be presumed, but that M.
Morton had seen, and read this, yet durst affirm, that there was no mention
of Religion at all in VViats pretense: which is the first lie.

in the Oration of Q. Mary against Wiat there was not found any scruple
concerning the cause of Religion, is proved likewise false by the same
authority of M. Fox in his Acts and Monuments: who writes that Q. Marie in her
Oration in the Guildhall said publickely, that she had sent diverse of her
Counsel to learn the pretenses of that Rebellion: and it appeared to our said
Counsel (said she) that the matter of the marriage se^^^ed to be but a Spanish
cloak to cover their pretensed purpose against our Religion. And this
testimony also of Fox must needs have been known to M. Morton: and
consequently here is a second witting lie, affirming that there is not so much,
as any scruple to be found, concerning the cause of Religion in that her
Oration.

46. The third point likewise that there was no Co^motioner in that cause,
Whether Ministers had any part in Wyats commotion.
is both false in it self, and cautelously set down: for that the commotion
of Wiat, and the Duke of Suff^lke ensuing within the compass of five months
after the death of the Duke of Northumberland that did conspire the deprivation
of Q. Mary (the first being put to death upon the 22. of August 1553. the other
beginning his rebellion upon the 25. of ^anuary 1554^ and it being well known,
the confessed both by In the in Stories an^o 1553. and 1554. See their lines in
the t^^rd part of the 3. Conuer^io^s of N. D.
Fox, Holins^ed, Stow, and others, that the motive of Protestant Religion was
common to them both, and pretended for chiese in them both: and it being
notorious, that in the first both Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Rogers, Jewel, and
all the chief Protestant Minis^ers of England did concur, who can doubt, but
that in the second a^lso (being but an appendix of the former) they ^ad their
hearts therein though not ^o ^ully their hands, as actual Commotioners, for that
the R^bellion was suppressed in the very beginning by taking away the two heads
Wiat and Suffolk.

47. Whereby you may see the crafty speech of M. Morton who says that
Ministers were not the Commo^ioners, nor brought into qu^stion for such, that
is to say, they were not taken with arms in the field, nor brought into
public judgment and trial for the same. Whereof D. Sanders in his book de
Schismate yields this reason: Sander. l. 2. de Schis. p. 322.
for that Q. Marie being a zealous Catholic Princess would have them rather
called in question for heresy, which is treason against God, then for
conspiracy or commotion, which is treason against her person: ^o as there can
be no doubt, but that considering the forsaid authors, and especially
Holinshead, M. Mortons advocate, who affi^meth expressly that this conspiracy
of VViats was generally agreed upon among most Protestants, and that for
Religion as well, as for marriage, though breaking forth before the time by the
apprehensio^ of a certain gentleman (whom he names to have been cast into the
Fleet for another matter) there can be no doubt I say, but the chief
Protestants, to wit, Bishops and Ministers had as deeply their hearts, and
hands, and heads in this, as in the former of the Duke of Northumberla^d, and
much more: and so did Q. Marie understand it, as D. Sanders declares, though
she proceeded rather against them in matters of Religion for the causes now
rehearsed: so as in this third point also M. Morton is convinced of falsitie,
yea of falsehood in like manner, as may appear both by that we have related,
and for that in this his last Reply he has wholly left this matter out, and
past it over with silence.

Fox ibid. Holinshed anno 1553. p. 1096.
48. And finally the fourth point is also most false, that there was nothing
meant by that rebellion against the State, or the Queen, but rather for them
both, and that her Highness preheminencie and sovereignty might not be
impaired, which John Fox also contradicts: and not only he, but Holinshed in
like manner M. Mortons own dear Author: for that both of them jointly relating
Q. Mary's Oration, do affirm VViats answer to have been unto two of the
Counsel, sent to him by the Queen, to know the cause, to wit, Sir Edward
Hastings and Sir Thomas Cornwallys (which Wiat confessed also at his
arraignement) that he and his would not be contented, except they had the
government of the said Queens person, the keeping of the Tower, and the
placing of her Counsailours, which was in effect to take the Royalty of her
Crown from her: I will rather be trusted, then trust, said he, and therefore
demand the custody of the Tower, and her Grace within it, and the displacing
o^ some Counsailours about her, and to have others placed in their rooms. So
writes Holinshed of Sir Tho. VViats words to Sir Edward Hastings. And yet
says M. Morton, that it is plain, that VViats commotion was not against the
Q. or State, but rather for both: and to the end, that her Highness
preheminencie, and sovereignty might not be impaired. And can any man forbear
to laugh, or rather not conceive indignity at the uttering of such palpable
untruths; yea known untruths to the writer, when he wrote them? For it is
impossible but that M. Morton insisting so much upon Holinshed as he does,
should have seen and read him in this place, and yet is not ashamed, as you
see, to co^tradict him, and face out the matter, as though all were smooth and
verifiable, which he utters, and shamelessely affirms, to wit, Full Satisf.
par. 2. p. 120.
that there was nothing attempted by Wyatt against Q. Mary's person, when he
demanded her to be his prisoner, and to dispose of her forces, State and
Counsel.

49. These four voluntary falsities then were laid upon M. Morton and proved,
Notorious lying.
as you have heard in my last Treatise, will it not be well to examine now, how
he has been able to discharge himself thereof in this his last Preambling
Reply? Let us hear then, if you please, his own defense in these four lies
objected.

50. The first lie (says he) which P. R. notes against me, Preamb p. 80.
is in relating of the Oration of Q. Marie, wherein I said, there was no
scruple concerning Religion, and I cited for witness Holinshed. This author
(as we may perceive) P. R. has examined, and could find nothing in him against
me for this point touching Q. Mary's oration, therefore he seeks other
evidence, and brings against me the testimony of M. Fox, wherein there is
mention of Religion. What therefore? Therefore I am by him condemned for a
liar. Nay. But rather by this opposing M. Fox, P. R. has wilily imitated the
fraud of a ^ox: A mad defense.
which creature, men say, does usually prey furthe^t from home. So likewise P.
R. if he would have proved me a liar should have done it out of Holinsheds
relation of Q. Mary's Oration, which was the witness, whom I produced: but he
wanting cause of reproof heerin, does therefore range further to convince me
of lying, by the testimony, which I mentioned not.

51. Do you see, what a kind of proof he brings? that for so much as
Holinshed either omitted, or guilefully concealed the mention of Religion in
the Proclamation of Wiat, and oration of Q. Marie, therefore I might not prove
the same out of John Fox, that was before, and nearer to the matter then
Holinshed, who takes out of him? does not one affirmative witness constantly
auouching any thing, prove more then ten that hold their peace, and say
nothing? Or is John Fox become of so little credit now with M. Mor^o^, as to be
shaken of so slieghtly, as here he is? Or is he become such a stranger unto
Protestants and their cause, as the citing of his authority must be accounted
for wily, foxlike, ranging, and preying ^urthest from home, as though he were
no longer any domestical ^riend or writer? Or is not John Foxes credit in
history as good, as that of Holinshed, especially when he affirms, and the
other says nothing?

52. But yet further, if you remember two points or wilful falsehood were
objected out of M. Morton, and proved out of Fox, which here are shufled up
into one: and the third, that no Minister of the gospel was brought in
question about this Commotion, is wholly omitted here by him, without any
mention thereof at all, Preamb. p. 81.
and much less, without any answer. And as for the fourth (which he calls
the second) that there was nothing meant against the Q. or State, M. Mort.
convinced of intolerable falsities.
he has a strange defense thereof saying, that even in that purpose of Wiat to
keep the Tower, wanted not the supposed intention which was the preservation of
the Q. and State, which (say I) must needs be understood also of the violent
keeping of her person, holding of the Tower and forces thereof, and appointing
her Counsaylors. And these be the good intentions and meanings that M. Morton
defends in the rebellions of his Protestants, holding them notwithstanding
for very good subjects, though by arms they forced them to these conditions.
And the success and issue may be seen by the practice of the Hollanders in
the low Countries, and of Duke Charles of Suetia, and others, who began their
taking of arms in the names of their true Kings and Sovereigns, pretending
and protesting that all was for the safety and good of their State and persons:
and no less in the cause of Sir Thomas Wyatt.

53. Here then you see, that he is convinced of four several false
assertions, which he could not choose but know to be false, before he set them
down, if he read, and believed M. Fox, and other Protestant writers. But how
now (think you) does all this convince, or so much as accuse me of any
wilful falsitie? And if it does not, as every man sees, why then is it
brought in h^e^e in this place for a several objection of fa^shood against me?
Yea with words of great reproach, saying: We may suf^er professors of the
^eates o^ l^gier-de-main to delude the behoulders to convey on^ man's ring into
another man's pocket, and then call him a cosner: but for us Divines to play
such tricks as P. R. has done, changing Holinshed into M. Fox, and then to
tax me for ^als^od, is a devise inexcusable. So he.

54. And did you ever hear a sober man in this tune? Stand att^nt I pray to
the controversy. He cited the proclamation of Sir Thomas VViatt, as not making
mention of Religion, and quoteth Holinshed in the margent, I produced M. Fox,
that wrote before Holinshed, and lived in Q. Ma^yes time, who set down not
only VViatts temporal pretenses, but that also for religion: and for all the
other three points I do allege the same Fox, and M. Morton quoteth no author
at all but Holinshed, as holding his peace and saying nothing therein, which he
will needs take for a denial; albeit in the last point, as you have heard,
Holinshed himself expressly testifies against him, which he dissembleth. And do
I then here play Legier-de-main co^ueying rings into other men's pockets, and
changing Holinshed into Fox? Does this man know, or care, what he says? Or is
there any one of these points, that proves any least falsehood in me, and not
rather all four in him? How then is it here again brought in against me in
this ninth objection of ^alsity? I am content that any indifferent friend of
his answer for him in this point; whether in leaving to me the charge of two
untruths, draws not unto himself all four much more forcibly, then they
were laid upon him before in our Treatise of Mitigation.

55. Nay, I must tell the Reader further, that ha^^ng considered better the
impudency of this his la^t Preambling Reply, wherein he would shroud himse^^
from a mani^est conviction of lying in the first point, for that Holinshed
speaks nothing of religion in VViats pretense: Holinsh. an. 1553. p. 1593.
column. 2. number. 10 Stow an. 1554. page 1046.
I took the pains to search him over more diligently, and found that he did
expressly affirm also the same that Fox does, saying: The Commons and many of
the Nobility for the marriage, and for the cause of Religion conspired to raise
war. And the very same does affirm John Stow in his Chronicle saying, that
for this (marriage) and for religion they conspired against the Queen etc. So
as now having found out this, M. Morton cannot say, M. Mort. taken in a
notorious open falsehood.
that I do wilily like a Fox prey furthest from home, for that before I did
urge only the authority of M. Fox, seeing that now both his proper Author
Holinshed, and Stow are found expressly to affirm the self same. Which way
will M. Morton turn himself here? For he is convinced of an open and manifest
falsehood, in denying that in two several Replies and Editions of his books,
which now his own author Holinshed is found flatly to affirm.

FOUR OTHER objections of M. Morton against P. R. in matter of wilful
falsitie: to wit, the tenth, eleauenth, tweluth, and thirteenth, in M. Mortons
Catalogue.. X.
IN sign that M. Mortons matter now grows barren, in obi^cting of will^ull
falsities against About the text of Esaias 29. of Ca^erius F^ising. and others.
and so fully answered and confuted before, as it is evident, he seeks but
some show of number to help himself for some ostentatio^: toward which help, I
do willingly increase his number more by one, then he makes it in his own
reckoning, though he indeed set all down: but yet being ashamed of the first
(about my erring in his name T. M.) he gives thereunto no number at all of a
distinct objection, as I have done in my answer. Let us see then^ what manner
of objections these four are, beginning in his account from the 8. in these
words.

See Pream.. 5. nu. 15. and 16.
57. A ninth falsehood (says he) may be accounted his peremptory r^prehens^on of
our English translation upon that o^ ^say the Prophet 29. as diss^nting from
the Latin, Gre^ke and Hebrew both in wo^ds and sense, in which censure he has
Thus far he. And for this he notes in the margent, About the 29. of Esaias
verse. 9.
see a^o^e. 5. nu. 15. meaning that the same is handled before between us, in
this Preamble, and consequently condemns himself of impertinency and o^ lack
of matter to object against me, when he brings it forth here again for
making up a number of many objections, though never so vain and idle, quite
contrary to his solemn promise in the beginning, that he would bring forth
nothing, but only such falls of mine, as may seem to be ^ecouerable by no
excuse, and enforce me never hereafter to credit my self, and the Reader to
think that I have no conscience at all. All this he threatened: and now do you
judge whether these objections of his do enforce thus much or no, being in
themselves both trifles and not proved by him.

58. And for this first, about the text of Esaias, wherein he accuses me of
gross falsehood, there could be none therein on my part at all, it being but a
reprehension of mine against him, for that he translated the sentence falsely:
which if it could be proved that he did not, yet should it be b^t an error in
me, and no witting falsehood, and consequently nothing to our purpose; vid.
Supr^ c. 1.. 2.
but he that shall peruse the place here cited, where this matter is before
discussed, shall find M. Morton, and his English translation (if there be any
such extant) clearly convinced, that they neither agree with the Latin, Greek,
or Hebrew, nor with S. Hierom, most skillful in all three languages: so as this
objection might have been left o^t, but only for want of other store. And as
for that he says in the last words of this objection that I am convinced of
gross falsehood by the judgment of my own Doctors, it must needs be gross
presumption for M. Morton to affirm it. For that there is no one of mine, that
is to say Catholic, that ever took out that sense of the words of Esaias, that
he does: nor could they do it, the text not bearing any such interpretation, as
before has been declared. Wherefore his sub^ility in forcing Esaias to say that
which he does not, is contempt^b^e to us in comparison of our gros^enesse, that
cannot understand him, but in the sense he speaks and means. Let us pass
to the other 3. objections of this Paragraph.

See Pream.. 6. n. 17. and 18. Pream. 82.
59 For a tenth (says he) take his wilful falsehood in pressing one only
edi^ion of Carerius, thereby accusing me o^ falsehood in corrup^ing the author,
whereas the Colen edition has i^sti^yed me, and discovered this disposition of
P. R. to have been willing, that I should rather be condemned rashly, then
justly acquitted. Whereto I answer that this also has been handled before in
the forsaid first Chapter, Supra cap. ^.. 6.
and is brought in here again without any grace, cause, or sub^tance at all.
The perverting of Carerius his text, as it lay in the Italian original
edition, to wit, in setting down aduantagiously, and urging Vere for Vero,
which made a great difference in the sense, I could not omit to note, he
standing thereupon so much as he did, and I never having heard before that time
of any other edition. Now he says, that he has another later edition of Colen
(which I never saw, nor could by any inquiry hear of, but now from M. Morton
himself) wherein he a^oucheth the word Vere is to be found. What wilful
falsehood was there in me to note the error, which I found in my edition? Nay M.
Morton is not so excused by his Colen edition, but that he may be argued to
legier-de-main for urging so much Vere out of that said second print, differing
from the Original, for so much as evidently he might see by the drift and
context of the author, that it could not be Vere Celsus, but rather Vero:
wherein I refer me to that, which before has been treated against him more at
large, and do conclude this his objection, that if there were any wilful
falsehood committed, it must needs lie on his part, and not on mine. He goes
forward.

60. For an el^uen^h fraud (says he) may be remembered his unjust ^rimination
in noting me as a notable liar, Preamb.. 7. n. 21.
^or a^firming that which his own ^riple instan^e does evidently euince.
Preamb.. 8. n. 21.
And we may add for a ^^elu^h ^^s objection of the Author Frisingen^is,
wherein that he may prove me a ^alsifi^atour, he does himself play ^oure
excellent feats of ^alshood. So he. And these two objections are also About
Protes^a^t Princes succession.
for which cause it will not be needful to adioyne much more here, but only
that the Reader may no^e, what simple furniture he has for the matter taken in
hand, to prove witting and wilful falsehood against me, such as cannot be
excused, but that I must needs know them to be falsities, when About
Frisinge^sis corrupted by T. M.
) as for example, in this his eleventh objection he accuses me for noting him
as a notable liar: but if I proved the same in the matter produced, then was
i^ no falsehood, but truth in me: and if I did not, yet does it not follow
presently that it was wilful fraud, for it might be error in me, that did
persuade my self, that he had lied in that point. But he that shall read the
place here quoted, See supra c. 1.. 8.
where before it is handled, shall find, that the lie is justified against M.
Morton, and that there is not any such triple or simple instance making for his
excuse, as here he pretends: and the like he shall find about the 12.
objection, concerning M. Mortons false and fraudulent allegation of the author
Frisingensis and that all the four excellent feats of falsehood there
mentioned are proved indeed to be but so many sooleries of his own invention.
And with this he ends his dozen of objections against me. Whereunto I having
added the title of one more, M. Morton has reserved another for the vpshot of
all, which he calls both new and noble. Let us hear what it is, and so end
this whole Chapter.

THE fourtenth, and last objected falsehood against P. R.. XI.
FOR this last place M. Morton has reserved a a new and noble falsehood
convinced against me: Of the doctrine of Equivocation granted for 400. years.
but the conviction is not yet granted by us, but rather is like to light on
his side. For whereas I had affirmed in my Treatise of Mitigation, that M.
Morton had confessed in effect, that for the space of these last four hundred
years the doctrine of Equivocation had been received for true and lawful
doctrine in our Schools, and consequently practiced also throughout all
Christendom, when just occasion was offered etc. Mitig. p. 279.
Upon this M. Morton falls into a great distemper of speech saying: that by
custom of falsity I have cast of all sense of lying, fallen into a dead sleep,
and cast away all conscience of truth, Preamb. p. 83.
and the like. Which he pretends to prove by two points. First in that I do
pervert his confession, for so much, that albeit he confess the use of
Equivocation for the space of these last four hundred years: yet (says he)
that he never acknowledged the same for so universal, as that it was received
in all Vniuersi^ies, Schools, of all Deuines, Casuists etc. Nay, that he
co^suted this assertion of generality, by the sentence of our own Doctor
Genesius Sepulueda, who says, that Gabriel Biel a lewd Sophister set it
abroach, and of him took it Siluester, Angelus, and some few other such
Glozers, but was not then so generally received among them. And hereof does he
infer this new and noble falsehood against me, as though I had avouched him to
con^esse the generality thereof in all Schools, Universities etc. for these
four hundred years.

62. But in this I see not what advantage M. Morton can take against me, not
only of any falsehood, wherein there must be voluntary error, but neither of
falsity, where error happens by oversight and infirmity. For first I said no
more in my Treatise, then that M. Morton had manifestly set down in his, to
wit, that for these last four hundred years, he granted the lawfulnes of
Equivocation to have been taught in our Schools. And consult (says he) with
the ancient Logitians from the beginning of the world, till within the compass
of these last four hundred years and less, that ever any Logitian did allow
your mixed proposition partly mental and partly verbal, and I will etc. Full
Satisf. par. 3. p. 54
Out of which exception for these last four hundred years, is evidently
deduced, that he grants the use of such mixed propositions (which are
properly Equivocations) whereof one part is uttered, the other reserved in mind,
as before has been declared.

63. And thereof I inferred further by evident consequence and sequel of reason
(though he specified not the same) that for so much as our Catholic Schools
were then over all Christendom and none publicly known or in use but they,
My inference of the generality of Equivocation upon M. Mortons grant for 400.
years.
(for the first three hundredth at least of these four) it must needs follow,
that the same doctrine, during that time, was generally received in the said
Schools, Universities etc. Whereof also may be alleged for proof amongst
other points, that which M. Morton ^iteth to the contrary, to wit, that
Genesius Sepulueda of this our last age seems to be the only first Author
that M. Morton can produce for disallowing absolutely Equivocation (though
indeed he do not) and thereby does plainly prove, that in the first three
hundredth of these four, there was no opposition found to have been made to the
contrary, among so many multitudes of books and Authors, as are extant of
those times: or if there had, that their opposition had been extant, as well as
this of Sepulu^da.

64. Neither did I say (as M. Morton would seem to persuade his Reader) that,
expressly and by name, he granted the general use thereof in all Schools,
Chaires, Universities, Tribunalls, and the like, for these four hundredth
years: but I did by force of consequence infer that he must needs grant so
much upon his first confession of four hundred years, as has been said.
Neither can he avoid that inference and consequence, as has been demonstrated:
for if it were a received doctrine among us, and no ancient contradiction to be
found, then must it needs in that antiquity be supposed to have been general
current doctrine in our Schools, Universities, Tribunalls etc. Preamb. p. 84.
For where no contradiction is found, there general approbation may be
presumed. Neither do I vouchsafe to answer to that obscure comparison of the
French ^ox which M. Morton (though a Minister) is not ashamed to bring in for
an example, M. Mort. obscene comp^rison.
that some, yea and many have had them in this age, and yet may we not
conclude, that all have had them: And the like (says he) in the doctrine of
Equivocation, though some Schools and Doctors have taught it, yet not all.
Whereto I answer that there is no parity. For if there had been as many writers
that had opposed them selves against the doctrine of Equivocation, and use
thereof in the four hundred years, and detesting the same, as there have been
clean men and women, that have detested that other foul disease, pro^essing
themselves to be free thereof; M. Morton would not have been in those straites
that he is, for finding out one Author that contradicts the same in all the
time by him appointed, before Genesius Sepulueda, that only in some particular
Cases, reproves the same, though granting and defending it in others. So as I
leave the filth of this comparison to the Author, and do conclude in this first
point, that here is nothing at all to be found, either of falsehood or falsity
in this objection against me. For what I said, is justified by M. Morton his
own words.

65. There remains then the second point to be discussed. But noting first by
the way, the lavish immodesty of M. Mortons tongue in citing the learned Doctor
Gabriell Biel out of Genesius Sepulueda by the contemptuous title of lewd
Sophister, Sepul. Dialogo Theophilus. c. 19.
whereas Sepulueda styles him in the same place, Theologum doctissimum, a most
learned Divine, and Tritemius who lived with him says: Tritemius lib. de
Scriptor. Eccles. in Gabr. Biel.
In diuinis Scripturis eruditus, ingenio excellens, vita and conuersatione
praeclarus etc. Learned in the divine Scriptures, excellent in wit, and famous
for his good life and conversation, Governor of the University of Tubinga in
Germany even from the beginning thereof, unto the year 1494 which praises and
^uloges will never (I doubt me) be verified or given by any Author of credit or
account, Injury offered to Doct. Gabriel Biel.
to M. Morton, that so scorneth and iniureth so grave and learned a man. And
yet does his gravity and humility make no bones to censure him for a lewd
Sophister at the very first blow, whom perhaps he has not read, and without (
perhaps) understands not in many points of chiefest learning. And this is the
privilege of our new Doctors, to contemn and reproach all others, though
never so much learneder then themselves. But let us go forward.

66. The second point in his Paragraph is, that he takes upon him to check
the general accepta^ce of Equivocation, Preamb. p. 84.
which I said to have been admitted in all Schools, Universities etc. for the
space of four hundredth years, by alleging the contradiction of three ^amous
learned ^esuits o^ our time (for so now he calls them, Three learned Jesuits
wrested against Equivocation.
when they seem som^what to serve his turn) to wit, Ioannes Azorius, Emanuel
S^, and Ioannes Maldonatus, who in some particular cases do reprehend, or not
admit all manner of Equivocation. VVherin first is to be noted, that whereas
M. Morton should have showed some contradictour of the three ages past, he
names only the writers of our time, and those Jesuits also, which sort of men
are every where accused by him, as the Authors and special favorers of
Equivocation, and now fyndeth none in effect to contradict it but them.
Wherefore M. Morton and his fellows must cease hereafter to accuse Jesuits so
generally, as defenders of this doctrine, or else say, that they are contrary
one to the other: or that there is some meaning and particular sense in those
that seem to deny the same, which M. Morton therefore concealeth, for that
being discovered, no contradiction would be found amongst them.

Jesuits restrain the use of equivocation but do not condemn it generally.
67. And this mystery by him concealed is (which before also sundry times we
have noted) not that any Jesuit does utterly deny the lawfulnes of
Equivocation in all cases whatsoever, as bouldly and ignorantly M. Morton
does, but for the restrayning of such abuses as may fall out in the practice
thereof, if to much liberty be permitted, they are more severe then other men
in limiting the same, as more fully may appear in part by our discourse in
the last Chapter of the Treatise of Mitigation: where Catholics are exhorted
to use the lawfulnes thereof with great restraint and parsimony. And further the
speech that in^ueth about these three learned writers Azor, Sa, and Maldonatus,
all three Jesuits, and misalleadged by M. Morton, will more plainly make
manifest the same.

THE OPINION OF the Doctor Jesuit, Ioannes Azor, about Equivocation falsely
objected by M. Morton, as making for him whereas it makes wholly against him..
XII.
AND as for the first which is Azor, M. Morton brings him in with this
Encomion, saying The first witness conuincing P. R. of falsehood, is Azorius a
learned Jesuit: Azor falsely alleged against all Equivocation.
but I do wonder that M. Morton will bring him in again here, or suffer him
to be so much as mentioned, I having convinced him in my Treatise of Mitigation
of so notorious and wilful a fraud and corruption in alleging Azor his words
about Equivocation in an Oath, Preamb. p. 84.
as could not but shame any man of modesty to have it seen or understood by
the Reader, wherein I refer my self to the place quoted in the Margent. Mit.
c. 11. nu. 18.19. page 450. and 451.
But now let us see notwithstanding further what Azorius says against
Equivocation in general, for to this effect he is brought in, in this place,
as though he held that all Equivocation were to be rejected as lying: for
proof whereof he cites two places out of the self same leaf and page of
Azorius. The first whereof reprehend^th some kind of men that did extend the
Rule of Res^ruation and Equivocation to far, out of Nauar, Silu^ster, and
Angelus, contrary to their meaning, making it lawful in common use and
con^ersation amongst men, to use any kind of dissimulation by reserving in
their minds any thing at their pleasure: which Azorius condemns, and so do we
to. And for better direction of men, how, where, Azor the Jesuit notably abused
by M. Mort.
and in what matters that occasions they may Equivocate, or may not, he sets
down distinctly in five several Rules. Whereof M. Mo^ton skipping over four
(for that they make expressly and resolutely against him, in allowance of many
Cases of Equivocation) runs only to the fifth and last, perverting the same
against the Authors meaning as presently shall be showed.

69 And to let you see what manner of writer M. Morton is, and what manner of
cause he mantayneth, that forces him to this foul kind of shi^ting, he
recites the words of Azor saying thus: I am of a different opinion (says
Azor) from those before men^ioned (that stretch the use of Equiuocatio^ to every
thing that they list to deny or dissemble) which opinion o^ mine I will declare
briefly by certain Rules that here I will set down. Azor. Inst. moral part.
1. l. 11. c. 4.. Meotamen.
Which words M. Morton having related, says presently. His fi^th Rule does hit
the nail on the head. And is it so Sir? What say you then of the precedent
four? Why say you nothing of them? What part of the nail do they hit? if the
last only stricke the head? How is it possible that your Reader, Five rules of
Azor about Equivocation.
if he should look upon Azor, would pass to the fifth without seeing the
former four, which are all quite against you? For that in the first he
resolves, that a Priest may equivocate, and say he knows nothing, when he is
demanded any point about Confession. In the second he resolves, that
whenever any man is demanded by an incompetent Judge, even in an Oath,
whether he has committed this or that sin, he may by Equivocation deny the
same even in an Oath. Whereof he gives many reasons, and resolves sundry other
cases by virtue of the same Rule. As if a man be wrongfully compelled by a
Judge to say, or swear that he will pay such a sum of money to his
adversary, he may swear it (says Azor) though he have no intention to
perform it, as being against law, having this reservation in his mind, that he
will pay so much as by law he is bo^^d: and three or four other like Cases
besides in the explication of this Rule.

70. By his third Rule he proves the like in other Cases, beginning his Rule
with these words Quoties in conuictu hominum communi etc. Diverse cases resolved
by Azor for Equivocation.
As often as in the common conversation of men we are demanded of any thing,
and driven to swear it, if any injury therein be offered unto us, it is law^ull
for us in swearing to use ambiguous words, and to take them in our sense so far
forth as the words may bear that sense, albeit in the minds of the hearers
they do engender an other sense. And by this Rule he resolves two several
Cases: that an adulterous wife being unlawfully demanded by her husband whether
she have committed adultery? An adultresse how she may equivocate.
she may, if the adultery be secret, swear that she has committed no
adultery, reserving in her mind, that she has committed none, so as she is
bound to confess it unto him. This is Azor his resolution. And is not this our
Case plainly? does not this hit the nail on the head also against M. Morton?

71. Two other Cases in like manner he resolves by the force of this Rule.
First, that if a man fall into the hands of a thief, How Equivocation may be
used to a thief.
a tyrant, or an enemy, or of any other that does vex him injuriously, and be
forced to swear and promise any thing by oath, he may equivocate, and is not
bound afterward to perform that which he promised upon wrongful coaction. The
second Case is the Couen^ry Case, which M. Morton in his former book did
greatly reprehend, and jest at, but learned Azor (as M. Morton calls him)
houldeth it for true and justifiable, to wit, that if a man should, for example
sake, come from Couentry, or any other City, that is suspected to have the
plague, and indeed has it not, nor is himself otherwise infected: The
Couentry case about coming from an infected place.
but yet should be demanded at the gates of London whether he came from
Couentry or no? he might lawfully answer, he came not: understanding in his
mind, that he came not from Couentry, as infected. And all these Cases does
Azor resolve under his first three Rules: which are all directly against M.
Morton as you see. And in his behalf there is nothing, either in these or in
the other two, which have no particular Cases assigned them, but only have this
in general.

72. The fourth rule of Azor is: Si nulla nobis ^iat iniuria etc. If no injury
be offered us when we Si reuera verba If indeed the words which we do use are
no doubtful in their signification, nor in the common use of men, nor have any
other sense but only one, we must use them in that sense which they yield.
Neither is it lawful for us, albeit we should be demanded against all law and
right to wrest it into another sense by any cogitation of our mind. For it is
never lawful for us to lie: but he does lie, that does take words in another
sense then they do signify. So Azor. Where you see that he forbids only,
that words which have but one only natural sense and signification, and are
not ambiguous or of diverse senses, should be used by the speaker in any other
signification then naturally, or by common use amongst men they do yield: as
for example, if one that had a horse and not an ox, should be demanded,
whether he had any horse, he should say noe, meaning that he had noe Ox, for
that he conceived an Ox for an horse, this were not lawful, says Azor, in
the use of words, because the word horse has but one proper meannig amongst
men, and cannot signify an Ox: and consequently cannot be so taken but by a
lie. But if the word horse had a doubtful or double signification, signifying
as well an Ox as a horse, then might a man use the amphibology of the word, to
avoid any injury offered him by an incompetent Judge, as Azor himself
determines.

73. But now (to return to the matter) what is this against our Clause of
Reservation in a proposition or sentence? And how does this strike the nail on
the head for M. Morton? Nay, does not Azor strike M. Mort. on the head
directly, instead of the nail, and most manifestly in the first, second and
third Rules, and by all the different Cases therein resolved? Who would think
then that a man of common sense, or of any mean modesty and care of his credit
would have alleged Azor so co^fidently against his adversary, as M. Morton
does? and that which is most ridiculous, so to insult against him, as he does
against me here, saying: P. R. ma^teineth that his mental reservation is a
truth: but Azorius concludes that it is a lie. Insolent fond insulting.
And can there be any greater co^tradiction the^ this? Has he any shadow of
excuse by ignorance of the Author and place? No, for he has alleged this
Author upon this question of Equivocation four times. Preamb. page 86.
Is he helped by dif^erence of translations or editions? Noe, he will not
pretend this. Therefore no evasion can save him: and thereby any man may
discern, what credit such wretched Equiuocators may deserve. So M. Morton.

74. Whereto I answer, that not only four times, but perhapps twice four
times have I alleged the authority of Azor for the lawful use of Equivocation
against M. Morton, Azor proved to defend Equivocation.
and in diverse of them he has been so manifestly convinced of witting and
willing falsehood, as there is no de^ence or excuse to be had. Nay, he does not
so much as pretend any defense thereof hitherto, nor I think shall I find any
of the^ defended by him in the ensuing Chapter, though it be expressly deputed
to this argument to answering diverse manifest and wilful untruths laid to his
chrage. Wherefore to say (as he does here) that I have no shadow of excuse by
ignorance of the Author and place etc. Five different frauds and lies at one
time.
is only to intertaine talk, and to seem to ^ay somewhat: for I am not charged
with any thing that requires excuse, but he is convinced of voluntary
concealing of five or six different Cases resolved against him by Azor, as you
have heard, and passed over by M. Morton, as if he had not seen them: so as
every one of them includes a witting fraud in him, that admits no excuse.
Let us come to his second learned Jesuit, whom he brings in for deniyng of
Equivocation, which you shall see to be no less contrary unto him then the
former, and especially to teach Equivocation to be lawful, in the very places
alleged by M. Morton.

M. MORTON His second witness falsely pretended against Equivocation is the
Doctor Jesuit Emanuel Sa.. XIII.
A SECOND witness says M. Morton conuincing Emanuel Sa, a famous learned
Jesuit among Casuists, Emanuel Sa untruly alleged against all Equivocation.
as here he is called, whose words are set down thus out of his Aphorisms:
Quidam dicunt etc. Some there be who say, that he who is not bound to answer
to the intention of the examiner, may answer by reservation of some thing in
his own mind, to wit, that it is not so, that is to say, Sa in Aphoris. verbo
mendacium 3. and 4.
so as he is bound to utter it unto him: or that he has not such, or such a
thing: to wit, to give it unto him: Albeit others do not admit this manner of
answering, and peradventure upon better reason then the former. Emanuel Sa:
alleged also as M. Morton says, Satisf. part. 1. cap. 26. Moderat. Answ. c. 10
by his former adversary the moderate Answerer. But how truly and sincerly M.
Morton here deals with him in this behalf we shall see presently after. Now
is to be considered, what he does infer out of this authority against
Equivocation in general, for thus he makes his inference upon the recited
text. Thus far Emanuel Sa (says he) confessing hereby that diverse Catholic
Authors have contradicted this equiuocating sorgerie, Pream. 86.
which P. R. has avouched, that no Catholic writer did ever contradict. Is it
possible that my adversary can free himself from a falsity corroding the
conscience?

76. Whereto I answer, that even now it shall be tried, who has a corroded
Conscience in this matter, he or I: and let the Reader stand attent, The Reader
required to stand attent.
for that M. Morton may not escape until he have satisfied somewhat. First
then my assertion was, that no Catholic writer within the time by him ascribed
of the last four hundred years has been ^ound to deny absolutely all
Equivocation without exception: albeit in particular Cases (as this is here
proposed by Emanuel Sa) some School-doctors were of one opinion, and some of
another, some more strait and some more large. The Case proposed here by
Emanuel Sa, is of a man that has no obligation to answer to the intention of
him that demands, whether he may answer with Equivocation or not, and say
that it is not so, understanding ( with obligation to tell it you:) or I have
it not ( to give unto you.) In which particular Case he says, that some men do
not admit that kind of answer: but for so much as he has no obligation to
answer any thing at all, he is bound either to hold his peace or tell the
truth. And perhaps (says he) this later opinion is the better, forte potiori
ratione non admittunt. So as here he speaks but by (perhaps) that a man may
not equivocate in this Case: Eman. Sa in Aphor. verbo Me^dac. 3. and 4.
which word (perhaps) M. Morton craftily omitted: and indeed in the last
edition of his book at Rome 1607. this whole last sentence was left out, as
though he had changed his opinion. But howsoever this be, this is but one
particular Case of Equivocation, as has been said, and M. Morton could not but
know it, and consequently does use notable fraud, when upon the different
opinions of some School doctors in this special Case (when a man is not bound
to answer) he would infer (as here he does) that diverse Catholic authors do
contradict and deny Equivocation in general, that is to say, all kind of
Equivocation in what case soever.

77. And that M Morton could not choose but know this to be a fraud, and
consequently the fraud to be wilful, is evident: Wilful fraud inexcusable.
for that in the very next four lines going imediately before the former
alleged words, Emanuel Sa does resolve two other Cases, wherein a man might
equivocate, saying: Petenti quae ei reddidisti, pot^s negare te accepisse etc.
if a man that had left some pledge with you, and you had restored the same to
him again, he should afterward demand the same the second time, Equivocation
in case of restitution.
and press you with an oath about the same: you might lawfully deny that you
had received any such pledge, understanding in your mind that you received it
not, in such sort as you are bound now to restore it. And again: if a man
(says he) should demand the whole some of money, whereof he had received back
a part: you might deny the said petition, saying: that you owe it not,
understanding of the whole, or of so much as he wrongfully dema^deth. So as in
both these Cases Emanuel Sa confesses, that Equivocation may be used, as you
see. And how then is he brought in here by M. Morton, as a witness denying
all Equivocation, or at leastwise as saying, that there are diverse opinions
about the same, which is in part also false, for that Emanuel Sa does not say,
that there is doubt or difference of opinions, whether any Equivocation at all
be allowable: but only whether in this or that particular Case it be to be
admitted.

78. This then is evident and witting fraud in M. Morton, Aphor. 25^ de Confess.
for that besides the former two Cases resolved in approbation of Equivocation,
Emanuel Sa has many more, Sundry cases resolved for Equivocation by Emanuel Sa.
which M. Morton probably could not but know, as amongst others these: Potest
Confessor iurare se nihit scire etc. The Priest that hears Confessions may
lawfully swear, that he knows nothing, nor that he has heard any thing in
Confession: understanding in his mind, ( so as he is bound to utter the same.)
Again: the penitent may swear, that he said nothing, Ibid.
or no such thing, as he is demanded in Confession, though he had said it. And
moreover in another place: Aphor. 8. de Testib.
Non legitime interrogatus etc. He that is not lawfully demanded, may deny that
he knows the thing he is demanded (though he know it indeed) understanding in
his mind, that he knows it not so, as he is bound to open it to him. And yet
further: Aphor. 7. de Reo.
Reus non tenetur etc. He that is accused is not bound to confess those
things, for which if they were revealed, he should unjustly be condemned:
Wherefore he may deny them, understanding in his mind (that he has not done
them so, as he is bound to utter them.) And now will any man say, but M.
Morton, that the learned Jesuit Emanuel Sa, is a good witness against all use
of Equivocation? Does not every one of these examples convince him of wilful
fraud? And consequently these four examples dissembled by him are four
several falsehoods wittingly and willingly committed? But let us see one
notable shift more, which is the fifth new falsehood, before we pass to his
third witness.

79 He does cite the foresaid authority of Emanuel Sa against Equivocation,
alleged by his first adversary (the moderate Answerer) and to cover himself
the better with his shadow, does dissemble that he has looked upon the Author
himself, to the end he may have some hole to run out, when he shall be
pressed with these wilful corruptions of Emanuel Sa, and his meaning. But yet
he could not do this handsomely enough, but he must also egregiously abuse and
falsify the words of his said adversary, making him seem to infer out of
this particular Case, an absolute denial of all Equivocation. To which end
after the forsaid words of Emanuel Sa recited, he makes him to conclude thus:
VVherby it is mani^est, that all Catholics do not allow of Equivocation; and
then himself says (I mean M. Morton:) Thus far he, conf^ss^ng heerby, that
diverse Authors have contradicted this Equiuocating ^orgery.

80. But o M. Morton, let me pose you here: M. Mort. is posed.
Is it true that your adversary said, so far, and no further to the purpose
in hand? Or is it rather true, that you cut him of, and would suffer him to say
no further? Surely your bad dealing is not excusable in this point. For your
adversary did fully clear the matter, if you would have permitted him to tell
out his tale: for these are his words: VVherby it is mani^est, that all
Catholics do not allow of Equivocation, Moderate Answerer c. 11. initio.
where he is not bound to answer the Judge or examiner proceeding unjustly and
not according to law and equity. By which words he declares plainly, that he
alleged not Emanuel Sa, as denying all Equivocation, or as making Catholic
Authors to doubt of it among themselves, as M. Morton does untruly impose upon
them: but only he teaches, that not in every particular Case whatsoever, where
he that is demanded is not bound to answer, do all Catholics allow of
Equiuocatio^. For that where there is no injury offered, nor violence used,
some think it better (or rather obligation) that he should hold his peace,
then Equivocate. But this is reported but as a particular opinion in this
particular Case, which it seems that Emanuel Sa did afterward change, as
before has been said.

81. Now then to conclude, consider (gentle Reader) in how many witting and
wilful falsehoods M. Morton, in producing this one forced witness, has here
been ta^en, both against Emanuel Sa, my self and his moderate Answerer. Against
Emanuel Sa, in falsyfying him contrary to his own words and drift, making him
to condemn all equivocation which manifestly he teaches in many Cases to be
lawful, The manner of falsities convinced against M. Mort. in this allegation
of E^anuel S^.
as now you have heard. Against me, for that twice or thrice at least he
fraudulently urges my saying as ^ontrary to Emanuel Sa, that no Catholic
writer did ever contradict any kind of Equivocation: which I never affirmed,
but rather granted that in this or that particular Case, there might be
difference of opinions: but my assertion was and is, that none did ever
absolutely deny all use thereof, in every Case. Against his moderate Answerer in
like manner he uses fraud, in that wilfully he cut of those words that
explain the whole matter about the meaning of Emanuel Sa. All which
notwithstanding, will he needs be talking of corroded consciences, as though
his Conscience were clear, and smooth among so many and manifold false tricks
as are co^uinced against him. But let us leave this, and pass to the third
witness.

M. MORTON His third Jesuit Doctor brought in to witness against
Equivocation, to wit, Ioannes Maldonatus.. XIIII.
The third witness conuincing P. R. of falsehood, presupposing that the former
two have done the same: Ioannes Maldonatus falsely alleged for a witness
against all E^uiuocation.
but how contrary that has fallen out, and of how many falsehoods M. Morton
himself has been by them and their occasion convinced, the Reader has now
seen and considered I doubt not. Let us peruse then that which he writes of
this third, which will be found to have no more against P. R. then the former
two, which in effect is nothing at all: yet shall we lay forth what M. Morton
produces in this behalf. Thus then he begins his narration.

83. Maldonate (says he) a principal ^esuit and Casuist resolves thus:
Preamb. p^ 87. Meldonat. Com. in vlt. Luc. ver. 28.
Whosoever does endeavor by feig^ing to deceive another, although he intend
to signify some thing else, yet doubtless he li^th. This testimony I used for
confutation of this vile art, which P. R. could not be ignorant of, because he
indeauoured to satisfy other testimonies, as of Genesius and Sotus: but this
Author Maldonat specifyed in the same place (as the weaker adversary will do
his ouermatch) he did willingly pretermit. So M. Morton, Satisfact. par. 3. c.
4. page 59.
and he quoteth in the m^rgent, Treatise of Mitigation, cap. 10. number. 4. page
409. and 410. where I do answer Genesius and Sotus and not Maldonate. But as
in all other places lightly which he cites he deals vnsincerely, when any
ways it may make for his purpose: So here, if the Reader will but take the
payns as to turn to the place quoted of my Book, he shall discover more then
simple shifting.

84. For first I do not treat in that place of Genesius and Sotus together (as
he says I do) but only of Genesius alone: False and absurd shifting
neither do I there endeavor to satisfy any of their testimonies, as he
falsely affirms, for that there are none in that place brought forth against
me: but rather to the contrary I do bring forth an evident unanswerable
testimony of Genesius in defense of Equivocation against M. Morton, which he
does not so much as go about to answer here, nor ever will be able. How then
will he be able to justify this quotation: Or how can he defend, that I do
endeavor to satisfy Genesius and Sotus together, as specified in the same
place, but pretermitting Maldonat as an unequal m^tch? For in the place quoted
I do not treat of them both, as now has bin said, nor do I remember that I do
join Genesius and Sotus in any place together throughout my Book, though
they be cyted within the co^pas^e of one page in M. Mortons Full Satisfaction,
Full satis. par. 3. c. 4. page 59.
together with Azor and Maldonate, which authorityes I do examine in different
places of my Book, according as the matter and subject requires.

85. It may be therefore that by some error he means of Azor and Sotus (and
not Genesius and So^u^) who^e authorities I do examine and ponder together
some twenty pages after the former quotation o^ M. Morton. Mitigat. page 431.
But truly me thinks he should have bin greatly ashamed to send the Reader
thither, ^or he shall find there the most intolerable corruptions and
falsifications of those two Authors proved against M. Morton, that perhaps are
objected against him in the whole Book For that Azor is cyted by him quite
contrary to his own words and meaning: Desperate dealing.
as for example, that he condemns his fellow Jesuits for allowing
Equivocation, where he does expressly defend the same: and that he condemns
the Couentry Case before mentioned of coming from an infected place, when as
he does by name allow of that Case. And the like falsifications are
demonstrated out of Dominicus Sotus, as may be seen in the book. And M.
Morton takes not upon him to answer, or so much as touch them here in this
his Preambling Reply, and consequently should have blushed to di^ect the Reader
thither, where he should find these wounds laid open, but durum telum
necessi^as. And when thorns are on every side of the path, to run barefooted
and blindfold, as M. Morton seems to do, is a hard Case. ^or of no side he
can step without incurring some peril. Now then let us come to Maldo^at, whose
authority he says I did of purpose, as unanswerable, pretermitt.

86. For to make Maldonate of more weight and credit, as though he had said
somewhat against me, and in his behalf; he begins with this description of
him. Preamb. p. 87.
Maldonate (says he) a principal Jesuit and Casuist resolves thus etc. and
in his book of Full Satisfact. he citing the self same sentence of Maldonate,
which he does here, begins with this preamble: Not only Sotus (says he)
called among you the subtle Doctor, but even the subtilest of all your Jesuits
calls your Equiuocating, rank lying: saying, whosoever does endeavor by
feigning to deceive another, although he intend to signify somewhat else,
doubtless he lies. In which two Prefaces to pretermit all other points you
may note two gross ouerslippes: Two absurdityes co^uinced against M Morton.
the first in stiling Maldonate a Casuist, who is never known to have read or
written of Cases in his life, but Scholasticall divinity he professed many
years in Paris, and left very learned Commentaries upon all the four
Evangelists, though the Roman Index Expurgatorius Anno Dom. 1607. do mention,
that certain Cases of Conscience published by another and printed at Lions An.
1604. were falsely ascribed to him. The second, that Dominicus Sotus was John
Scotus the subtle doctor, which lived above 200. years before Sotus, whereof I
admonished him before in the Treatise of Mitigation, and yet he would needs
renew again the memory thereof in this Preamble, by sending me^ to peruse what
I answered before to Sotus, and thereby reveal his own shame.

87. But now what has Maldonatus here in the sentence alleged, that I should
willingly pretermit to answer, as being ouermatched therewith? does Maldonate
say any thing in this sentence that is not conform to our Common doctrine of
Equivocation? Noe truly. For we grant, that whosoever does endeavor by
feigning to deceive another, does lie. In so much as it agrees well with the
definition of a lie set down in S. Augus^ine: M^ndacium ^st salsa ^ocis
significatio c^m int^ntione sal^^ndi. Lib. d^ me^da. c. 4. and lib. con. ^enda.
cap. 12.
A lie is a ^alse signification of speech with intention to deceive: which two
clauses of the definition of a lie, I do pro^ue and demonstrate ^or diverse
leaves together, in the eight Chapter of my former Treatise, that they can not
agree with the nature of ^quiuocation, and by consequence that Equi^ocation is
no lie.

88. Not the first Clause, a false signif^ca^ion of sp^ach, which is, when the
speech does di^^er from the meaning and sense. Not the second, o^ intention to
deceive: Mi^ig. c. 8. page 336.337.
for that the first and principal intention of him that is forced for some
just cause to equivocate (^or otherwise he may not use it,) is to del^uer
himself from that injury which is o^^ered him, and not to deceive the Judge or
hearer, though consequently that do follow. And this I do prove to be ^o
clear, as that by this are ius^ified all Stratagems in war, which are indeed
nothing but Equi^oca^ions in fact, Stratagems lawfu^l though they be
equivocations.
that otherwise should be unlawful and sinful: Which yet S. Augustine with
all other ancient Fathers do expres^ly justify saying: Cum iustum bell^m q^is
suscep^rit, vtrum aperta pugna vel insidijs vincat, ^ihil ad ius^itiam
interest. When a man wageth just war, it imports not in respect of justice,
Aug. q. 10. in Iosue. Gra^tian. in causa 23. q. 2.. Don^mus.
whether he overcome by open fight or else by sleightes or stratag^ms: which
stratagems are indeed nothing else, but lawful dissimulations that seem to
have deceit in them, and consequently to be lies in fact and unlawful, but
indeed are not: as I do show by sundry examples out of Scripture it self,
where God that cannot lie, did either commau^d or allow such sleights and
deceipts in stratagems, as that of Iosue at the City of Hay, Iosue 1. 4. Reg.
6. Judith 11.
wherein many thereby were s^aine: the stratagems of Elizeus at the City of
Dothaim: that of Judith at Bethulia and the like. And I do allege diverse other
examples both in fact and wo^d as well of our Savior out of the Evangelists,
Mit. c. 7. number. 23.24.
as of S. Paul and other Saints; whereby it is most evident that in some Cases
a man may equivocate.

89. I do show also at length in the same Chapter to wit, See of t^is i^ gely
c. 8. nu. 56.57. etc. 9. n. 71.72.73. and deinceps.
the eight, but much more in the nynth, that the Clause ( intentio fallendi)
contained in S. Austines definition of a lie, does in no case truly enter into
^quiuocation. For that he which uses lawful ^quiuocation, has not his first
and principal end to deceive the hearer, but to avoid the hurt that he is
subject unto, i^ he did not ^quiuocate; albeit thereby it follows, that the
other be deceived, which is without all fault of him that speaks doubtfully:
which I do demonstrate by many examples out of the Scriptures and Fathers;
whereby is evident that this permission of others to be deceived by our speech,
when we do in effect but conceal a truth, is lawful, and used by Saints, yea
God himself, and consequently can be no lie.

90. Now then to return to Maldonate M. Mortons third witness, which he
affirms in his title to convince me of falsehood, See the former places
quoted: and more cap. 9. n^. 77.78.79. M^ld. co^m^nt. in Luc. c. 24. ver. 28.
he says nothing against me at all, or for him. For we grant that whosoever
by seygning, does endeavor to deceive another, does lie: so as it differs
nothing from our common opinion, as now has been said. And how then does he
convince me of falsehood? Or how did I willingly pretermit to answer him, when
as he said nothing against me, but with me and for me, as I do show by diverse
distinst numbe^rs, cyting, him also number. 75. page 399. and this very place here
quoted by M. Morton, together with another of Toletus to the same effect?
Tol^t. lib. de 7. Sacram. c. 46.
What means, I say, M. Morton to de^le so vnsincerely in such sort as every
child may see his fraud? And if any man will doubt whether Maldonate did de^end
Equivocation in such Cases as we do, wherein somewhat is reserved in mind of the
speaker, more then is specifyed in the words, let him read him in his
Commentaryes upon the Ghospells, in the places that conteyne such reseruations,
as that of our Savior concerning the Archisynagoges daughter, Non est mortua
puella, sed dormit: the maid is not dead, but sleeps: Au^. ser. de v^^. Do
mint 44.
whero^ the secret understanding and reservation is, says Mald^nate, that she
was no so dead as the people thought, Matt. 9.
that she could not be raised again: M^^c 5
which mental reservation S. Austin also notes upon that place in like
manner. Lu^. 8.
The other words o^ our Sau^our, Ego non iudico quemquam: I do not judge any
man, cannot be verifyed without a mental reservation or subintellection.

91. Yea Maldonate has a special note upon these words of the last of S.
Mark, He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved. Mar. vlt. v. 15.
The Rule, says he, which in many other places we have set down is here to
be observed, to wit, that general propositions in the Scriptures are to be
understood with certain conditions not expressed, but only conceived in mind,
Maldonat teaches plainl^ Equivocation.
if they be not set down in the text: as that saying in Joel: Every one that
shall call upon the name o^ our Lord, shall be saved, to wit, Si reliqua quae
debet, faciat, if he perform all the rest which he is bound unto: which clause
was not set down by the Prophet, but reserved in mind. An^ so here in the
alleged sentence of our Savior, is necessarily to be understood this
reseru^d condition, Si been crediderit, and baptizatus fuerit: if he believe
well, and be baptized.

92. Here then you see that Maldonate does expresslie teach, not only the
lawfullnes, but also the necessity of reserved Equivocation in some Cases. Now
then to conclude, we see what help the Jesuit Maldonat, drawn in for a third
witness, has brought to M. Morton, that is to say, he has testified plainly
against him. And yet you must have patience to hear his triu^phant conclusion
after his manner. Now (says he) have I insta^ced this general proposition of
all Universities, Deumes, Casuists, approving this doctrine in three famous
Jesuits and Casui^^s, Azor, Sa, Maldonate, A most f^d in^ulting conclusion of
M. Mort.
and in the confession of his fellow, the Moderate Answerer, acknowledging that
diverse Catholics approved not their mental reseruatio^ etc. I have exceeded
the proportion of our Mitigators demand, who required but two or three
instances in any, though of himself: I have offered him thirteen
vnsatisfiable falsehoods, as many as I could well bundle up in this brief
Preamble, reserving the rest for the exact Encounter, when I doubt not, but
upon the discovery of his unconscionable deprauations, he will wish, that his
brains had been a sleep, when he framed this Mitigation.

93. This is his Conclusion, still singing the victory as you see. And it shall
not need for me to answer any points thereof: for that they are either
evidently false or impertinent. I said that for these last four hundred years
the doctrine of Equivocation in some Cases has ever been admitted, and never
known to be wholly controlled by any. He brings forth three Jesuits of our
time against this, A brief answer to the follies before promised.
who were so far of from denying the doctrine of all Equivocation, as they
teach the same expressly in sundry Cases, as now you have heard. This then
rather deserves laughter of the Reader, then any confutation by me. He says
it is con^^ssed that diverse Cat^oliks do not app^oue mental reservation: I
answer that in some Cases it is true, but not in all He says, he has
exceeded the proportion of my demand of two or three instances: I say, he has
brought forth never a one, or half on^ that he can defend to make for him. He
avouches that he has o^^ered me thirtene vnsatisfiable falsehoods against my
self out of my writings: I answer, that three were sufficient, if they were
vnsatisfiable: of which kind he has yet produced never a one, as by experience
you have ^ound, and consequently his words of my unconscionable deprauation
discovered, and that I would wish that my brains had been a sleep when I wrote
my Book, are most vain threats, and fit for such a brain as M. Mortons
seems to be.

THE FINAL Reckoning of this whole Chapter.. XV.
M. Morton: The conclusion of all these 15. Paragraphes.
let the reader remember, how at the beginning thereof, for so much as, I was so
bound (to use his words) as to insert my self also in the offer made, that if
two or three such wil^ull falshods, as there I described (wherein nothing can
excuse from witting malice) should be found in my writings, I would discredit
my self, and would be content to be discredited for ever, and esteem my self
unworthy to take pen in hand again: for this confident speech, I say, M.
Morton condemned me and my conscience for worse then no conscience at all,
promising to prove it in this Chapter by the matters to be objected unto me:
and further added as you have heard, let our Reader witness between me and him
according to the evidence of testimonies, which shall be brought against him.
Preamb. page 71.
Now the testimonies have been brought forth, and viewed by the Reader,
thirteen in number, as M. Mort. reckons them, but fourteen in my account.
Exceeding vaunting.
All which do contain (as he affirms) vnsatisfiable falsehoods and
irreuocable falls, and that so apparent ^or the most o^ them, that any one
understanding English may presently discern them.

95. This was his promise then, and is his vaunt now. Pream. p. 71. sup.. 1.
I for my part demand performance, and that the Reader give his judgment. And
as for these fourteen objections now brought against me, they might be as well
four hundred of that kind, which they are, as fourteen; that is to say, of
no force in the world to the question here handled of witting and wil^ull
falsehood. For as for the most part of them, he cannot so much as pretend any
such malice to be in them. Page 72.
For what malice could there be in interpreting the letters T. M. for Thomas
Morton in my Dedicatory Epistle written after the Treatise ended (which is his
first charge against me) and yet saying before, that until that time, I had
not known that Name to have been meant by these letters? Page 72.
What profit might my cause gain thereby? As also by wilful erring (if it had
been an error, Page 81.
) in counting how many times M. Morton had set down the Clause of reservation
in latin? Page 82.
What gain might I pretend by applying that to all Catholic Priests and
teachers in their degrees, which M. Morto^ scornfully objected to his
Adversary, as to a Priest, in contempt of all Priests?

96. And with these he begins his charge, and ends with no better. For
what do make to the purpose those other last objections, as that I reprehended
him for placing, as his poesy in the first page of his book against
Catholics, Stay your selves, for they are blind and make others blind: where
as neither the original Hebrew, nor Syriack, Greek or Latin ancient
translations have it so? That I noted him to have used and urged Vere for Vero
out of Carerius contrary to the edition which I had of that book? And like to
these, are the other three that ensue in him, which are but very light and
vain toys. And if they should be all granted, as they ly, they would prove
nothing of moment, concerning the question in hand. And yet does he repeat them
again and again, and some of them three times, as though they were great
matters against me. Can there be any more poor and miserable dealing then this?

97. But besides this, I presume not only to have cleared my self in all these
trifles objected by him, but further also, to have convinced my adversary
commonly in every one of his objections, to have committed some new manifest
falsities himsel^e. And as for his last three witnesses, learned and famous
Jesuits, I doubt not, but so to have turned them against himself, as he has
received much con^usion by bringing them in. There remains nothing then for
the ending of this account, but that the Reader, as chie^e Auditour, laying
before his eyes, what he has seen brought in, in charge, and answered in
discharge, do give his sentence where the debt remains: or rather who is
banquerupt, either I, or my Adversary. Which yet he shall be better able to do,
after he has heard in likewise, what new Charges are to be laid upon him, in
the ensuing Chapt^rs. For that hitherto has been handled only, what he has
pretended to be able to say against Catholic writers, and me his adversary;
which has been so weak, poor and pitiful, as now you have seen, every
battery of his, recoyling commonly upon his own head. But the next three
Chapters are to contain the fight made upon himself, Chap. 5.
for three sorts of falsities. First such as he goes about to defend, and
cannot: Chap. 6.
the second, such as he dis^embleth and pretermitteth to mention, for that he
could not clear himself therein: and the third, such as he has committed a
new, Cap. 7.
in going about to defend and clear the old: and then after that, you are to
see and behold his multitude of new braggs and Challenges, as though
notwithstanding all this, he had had the victory in the former: so confident
the man is in his own concepts.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER CONCERNING THE CHIEF POINT INTENDED BY M. MORTON In this
his last Reply, which is the clearing of himself from many notorious
untruths, obiect^d as wilful and witting, by his Adversary P. R. And how
insufficiently he performs the same.
PREFACE.
I FIND the saying of the Philosophers, That the thing which is last in
execution, is first in our intention, to be verified in this Prea^ble of M.
Morton: for that his principal intention being to quit himself, so far as
he might, of the odious imputation of so many wilful untruths objected unto
him by P. R. in his Treatise of Mitigation, and that the importance of the
matter o^ satisfying somewhat, or staying at leastwise the judgment of the
Reader, with some speedy Apology in that behalf, required that presently in
the first place he should excuse himself, from those mani^est imputations laid
against him: Volu^tary wandering from the purpose.
Yet has he delaid the matter as you see unto this last place, intertaining
himself first in certain idle, and impertinent skirmishes with his Adversary:
As whether he be a man o^ sufficiency, wit, memory, skill in Logi^ke, Greek
and Hebrew, and the like, and then taking in hand to touch two or three little
points about the argument and subject of his Adversaries Book: and thirdly
obiecting falsities to others, that he alone might not seem to be culpable:
and so finally he comes by little and little, though unwillingly, as it
appears, like a bear to the stake, to the point first intended, which is to
deliver himself from some small number of a greater multitude of manifest
untruths objected against him, out of which multitude he says, Preamb. page
88.
That he has singled out fourteen, not such as might seem unto him most
easily answered, but those which P. R. has most vehemently pressed and urged.

2. In both which assertions he swarueth again from the truth, as presently
will appear: for that the Reader by taking the view, as well of those that he
has pretended to answer, as of the rest, that he has willingly pretermitted,
A manifest falsity.
will see (and so shall we also demonstrate in the next Chapter) that those
which he has ouerpassed are much more both in number and force, then these
which he has produced, and consequently has singled out such as might seem
unto him most easily answered: the other part also of his ass^rtion is false,
that P. R. has most ve^emently pressed and urged against him these which he
has answered for that he presses and urges most the corruptions against
Bellarmine, Azor, Sayer, Sotus, Cicero, Victoria, and others, which shall be
set down more particulerly in the next Chapter, and thereby convince M. Morton
of ouerlashing in this behalf.

3. Of all which M. Morton has made here no mention, and besides this, has
laid together in these fourteen, diverse of small weight and moment, and some
handled before upon other occasions. As for example, about the place of Esaias
the 29. which was but lightly objected unto him for an oversight. And the like
in urging vere for vero out of Carerius, brought in here by him the third time
to make up a number. And the like about a citation of Dolman, that was handled
before. His 12. objection also in this Chapter about the succession of
Protestant Princes, and the 13. about an allegation out of Frisingensis, have
been all handled before, A fond vaunt.
and brought in by him again and again, thereby to make a show, that he
answers to many things: whereas in truth, he answers to nothing truly and
substantially; no, not indeed to the easiest of these, which here he has
picked out, to show his manhood in defending them. And yet he says in the
Preface of this Chapter, Preamb. page 88.
That he hops to give such satisfaction to all, as that not only the wound of
slander may be cured, but even also the suspicious scarre of imputation may be
wyped away.

THE FIRST objected falsity pretended to be answered by Thomas Morton. I.
IN the first front of his squadro^ of 14. objected falsities, chosen by him
here to be defended, he places About Popes names changed out of Polidore.
Preamb. ibid.
made unto him in my Epistle dedicatory to the Universities, for that in his
Epist^e to the K. Majesty of his Treatise, entitled A full Satisfaction, he
uses these calumnious words: Polidore observes (says he) that the Popes a
long time in their election, had their names changed by Antiphrase, viz. the
elected, if he were by natural disposition fearful, was named Leo, if cruel,
Clemens, if uncivil, Vrbanus, if wicked, Pius, if covetous, Bonifacius, if in
all behavior intolerable, Innocentius etc. This speech as malicious and
contumelious, and fraught with deceiptfulnes, I justly reprehended; noting by
the way that he had cited no place in Polidore, whereas he has written sundry
books besides his histories. I noted also that diverse Kings and Princes might
have names whose significations might be far different from their qualities
and actions: and that Popes, since the beginning of that custom of changing
their names after their election, did not take names by antiphrase or
contrariety of sense, as this man seditiously did insinuate, but for reverence,
commonly, of other holy Popes who pas^ed before them, whose names they took,
as I exemplified in many: and yet not having Polidore then by me (I mean that
work of his de Inuentoribus Rerum) I passed over diverse other points of
deceiptfull sleightes in him, which I might have urged, and now must needs in
part touch, for that to this accusation of mine, he has nothing to answer in
this his Reply, but this which ensues.

Preamb. 8^. and ^^.
5. First that albeit he cited not any certain book or place out of Polidores
works; yet that the sentence reported by him upon his memory, is found in
Polidore his fourth book de inuentoribus Rerum c. 10. which is entitled, De
origin honorum qui Romano Pontifici hab^ntur, and de eius authoritate in omnes
Ecclesias: of the beginning of the honors that are given to the Bishop of Rome,
and of his authority over all Chu^ches. And albeit this observation of Polidore
mentioned by M. Morton be not found in any of our Books, now commonly extant:
yet, he says, that they are in his book of the edition of Basilea of the
year 1570. and that two years after that by order of Pope Pius Quintus,
Pream. page 90.
the Index expurgatorius did put out these words, Lib. expurgat. ex Hispanico
and Belgico verbo Polidorus p. 457.
but he tells not what Index it was, for I have one containing both the
Spanish and Flemish Index, wherein it is written about Polidore Virgil thus: Ex
Indice Louaniensi quae in Polidoro Virgilio de rerum inuentoribus Basileae
impresso anno 1544. in octauo, corrigenda sunt atque delenda. The things that
are to be corrected, or blotted out in Polidore Virgil (in his eight books) of
the first inuentors of things, which work of his was printed at Basilea in
octauo, upon the year of Christ 1544.

6. Out of which words it may be presumed, as to me it seems, that upon the
said year of Christ 1544. whiles Polydore Virgil lived yet in England, his
work de inuentoribus Rerum, though it were printed at Basile, where Protestant
Religion was entered, yet this place of Polidor about changing of Popes names
was not found, for that being both scandalous and untrue (as presently shall be
showed) it is very like, A great probability that Polidore is abused.
or rather certain, that this our Index expurgatorius would have noted it at
least, as it does diverse other things, not only out of the same work, but
even out of the same 4. book and 2.3.4.5.6.7. and 8. Chapters, and yet says
nothing at all of any thing of the tenth, where M. Morton says this his
observation is now found in his book printed at Basile 1570. which was 26.
years after the former edition: whereof must needs be inferred, that either M.
Morton deals not sincerely with us (which yet in this matter I will not be
so unfriendly as to suspect) or that his edition of 1570^ (which hitherto I
cannot see) has received this addition about the Popes changing their names
after the foresaid edition of 1544. which could not be from Polidore himself,
who was dead before, but from some new merry brother of Basile, then
heretical, who to make sport, put it in for a merriment indeed, for so in the
text it self he professes that he wrote it in jest, though it pleases M.
Morton to take it up in earnest.

7. But let us hear the words themselves which M. Morton sets down as
found in his Polidore. Primus honos (says he) Romano Pontifici habetur, vt si
minus pulchro honestetur nomine, ei statim creato liceat illud mutare: verbi
gratia (quod non extra iocum dictum sit) si homo maleficus antea fuerit, vt
Bonifacius appelletur, si timidus, Leo, si rusticus, Vrbanus etc. This is the
first honor given to the Bishop of Rome after his creation (says he) that if
his name be not fair, he may change the same: as for example, (which yet be
not spoken but in jest) if before he had been perhaps an evil doer, he may be
called Bonifacius, that is a good doer, if he had been fearful, then may he be
called Leo, a lion, if ^usticall, then Vrbanus, or civil etc. And the first
Author (or beginner) of this custom is said to have bin Pope Sergius the 2.
whose name having bin before Os Porci, which signyfi^th the mouth of a hog,
it was permitted unto him (says the suppos^d Polidore) for avoiding the
obscenity of his former name to change the same.

8. Thus much out of M. Mortons Polidore, Preamb. page 80. and 90.
whereof he vaunteth according to his fashion in these words: Although they have
made Polidore by their Index expurgatorius almost in every page dumb, not
suffering him to bear witness against the pride of Popes etc. yet our ancient
Polidore now dwelling among Protestants printed anno 1570. Basileae, The tale
out of Polidore confuted.
has a tongue that will tell tales. So he. Speaking more truly then perhaps he
imagines that his Polidore in this point tells mere tales indeed, and
consequently, is no great jewel of antiquity to be bragged of, as dwelling now
among Protestants. For now I have showed that in a more ancient edition then
this by 26. years, this treasure so much bragged of by M. Morton, is not
extant.

9. And as for the two points touched therein, the one a jest (as himself
terms it) about changing of names by antiphrase, the other of the first
occasion thereof by Pope Sergius, Platina in vita Sergij secundi.
neither of them has any sound subsistence at all: for that to speak first of
the second, the narration of Platina in the life of Pope Sergius 2. who was
chosen Pope upon the year of Christ 844. that he being called first Os Porci,
or Os-Porcius, changed his name into Sergius, himself proposes the matter
very doubtingly, saying: Sunt qui dicant, there are some who say, that Sergius
2. was called before Os Porci, and so changed his name Vt^unque sit, constat
Sergium ex Illustri familia natum, howso^uer be it, it is ^uident that this
Sergius was of a Noble Family: so as here Platina relates it but as a report
of some, and namely, as is thought, out of Martinus Polonus a simple credulous
writer, as all learned men do know.

10. But further then this Onuphrius Panuinus a very learned man of our age,
Onuphrius Panuinus in vita Sergii 2.
confuteth this tale much more effectually out of the history of Anastasius
Bibliothecarius, that according to the account of Tritemius and other learned
men, lived in that very time when Pope Sergius did, Anastasius Bibliothecarius
ibidem.
and had chief care of the Roman Library, and wrote the life of this Sergius
2. and therein shows evidently where, and of what noble parents he was borne,
how brought up, by what means chosen Pope, and that before his Popedom he was
called Sergius, and says no word of changing of his name, nor of Os Porci, and
yet he may be presumed to have been present at his election by the many
particularityes which he sets down of the same. Besides it is to be noted,
Consider of this reason.
that Os Porci, or Os-Porcius is the surname of the family, which no Pope is
wont to change, but only the Christian or proper Name, as when of late
Hippolytus Aldobrandinus was called Clemens 8. he changed not the name of
Aldobrandinus, but only of Hippolytus: and the like in other Popes, wherefore
though the surname of Sergius had bin Os Porci, yet would he never have changed
that, but only his proper name.

11. The forsaid Onuphrius also in his notes upon the life of Pope John the 12.
a noble Roman, called before Octauianus, What Pope first changed his name.
who was chosen Pope upon the year 955. (more then a hundred years after
Sergius) shows by many arguments, that he was the first of the Popes that
changed their names at their election. And Cardinal Baronius having found an
old Epitaph written in marble in the Church of S. John Lateran in Rome of Pope
Sergius the fourth, chosen Pope upon the year 1009. (an other hundred years
after the for^said Pope John the 12.) does manifestly show out of this Epitaph,
that the said Sergius the fourth, being called Peter before, did out of the
reverence and respect he bare to that name leave it, and took the name of
Sergius, which was the cause why others, especially Martinus Polonus, mistaking
one Sergius for another, did ascribe it to Sergius the second.

12. But howsoever this be (as Platina before said) concerning the first Author
o^ this changing of names, which little imports; certain it is that M. Morton
did falsely and maliciously abuse this jest of Polidore, or of whom soever it
be, about naming Popes by Antiphrase. A detectio^ of M. Mortons lies about this
matter.
Nor is he able to defend himself now, but rather as i^ falls out commonly
in vntwisting of lies, he has entangleth himself much more, or rather
convinced himself of open falsity. For first, he says to his Majesty, as now
you have heard, that Polidore observes, that Popes for a long time in their
election had their names changed by Antiphrase, viz. the elected if he were by
natural disposition fearful, was named Leo, i^ cruel, Clemens, if uncivil,
Vrbanus, if wicked, Pius etc. But now by the latin words of Polidore brought in
by M. Morton himself, it appears that he says not so; to wit, that Popes
for a long time had their names so changed by Antiphrase. Nay, he affirms it
not of any one of all the whole rank of Popes, but says only (and in jest)
that some might be so called by changing of names, not answerable to their
dispositions.

13. This then is the first inexcusable untruth, wittingly and willingly
avouched to the Kings Majesty, and now again auerred to the Honor of my Lord
of Salisbury, A wilful untruth uttered to the ^ing and to the L. of Salisbury.
to whom, notwithstanding, he writes in the Dedicatory Epistle of this
Preamble, that he is content to undergo all the crimes objected against him, if
it may be proved that he durst affirm an untruth before his Lordship. But he
that durst do it so confidently to the King, it may easily be presumed that he
will dare it to the other also. And here I must charge him to have done it
unto them both, until he can defend himself.

14. His second falsehood was, the leaving out of those words of Polidore, The
second falsehood in abusing of Polidore.
(non extra iocum dictum sit,) let not this be spoken by us (or be understood
to be spoken by us) but in jest (or for a merriment:) whereby the writer would
signify, that this pleasant conceit came into his head, that by this changing
of names, such an Antiphrase, or contrariety of names and dispositions might be
practiced: which words if M. Morton had related in his first quotation of
Polidore, the matter had bin well qualified of it self. But this made not for
his purpose, which was to scoff at Popes, and make them contemptible by the
help of Polidore. And I doubt not, but that this was the cause, why he quoted
neither book nor Chapter in that allegation, least we should have found out
this which now himself is forced to produce to his own shame and condemnation.

15. But now perhaps the reader will dema^d what has M. Morton answered to
these two Chapters in this his Preamblatorie Reply? What M. Morton answers to
these two notorious lye^ Preamb. page 91.
Has he cleared himself of falsehood? No, but rather doubled the same. For to
the first this only he answers: What have I reported from Polidore? viz. that
Popes names were changed by Antiphrase or contrary speech, to cover their
defectes, and this is no whit different from the testimony of Polidore, who
says that if the Pope were before his creation wicked, he did take the name of
Godly upon him, if rigorous, then Gentle etc. This is his defense. But we have
showed now the same to be false: and it is convinced out of the foresaid latin
words of Polidore, who says only, that by the liberty of changing names,
there may such Antiphrases be brought in: but says not that it was practiced
in any one. Liceat mutare (says he;) they may change their names if they will.
This falsehood then is doubled by himself, which is the first.

16. The second is of concealing or leaving out deceiptfully in his first
citation, the words of Polidore ( non extra iocum dictum sit) let it not be
spoken but in jest: where unto here now he answers nothing in effect, but
first with this interrogation, Can this be ought but a transcendent impudency
to blame me for not citing that testimony which his Pope, least it might be
cited^ has utterly razed out? Two impertinent answers of M. Morton.
But Sir, be more calm I pray you, for you are not blamed for not cyting that
which our Pope had commanded to be blotted out in our Copies, but for not
cyting that which remained in yours, and was willingly omitted by you (as now
it appears) for that it made against you. This is then his first answer very
cholerike as you see. His second is a certain evasion by a sleightfull
translation into English, whereby he seeks to shift of the force thereof, for
thus he Englisheth it. As for example, says he, (which may not be spoken
without a jest) if peradventure he had been before a wicked man etc. which
slight every man, that is but meanly learned in the latin tongue, will easily
discover. For that, non dictum sit cannot be fitly translated, it may not be
spoken without a jest, but, let it not ^e spoken but in jest, wherein I remitt
me to the sense of the text it self. So as about this second point M. Morton
remains culpable two ways, first in dissembling and suppressing this jest in
his first book, and now in seeking to avoid the same by sleightfull
translation. But let both tricks go under one, and so I make it but one
falsehood, which laid to the other before, do make two notorious untruths,
wherewith I do charge M. Morton now again in this his last Reply, and say they
are unanswerable.

17. As for that which he inveigheth against our Index expurgatorius, wherein he
says that our Popes do, appoint what words shall be put out in men's books,
as if they pulled out their tongues, least they should speak, it is not worth
the answering. And I remember that I have handled the matter else where against
some of M. Mortons Warnword against Sir Franc. Hastings, enc. 2. cap. 9. nu.
22.23 etc.
fellows. Good reason, it must needs seem in any reasonable man's judgment,
that such as profess themselves Catholics, should be content, that if in any
works of theirs, any thing had escaped them, that either disagreed from the
public rule of faith, acknowledged by the whole Church, or were temerarious,
scandalous, inconsiderate, or otherwise offensive, should be censured and
reformed by public authority of the same Church. And he that has not this
humility and submission with him, is not worthy to be accounted a Catholic, or
son of the Catholic Church.

18. And as for others that are not Catholics, they rather gain heerby: How
just a thing it is that Catholic books should be ouerseene and corrected when
need requires.
for that whereas their books that handle matters of religion, and are judged
to contain inexcusable heresies, are wholly forbidden to be read by Catholics,
but with particular license: yet some other works of theirs, that either treat
not of that subject, or do it so moderatly, as with paring and cutting of some
exorbitant things that be most offensive; they may be made tolerable, and are
permitted to remain to posterity: and all this by the benefitt of this Index
expurgatorius, which otherwise should be extermined with the rest, whereof
almost infinite examples may be seen in the Indices expurgatorij of every
Catholic Country, which permit books of heretical Authors of all sorts, How
books of Heretical authors are permitted.
to be read commonly and publicly after they have been censured and reviewed in
this sort, which is not done by the Pope himself, or by his particular order,
in this or that place, as M. Morton would seem fondly to persuade his Reader,
when he says, that Anno Domim 1572. by the Authority of Pius Quintus the
foresaid words of Polidor were commanded to be blotted out: and again, which
his Pope (says he) utterly razed out etc. but the same is performed by a
Congregation of learned men in every Nation by commission of the said Church
and Head thereof.

19. And I would demand of M. Morton, or any indifferent man on his behalf,
if in England there were the like Congregation appointed of learned men to
examine and censure books of their own men, that are set forth, or after they
be published, and are found to be so full of palpable untruths as these of
his, and some other of his fellows are, were it not a good providence, and
more profitable both to their public cause and private credit of the writers
themselves, A dema^d made to M. Mort. about ce^suring of books.
that some such reuiew should be made, than that every man writing what he list
without check or controlement, do come after to shame their own cause, by so
many and manifest untruths laid open to the public sight and laughter of the
world, as in this and other books appears? But this point of providence
concerns not me, and I have mentioned it only by inforcement of M. Mortons
importunity. Let us pass to the sebond imputation.

THE SECOND Charge of wilful falsehood against M. Morton, and pretended to be
answered by him, but poorly performed. II.
AFTER this first charge which he took unto About the death of Pope Adrian by
^ fly.
and has so badly discharged, as you have heard, with adding of new falsehoods;
he takes the second out of the fourth Paragraph of my second Chapter of the
said Treatise of Mitigation, where I having reprehe^ded him for false accusing
of Pope Sixtus Quintus, that he censured the late K. Henry of France, Preamb.
page 91.
for this only crime (as he auerreth) for that himself being a Papist, yet
favored the Protestants etc. concealing the two known murders both of the
Cardinal and Duke o^ Guise, I do pass on to tell him of another egregious
falsity about the feigned death of our English Pope Adrian by a fly in these
words.

The Charge.
21. And again in the same place, or precedent page, he has these words:
Mitig. p. 79. c. 2. number. 46.
Pope Adrian being guilty of like sedi^ious practice against the Emperor Henry
the second, was choked with a fly. Nau^l. p. 1. gener. 39.
And in his quotation cites Nauclerus for it, Generatione 139. which should be
39. for that Nauclerus has nothing near so many Generations in that part: Our
English Pope Adr. egregiously abused by T. M.
and instead of Henry the second, he should have said Frederick the first of
that name, for that Henry the second was before the time of our Conquest, and
almost two hundred years before Adrian the 4. our English Pope, of whom we now
speak, who lived in the time of King Stephen, and King Henry the second of
England, and was a holy man, and accounted the Apostle of Noruegia, for
converting the same to our Christian faith, before he was Pope: and all Authors
do write honorably of him, and so does Nauclerus affirm; and therefore though
he makes mention of such a fable related by Vrspergensis that was a
Schismatic writer in those days (who also does not absolutely avouch it, but
with this temperament, vt ^ertur, as the report goes) yet does the said
Nauclerus reject the same as false, and confuteth it by the testimonies of all
other writers, especially of Italy that lived with him, and thereby knew best
both his life, and death. And yet ( said I) all this notwithstanding will this
false ladde T. M. needs set down this history as true, affirming it for such,
and never so much as giving his Reader to understand, that any other denied the
same, or that the only Author himself of this fiction doubted thereof. And is
not this perfidious dealing? Or can any man excuse him from falsehood and malice
in this open treachery?

The pretended discharge.
22. This was the Charge. What does he now answer for the discharge of this
imputation? First for a ground of evasion he says, I do truly protest (for the
man is every where full of protestations) that I did not write this out o^ the
Author himself, An absurd Confession.
which I had never seen, but from collection out of some other books. So he.
Which though it be a thing little standing with his own credit to confess; yet
in this protestation he must give me leave not easily to believe him, and this
^or two or three reasons. The first reason.
First, for that he has made many protestations in his former books to God,
the King, the L. of Salisbury, and others of true and sincere proceeding, and
does iterate the same here again in many places, and especially in the end of
this Preamble, with great solemnity, under the names of new Chalenges, wherein
notwithstanding I find him to have practiced the quite contrary to his
protestations.

23. The second reason is, The second reason.
for that it is not probable that he having to lay so great and greiuous an
accusation upon our English Pope Adrian, held by the Christ^an world of his
time for a holy and renowned man, and this upon the only testimony of
Nauclerus, he would presume to do it, without looking upon the Author himself:
or if he did, it must needs argue him of great temerity, and of the same crime
that here he would avoid, to wit, of falsehood, and malice, and perfidious
dealing. A comparison showing unconscionable dealing without regard of credit.
For i^ in England one should accuse another of murder or any other like
greiuous crime, and that resolutly and affirmatively in public judgment (as
this was presented by him to the Kings Majesty of England, and to all
Englishmen besides in a printed book) and this only upon hearsay, that some
man had spoken it, and the man being in the City to be found out (as Nauclerus
book was in London) yet that he would not so much as seek him out nor speak
with him, but go presently to the Kings Bench and accuse the other, and cause
the arraignment to be made: and when the witness denied the same, he should
excuse himself, saying, as M. Morton does here: It is true, and I do truly
protest that I did never see the man, or speak with him, but framed my
accusation upon hearsay; were not this sufficient to condemn this man of
falsehood, and malice?

24. My third reason is, for that he set down in the citation the very latin
words themselves of Nauclerus thus: The third reason.
Hadrianus Pontifex excommunicationem Henrico secundo d^nu^cians, ipse a D^o
maledictus, a musca suffocatus est. Naucler. geuer. 139. Adrian the Pope
pronouncing excommunication against the Emperor Henry the second, himself
being cursed by God, was choked with a fly. Which words are not to be found
in Nauclerus, as here they lie, nor yet in Vrspergensis, out of whom Nauclerus
recites this fable, Many probabil^ties of false dealing.
but his words are these: Cumque venisset ad quenda^ fontem, ha^sit et bibit,
ac continuo, vt fertur, musca os cius intrauit etc. And when as he came to a
certain well, he took water, and drunk it, and presently, as it is reported,
a fly entered into his mouth, and could not be gotten forth until he died. So
Vrspengensis, says Naucl^rus. And then refuteth it both by the testimonies of
all Italian writers which he could read, and of John Salisburi^nsis (whom he
calls Falsboriensis) who was familiar with Adrian himself, and testified his
virtues. And if M. Morton had not seen nor read Nauclerus (as here to excuse
himself he says) how did he presume to set down his latin words so
precisely, as his reader could have noe probable cause to doubt, but that they
were his own proper words? Was not this cra^tie perfidious dealing? So as to
me it seems, that M. Morton by this first part of this evasion which
consists in his protestation that he he had not seen, nor read the book,
does more entangle himself in the crimes of falsity and malice, which he
pretends to avoid, then if he had simply confessed the same. But let us see
the other parts of his Answer.

The second part of his answer.
25 Secondly then he confesses, that he erred in the misquotatio^ of the
Generation cited out of Nauclerus, to wit, 139. for 39. and goes about to
prove that there was no malice therein, which I easily grant, nor did I object
it as any corruption, but only advised him of it as an error. And therefore his
long excuse of that matter, Preamb. page 92.
which was never urged against him, shows that he seeks occasions to
intertaine himself, and to make a show that he answers somewhat, where in
effect he says nothing.

26. Thirdly, he confesses that he should have said Frederick the first for
Henry the second, The third part.
against whom he accused Pope Adrian to have moved sedition, and says for his
excuse: What skilleth it whether it was Henry an Emperor, or Frederick an
Emperor that was excommunicated^ whereas the intended conclusion was only this,
that Adrian the Pope did excommunicate an Emperor, and conspired against him?
But this now is not so tolerable as the former excuse, no nor tolerable at
all in a learned man, especially in an accusation of so great weight, wherein
the accuser ought to be exact, and precise. M. Morton says it imports no
more, then in an examination of a murder, whether the wound were given by the
right hand or by the left: but ^e is deceived, or would deceive in this: For
that error personae is of another manner of weight in such kind of accusatio^s
then M. Mort. would seem to make. For if Thomas Haruey (for example) should be
accused to have murdered secretly Henry Denham, and that Thomas Harueys
friends could prove that Henry Denham was dead two hundred years before Tho.
Haruey was borne (as Henry the second was very nere before Frederick and
Adrian) should this import no more, then whether Denham were slain with the
right or with the left hand of Haruey, whereas he could not be slain by him at
all? Here then you see that matters are not exactly handled by M. Morton in
this his false accusation of Pope Adrian. The 4. part of his answer.


27. Wherefore in the fourth place concerning the principal point it self of
alleging Nauclerus, as a witness of the disastrous death of Pope Adrian by a
fly, he answers little or nothing to the purpose, for excuse of his guilfull
dealing therein, though he turn himself many ways to get out. He says, that
though Nauclerus does not affirm it, yet Abbas Vrspergensis, related by
Nauclerus, does. But why had not M. Morton mentioned Vrspergensis at the first?
and sincerly have told his Reader that he did only relate the matter with this
clause ( vt fertur) as it is said? Why, if he would have dealt plainly, had he
not confessed that Nauclerus did mislike and improve the said report, and that
by the testimony of all Italian writers that he could read? Nay, why does he
now again, being taken in flagrante delicto, misalleage Nauclerus words after
that he had seen and read him, saying: Verum cum multi Itali nullam de hoc
mentionem faciunt etc. but whereas many Italians do make no mention of this,
whereas Nauclerus true words are: Verum cum Itali, quos legere potui, nullam de
hoc faciant mentionem, and Ioannes Flasboriensis alijque multam de Adriano
reserant honestatem etc. But whereas the Italian writers, which I could come to
see, do make no mention of this matter, and John of Salisbury and other Authors
do relate much good of Adrian, etc. Many bad shifts of T. M. against Nauclerus.
Hae^ et alia ambiguum me reddunt quid potius eligendum, quidue credendum sit.
Scribimus enim res gestas affectu nonnunquam plusquam veritatis amore ducti.
Verum vnum hoc adijcimus, Adrianu^ Virum ^uisse integrum etc. These and other
such things do make me doubtful, what were to be chosen, or what were to be
believed. For that we do write other men's acts more oftentimes by affection,
then led thereunto by the love of truth. Which words are evidently meant by
Nauclerus, of Vrspergensis, taxing him that he wrote much of passion against
Pope Adrian in behalf of the Emperor Frederick, with whom he held against
the Pope, and that do the next ensuing words of Nauclerus show which are cut
of by M. Morton in relating them here, in his Preamble, Ver^m hoc adijcimus,
Adrianum Virum ^uisse integrum etc. but we add notwithstanding to this, that
Pope Adrian was an irreprehensible man. So as in this small speech o^ Nauclerus
by us now related, M. Morton instead of Itali quos leg^re potui, recites his
words to be, C^m multi Itali: he strikes out also Ioannes Flasboriensis
alijque multam de Adriano re^erant honestatem: he adds of his own that he
was maledictus a Deo: and finally he cutteth of the last of Nauclerus, which
contain his own judgment. Adrianum Virum ^uisse integrum. So as, if now after
he confesses to have seen Nauclerus, he does relate him so corruptly, what
great credit can be given to his former protes^ation, that he had not seen nor
read him? Or what imports whether he saw him or no, for so much as he was
resolute to corrupt him, and to make him speak no more nor less, then he
would have him to do, as now you have seen.

28. So as to conclude this account, we see that M. Morton in going about to
clear himself from this charge of treachery, does entangle himself with two
or three other treacheries more. And last of all, not having what to say,
runs to a common place, that four other Popes are reported to have had
disastrous ends, Four other Po^es objected impertinently to have had il ends.
to wit, Anastasius 2. Ioannes 10. Ioa^nes 12. and Vrbanus ^. as if we
defended, that all Popes had good lives, or prosperous deaths, or that among
our Kings of ^ngland and Scotland, who have been peradventure fewer then Popes,
many lamentable ending^ were not to be found: and yet may we not argue thereof
against the lawfullnesse of Kingly power, or due respect to be borne to their
persons and places: or that it might be taken for an argument that God did
abandon them and their dig^ity, for suffering them to dye disastrously, as this
man would infer of Popes. And finally how many Popes soever did dye
unfortunately, this does not excuse M. Morton in belying Adrian, and his Author
Nauclerus, from which it seems that he cannot be excused.

29. And this in case all were true which he writes of these other four
Popes, whom impertinently he brings in to accompany Adrian: but as in the one
we have found him manifestly false, so in these also you shall not find him
exactly true, in any one thing lightly, that he says of them, but still there
must be some mixture of sleightfull tricks to disguise matters. And to help out
the dye (to use his own phrase) he begins thus: Preamb. page 94.
But why should it be thought a matter incredible, that suth a dismal end
should befall a Pope? Whereunto I answer that the question is not whether it be
incredible, that a dismal end may befall a Pope, but whether such an end as
you describe, did befall Pope Adrian, or no? And whether you have used true
dealing in the manner of recounting the same?

About Pope Anastasius the second his death.
30. It follows in your narration out of one of our Doctors (as you say:) Been
legitur Anastasium diuino nutu percussum interijsse: It is read that Pope
Anastasius was stricken with the hand of God and perished, and you cite for it
Ioannes de Turrecremata lib. de summa Eccles. de Anastasio. Which citation is
so set down, as I persuade my self, Anno Domini 499.
that at the next reply he will have the like evasion as before in citing of
Nauclerus, to wit, that he saw not the work it self. For that Turrecremata
does not write only one book de summa Eccles. as here is insinuated, but
four, each one of them having many chapters, and one only has more then a
hundred, which is this wherout this sentence is pre^ended to be taken. And yet
does M. Mortons citation specify neither book nor Chapter, which always you
must imagine has some mystery in it. He quoteth also de Anastasio, as though
the Author had some such Chapter, whereas he only speaks of this Pope
Anastasius by way of answering certain objections about the cause of
infallibility of not erring in the Bishop of Rome, when he is to decree any
thing for the Church: wherabout some said, that albeit a Pope might fall into
heresy, yet God would not permit him to decree any thing heretical, whereof an
example was brought of this Pope Anastasius 2. that being inclined, as some
thought, by instance of the heretical Emperor (of his own name) Anastasius
then living, to admit unto his communion the heretic Acatius, and expecting
only for that purpose (as was thought) the returning of his legate Festus from
Constantinople, Turrecre. lib. 2. de sum. Eccles. cap. 112.
God took him away before his return. Turrecremata his words are these:
Tertium etiam hic inducunt e^emplum de Anastasio, qui licet voluerit reuocare
Acatium, non tamen potuit, quia Diuino nutu percussus est. They bring in also
here a third example of Pope Anastasius, who albeit he had a will to recall
the heretic Acatius, yet he could not do it, for that he was stricken by the
hand of God and dyed.

31. This is all that ^urrecremata says of the matter, which makes much more
for the pre-eminence of the Bishop of Rome, if you mark it, then any way
against the same: for it shows that God has such sp^ciall and particular
care of that Sea, and Pastor thereof, as he will rather take him away then
permit him to do any thing prejudicial to the Church, which is the blessing,
as we know of the elect, and dearly beloved of God, according to the saying of
the Scripture: Placens Deo, ^actus dilectus, rap^us est, ne malitia mutaret
intellectum eius, albeit I mu^t advertise the Reader, Sap. 4. v. 11
that the whole current of other writers do deny this matter about the
inclination of Pope Anastasius to recall Acatius, Nicep. l. 16. c. 12.
affirming that the said Aca^^us was dead diverse years before Anastasius was
Pope, E^ag. l. 3. c. 18.^^ 23.
as do testify Nicep^orus Callix^us, Euag^ius, Anastasius Billiothecarius,
Liberatus, ^ib^^at. c. 19.
Gelasius and others: all which, or the most, are nam^d in the first part of
the Decree or Dis^in. 19. cap. 9.
Gratian which is cyted also by M. Morton, and so if he looked upon it, he
abuses us greatly in dis^embling the matter: and if he did not, why does he
cite it? And thus much of Anastasius, whom all writers commonly do hold for a
very good man. And if any will see him further defended both for sanctity of
life, integrity of faith, and the removing of this slander touching his death,
let him see the learned discourse of Albertus lib. 4. Hierarc. cap. 8.
Pighius, Cardinal Lib. 2. Prop^g.
Hosius, Doctor In visib. monarchia lib. 7. fol. 386.
Sanders, Cardinal tomo 6. in Anastasio.
Baronius, Cardinal Lib. 4. de P^ntif. cap. 10. Decimus nonus est Anastasius 2.
Bellarmine, and others in the places here cyted. All which M. Morton in his
manner of plain dealing dissembleth, and passes over, and alleges only 4.
or 5. words out of Turrecremata, which that Author proposes only in the way of
objection, and not of as^ertion.

32. And as for the fable raised about his suddayne death, it seems to have
been taken by error, and similitude of the name of Anastasius, of which name
the heretical Emperor being, that lived with him, as before has been said, and
being stricken suddaynly by death with a thunderbolt, as both Paulus Diaconus,
Beda, Cedr^nus, and Zonaras do testify, In vita An^st^sij Imperatoris.
it fell out that the one was mistaken ^or the other, as diverse learned men are
of opinion.

33. As for the other two Popes John the 10. and John the 12. as they were both
violently intruded by favor and force of friends into that Sea, and gave no
great edification in their lives, so no marvel if ^hey had no very good ends.
L. de vitis Pontif. Rom^n. cap. 115.
Albeit for so much as belongs to John the 12. otherwise the 13. diverse
Authors do defend him, and namely in our age Franciscus Ioannettus, citing both
Otho Frisingensis, and Abbot Vrspergensis for the same.

34. The last of the four, About the death of Vrbanus tertius calumniated. by.
T. M.
Vrbanustertius, whom M. Morton brings in as noted by Doctor Seuerinus
Bin^us out of the testimony of Vrspergensis, that for sedition against the
Emperor he was called Turbanus and died as stricken by the hand of God: true it
is, that Binius relates such a thing recorded by Vrspergensis, a Schismatic
Author, standing with the Emperor against the said Pope, but refuteth the same
as false and malicious out of Platina, and other Authors, showing how he died
peacebly in his bed at Ferrara, for the sorrow he conceived of the overthrow of
the Christian army in the Holy Land, for preventing whereof he had taken a
journey to Venice Anno Domini 1187. adding these words: Anno 1187.13. Call.
Nouemb.
Ita Platina de obitu optimi Pontificis, verius et melius sentiens quam
Schismaticorum fautor Vrspergensis. So writes Platina of the death of this
excellent Pope, wherein his judgment was truer, and better then the judgment of
Vrspergensis the favorer of Schismatics: which conclusion M. Morton according
to his ordinary art of simplicity thought best to pretermit and conceal from
his Reader: and yet to furnish his margent with sundry citations of Doctor
Binius, as though he made for him.

35. And besides this testimony of Platina guylefully concealed, he dissembleth
also two other Authors of greater antiquity of our own Nation, to wit, Roger
in Henrico 20. p. 362. in fine
Houeden, and Lib. 3. c. 34. in fine
Neubrigensis, who both lived in the same time when Pope Vrbanus did, and do
write very honorably of his death, saying that when he hea^d the gri^uous
calamityes happ^^ed at Jerusalem, dolu^t vehement^r, and incidit in
aegri^udin^m, and mort^u^est apud Ferrariam: He ^eceyued ^xceeding grief
the^by, fell into s^cknesse, and so dyed at ^errara, which signifies both his
piety in Gods cause, and the honorable cause of his death.

36. Thus th^se two ancient English writers to omit many other that do ensue.
And now consider good R^ader the vain vaunting of M. Morton^ speech upon this
fiction: What is now wanting (says he) but an example of one Pope to be
produced upon whom the vengeance of God seiz^d, because of his re^el^ious
opposition against temporal Lords? This was Urban the third ( says Abbas
Vrspergensis) commonly called Turban etc. so little cause could I have to wound
my adu^rsaryes with forged inventions, being thus sufficiently furnished, and
prepared to con^ound them with true and plain conf^ssed t^stim^nyes. Preamb.
p. 98. and 99.
So he. And do you hear him how he croweth? Has he cyted any one Author but
V^sp^rge^sis and Binius, whereof the later is expressly against him, as you have
heard, and fully overthrows the former? And have not we alleged three for
his one to the contrary? and may do thrice as many more of those that ensued
the other, if we would stand upon it? How then is M. Morton so sufficiently
furnished to con^ound us with true and plain confessed testimonies? Where are
they? ^Vhat are their names? When lived they? Where dwell they? Why did he
not bring them forth with the rest? Is it not plain that M. Morton ^elleth
wynd, and words, and vaunts for works? but let us furnish him with
testimonies to the contrary, of Authors who write right honorably of this
Popes death. Let him read and consider what Sabellicus has left written,
Aenead. 9. lib. 5. What Cranzius, lib. 6. histor. Saxon. cap. 52. What
Na^ul^^us, pa^te 2, generatione 43. The authors that wrote of Pope Urban his
death.
What VVe^ne^us in fas^^^^lo temporum a^tate 6. anno 1184. What Onuphrius
Pa^^inus in vita Vrbani te^tij. What Ioanne^iu^ in Chron. cap. 151. What
Phili^pus in suppl^mento ^istoriarum anno 1186. What Carolus Sigonius lib. 15.
de ^egno Italiae anno 1187. What Genebrardus in Chronico anno 1185. And finally
what Blondus does testify lib. 6. de^ad. 2. anno 1181. whose words be these
and may stand for all the rest that agree in the same: Orb^m Christianorum
(says he, speaking of the life and death of this Pope Urban the third) de
mittendis in Asiam copiis monuerat etc. Pope Vrbanus 3. advertised the
Christian world by an universal decree to send forces into Asia, (for
recovering the holy Land) the succes^e whereof when he saw to proceed more
slowly and negligently, then the fervor of his heart desired, he dete^mined to
go in person to Venice, there by his presence, to draw together more
abundantly, and with greater speed a Christian army. Wherefore being arrived
unto Ferrara, and advertised first by common rumor of an unfortunate fight had
with the Infidels, and then afterward understanding more certainly the truth
thereof, he fell into such sorrow, as caused an Ague, and soon after death it
self, through the force of grief.

37. Thus wrote Blondus. And with him agree the rest of the Authors cited, and
many others by me pretermitted. And now consider M. Mortons words, What is now
wanting (says he) but an example to be produced of one Pope upon whom the
vengeance of God seized, because of his rebellious opposition against t^mporall
Lords? Was it a vengeance of God to dye peaceably in his bed, through the
fervor of holy desires to see the holy Land recovered? But I will pose M.
Morton no further in th^se matters, for that every man sees what necessity
drives him to speak and write so absurdly, as he does.

THE THIRD Charge of falsehood against M. Morton, which he pretends to
answer.. III.
IN the third place it pleases M. Morton to choose out another imputation of
mine against him, in D. B^ucher the Frenchman De iusta abdicatione etc. th^rby
to make all English Catholics odious, A^out the as^^rtion of D. Boucher
perverted. P^eamb. page 95.
as allowing his doctrine. The controversy is clearly set down in my
reprehensio^ of his fraud, expressed in these words.

The Charge.
D. Boucher de abdic. l. 3. c. 16.
29. An other like trick he plaieth us some few pages before this again,
citing out of D. Bouchers book, De iusta abdicatione these words: Tyrannum
occidere honestum est, quod cuiuis impune facere permittitur, quod ex communi
consensu dico. Mitig. page 80. Dis^ou. page 23.
And then he English^th the same thus: Any man may lawfully murder a Tyrant,
which I defend (says he) by common consent. But he that shall read the place
in the Author himself, shall find that he houldeth the very contrary, to wit,
A notable corruption about D. Boucher.
that a private man may not kill a Tyrant, that is not first judged and
declared to be a public enemy by the common wealth. And he proves the same
at large, first out of Scriptures, and by the decree of the general Council
of Constance: his words be these. Neque vero eo iure quod ad regnum, habet,
nisi per publicum Iudicium, spoliari potest etc. Neither can a tyrant be
deprived of that right which he has to a Kingdom, but only by public
judgment: yea further also so long as that right of kingdom remains, his
person must be held for sacred, whereof ensues, that no right remains to any
private man against his life. And albeit any private man should bring forth
never so many private injuries done by the said Tyrant against him, as that he
had whipped him with iron rodds, oppressed him, afflicted him, yet in this case
must he have patience, 1. Pet. 2.
according to the admonition of S. Peter: That we must be obedient not only
unto good and modest Lords, but also unto those, that be disorderly: and that
this is grace when a man for Gods cause does sustain, and bear with patience
injuries unjustly done unto him etc.

40. And in this sense (says he) is the decree of the Council of Constance to
be understood, Council. Constant. S^ss. 15.
when they say, Errorem in fide esse etc. Catholic moderation toward
censuring of Princes.
It is error in faith to hold (as John Wickliffe did) that every Tyrant may
be slain meritoriously by any vassal or subject of his, by free or secret
treasons etc. Thus writes that Author, holding as you see, that no Tyrant
whatsoever, though he be never so great a tyrant may be touched by any private
man, for any private iniuryes though never so great, nor yet for public,
though never so manifest, except he be first publicly condemned by the
Commonwealth, which is an other manner of moderation and security for Princes,
then the Protestant doctrine before rehearsed, and namely that of Knox uttered
in the name of the whole Protestant congregation both of Scotland and Geneua:
Knox in hist. p. 372.
If Princes be tyrants against God and his truth, his subjects are freed from
their Oaths of Obedience. So he.

41. And who shall be judge of this? Knox appel. fol. 33.
The people: for that the people (says he) are bound by oath to God to revenge
the ini^ry done against his M^iesty. Let Princes think well of this, and let
the Reader consider the malicious falsehood of this Minister T. M. who in
alleag^ng that little sentence before mentioned, about killing of a Tyrant,
struck out the words of most importance quem hostem Resp. iudicauerit: whom
the commonwealth adjudged for a public enemy, and adding that other clause,
which I say by common consent, which is not there to be found: and with such
people we are forced to deal that have no conscience at all in cosenage: and
yet they cry out of Equivocation against us, where it is lawful to be used;
making no scruple at all themselves to lie, which in our doctrine is always
unlawful for any cause whatsoever. Thus far were my words of charge and
reprehension to him in my former Treatise of Mitigation.

The pretended discharge.
42. And now you having heard this large Indictment, it is reason you hear
also what the prisoner at the bar can bring forth for informing the Jury to
his discharge. You must stand attent, for he would gladly slide away, under a
veil of words. Wherefore first he lays forth at larg the drift of D.
Bouchers discourse, saying that he makes a double consideration of a Tyrant: A
very pretty evasion of M. Mort.
one, as he does any injury to any private man, and that for this he may not be
slain of a private man: the other, as he does commit public injury and
violence either in case of religion, or the civil state, and this Tyrant may
be slain by the common wealth; yea also and by any private man, when the
common wealth has declared him for a public enemy. And then he infers
thus for himself: We see now that Boucher has def^nded, both that no private
man may kill a Tyrant for private injuries done against private men, and also,
that any private man may kill a Tyrant for common injuries. I have alleged the
later, and P. R. has opposed the former, both of us have affirmed a truth,
where then is the falsehood? Thus seeks M. Morton to escape, and goes about
by two similitudes to confirm this manner of answering. The first, that if an
Esquire have a son that is a knight, he shall sit above him in public
meetings, but not in private: that is, that he shall fit above him, and not sit
above him, and so Christ commanding (^aith he) that we should do as the
Pharisees did ordain, but not as they did in their lif^ and manners: he willed
us to do, and not to do as the Pharisees do, in different respects and senses
etc. And thus thinks to have quitted himself learnedly by a distinction, for
that as he says the self same Tyrant may be killed, and not killed by a
private man, in regard of public or private injuries.

43. But this evasion is overthrown by the words and whole discourse of Doctor
Boucher now alleged, The overthrow of his evasion.
for that he speaks not only against killing a Tyra^t for private injuries by
a private man, but also in public injuries: for so does show his allegation
of the Decree of the Council of Constance that condemned as an error in faith
to hold with John VVickcliffe, that every Tyrant may be slain meritoriously by
any vassal or subject of his, by open or secret treasons, which is understood,
as well for public as private injuries.

44. But it is granted by D. Boucher, says M. Morton, that when the common
wealth has condemned and declared any Tyrant for a public enemy, he may be
slain by a private man. Whereto I answer, that then he is no private man, for
that he does it by a public authority of the Common Wealth, as does the
ex^cutioner, that cutteth of a Noble man's head, by order and authority of the
public Magistrate: so as in this M Mor^ons distinction se^ueth him to no
purpose, for that neither for private or public injuries can a private man,
as a private man, that is to say, by private authority kill any Prince though
he were a Tyrant for any cause either private or public whatsoever. So as in
this principal charge M. Morton remains wholly convicted as you see.

45. There do rest the two other wings of falshod objected unto him: M. Mort.
condemned in the principal.
the first, that he stroke out the words of most importance from D. Bouchers
discourse, which made the matter clear, to wit, quem hostem Respublica
iudicauerit, whom the Commonwealth has adjudged for a public enemy, him
may a private man kill: and the second, that he adds the other clause of his
own that are not found in Bouchers words, Which I say by common consent. The
first of these two falsehoods he would excuse by saying, that albeit that D.
Boucher in the place before alleged, out of his third book, does set down
this position with the foresaid restriction, priuato etiam cuiuis Tyrannum quem
hostem Respub. iudicauerit, occidere licitum esse: that it is lawful also to
any private man to kill a Tyrant, Two accessoryes.
whom the Commonwealth has judged for a public enemy, (for then he does it
not by private authority:) yet that in his fourth book he has a whole Chapter
to prove, that in some urgent cause the matter may be prevented, as when the
thing is so notorious, instant, and perilous, as the said public judgment
cannot well be expected, and may be presumed, as granted, especially (says
he) in po^na priuatiua in privative punishment, that is to say, when subjects
in punishment of open and manifest tyranny do withdraw their due respect and
obedience, by seeking only to defend themselves: though not in positiua, in
positive punishment of actual rebellion or war offensive. But this does not
any way satisfy the falsehood objected in striking out these words in the
former book and place, where D. Boucher set them down for declaration of this
doctrine, that a private man was not licenced to kill a Tyrant by his own
private authority: for when Subjects are forced to use this way of prevention
by arms defensive, before the commonwealth can make public declaration; in
such cause they do it not, as private men, but as the body of the
Commonwealth: So as considering what here is in question, he must needs be
condemned of a nihil dicit, if not also of ^alsum dicit.

46. And the very like may be said about the second accessory untruth, for
adding the words ( which I say by common consent,) for excuse whereof he
runs to the other Chapters wherein he says that D. Boucher avouches, Mirum
esse in affirmand^ consensu^, there is wonderful consent in allowing this
doctrine, and then in another Chapter, that he who denies this (that he says)
is destitute of common sense: But these are of other matters and spoken upon
other occasions and not annexed to the former sentence of D. Boucher, The
second Accessory.
produced and corrupted by M. Morton, and consequently they are mere
impertinent euasions, that do more confirm and establish, then any way remove
the frauds and falsehoods objected against him. And so much of this matter,
which would grow over long, if we should prosecute the same, as M. Mortons
manner of answer would inuit us.

THE FOVRTH Charge of falsehood pretended to be answered or rather shifted of by
M. Morton, and cast upon R. C.. IIII.
AMONG other examples that I alleged of M. spirit in dealing vnsincerely by
calumniating our Catholic writers, thereby to get some show of advantage
against them, and the Catholic cause, I produced a place out of M. William
Reynolds his book de Reipublicae authoritate, About the abuse of M. William
Reinolds
most notoriously abused and perverted to make him seem to abase the authority
of Kings, and Princes in that very place where M. Reynolds did specially employ
himself in advancing their dignity: I shall here lay forth the fraud; you
shall judge what manner of consciences these men have, and whether they defend
their cause as a cause of truth or no. This then was my former reprehe^sion
about his dealing in this point.

The Charge.
Mitig. page 68. Discou. page 8. R^inold. de iusla R^ip. aucto^itate. c. 1.
48. In his book of Discovery page 8. having set down this false proposition,
that all Catholic Priests did pro^esse a prerogative o^ the people over all
Princes, for proo^e thereof he cy^ed this position of M. Reynolde^ in the place
aforsaid, Rex human^ creatura est, quia ab hominibus consti^uta: and englisheth
it in this manner, a King is but a creature of man's creation, where you see
first that in the translation he adds, but, and man's creation of himself,
^or that the latin has no such aduersatiue clause as, but, nor, creation, but
rather the word constitution. Secondly these words are not the words of M.
Reynolds, but only cited by him out of S. Peter, and thirdly they are alleged
here by Thomas Morton to a quitte contrary sense from the whole discourse and
meaning of the Author, which was to exalt and magnify the Authority of Princes,
as descending from God, and not to debase the same as M. Reynolds is
calumniated to say. For proof heerof whosoever will look upon the book and
place it self before mentioned, shall find that M. Reynolds purpose therein is,
M. Reynolds discourse.
to prove, that albeit earthly Principality, power and authority be called by
the Apostle, humana creatura: yet that it is originally from God, and by his
commandment to be obeyed. His words are these: Hinc enimest etc. Hence it is,
that albeit the Apostle do call all earthly principality a humane creature, for
that it is placed in certain men (from the beginning) by suffrages of the
people: yet election of Princes does flow from the law of Nature, which God
created, and from the use of reason, Romans 13.
which God powered into man, and which is a little beam of divine light drawn
from that infinite brightness of Almighty God: therefore does the Apostle S. Paul
pronounce, that there is no power but from God, and that he which resists
this power resists God himsel^e. So M. Reynolds.

49. In which words we see that M. Renoyldes is so far of from debasing
Kings in this his discourse or subiecting them unto the people, as he does both
extol and magnify their dignity, as proceeding from God himself, and
reconcileth together the speech of P. Peter, calling a King a humane creature,
with the words of S. Paul, pronouncing it to be of God, and under pain of
damnation to be obeyed. And can there be any more untrue dealing then this? Let
us see then how M. Morton will here discharge himself: you shall see him
somewhat more humiliated then before (would God to his conversion, and not to
his greater obduration and confusion:) and yet will he in any case defend and
not amend his error: for thus he proceeds.

The pretended discharge.
Page 100.
50 This Allegation is (says he) of all which yet I have found most obnoxious,
and alliable unto taxation; which (God knows that I lie not) I received from
suggestion, as the Author thereof R. C. can witness. For at that time I had not
that Rosaeus, alias Reynolds, neither by that present importunity of occasions
could seek after him, which I confess, is greatly exorbitant: for I received
it as a testimony debasing the authority of Kings. So he. And truly when first
I read the beginning of this answer, and heard him so earnestly, and solemnly
to protest before God that he received this fraud against M. Reynolds by
suggestion, I imagined he would have said of the Devil, for that he commonly
is the proper suggestour of all such unjust and wicked calumniations: but when
I saw the letters of R. C. follow instead of the Devil, I began to muse and
think with my self whether there were any Devil of that name or no, A
strange evasion of M. Mort. by accusing R.C.
or if it were no Devil himself, what instrument or chosen servant of Satan
it might be, that had made this false suggestion, which M. Morton himself
confesses here to be greatly exorbitant from the truth, and instead of one
thing to have suggested the quite contrary, and that wittingly against his
conscience; yea with a double malice as may seem. The first to calumniat^ M.
Reynolds, and Catholic doctrine by him: and the other to disgrace M. Morton,
by making him put in print so notorious a lie and corruption.

51. But when afterward I was advertised by some that would seem to know the
mystery, that R. C. did signify Ri. Can. I was driven into a far greater
me^uaile, how M. Morton could be permitted to publish such a matter in print
(the thing having to pas^e the view of R.C. his officers) and how he could
presume to have more care of his own credit, then of the others that is his
head and Chiefteyne? For as a scarre the more higher it stands in the
forhead, the more deformity it works to the whole body: so such a notorious
crime of wilful falsification being proved to be in the Head it self, even by
the asseueration and testimony of so principal a member of the same Head,
cannot be but very disgraceful to the whole body: though it may be that M.
Morton being the party most interessed, might pretend in this, not only his
own personal defense, in this particular escape, but a protection also more
general heerby for all Ministers to use this art with less reprehension, when
the Head of Ministers should be convinced to use the same with such liberty and
lack of conscience, especially in a matter so odious, preiudicious and
calumnious to all the rank of Catholics. I do confess (says M. Morton) that
it is greatly exorbitant, for I received it as a testimony debasing the
authority of Kings. And from whom? From R. C. But did he gather it himself
(think you) or did he take it also by tradition of others and upon credit as
you profess your self to have done? The later were disgraceful: the first
hateful. For if he looked upon the Author himself he must needs see, that M.
Reynolds drift was to advance Kingly authority, and not to debase it: and
therefore for R. C, to set down the quite contrary, and make another to print
it also with his allowance and approbation, was a double or triple iniquity.
And surely if the like may be proved in any Prelate of ours, let him have for
penance never to be trusted after, A moderate satisfaction demanded for a
great crime.
which is the greatest satisfaction that I would wish to be exacted of R. C, if
he acknowledge this accusation of M. Morton for true.

52. But now, though this charging of R. C. be some disburdening to T. M. that
he invented not the slander of himself: yet does it not wholly free him from
all falsehood in the matter. For he should not have yealded to the false
suggestion, nor^ e^ admitted so unjust a temptation: for supposing that R. C.
would needs play the part of the tempting and lying serpent, yet ought T. M.
not to have followed the frailty of the credulous and infirm woman: and
although R. C. had delivered unto him the note so ba^ely, as he puteth it
down, out of M. Reynolds, to wit, Rex humana creatura est, quia ab hominilus
co^stituta: yet could not M. Morton but remember, that the effect thereof was in
the Epistle of S. Peter, and that in no sense it could be truly Englished as he
does, A King is but a creature of man's creation: The word ( but) maliciously
inserted.
both for that the word ( but) which is a particle aduersatiue or exclusive, is
not to be found in the latin words of M. Reynolds: nor could it stand in any
reasonable good meaning, that a Kings authority is nothing else but a humayne
creature, as though it had no dependence or causation from God. Wherefore as
there was great malice in the suggestor of this false imputation: so was there
no less want of truth in him that so willingly yealded to so bad and false a
suggestion. But what says he here for his defense? This which now ensues.

Preamb. page 100.
53. Upon this presumption, says he, (if true,) ( to wit, that M. Reynolds had
spoken to the debaseme^t of Kings authority as he did not, but to the contrary)
it could be no falsehood in me, to insert the particle ( but,) especially being
acquainted with the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine, who that he may disable
the authority of a King in comparion of the dignity of a Pope, does defend,
that Kings, being chosen by men, are not immediately created by God: and yet,
the Pope elected by Cardinals, has his authority immediately from God.

54. Whereto I answer, that well he might say so, for that Christ both God and
man did institute in particular, and immediately the Supreme Authority of S.
Peter, and his successors, when he gave to him, and by him to them the keys of
heaven, but he i^stituted not the Authority of Kings immediately, but left to
each people to be governed by what sort of government they best liked: How the
authority of Kings is from God and how from man.
albeit, that where that form of government, or any other (as of Dukes,
Commonwealth, or the like) was once lawfully introduced, he commanded due
obedience to be performed theru^to. So as though we may truly say, that Kingly
Authority is immediately but from man; yet can we not say, that a King is but a
creature o^ man's creation, for that this includes both immediately and
mediatly, which is false: For that kingly Authority is the creature of God
mediatly and originally; for that God gives power to the people to choose him,
with commandment to obey him when he is chosen, and it is the creature of man
immediately, for that by choice of men that dignity is appointed in some
Countries, and not in other, which is not so in the Popes, and their Authority.
For though their persons be chosen immediately by Cardinals, that are men, as
here M. Morton obiecteth: yet is not their office, power or authority chosen or
appointed by those men as in Kings, but immediately by God. So as this hole
will not serve M. Morton to run out at, or to excuse his fraudulent thrusting
in of the word (but) that perverted the whole sentence of his adversary.

55. And yet is it further to be considered by the Reader^ that all which here
he has said for his excuse therein, is but upon a supposition, that this
sentence in M. Reynolds did tend to the abasing of Kings Authority: which
suppositio^ being t^ue^ ^aith he) it could be no falsehood in me to insert the
particle ^ but^) which I have showed to be^alse. For that albeit we admit the
supposition to be true, that M. Reynolds intention was in that place, The
particle ( b^t) slily inserted ^y M. Mort.
to prefer the Popes authority before the Kings, in that it is immediately
from God^ and the other mediatly only: yet that the sentence of S. Peter could
not admit the inserting of the particle ( but) without falsehood.

56. But now this supposition is not true but false that M. Reynolds pretended
that, in the place alleged, but the quite contrary, as was delivered in my
reprehension: and M. Morton having seen the place before the making of this
his last Reply, and thereupon made his protestation which you heard, saying, God
knows that I lie not, but received it from suggestion of R. C^ yet this
notwithstanding he makes all his defense out of a supposed presumption,
saying: If it be true (says he) then it could be no falsehood in me: but now
being proved and granted not to be true, it must needs follow that it was a
falsehood in him. And this is the substantial manner of clearing himself.

57. Lastly he frames to himself an objection, and seeks to intertaine time
by answering the same to no purpose in the world, for thus he says. An
objection made by himself, which he is not able to solue.
I know that P. R. may possibly insist, that he cited the text o^ S. Peter 1.
Pet. 2. who calls a King or Governor constituted by man, humanam creaturam, a
humane creature, and then how could those words be reprehensible in M.
Reynolds, which are warrantable by S. Peter? This is his objection, which
indeed has no solution: for that the words being taken out of S. Peter, and
used by M. Reynolds in S. Peter's sense, and to ^he same end that S. Peter did,
as here ^s both proved and confessed, they can have no reprehension, except we
will reprehend the Apostle himself, and consequently they were absurdly
brought in by M. Morton against M. Reynolds as picking a quart^ll where none
was.

58. But to this M. Morton answers, that the self same sentence may be used
by diverse in several senses, laudably in the one, and reprehensibly in the
other, Matthew. 16.
as hail Master was to Christ by the Disciples, and by the Pharisees, and,
Marc. 5.
thou art the Son of God by S. Peter, and by the Devil, and so it might have
been presumed (says M. Morton) that M. Reynolds used S. Peter's words, but not
in S. Peter's sense. And let the Reader observe that he says that it might have
be^ne presumed, to wit, when R. C. did falsely suggest it so, but now that M.
Morton has seen, and read the place both in my reprehension here set down,
and in M. Reynolds himself, and has found that he used this place in the very
sense of S. Peter for exalting the Kings authority; yea in the sense of M.
Morton here set down, saying: Let every Christian learn that, that Governor
whom S. Peter calls a creature of man, S. Paul calls the Ordinance of God.
If this I say be so, how can M. Morton excuse himself from a gross malicious
falsehood, Diverse shifts to get out.
in that he objected this sentence in his Discovery against M. Reynolds, as
though thereby he had debased Princes Authority? Hear I pray you his last
shift. Though not the place alleged (says he) yet the scope of M. Reynolds
whole book does convince him of rebellious doctrine, as will more plainly
appear in the Encounter. Mark now whither he is fled. He confesses, that in
the place alleged by M. Reynolds (wherabout only stands our controversy)
his dri^t was not to debase, but exalt Princes Authority, and consequently he
must grant, that he abused him in that crimination. But he says, that the
scope of his Book is otherwise, which he deferreth to prove until he make his
larger Encounter, which I suppose will require a large time: and in the mean
space we have both by our euiction and his own confession, that he be^ied M.
Reinolds in this accusation, and fraudulently also put in the particle ( but)
to make it seem more heinous and odious, especially to his Majesty, whom
both he and R. C. purposed to incense by this their false co^spiracy against
us, and our whole cause, using such inventions of their own for our
assertions; then which manner of proceeding nothing can be more malicious or
wicked. And it being once discovered to his Maies^y by so authentical
witnesses as are the confessions of these two Ministers so co^byned together,
may justly move his Majesty not so ^asely to believe hereafter, what is
presented by such people unto him. And now to the sequent imputation, for this
is not only not put of, but confessed and confirmed, as you have seen.

THE FIFTH Imputation of lying pretended to be answered by M. Morton, or rather
by M. Stock for him.. V.
M. Mort. culleth out of my book some dozen pages after the former, About the
decree of Gratian wrongfully alleged.
an imputation of false dealing about certain places cited out of the Canon
law. My reprehension of his said false dealing is set down in these words.
But will you hear a case or two more out of the Cano^ law, how dextrous Sir
Thomas is in corrupting that which he loves not, Mitig. page 82.
nor seems well to understand? You may read in the fourth page of his
pamphlet an ancient decree (for so he calls it) alleged by him out of
Gratian in the Gloss, determining, that though a man has sworn to pay money
to one that is excommunicated, Another Cosenage about a text of Gratian.
yet is he not bound to pay the same, and he alleges the latin text thus: Si
iuraui me soluturum alicui pecunia^ qui exco^municatur, non ^eneor ei soluere:
If I have sworn to pay money to any man that is excommunicated, I am not bound
to pay it, adding this reason, quia qualiter cumque possumus, debemus vexare
malos, vt cessent a malo: We ought to vex evil men by what means soever we
may to the end they may cease from doing evil. In the allegation of which
little text a man would hardly believe how many false tricks there be to make
Catholic doctrine to seem odious and absurd. Apud Great. causa 15. q. 6. cap.
4. Gloss.
For first these words not being found in any text of law, or decision of any
Pope or Counsel, but only in the Gloss or comme^tary, they ma^e not any
ancient or modern decree, as the Minister falsely auouch^th, but rather show
the opinion of him who writes the Commentary, if his words were as here they
are alleged.

60. But the truth is that the words of the Gloss co^teyne only a certain
objection, upon a clause of a Canon, concerning promise to be observed to one
that is exo^municated, after the promise was made: A doubt proposed and solued.
and the objection or doubt is made in these words by the Author of the Gloss
or Commentary: Sed quid dices, si iuraui etc. But what will you say, if I have
sworn to pay money to any person, or have promised the same under some
forfeiture, and in the mean space, he, to whom I made the promise, is
excommunicated, am I bound to pay the same or not? This is the question: and
then he argues on both sides, and first for the negative, Vi^etur quod non, It
seem^th I am not: for the Canon law says causa 23. q. 6. That we ought to
afflict wi^kedmen by all means possible, to the and they may cease from their
wickedness. So he^ alleging diverse other arguments for the same opinion, but
yet afterward coming to glue his own resolution he says thus: Verius credo,
quod licet ill^ non habeat ius petendi, tamen debet et solui: I do believe the
truer opinion to be, that albeit he, that is so excommunicated, do leese his
right to demand his money yet is the other bound to pay him. And for this he
cites diverse laws and reasons, therein mentioned, as namely Extrau. de iure
debitoris, and Extra. de senten. Excom. Si vere and 11. q. 3. Cum
excommunicato.

See of ^his ^^sto^y the dis^utatio^ b^f^^e the King of F^ance, a^nexed to the
Confut. of the first 6.

Mon^thes of Foxes Calendar.


61. So as here our Minister, not of ignorance but of falsehood, takes the
objection for the resolution, as Pl^ssis Mo^nay did in his book against the
Mas^e, where he would prove, that S^otus, Durand, and other School divines did
doubt of the Real presence, and transubstantiation, for that having proposed
the question, they began to argue for the negative part, saying: Videtur quod
non, though afterward they resolved the contrary, and solued the argument. And
the very like does our Minister here, calling this objection of Videtur quod
non, not only a resolution but an ancient Decree. Secondly, there is wilful
deceit in leaving out the first words of the Author, Sed quod dices, si
iuraui? But what will you say, if I have sworn? which do plainly show that it
is but an objection. Thirdly that he alleges the reason of the objection,
Four fal^^^oodes about one thing.
Quia quali^ercumque possumus etc. for the reason of the solution, which is
false: for that the resolution is made against that reason. Fourthly, the true
resolution of the Commentor is utterly concealed, and a contrary determination
by him impugned set down, and this not as a private opinion, but as an ancient
decree of the law and Canon it self. Consider I pray you how many frauds and
falshoodes there be in one little quotation, and what a volume I should be
in^orced to make, if I would examine exactly such a multitude of citations, as
he quoteth against us. Thus far wrote I at that time in my Treatise of
Mitigation: now let us see how M. Morton will quit himself heerof. He
begins his discharge in these words.

62. My adversary, P. R. (says he) may satisfy himself for me, Pream. p. 104.
who a little afte^ concerning this same allegation of this Authority has said,
Mitig. p. 84. nu. 52.
that, It may seem to import that he (T. M.) scarce read the books
thems^lues, but cited the same out of some other man's notes. Here, we see, in
his vehement crimina^ion of malicious falsehood, he has inserted a charitable
and true divination of my integrity. I am glad to see in the mingling of a
pound of worme-wood, and ten ounces of gall, he had the grace to let fall this
drame of sugar, and that so seasonably. For the truth is, that I took up these
allegations of Gratian upon credit, and therefore return these pieces unto him,
of whom I receiu^d them, who is to prove them current, and to satisfy for
himself. So M. Morton.

63. Whereby we may see, first how doughty a man M. Morton is to be a public
writer, when so often he is forced either to confess that he never saw the
Authors which he cites, or that he took them up by credit or borrowing of
others: we may see also how poor men in substance our Ministers are, who for
some show of defense of their bad cause, and for some oste^tation or rather
calumniation against Catholics they join their labors together like
emmitts, the one to carry straw, the other earth, the other some more
contemptible matter to make a common treasure, out of which every man may take
for furnishing himself: but yet when it comes to be handled and weighed, it
proves nothing but dross, Considerations upon the former confession of T. M.
every one of them following rather his preiudicate passion and appetite in
making his collections, then the truth or substance of the things he gathers
together: and whereas he takes so kindly the dram of sugar, that I let fall, in
saying, that it seemed that he scarce read the books which he cites against
us, I cannot but be delighted with his gratitude: yet if he had set down my
whole words, they had some worme-wood ^lso in them: for I say, that this fau^t
we^e more pardonable, if he did not use fraud in like manner in the things
themselves deduced by him from those m^salleadged authorities, as you shall
hear in the next imputation.

64. Now then finding himself pressed in such so^t as he cannot tell which way
to turn for defending his credit, he is forced to make recourse to stocks and
stones, blocks and bones, (as their phrase is, of our recourse to intercession
of Saints and honoring of their relics) that is to say, he is constrained to
refer us over to one M. Richard Stock a brother-Minister of his, and
digni^ied by him in the margent with the title of a learned Preacher of London.
This Stock then being a bad storehouse of such as write against us to furnish
them with false wares, lent M. Morton the places, or rather deceived and abused
him with them, as Ri. Can. did before, which Stock acknowledges the matters
and begins his recognisance thus: I Richard Stock brought this allegation
with some others to the Author of the Discovery etc. And can there be any thing
more ridiculous then this, when one Minister is brought in to help out another
in matter of false dealing. If I would bring in a Colloquium here between M.
Morton and M. Stock about the defense of this place for saving mutually their
honesties, should I not have other manner of matter for an interlude the M.
Morton framed to himself before out of his fingers ends between the Moderate
Answerer, Supra. c. 2.
and the Mitigator.

65. But I mean not to spend time in such trifles: only I would have the
judicious Reader in earnest to consider, that if M. Morton either of himself
or with the help of his creditor M. Stock, that lent him the falsified
authorities before alleged against Catholics, could any way in the world
with any probable shift have answered the said falsities himself though never
so slenderly; it may be presumed that for his credits sake he would have done
it rather in his own name, then have confessed his poverty, or rather patchery
in borrowing it of another, and much less would he have sent us to M. Stock
for answer thereof, The conference between M. Stock and M. Morton, for
dividing the shame of falsifying.
but rather would he have taken Stocks direction, and have delivered the same
as from himself, if any way he had found it to be sufficient for some
probability of truth? But indeed they co^ferring matters together, and
examining the places, and finding that they were both of them taken in a false
measure, the one for lending the false authority, the other for borrowing and
abusing; they concluded like good fellows and friends to divide the shame
between them, M. Morton for his beggarly borrowing and deceiptfull usage of
that which he had borrowed, and M. Stock for his fraudulent lending of that
which was not true, nor verifiable.

66. Let us come then to the trial how both joining together, do endeavor
each one for his part to satisfy my former charge. There be four or five
points of falsity objected to them as you have heard. The first, that M. Morton
in his Discovery auerred (and repeated the same afterward again in his full
Satisfaction) that it is an ancient decree of the Canon law, that Catholics
are not bound to pay debts unto heretical creditors, notwithstanding they have
sworn to do it. And for this he cites thus: Discou. p. 4. full Satis^. part.
1. page 21. Mitigat. p. 82.
Apud Gratian^ causa 15. q. 6. cap. 4. yet cited he no particular Canon but
only certain words in latin found in a Gloss upon the 4. Cano^ that
begins Nos Sanctoru^ etc. but so fraudulently patched together by M.
Morton, or by his Creditor M. Stock, as where the said words lie not
together, nor are spoken by the Gloss to one purpose but to quite contrary
and opposite senses, M. Morton alleged them as appertaining to one and the
same effect: the words are before set down: Si iuraui me soluturum etc. and
the different frauds and falsities therein used have been before displayed. Now
only we must see how M. Stock (the Champion or undertaker) can defend himself
about the first point, whether there be an ancient decree or no, for not paying
debts to excommunicate persons, which both he, and his borrower M. Morton are
bound to bring forth under pain of discredit, for that the words of any
Gloss do not prove a Canonical decree, nor do these here alleged, Si
iuraui me soluturu^, make to that purpose but expressly to the contrary that a
man is bound to pay, as has been declared. How then are these two first
points answered of falsifying a decree, and perverting the Glos^e? Let us
hear the new advocate M. Stock speak for himself.

67. This allegation (says he) with some others, I Richard Stock brought unto
the Author of the Discovery, which P. R. challenges to be maliciously cited,
Pream p. 104. M Stocks defense.
partly for that the words of the Gloss were only set down, when the decree
is mentioned, wherein I conceive P. R. complayneth no otherwise, then one, who
being smitten with the scabbard, should complain that he was not struck with
the sword: So he, because T. M. talked of the decree, and urged only the
Gloss. For the decree is far more plain against them then the Gloss. Nos
sanctorum praedecessorum statuta tenentes, eos qui excommunicatis ^idelitate
aut Sacramento constricti sunt, Apostolica Authoritate a iuramento absoluimus:
and ne sibi fidelitatem obseruent, omnibus modis prohibemus, quousque ipsi ad
satisfactionem veniant. This is the Decree, which in the general carries as
much or more, as is set down by him, and so clears him from any malice in
this point. So M. Stock.

68. But as for malice, we shall treat afterward. Now we are to see how he
has beaten us with both the sword and scabbard, that is, both with the Canon
or Decree it self of Gregory the 7. Nos Sanctorum: as also with the scabbard,
which is the Gloss upon that Canon: and for this later we have proved before,
that being perverted and manifestly corrupted by M. Morton, quite contrary to
the sense, words, and meaning of the writer, who says, and proves the quite
opposite to that which he was made say by M. Morton: though it be but a
scabbard; yet has it wounded and broken M. Mortons head, and M. Stocks also,
if he had part in the corrupting thereof.

69. As for the sword it self which is the Canon Nos Sanctorum here alleged,
The sword and scabbard both wounding M. Mortons cause.
M. Stock himself confesses, that it strikes not us in particular in
determining any thing about or against paying of debts to excommunicate people,
and therefore he makes his inference thus: This is the Decree which in the
general carries as much or more as is set down. Mark that he says, that it
carries as much in general: but generalities are not sufficient to avouch
particulers. This Canon does prohibit obedience to be exhibited to
excommunicate persons until they do conform themselves: it speaks nothing
of debts: how shall we try it? First by the words themselves, wherein there is
no mention at all of debts: and for that cause it is probable that M. Stock
was ashamed to English them, as M. Morton before to recite them. Secondly by
the Co^mentary or Gloss, whose words are plain Licet excommunicatio tollat
obligationem quoad ^^^^li^at^m, non tamen quoad alios contractus: albeit
Excommunication do take away obligation of fidelity or subjection toward the
person excommunicated, yet not in other contracts: So as if I do owe to an
Excommunicate person money, I am bound to pay him. Thus does the Glos^e expound
the Canon, and the scabbard does agree with the sword, and both of them do hurt
M. Morto^ and M. Stock, though never so good fencers in a bad cause.

70. After this M. Stock, to help out somewhat his Client M. Morton, tells
us that the self same Glos^e (that after disputing to and fro, concluded
before for us, as we have seen, that we are bound to pay debts to
excommunicate persons) grants notwithstanding in the end, that probabiliter
dici potest etc. probably, notwithstanding, it may be said that by
excommunication of the person a man is excused from paying debts unto him in
respect of the sundry authorities and reasons that he had recited for that
opinion before: but what of this? We know his own resolution before was,
Verius credo etc. I do think the truer opinion to be, that we are bound to
pay, though this other be not improbable also for the reasons alleged: what
makes this for the excuse of M. Morton that alleged this Gloss, as holding
the quite contrary.

71. M Stock goes further to allege another beginning of a Cano^, Absolutos
se nouerint, which was made by Pope Gregory the 9. almost two hundred years
after the former, Greg. 9. decret. l. 5. tit. 7. c. 16.
wherein the very same thing is decreed as in the other, to wit, that he who
falls into manifest heresy, (and is by name denounced, as both Medina and
other expositours do observe) leeseth all se^u^ce and obe^^ence due unto him,
Medin. Cod. de restitut. q. 3. causa. 9.
until he be absolved again: Wherein there is no one word of debts, though by
occasion of this decree a certain Glos^e^, which is of Bernardus de Buttono
Parmensis, does probably hold, that to such a man there is not obligation of
payment of debt (at leastwise of such debts as are only contracted by promises,
but are not real debts) so long as he remains in that case. Tolet. lib. 1.
Instruc. cap. 13.. Sextus.
And to this effect also speaks Tolet in the place here cited by M. Morton,
and we have heard before, how the other Gloss of Bartholomaeus Brixiensis held
it for probable, though the contrary for more true, upon the Canon Nos
Sanctorum.

72. Wherefore to conclude, we see that neither M. Mort. nor his new Advocate M.
Stock, nor both of them together have been able to bring forth the ancient
decree which was promised about not paying of debts due to Protestants (for
this he would infer to make our doctrine more odious unto the^) for besides
that Protestants are not nominatim excommunicati, and consequently not
comprehended in the cases alleged, the two decrees mentioned, do speak only
of temporal service and obedience, and secondly the Gloss, alleged and
corrupted by M. Morton and M. Stock both in words and sense is not here
justified nor defended at all, according to their former allegation thereof, but
that the four abuses objected by me out of the same, remain still liable upon
them, as if they had answered nothing at all, so valiant undertakers have they
showed themselves, and stout Champions. Let us pass unto another no better
defended by them then this.

THE SIXTH Imputation of falsehood pretended to be answered by M. Morton with the
help of the same M. Stock.. VI.
About another false pretended decree in Gratian.
THE sixth charge given by me upon M. Morton for wilful and fraudulent dealing,
chosen out by him to be defended is set down by me somewhat largely in my
Treatise of Mitigatio^, for that it contains sundry branches: and I beseech
the Reader to have patience to read it out, and to mark with attention the
points thereof. Thus then I wrote before.

The Charge.
Mit. p. 84.
74. In the sixth page (quoth I) of his Discovery he has this grievous
accusation out of the Canon law against us: Haeretici filij, vel consanguinei
non dicuntur, sed iuxta legem sit manus tua super eos, vt fundas sanguinem
ipsoru^. And then he quoteth thus, apud Great. gloss. in decret. lib. 5. Ex
decret. Greg. 9. cause. 23. q. 8. cap. Legi. which distracted kind of quotation
separating the first and last words that should have gone together, seem to
import that he scarce read the books themselves, but cited the same out of
some other man's notes. But that fault were easily pardoned, if he used no
greater fraud in the thing it self. For first he Englisheth the words thus,
Heretics may not be termed either children or kindred, but according to the
old law thy hand must be against them to spill their blood, and then in the
margent he sets down this special printed note, The professed bloody
massacre against the Protestants without distinction of sex or kindred. And
what can be more odiously urged then this? Now the^ let us see how many false
tricks and shifts, fit for a Protestant Minister, do lie lurcking in this
short citation.

75. First of all is to be considered that this Gloss or commentary of the
Canon law, which here is both vnt^uely cited and maliciously applied, is upon
a Canon, beginning Si quis; which Canon is taken out of the third Council of
Carthage, Decret. l. 5. de haeret. tit. 7. c. 5
wherein the famous Doctor and holy Father S. Austin was present, as a chief
Bishop that had voice in that Council, and the decree of the Canon is: That if
any Bishop should institute heretics or pagans for his heirs, whether they
were consanguinei or extranei, kinsmen or externes, ei Anathema dicatur, atque
eius nomen inter Dei Sacerdotes nullo modo recitetur: let him be accursed, and
let not his name be remembered any way among the Priests o^ God.

76. This is the severity of that Canon: for ground whereof, another precedent
Canon s^tteth down out of the same S. Augustine, quod haereticus perseuerans,
aeternaliter damnatur etc. that an heretic perseuering in his heresy is
damned eternally; The severe sentence of S. August. against heretics.
Neither can he receive any profit by baptism, alms, martyrdom, nor any
other good works. So has the title of the Canon. But the words of S.
Augustine are these: ^irmissime tene and nullatenus dubites etc. Hold for most
certain and no ways doubt, August. l. ^e Fide Cath.
but that every heretic or schismaticke shall be partaker of hell fire
everlastingly, together with the Devil and his Angels, except before the end
of his life he be restored and incorporated again into the Catholic Church.
Neither shall baptism, nor alms n^u^r so abundantly bestowed, no nor death
it self suffered for the name of Christ, profit him any thing to salvation. So
S. Augustine.

77. Upon this ground then that heretics out of ^he Church and so censured as
here you have heard, t^ough they be never ^o near of kin, may not be made
heirs, especially by Church men, the Gloss yealding a reason thereof, has
these words: Qui^ isti Haeret^^s, iam non dicuntur filij vel consanguinei.
Vnde dicitur in lege; si frater tuus, and amicus tuus, and vxor tua depra^are
volue^it veritate, s^ manus ^ua super illos: For that these heretics are not
now called children or kinsfolks, therefore, as such, they cannot be made
Inheritors by Ecclesiastical men. Whereupon it is said in the law (of
Deutronomy) if thy brother, and friend, or wi^e will go about to deprave the
truth, let thy hand be upon them. And presently he cites to the same effect,
the Authority of S. Hierome, out of another Canon, in another place of the law,
as presenly we shall see.

78. So as first here we may behold that T. M. has not put down this his
quoted Gloss, as it is found in the true Gloss it self, but left out both
the beginning, Quia isti haeretici etc. which imported so^what to the
understanding of his meaning: as also he le^t out the reason alleged by the
Gloss out of Gods own words in Deutronomy, to wit, the wil^ull corrupting o^
his truth. Hier. cont. Vi^il. cit. a Gratiano cause. 23. q. 8. c. Legi.
And thirdly he added these words vt ^undas sanguinem ipsorum, which here (as
you see) the Gloss has not, but they are cited out of S. Hierome, in another
Canon, and volume of the law, where the holy Father excusing to his friend
Ripariu^ a Priest his earnest zeal and desire to have Vigil^ntiu^ the
heretic (against whom he had written) punished by his Bishop, alleges
diverse examples of severity in like cases out of the Scriptures, as of Phin^es,
Elias, Simon Can^naeus, S. Peter, S. Paul, and lastly cites also the foresaid
words of Gods Ordinance in Deutronomy: I^ thy brother, thy wife, thy friend,
etc. shall go about to pervert thee from Gods true worship etc. hear him not,
nor conceal him, but bring him forth to Judgment, and let thy hand be vp^ him
^i^st, and then after the hand o^ all the people etc. which is to be understood
according to the form of law appointed afterward in the 17. Chapter, that he
be orderly brought ^orth to Judgment, and then when sentence is passed against
him, he which heard or saw him commit the sin, and is a witness against him,
must cast the first stone at him, and the rest must ^ollow. And this also does
the ordinary commentary or Gloss of Lyranus, and others upon those texts of
Scripture, declare.

79. And now let the judicious Reader consider how many corruptions this crafty
Minister has used to bring forth to his purpose this one little distracted text
for proof of professed bloody massacres intended by us against Protestants. A
Catalogue of corruptions.
For first he corrupts the words of the Gloss apparently, and that in diverse
points, leaving out that which the Gloss says, and adding that which the
Gloss has not; then he corrupts the meaning both of Gloss and Canon,
deprauing that to a wicked sense of bloody massacring without distinction of
sex or kindred; which the Canon and Council of Carthage, with S. Augustine,
meant only of civil punishment against heretics, to wit, that they could not
be made heirs to Ecclesiastical men. Thirdly he peruerteth in like manner S.
Hieromes intent, which was, that albeit he wished that heretics should be
punished also bodily, yet by order and form of law, and not that any one
should kill another, and much less by ^loudy massacres, as this fellow sets
it down in his marginall note. And lastly he presumes to pervert the very
words of God himself in the law, by translating, fundas sanguinem ipsorum,
spill their blood, in steed o^ shed their blood, as though God were a
bloud-spiller, or commanded the same to be done unjustly by others. But all is
^trayned by the Minister, to make us odious, whereas himsel^e indeed is thereby
made ridiculous. And thus far endured my former Charge.

The pretended Discharge.
80. To this impo^tant Charge, let us see now how M. Morton ^^ameth his
discharge: for it ^ay be presumed, that if he had not been ab^e to do the same
sufficiently in his own conceit, he would not have made choice of defending
this before so many others as he has let pass without answer. First then,
you must know, that here again he refers us to his friend M. Stock, to
help him out, which he does so miserably, as it is pitiful to see in what
plight they both are. For that M. Stock, though ^e confess that he lent him
this place also out of the Glos^e, yet he will not take upon him to iusti^y any
thing the^in, but only the citation to be true which notwithstanding he cannot
perform, as presently shall be showed:) but as for the corruptions and
falsi^ications used about the same, he leaves them all to M. Morton to shift
with them as he can. The Comedy b^twene M. Mo^to^ and M. Stock.
And in truth it is a very Comedy to see, how they deal together. For first
you must imagine M. Morton to enter on the scaf^old, and there being charged
with this imputation of so many falsityes, as now you have heard, first looks
round about him who will come forth to help him therein: and then seeing no body
appear says thus: To the allegatio^ o^ thi^ place of Gratian, Ric. Stock
does owe you an answer. And so goes of the scaffold again, leaving the other
to play his part, who coming up, prosecuteth the matter thus.

81. This second place also I brought (says R. Stock) unto T. Morton, Preamb.
pa. 107.
the whole being no otherwise distractedly quoted then the Gloss, whence I had
it, warranted by me: so that if P. R. reprove me, he must check his Glossary:
for when the Gloss had set down the first part, he quoted for the later,
Causa 23. q. 8. cap. Legi. etc. And this being said, he presently recoyleth,
and leaves the stage for M. Morton again to make the Epilogue, and end the
Comedy. But we must call him back again, for the glos^e cited by him does not
warrant this citation, to wit, apud Gratianum Glossae in decret. lib. 5. ex
Decret. Grego^ij 9. cause. 23. q. 8. cap. Legi. for it had bin ridiculous that
this Gloss here cited upon the 5. of the Decretals of Pope Gregory, should
have been found cited in Gratian, as the Collectour of these Decretals of
Gregory the ninth, for so much as the said Gratian was dead many years before
this Pope Gregory the 9. was made Pope, which was upon the year 1227. as in
the beginning of the said Decretals is set down: and Gratian collected his
Decrees seauenty and six years before, Vide Posse^in in ^iblioth. verbo
Gratianus.
to wit, 1151. So as M. Morton in his first two books, the Discovery, and full
Satisfaction, citing the sentence, Haeretici filij vel con^anguinei non
dicuntur, quoteth the place thus, apud Gratian. Glossa in Decret. lib. 5. ex
decreto Gregorij noni, did miste first in saving apud Gratianum Glossa, for
that the Gloss cyted is not upon Gr^ti^n, but upon the Dec^etals of Gregory,
and the Author thereof is Be^nardus de Bottono. Secondly it is not in Decretis
gathered by Gratian, but upon the Decretals of Pope Gregory, gathered by Saint
Raimondus Bar^inon^^sis almost a hundred years after Gratian, as has been
said.

82. Wherefore, though before I said to M Morton, that this ^ault of distracted
quotation were easily pardonable, if he used no greater fraud in the thing it
self, for that it was likely he read not the books which he cyted (and he
thanketh me heartily for it, M. Morto^ more pardonable then M. Stock.
as now you have heard, as for a dram of sugar ^alling seasonably upon him out
of a pound of worme-wood, that had gone before:) yet I cannot so easily pardon
it in M. Stock, who will confess nothing, nor imitate M. Morton in his
humility, but will needs stand to his former error, and redouble it by a new
out-facing that he quoted the place no otherwise then the Gloss had warranted:
which is manifestly false. For albeit the Gloss did cite the later part well
out of Gratian, to wit causa 23. q. 8. cap. Legi. which I reprehended not: yet
the former part, to wit, Apud Gratian. Glossa in decret. lib. 5. ex decret.
Greg. 9. can never be defended or justified. And so M. Stock, though he took
but little upon him for defense of M. Morton which was to defend only the bare
quotations: yet has he not performed so much as he promised, but left his
Client more entangled then before. For now the error is not only of ignorance,
as before, but made malicious also by this extrauagant defense. Let us hear
how M. Morton will satisfy the rest. He begins his defense in these words,
after M. Sto^ke is departed of the stage.

83. So has M. Stock satisfied (says he) for ^i^ all^gation: It remains
that I likewise iusti^y both my collection and ^ranslation. Whereto may be
answered, that if you do justify no better the^ he has done, you will prove
both of you just men alike. And first of all it is ridiculous in you, that
being charged with so many grave matters of shifts and falsi^ications, as are
set down in the precedent charge, which you have related most brokenly and
corruptly, leaving out many chief parts thereof to hide them from the sight of
your Reader; you run to a certain Dilemma, set down in your margent, and
say, that you will take me up upon a Logical rack, Deutr. 31.
demanding me whether the Canon of murdering kindred (which words are taken
out of Deutronomy, and applied by S. Hierome against the heretic Vigilantius)
if they should be applied to Protestants, whether I would hold it for a
Massacre or for Catholic justice. For if I answer the one, then am I a
Traitor, if the other, then am I against the Cano^. M. Mort. fond Dilemma.
Whereto I answer, that the demand is foolish, and not worthy the answering at
all: for that the like odious demandes may be made about the execution of all
criminal laws. And it is a token that M. Morton is at a Nonplus, when he
seeks to intertayne time in these impertinences. Why does he not answer
directly to some of the main charges laid against himself before: as first,
the manifest corruption S. Hieromes fundas sangui^nem ipsoru^ etc spill their
bloud^ instead o^ shed their blood, as though that God were a bloud-spiller,
and commanded the same to be done unjustly by others: for that spilling of
blood is commonly understood in the worst sense. And this translation is seemed
to be used by him, rather then the other to make the very words of Deutronom^
odious, as they lie in the Popes Canon taken out of S. Hierome.

84. But now he pretermitting all the other three points, takes upon him only
to write some few lines in defense of this fourth and last point about spilling
of blood, Whether spilling and shedding of blood be all one.
going about to show out of diverse places of the Rhemish Translation of the new
Testament, that not only spilling of blood, but shedding of blood also is
sometimes taken in ill part, as Romans 3.15. Their feet are swift to shed blood:
and aga^ne Apoc. 16. They have shed the blood of Saints, and other such places,
where shedding of blood is understood vn^u^^ shedding, or spilling of blood:
which I deny not, but that oftentynes shedding of blood may be taken for
spilling of blood: but yet this difference you shall find, if I be not
deceived, that spilling is always taken in the evil part, and shedding
somtymes in one, and sometimes in the other, as k^lling and murdering for
example, killing may be applied both to good and bad, just and unjust slaying,
but murdering can never be taken in good part. And so M. Morton, if passion
against the Popes Canon had not let him, would never have translated the
words of God sundere sanguine^, to spill blood, which always is taken in the
worst sense, but rather shedd blood, that may have a good sense. And against
this distinction, and observation, let M. Morton allege me but three
examples, where spilling of blood is taken in good sense for law^ull shedding
of blood, and I will say he has done some what. And for so much as he has not
been able to do it here, where most it imported him, and where he most
endeavored to seek out some one example for the purpose, the discreet Reader
will easily consider of his passionate speech and conclusion in this place,
which is this: Now then (says he) what a notable Critike have I met withal,
Preamb. page 108.
whom every good wise is able to convince of idle dotage, the vulgar use of
speech being, tha^ drink is spilt, and drink is shedd: this is the man
privileged to send me to the University to make a syllogism, whom I may more
justly send to an Alehouse to learn English. So far M. Morton in his
choler. And now all this (as you see) requires no answer, but compassion
rather toward the party, so pitifully put out of tune by the weakness of his
cause, as he is forced to draw us to an Alehouse for ending thereof. But let
him prove by any of his Ale-wiues, that spilling of good ale is taken in good
^ense, to wit, that it is well spilt, and then he proves somewhat out of his
Alehouse, where I p^rswade me that he shall find few good drinkers, that will
be of his opinion.

85. Finally then he concludes his defense in these words: The last point
(says he) which is observed in our Mitigator, is, that he a^fi^meth this Canon
to have been de^reed in the third Councel^ o^ Carthage, where no such thing can
be ^ound: ther^ore must his o^ne ^^^mes of falsehood, fraud, treachery,
reue^b^rate upon himself. Thus he. And truly I cannot but marvel greatly
what he means to deny matters so resolutly, that are so apparent as this is,
and may inuincibly be proved against him. For first the Canon it self that
b^ginneth: Si quis Episcopus etc. If any Bishop do institute heretics for his
heirs etc. is cited by the Collector of the Decretals ex Concilio Africano, out
of the Council of Afrike, whereby some do understand to be meant the said ^.
Counsel of Carthage, as held in Afri^ke: but the note in the margent upon the
Cano^ it self does expressly refer the reader to the said third Council of
Carthage, and 13. Chapter, and to the testimony of Theodorus Balsamon a Greek
writer in his Collections upon the Council of Carth^ge, and 25. Chapter.

86. But what need more testimonies when the thing is clearly extant in the
Council of Carthage it self, A shameful denying of a Canon in the third
Council of Carthage.
where it is written in the 13. Canon, Vt Episcopi vel Clerici etc. that
neither Bishops nor Clergy me^ shall bestow any of their goods upon any that
be not Catholick^ly Christian, though they be their kinsfolks. And the
Council of Hippo where S. Austen was Bishop, which Council professes to make
Abbreuiationes Concilij Carthaginensis tertij, an abridgment of the third
Carthage Council, has this Canon: That Bishops and Clergy men shall bestow
nothing of their goods upon any, but such as are Catholics. So as for M.
Mort. to deny this matter now, and to say boldly that there is no such thing
found, ye^ t^ t^^ne it over again to me as falsehood, fraud, and t^each^^y, I
know not in what account of speech or proceeding it may be reckoned; but only
that the necessity of intertaining his Reader forced him to say somewhat, though
never so false or far from the purpose, yea void of modesty and shame, as now
you have seen, in denying that, which his own eyes must needs testify against
him. But let this pass with the rest.

THE SEVENTH Imputation of falsehood pretended to be answered by M. Morton..
VII.
M. Morton protested that he had not chosen out those imputatio^s which were
most easy to be answered, About the Extrauagant for the Gloss
but such rather, as his Adversary did most insist and insult upon. Now he
lays further forth against me, that I do charge him with falsehood about
alleging an Extrauagant of the Pope instead of a Gloss, and that after my
whole charge given, I do insult in these words: Thus much ^or his variety o^
corruptions in this little sentence. To which I answer, that this is no great
insuitatio^, if the particulers of the Charge given be considered. For thus it
stands in my book of Mitigation.

The Charge.
88. To pass no further ( said I) in this second point of arguments, Mit. p.
173. and 174.
under the n^w Testament, we shall say a word or two only of the third, to wit
of proofs affirmed to be deduced by us from force of reason, for so M. Morton
intituleth them, to wit, Popish Arguments from Reason. And to the end you may
see his talent therein, we shall examine only the third reason in this place,
which he declares in these words: Except (says the Romish pretense) there
were a way of deposing Apostata Princes, God had not provided sufficiently ^or
his Church. And for this he cites the Constitution Extrauagant of Pope
Boni^acius, and says, this objection is in your Extrauagants, and so it may be
called, because it rangeth extra, that is without the bounds of Gods Ordinance
etc. Disco p. 34 Extrauag. co^munium de Maior^ and Obedie^tia.. Vna^ sanctam.
But as in all his other citations generally he is never lightly true, and
sincere in all points, no not thrice (I think verily) throughout all this
lying Book of his: so neither here. And it would require a great volume alone
to examine only some part of his leaves about this point of his shifts and
corruptions, they are so many, and thick, and craftily hudled up together. As
for example here, first this sentence is not in the Popes Extrauagant at all,
but only in a certain addition to the ordinary Gloss, or Commentary of John
Picard, Extrauagant of Bonifa. 8. falsely alleged.
which addition was made by Petrus Bertrandus a late writer. Secondly this
Commentary says nothing of deposing Apostata Princes, but only affirming the
foresaid opinion of Canonists to be true, that Christ was Lord absolutely in
this life over all, not only in spiritual authority, but in temporal also, he
infers thereby, Christ should not have sufficiently provided for the
government of his Church, and Kingdom upon earth, Nisi vnicum post se talem
Vicarium reliquisset, qui haec omnia posset, except he had left some such one
Substitute or Vicar after him, as should be able to perform all these things,
Addit. ad ^om. extrauag. de maiorit. in c. 1. ad finem.
to wit, as belong both to spiritual and temporal power, according as
necessity shall require, which later clause you see, that T.M. cut of, as he
added the other about Apostata Princes. And thus much for his variety of
corruptions in this little sentence.

The pretended discharge.
89. We see the points of iugglings here objected, let us also see how
sincerly they will be now answered by M. Morton in this his last Reply. First
he said in his Book of Full Satisfaction, that the sentence by him proposed,
was in the Popes Extrauagants, or Extrauagant Constitutions: now it is showed
that they are not found in any Extrauagant Constitution at all, but only in a
certain addition of one Petrus Bertrandus a late writer upon the Gloss or
Commentary what answers he to this? For cityng (says he) the Extrauagants of
the Pope, Preamb. p. ^10.
an ingenious Reader would have understood a figure called Synecdoche, where
the part is put for the whole: as when we say, This man shall not come under my
roof, meaning by roof, which is ^ut a part of the house, the whole house i^
self: so here by Extrauaga^t might have been meant the whole body of their
Constitutions, which contain both Extrauaga^ts and Glosses etc.

90. This is the first part of his answer, that we must understand him by a
figure, A ridiculous answer by a figure.
Pars pro toto, as if a man should say in divinity, the Scripture has this or
that, because some that write Commentaryes or Annotations upon it have it: so
as all Commentaryes must be held for Scriptures. And the like in Philosophy,
Aristotle may be affirmed to say this or that, for that some of his Expositours
do say the same. Were not this a substantial kind of arguing ou^ of the
figure Synecdoche, which is Pars pro toto, a part for the whole? Will not M.
Morton be ashamed of this shift, and blush at the consequence? But indeed here
is not so much as any Synecdoche, or such figure at all, but only the figure of
plain lying. For neither are the Extrauagant Constitutions of Popes, parts of
the ^losses, nor the Glosses are parts of the Constitutions, and much less may
Additions or Annotatio^s be accounted any parts at all of the same: So as
here M. Morton cannot be defended or excused by his Synecdoche in cyting an
Annotation for an Extrauagant Decree, or Papal Co^stitution. And this is his
first shift: let us see his second.

91. The second is not so fine, but much more soul and ^raudulent, or rather
shameless, which he delivers in these words, thereby to prove that Glosses and
Annotations are not only parts of the Popes Constitutions, but of the very
same Authority and validity with them: a strange desperate assertion, if you
consider it well. But how will he prove it think you? Let us hear his words
and reason.

92. Pope Gregory the 13. (says he) has ratifyed the foresaid Gloss and
Annotatio^s, Preamb. p. 111.
with privilege and authority equivalent and answerable to the anthority o^
the Decretals and Ex^rauagants themselves. Whereof he infers, that whether a
man do cite Decretals, Extrauaga^ts, Glosses, and Annotations, all is one, for
that all have equivalent authority. And will any man of sense believe this to
be true? It is incredible. And how then does he avouch it? Or what reason can
he allege for it? You shall hear his manner of proof how substantial it
is. First then you must know that Pope Gregory the 13. in these our days being
demanded license to print the Cano^ ^aw a new, A notorious and se^sles
falsification of Pope Gregory the 13.
prefixed an Epistle before the Decretals of Gratian with this title, Ad
suturam rei memoriam, wherein he gives license to Paulus Constabilis Magister
Sacri Palatij to reuiew the same, and to the Printers to print it exactly
according to the Roman example, saying among other things thereupon: Vt hoc
Iuris Canonici Corpus fideliter and incorrupte, iuxta exemplar Romae impr^ssum,
imprimi possit, that this Corpse of the Canon law may be faithfully, and without
corruption printed, according to the Copy set forth at Rome: whereof M. Morton
will needs infer, that for so much as Pope Gregory did ordain, that all the
whole Corpse of the Canon law should be printed together, according to the
Roman Copy, as well of Constitutions, Decrees, Extrauagants, Glosses,
Annotations, and the rest, he made them all equal, and of the same and equal
authority, for so run his words: Pope G^egory the 13. (says he) has
ratifyed the foresaid Gloss and Annotations with privilege and authority
equivalent and answerable to the autho^ity of the Decretals and Extrauagants
themselves.

93. And what man in the world in his right wits, besides M. Morton, would
have had the face to allege this License of printing, for an equalling the
credit and authority of all the things printed? Can there any match be found to
this? Tell me I pray you, when king Henry the eight did allow at the beginning,
and gave priuiledg for printing the great English Bible with Tindals notes
(which afterward he called in again and censured for heretical, did he thereby
make these notes of Tindall of equal Authority with the Scripture it self? Or
if Queen Elizabeth did approve the printing of the English new Testament with
Beza his notes, did she thereby equal the said Notes with the text of the
Testament it self? Who would reason so, or who would go about so to abuse his
Reader, and himself, that had care of conscience or credit? Can these frauds
be committed but of deliberation and set purpose? Surely if any one such trick
should be brought and proved against any writer of ours, it were enough to
shame him for ever. Let any man read the said Breue of Gregory the 13. and he
will say, that these men are driven to great extremities, when they are forced
to lay hands upon such base and bare thiftes.

94. But let us see how he shifteth of the last two charges of adding to the
beginning, and cutting from the end of the sentence alleged out of the
Gloss. He says to the first, that albeit the words Apostat^ Princes be not
in the text of the Gloss, Extrauag. Co^mun. l. 1. de maiorit. and Obed. cap.
1. ad finem.
totidem verbis, that is in precise words (nor indeed are they found at all:)
yet may the matter handled in that Gloss be extended unto them, and to their
deposition, for so much as in that gloss is disputed the Popes authority in
general over temporal Princes: which is far fetched as you see, to be set
down by him in a different letter, as the very words not only of the Gloss,
but also of the Canon or Extrauagant it self. And as for the second clause
which is the cutting of the last words of the sentence, Nisi vnicum post se
talem Vicarium reliquisset etc. he answers thus: What needed any addition of
that which was sufficiently expressed in my Adversaries objection? But Sir, we
require no addition by you, but why did you cut of these last words of the
sentence that immediately followed in the Gloss, and made so much for
explication of his meaning? What need these niblings, strechings, and other
such shifts in so small sentences (as now we are to see also in the next
imputation) but only that the misery and necessity of your cause cannot else be
defended? For that otherwise it may be supposed, that you are not so delighted
in falsehood, as to use it so often, without vtility or necessity: yea more or
les^e in every least sentence lightly, that is alleged, as now the Reader
shall see in another that ensues. In the mean space it is evident, that you
are so far of from being able to deliver your self from the Charge and
imputation of falsehood in this place objected, as you have incurred new, and
that most notorious in slaundering Pope Gregory the 13. to have equalled
Glosses and Annotations with Extrauagants and Canonical Decrees, which never
passed through his cogitations. And the mistaking is not only ridiculous, but
also malicious, to discredit thereby Pope Gregory, as by it self is most evident.

THE EIGHT Imputation of falsehood pretended to be answered by T. M.. VIII.
M. Morton in a little sentence alleged by him out of Cardinal Bellarmine,
About the h^^^^^e of Autoth^isme objected to Calvin and the corruption of
Bellarmines words th^rin.
which though it conteyne scarce two or three lines: yet has it two or three
corruptions therein, so set down, as could not by any probability be of
oversight or error, but of set purpose for helping of a bad cause. I handled
this matter somewhat before in the precedent Chapter, but M. Morton ^or want of
new store, draws it here in again. The controversy arose about a certain
speech brought in by M. Morton of Calvin and Beza, how they were accused by F.
Campian, Genebrard, and other Catholic writers, for holding the heresy of the
Autotheans, who deny Christ to be God of God^ and Light of Light, as the
Council of Nice teaches us to speak, but that he is God of himself: which
doctrine notwithstanding M. Morton said, that Cardinal Bellarmine holds for
Catholicall, and consequently he both delivers Calvin and Beza from
imputation of heresy therein, and is contrary to his fellows, who of ignorance
or passion ascribed this for heresy to Calvin and Beza; wherein M. Morton goes
about by Equivocation to beguile his Reader. For albeit Bellarmine does teach
that in some sense it may be truly said, that Christ is God of himself: yet
absolutely does he condemn the speech of Calvin for heretical therein, and he
proves it by many arguments, which point M. Morton concealed, and besides
craftily corrupted the words alleged out of Bellarmine, as presently will be
seen. For thus my former Charge was made after the recital both of M. Morton
and Cardinal Bellarmines words at large.

The Charge.
96. But now ( said I) as well Calvin and Beza (as Mitig. p. 230.
also M. Willet and Doctor Fulke their Scholars) in a particular sense (says
our Minister) do deny Christ to be God of God, to wit, that the Essence of his
Godhead has no generation, though as he is Son, and the second person in
Trinity, he is by generation from his Father: Bellarm. words fraudule^^ly
alleged.
which doctrine he says our Bellarmine does hold for Catholicall, whose words
he alleges in the margent thus: Dum rem ipsam excutio, non facile audeo
pronuncia^e ill^s in errore fuisse, while I do examine well the thing it self,
I date not presume to pronounce them to have been in error, to wit, Calvin and
Beza: whereas Bellarmines words are, dum rem ipsam excuti^, and Caluini
sententi^s diligent^^ consider^, non facile audeo pronunciare illum in hoc
errore fuisse^ while I examine the matter it self, and diligently consider
Caluins opinions, I do not easily presume to pronounce him to have bin in this
error, to wit, in the particular error, or heresy of the Autotheans, set
down and confuted by Genebrard, and in his sense condemned expressly by the
ancient Catholic Church, for denying Christ to be, and to have his Essence
from the Father: but yet though in some sense it seems to Bellarmine, that
Calvin may be excused in this private and particular meaning of his, yet not
absolutely as T. M. would m^ke his Reader to think, by striking out cu^ningly
the particle hoc (this error) and leaving the word (error) in common, as
though Bellarmine had excused him from all kind of error, which is most false,
for that presently after, he both impugneth of purpose and confuteth by many
arguments his manner of speech, as heretical in this behalf.

97. Restat (says he) vt modum loquendi Calumi, qui dicit Filium a se habere
essentiam, simpliciter esse repudiandum, and contrario modo loquendum esse
demonstremus etc. It remains that we do demonstrate Caluins manner of speech,
Caluins manner of speech condemned by Bellarmine.
that says the Son to have his essence of himself, is simply to be
rejected, and that we must speak in a quite contrary manner, to wit, that the
Son has not only his person, but essence also from the Father, and so is God
of God, and light of light, as the Council of Nice declared: and this he
proves Quia pugnat cum Verbo Dei, Caluins manner of speech is opposite to the
word of God etc. Pugnat secundo cum Concilijs, and secondly it is repugnant to
the manner of speech of ancient Nicene and others. Pugnat tertio thirdly it is
contrary to the doctrine of the old Fathers. Fourthly it agrees with the
speech of the old Arians: and other such proofs, which Bellarmine does
prosecute at large, co^firming each one of these members by diverse examples and
instances, and that Calvin spoke heretically in favor of the Arians in this
behalf.

98. So as the cosenage here of striking out (hoc) out of Bellarmines words,
making him to say, non audeo pronuntiare illos in errore ^uisse, instead of
illum in hoc errore fuisse, though it be small in sound of words, yet in
substance it is much. For that thereby Thomas Morton would make his reader
believe that Bellarmine clears Calvin and Beza from all sorts of error in
this point, and for that propose turns illum into illos, and hoc errore, into
errore, that is to say, him into them, and this error, into any error at all:
whereas Bellarmine though in one sense he excuse him, yet absolutely does he
condemn him, as you have heard. And no man can deny, but that his latin words
were here fraudulently and per^idiously alleged, and mangled by Thomas
Morto^, for that he could not do it but wittingly and of purpose: and yet
forsooth this man will not equivocate as he says for a world, though lie he
will manifestly for much less as you see. Thus wrote I then.

The pretended Discharge.
99. For answer to this Charge M. Morton says three things. First, that for a
sign of his sincere meaning, and that he had not any such devilish disposition
to cosen his Reader, Poor and weak answers.
as is pretended, he alleges that he left the latin sentence of Bellarmine
untranslated: whereas if he had recited it also in English, he had laid as it
were a double nett to trap his Reader etc. But this is a poor excuse: For he
that shall read the contexture and thread of his text in that place, shall see
that he could not conveniently bring in the sentence of Bellarmine Englished,
but it was enough to cite the latin words for the more learned, and deceive
the vulgar Reader with the false assertion, that Bellarmine held the doctrine
of Calvin and Beza for Catholic, without any mislike or reprehension at all.

100. Secondly for nibling of the word hoc, and citing errore, for hoc errore,
he says the fault was nothing, Preamb. p. 113.
for that all was one in Bellarmines speech. For proof whereof he runs to
diverse experiments of speech, as before to the Alehouse and Ale-wyues about
spilling and shedding ale: so here he takes example of his Hostess and of
eating at the table, affirming that if one should say, of two sorts of bread
used at table, give me the courser bread, and his servant should fetch him
hors-bread, ^or that he had not added ( hoc) that is to say, give me of this
sort of courser bread, and not hors-bread, for so much as it was so to be
understood of it self: so when the question was about a particular heresy of
the Autotheans, when Bellarmine delivered Calvin ( ab errore) it was as much to
say, as ab hoc errore, from this particular error. And the like he answers
about illos for illum, saying that for so much as Bellarmin does afterward in
the same place exuse one Simlerus a follower of Calvin for the same opinion o^
Calvin, he does consequently also excuse Beza: and so M. Morton might quote
illos for illum.

101. Thus he trifleth out matters ad excusanda^ excusationes in peccatis. And
what may not be defended or deluded in this sort? but let him answer directly
and substantially to this demand? M. Morto^ hardly pressed.
Why had not he (if he had meant plainly and sincerely) set down Bellarmines
words as he found them in his text? especially they being so few? Why did he
alter them? Was it by chance or of purpose? If by error he missed in the
citation, why happened it upon those things that were all to his advantage? To
wit, the leaving out of ( hoc) thereby to make it seem that Bellarmine cleared
Calvin of all error in that matter, wherein he expressly condemned him quoad
modu^ loquendi, in his manner of speech, which he proves to be heretical by
four sorts of arguments, as now you have heard. Or why had not M. Morton so
much as mentioned this condemnation by Bellarmine, seeing it imported the matter
so mightily? If it were not by chance, but by industry and set purpose (though
it be but a word:) yet is it sufficient to argue the faulty mind of the
Corrupter. And in this sort might I argue in all the rest of other points, that
are perverted: It could not probably fall out (especially so often) by chance
or error, ergo of purpose, ergo of fraudulent meaning, and of desire to
deceive. And so much for this to prove in M. Morton mentem rea^, a guilty
mind, that according to S. Augustins judgment makes him mendacij reum, guilty
of wilful lying, though it be but in smaller things, where malice is more
the^ the matter it self.

102. Hitherto M. Morton has gone up and down, seeking and picking out the
weakest sort of imputatio^s laid against him^ whereunto he thought himself best
able to make some show of probable answer: wherein notwithstanding you have
seen how little he has been able to perform in any substance of truth, and
how in three or four of these eight aready proposed, he has been forced
either to confess, M. Mort. idle repetition of things before discussed.
that he saw not the Author which he cited, or to remit us to other men for
answering the falshoodes therein objected. And now he betaketh himself to
another shift, for making up a number of imputations, as satisfied by him (for
it seemed somewhat to touch his credit to answer fourteen imputations, which
was the number he objected against me, though he leave more then twice
fourteen unanswered) and this new shift is to repeat, and bring in again in
this place five several imputations treated both by him, and us before, and
some of them twice at least: and yet would he needs fetch them in the third
time, not for want of other laid against him, of much more force and difficulty
to be answered, but for that these being things of small moment, and lightly
objected for such by me, they do serve him to make a bulk of work, as though
he had dispatched much matter, and solued great difficultyes, whereas indeed
they are nothing but words, on his behalf, and ostentatio^ without substance.
Let us see then what they are.

THE NINTH Imputation twice handled before, and now again^ brought in by M.
Morton.. IX.
Isay the Prophet in the 29. Chapter and 9. verse, About a place of Isay 29.
where it is said in the common Latin translation of S. Hierome, Obstupescite
and admiramini, fluctuate and vacillate, inebriamini, and non a vino, mouemini,
and non ab ebrietate: See before cap. 1.. 5. and cap. 4.. 10
Be ye astonished and wonder, waver ye and reele, ye are drunk, but not with
wine, ye are moved but not with drunkenness: and conform to this are the
other texts also both in Hebrew and Greek. Which sentence M. Morton
translateth into English, Isay. 29.9.
and sets it forth for his poesy in the first page of his book in these
words: But stay your selves and wonder, they are blind and make you blind,
Mitig. p. 88.
applying it to our Catholic Doctors and doctrine: for which I noted him only
in the end of my second Chapter, for falsely alleging, corrupting, and mangling
this place: the Reader will se my reason by looking upon the text. And how
little he has been able to say for himself in justification of this his
fancy, may be seen in the two Chapters before mentioned. And so we pass to
another as trifling as this.

THE TENTH Imputation twyce also handled before, and now again brought in by
M. Morton.. X.
THIS also is a Colewort twice already sodden, and now brought in again the
third time, for Carerius the Paduan Doctor, About vere and vero in Carerius
whether it should be Nuperrime vere Celsus, or nuperrime vero Celsus, whereof I
spoke but a word or two in my Treatise of Mitigation, Mitigation p. 234.
censuring it for a trifle: and now M. Morton has so stretched out the matter,
for that he may seem to have some little patronage for his error by the later
error of another prynt, See before cap. 1.. 6. and cap. 4.. 10.
as having brought it in twice already in two several Chapters for an
ostentation of his manhood, he comes now again the third time with the same
thing, as you see, whereas my book might have lent him a great many of other
more real Charges, wherein his said manhood might better have been tried. But
he desired only to make a flourish.

THE ELEVENTH Imputation pretended to be answered, which is handled also
before.. XI.
M. Morton had affirmed that Doleman does pronounce sentence, About Dolman
falsely alleged.
That whosoever shall consent to the succession of a Protestant Prince, is a
most grievous and damnable sinner. Which sentence I do affirm in my Treatise
of Mitigation, that it is neither in words nor in sense to be found in
Doleman, See cap. 1.. 7.
which I do prove by producing his whole text that has no such words, though
M. Mo^ton has set them down in a different letter, Mitigat. p. 72.
as Dolemans prope^ words. Nor are they there in true sense, as more
prejudicial to Protestants, then to men of other religion: for that the
discourse is general for all sorts of men of what Religion or sect soever,
that they do sin grievously, if willingly they do concur to the making of
a King, whom they think in their conscience to be contrary to Gods true
religion? Where M. Morto^ (saying nothing to the substance of the matter it
self) indeuoureth to show, that as a man may sometimes allege the sense of
Scriptures only, and not the very words, Impertine^t ^itations.
citing for the same diverse examples, as Ephesians. 5.14. Heb. 1. 1. Heb. 3.5. Act.
10.43. and so might he allege the sense of Doleman though he varied from his
words. But I deny, that either the true words, or true sense of Doleman was
related by him, and consequently, it cannot be excused from a witting falsehood.
See this matter handled before Cap. 1.. 7.

THE TWELVTH Imputation handled before Chap. 1. and pretended now again to be
answered.. XII.
THIS Imputation was about false dealing on M. Mortons behalf, About the
succession of Protestant P^inces
in setting down a general as^ertion, that all Popish Priests upon the
pretended supremacy and prerogatiu^ of Pope and People (over Princes) do
utterly abolish the title of succession in all Protestant Prin^es. Wherein he is
convinced of diverse falsehoods, handled before by us in the first Chapter of
this Treatise, Mitig. p. 72. full satisfact. part. 1. c. 13. p. 9.
where we have showed evidently, that he cannot defend his position, but with
multiplying more fal^ityes one upon another, for view whereof I remitt the
Reader to the place quoted: for so much, as M. Morton in this last Reply
writes only five lines thereof in this place, Preamb. p. 116.
remitting us in like manner to that which before has been handled.

THE THIRTEENTH Imputation handled also before, and now brought in again by M.
Morton.. XIII.
IT is a great argument of M. Mortons penury that About Otho Frisingensis
peruerted^
thereby to make some show of answering to somewhat, though in truth it be
nothing in effect: for that he dissembling above 30. weighty and maine Charges
given him by his Adversary, as will appear in the next Chapter, he seeks to
intertaine his Reader here with smaller matters, twice or thrice repeated. And
now this thirteenth Imputation, if you remember, was about alleging the
authority of the Historiographer Otto Frisingensis, against the cause of Pope
Gregory the seventh, in favor of the Emperor Henry the fourth, quite
contrary to the words and meaning of the said Historiographer, who defends
the cause of the said Pope, speaking much good of his life and virtue. And M.
Mort. is so far of from being able to quit himself from false dealing in this
behalf, as he is forced partly to lay the fault upon others, as upon Doctor
Tolo^anus, partly to abuse the name and testimony of Claudius Espencaeus, and
make him to say and auerre that which he does not, but relates out of others:
And in no one Imputation hitherto touched was he more graueled then in this, as
the Reader may see by turning to the place it self. So as it is strange that M.
Morton will bring in this again, Supra c. 1. (...). 8^. and 103. and cap. 4..
10
but only to make up a number, and yet leave out so great store of other of
far greater importance as has been said. But now leaving this, let us peruse
another defense of his, which he has chose^ to make, as the last prize of his
maistery in this behalf: and it being reserved by him for the last place, we
may imagine, it will be a good one.

THE FOVRTEENTH and last Imputation of falsehood pretended by M. Morton to be
triumphantly answered.. XIIII.
FOR the last place and vpshot of this Combat, M. Morton has made choice of an
Imputation which he pretends not only with great advantage to be able to
repel and shake of from himself, but to retort the same in like manner upon
his adversary, and About La^mbertus Scafnaburg. perverted.
and deuideth his answer both into a several preface and four distinct heads
or paragraphs, promising in the one to show the falsity of this objected
Imputatio^: in the second the foolishnes: in the third the vn^ortunatnes: in
the ^ourth the blasphemy. And surely if he can, not only clear himself from
the imputation, but prove also these four points against me for obiecting the
same, or any one of them (which is more liberality then he dema^deth) I will
say that he has showed manhood indeed in this last attempt, to recompense the
Childhood we have found in all the rest.

109. But yet before we pass to the particular trial, I must needs tell him
friendly, that this adue^trous anymosity of his is not allwaies either
co^me^dable or fortunate, as we shall show in our eight Chapter, where we shall
be forced to treat somewhat of his confident and audacious o^fers and
protestatio^s. And for that he terms the Charge made by me of this imputation
an Inditeme^t, I shall use the same Metaphor in this my Answer and aduertisme^t
unto him, which is that I have heard of sundry in England, who being called
into suspicion about criminal imputations, M. Morto^s fond animosity, whereo^
see afterward c. ^.
and bound over only upon slight bands to appear at the next Assizes, have
upon like animosity, and to daunt the adversary with voluntary appearing and
defending their own cause, remained condemned, and executed, notwithstanding
their indiscreet courage in presenting themselves at the bar, when it needed
not, and sometimes perhaps the sooner, for that they showed thereby so little
respect to the Sea^ of Judgment, as to think themselves able to delude the
same: And eue^ so fares it in our case, M. Mort. having seen the parts of his
inditeme^t, as himself calls it, and pondered (no doubt) of what weight they
are, would, notwithstanding, needs call the matter into question again before
a new ^ury and have al particulers r^^i^wed, and more exactly looked into,
whereas the thing might have bi^ passed over with silence, or at least with
les^e publicity, if himself had not provoked the contrary.

110. Well then for so much as he will needs have i^ so, let us bring forth
our Charge set down in the Trea^ise of Mitigation, which he call^th an
Indi^emen^, the subject whereof is about egregious false dealing, in alleging
the authority of the Germa^ historiographer Lambertus Scafnaburg. against Pope
Gregory the 7. whom Lambertus does highly commend, even as the same M. More.
had done before in alleging Otto Frisingensis; but yet with more audacity, for
that he would seem to excuse the other fact, by laying the fault upon Doctor
Tolosanus as you have heard. But here he does not only not lay it upon
another, nor excuse the fact, nor acknowledge any error or over sight, but
auerreth both falsity, ^olly, infelicity and blasphemy to be in the
imputation. Let us come the^ to the discussion of the whole. My former words
were these.

The Charge.
111. But the next fraud (after that of misalleaging Fri^ingensis) or
impudency, or rather impudent impiety (said I) is that which ensues within
four lines after in these words: Pope Gregory the 7. (says your
Chronographer) was excommunicate of the Bishops of Italy, for that he had
defamed the Apostolic Sea by Symony and other capital crimes. ^iti^. p. 215.
nu^. 37.
And then cyteth for proof hereof Lambertus Schasnaburg. Anno 1077. As if this
our Chronographer had related this as a thing of truth against the said Pope,
or that it were approved by him, and not rather as a slanderous objection cast
out by his adversaries that followed the part of Henry the Emperor. Let any
man read the place and year here c^ted, and if he be a modest man, he will
blush at such shameless dealing. For that no Author of that time does more
earnestly defend the cause and virtuous life of Pope Hildebrand, the^ this man,
whose words are: Lamb. Schafnab. in histor. Germaniae, ann. 1077. sub fine^.
Sed apud omnes sanum aliquid sapientes luce clarius constabat falsa esse quae
dicebantur: Nam and Papa tam eximie tamque Apostoli^e vi^am instituebat etc.
But with all men of sound wisdom, it was more clear then the sun, that the
things which were spoken against Pope Hildebrand were false; for that the Pope
did lead such an excellent and Apostolical life, as the sublimity of his
conversation did admit no least spot of wicked rumor against him, he living in
that great City and open concourse of men, it could not have been hidden, if he
had committed any unlawful thing in his life. And moreover, the signs and
miracles which by his prayers were often times done, and his most fervent zeal
for God in defen^e of Ecclesiastical laws, did sufficiently defend him
against the poisoned tongues of his detractours. And again: Hildebrandi
consta^tia et inuictus aduersus auaritia^ animus omnia excludebat argumenta
humanae ^allaciae. The constancy of Pope Hildebrand and his invincible mind
against the corruption of avarice, did exclude all arguments of humane fallacy
and deceit. So Lambertus.

112. And now let the Reader consider, with what conscience and fidelity T. M.
has cyted him for co^demnatio^ of Pope Hildebra^d. He relates indeed, what
certain Noblemen, Captains and others that came with the Emperor to the
Cas^le of Canusium, The submission of the Emperor Henry the fourth to Pope
Hildebra^d at Canusiu^.
and would not have had him made peace with the Pope in that place, said in
their rage afterward, for that against their Counsel he had submitted himself
unto the said Pope. And when a certain Bishop named Eppo was sent to their
Camp by the Pope and Emperor to inform them of the agreement and submission
made: Lambert. vbi supra.
Fremere omnes (says this Story) and seuire verbis and manibus coeperunt,
Apostolicae legatio^i irrisorijs exclamat^onibus ^bstrepere, conuitia and
maledicta turpissima q^aec^mque f^^or sugg^ssisset irrogare. All of them began
to fret and wax ^ierce, both in words and casting their hands, and with
scornful outcries to contradict this Apostolical legation sent unto them, and
to cast upon the Pope all the most foul reproaches and maledictions that fury
could suggest unto them. Thus says Lambertus: and then sets down the
particular slanderous reproaches here cyted by T.M. which he approves not,
but condemns as you have heard, and highly commends not only the virtue,
but sanctity also of the Pope. And will ever any man credit T.M. any more in
any thing that he alleges, when this co^scienceles falsification is once
discovered in him? yea though it were but once throughout his whole Book, it
were sufficient to prove that he deals not out of any faith or conscience at
all.

A comparison expressing the fraud of T. M.
113. If an enemy would discredit both Christ and Christian Religion, and say,
your own Evangelists do recount foul things against him (as here this
Minister says our historiographer does of Pope Gregory) and namely that he was
accused by the Scribes and Pharisees for casting out devils in the power of
Beelzebub, for deceauing the people, for denying tribute to be paid to Caesar,
for moving sedition, and other like crimes, which our Evangelists do recount
indeed, but do condemn them also as false and calumnious: were not this as
good and faithful a manner of reasoning, as this other of Thomas Morton out of
Lambertus and Fri^ingensis against pope Hildebrand, who is by the^ both most
highly commended, as you have heard, and his adversaries condemned? Truly, if
any man can show me out of all the Catholic writers that be extant, English
or other, that ever any one of them used this shameful fraud in writing, where
no excuse can free them from malicious and witting falsehood, then will I grant
that it is not proper to the Protestant spirit alone. Hithert^ I must confess
that I never found it in any: and if I should, though it were but once, I
should hold it for a sufficient argument not to believe him ever after. And
this shall suffice for a taste only of M. Mortons manner of proceeding: for that
to prosecute all particulers would require a whole volume, and by these few you
may guess at the man's vein and spirit in writing. So I wrote then in my
Treatise of Mitigation.

The pretended Discharge.
114. To this Charge M. Mort. begins his Discharge thus: Preamb p. 119. and
120.
Thou see (Christian Reader) I have had patience to hear my Indictment
delivered unto the full, and suffered my Adversary without any interruption to
say so much in this accusation, as that by this time he may seem to h^^e run
himself out o^ breath etc. Now ther^ore I turn my self unto thee (good Reader)
as to my Judge, who may seem by this time to exact of me an answer, and of
whom I must desire and expect a just censure. Vouchsafe therefor (I pray
thee) an inten^iue examination, and I dare presume, thou will ackn^wledg this
accusation to be both so false, and foolish, and unfortunate to his cause, and
indeed blasphemous, as though he had studied to be either ^aithl^s, or fond, or
unlucky, or impious etc. So M. Mort. And you see how passionate the man is in
these his speeches, and how needful it was for me to entitle this Answer A
quiet and sober Reckoning, for that otherwise we might have fallen from all
reckoning of reason and moderation. But to come to the matter, what says he to
the point it self of justifying his allegation of the vn^ruth of Lambertus
against Pope Gregory? You shall hear it deliuer^d by himself.

115. In the beginning (says he) I am charged with impudent impiety for citing
Lambert Schafnaburge to affirm that, Page 1^^^ M. Mortons narration out of
La^bert. about Pope Gregory's excommunication.
The Bishops of Italy did excommunicate Pope Gregory for capital crimes. But
why is this impudency? As if (says P. R.) this our Chronographer had related
this as a thing of truth, or that it were approved of him, and not rather as a
slanderous objection cast out by his Adversaries that followed the part of
Henry the Emperor etc. The point now in question is, whether this Author
Lambertus Schafnaburge was of this opinion? Which P. R. denies, calling my
assertion an impudent impiety. Let us be judged by the evidence of the Author
himself who in the place alleged has these words: Postquam per It^liam fama
percrebuisset etc. After that the fame was spread abroad throughout Italy that
K. Henry had set his foot in their coasts ( certatim omnes Italiae Episcopi
etc.) All the Bishops of Italy did flock by troops unto him, receiving him
with all honor worthy the magnificence of such a person, and within a few
days after, an army of an infinite multitude was gathered unto him: for from
the first time that he was King, the longed for his coming into Italy, because
at this time Italy was pestered with the every. And what else? It follows a
little after. Besides they (viz. the Bishops and people) did co^gratulate his
coming, because it was reported that he came with a resolute courage to depose
( Gregory) the Pope. Here we see it granted by Lambert, that all the Bishops
of Italy were desirous to have this Pope Gregory deposed. Thus far are M.
Mortons words.

116. But to begin with that which he last mentions of all the Bishops of
Italy, the word all is fraudulently urged by him, as you will see: so that
scarsly in any thing does he deal sincerely, for albeit these words be in
Lambertus, Certatim ad eum omnes Italiae Episcopi and Comi^es confluebant: All
Bishops and Earls of Italy did flock unto him, yet that they were only
certain Italian Bishops and Earls, that dwelt about the Alps is evident by
the narration it self. For the very next precedent words le^t out by M. Morton
are, Superatis asperrimis rupibus, iam in^ra Italiae fines consistere, certatim
ad eum omnes Italiae Episcopi. After that it was understood that the Emperor
had overcome the high rocks, and was within the borders of Italy, all the
Italian Bishops and Earls flocked unto him. And what sort of Bishops these
were, he expounds with in few l^nes after saying: Qui fe iampridem ab
^cclesiastica communione suspenderat: they hated Pope Gregory^ as him that had
suspended them from Ecclesiastical Communion. And again a little after, about
the cause of their suspension: Passimiactantibus Regis sa^^^ribus and pre^ipue
Cleri^is, quibus i^ici^a and con^ra s^ita Canonum cont^acta coniugia
prohibe^at. The Emperors ^auorers did cast abroad, especially Clergimen, unto
whom Pope Gregory had forbidden unlawful marriages, contracted against the
Decrees of the Canons, that he lived dissolutely etc.

117. These the^ are the Bishops of Italy whom he me^tioneth, to wit, some of
Lobardy that lived about the Alps and were of dissolute life and
excommunicated by Pope Gregory, What manner of Italia^ Bishops impugned Gregory
7.
who were the first that ran to the exommunicated Emperor, hoping, as the
said Lambert says, by his means, vt iniuriam suam idonee vindicarent, that
they should fitly be able to revenge by his power their injury received, as
they acompted it. And albeit in respect of the multitude of German Bishops, and
also of Burgu^di^ and other Countries that came with the Emperor, some for him
and some against him, Lambertus does call them Ital^s and Italiae Episcopos:
yet does h^ no^ mean that all the Bishops of Italy, nor yet all of the
Northward parts thereof (and much less of the Southern) were against Pope
Gregory, or favored the Emperor. For that expres^ely he shows that the
Countess Mathildes which was Lady of the most and greatest Sta^es bordering
upon those Countries of Lombardy was wholly with the Pope against the Emperor:
so as all those Italian Bishops (in which word M. Morton stands much) that
did make Conuenticles against Pope Gregory, were only those, and of that sort
which I have mentioned. And this did M. Morton craftily conceal, as his
fashion is though it lay in the very same lines, from whence he took the rest.

118. But this is not the chief question, that now we must handle, whether
these Bishops were all the Bishops of Italy or not (which no man will imagine,
that shall read the endeauours o^ S. Anselmus of Luca, and of many other holy
Bishops of Italy for the Pope:) but whether Lambertus did affirm or approve,
that those Schismatic Bishops did depose Pope Gregory or no^ For if he did
not te^tify both these points, ^^en was he no fit witness for M. Morton to
disgrace Pope Gregory withal, yet does he to avoid this illation propose the
matter otherwise in the^e words.

119. The point in question is (quoth he) whether this Author Lambertus did
think that those Bishops of Italy had condemned this Pope Gregory (for whether
they did it iusty or iniustly is the second question) for such crimes or no. I
have affirmed that Lambertus was of this opinion, but P. R. denies it. So he.

120. Whereto I answer, that this is not the point in question, whither
Lambertus did think, that they had exco^m^nicated him or no? Neither did we
ever join issue thereupon, as does appe^re in my charge before set down:
though Lamber^us is not found any where to affirm that they did excomunicate
him, but only rela^eth, that some of his enemies in their fury, rage, and
passion did object ^uch things against him: but the true question is, Whether
Lambertus supposing such a thing had been done, were of opinion, that it was
justly or iniustly, rightly or wrong^ully done, for otherwise he should
impertinently be brought in for the condemnation of Pope Gregory: for so much
as if he had bin wrongfully and injuriously so condemned, it would have bin
more for his praise, as by the examples of S. Athanas. S. Chrysostom. and other
holi^ men so condemned by multitudes of either bad or deceived Bishops, may
appear.

121. Wherefore we see M. Morton brought here into great straites, and forced
first to chang the whole state of the question: and then to say, that I did
deny that which I did not, and himself to affirm that thing which is neither
to the purpose, nor can be proved to be true. For neither did I deny that
Lambertus knew of such a condemnation, nor is M. Morton able out of him to
prove, that he knew it. And if it were, yet is it a very absurd and injurious
manner of proceeding, upon another man's relation only, without approbation or
liking the fame, to infame and condemn so great a man as P. Greg. was. Let us
set down the Case in true terms.

122. A Son complaining that his Father has been iniustly infamed, says,
that his enemies amongst other things did slanderously accuse him of murder,
stealth, adultery and the like, A case expressing the nature of M. Mortons
calumniation out of Lambertus.
but that all was false and done of hatred against him. Whereupon
notwithstanding some of them having no authority thereunto did deprive him of an
high office which he bare in the Comonwealth^ and his complaint remaining in
Record, some enemy of his house many years after, should alleadg these things
for true against him, and should cite the ^estimony o^ his own Sonn^ for
witness thereof, might not he be accounted for a notable bad fellow and malicious
calumniator, that would do this? M. Mort. Case is just the same toward P.
Greg. and Lambertus alleging the later for infaming the first: whereas he does
defend, praise and extol him. Can there be more wilful malice then this? But
let us examine yet further some words of his defense.

123. Besides this (says he) the said Bishops and people did congratulate the
Emperors coming, because it was reported that he came with a resolute courage
to depose (Gregory) the Pope. p. 120.
And the^ he infers thus. Here we see it granted by Lambertus that all the
Bishops of Italy were desirous to have this Pope Greg. deposed^ But we have
showed a little before what manner of Bishops those were. And now if M. Morton
would have dealt plainly, and without fraud (as scarce he does in any thing)
and have continued the words of Lambertus but a little further, as they ly in
his text, we should hau^ ^eene the causes of this their desire: for thus
L^^bertus writes. L^mb. vbi supra an. 1077.
Praeterea quia fama vulgauerat ad deponendum Papam ^er^cibus eum ^nimis
properare (which M. Morton translateth, with a resolute courage) admodum
gratulabantur oblatam sibi occasionem esse, qua in cum, qui se iampride^ ab
Ecclesi^ comm^^ione suspenderat etc. Moreover, ^or so much as the same was now
public, that the Emperor came hastening his journey with a ^yerce mind to
depose the Pope, they did greatly congratulate, that they had an occasion
offered, whereby they might fitly reueng their injury upon him, that had before
suspended them fr^ Ecclesiast. Communion. And by this you see the true case why
these delinquents were glad to see a potent enemy come to vex him that was
their lawful judge: was this any dispraise to him? but let us see yet further in
M. Mort. defense.

Preamb. p. 120. and 121.
124. After all this (says he) the Emperor goes to Rome, seeks absolution
of the Pope, returns back again, and the Bishop Eppo is sent after to
signify to the Italians this submission to the Pope. What now? Now follows
the testimony which was alleged: Qui cum causa^ Italis expofuisset etc. When
Eppo had told his message to the Italians, all of them began to rage and fret
etc. casting upon the Pope all opprobrious reproaches, whom all the Bishops of
Italy had before justly excommunicated, because by Symony he had defiled the
Sea Apostolic. Could this Cronologer but acknowledge that the Pope had been
excommunicated by the Bishops of Italy, who (as he confessed in the beginning)
did rejoice at the coming of the Emperor, because he came with a resolution
to depose the Pope?

125. To this now I have answered, that this is not the point in question,
whether this Cronologer acknowleged the Pope to have been excommunicated by so^e
schismatic Bishops of Italy or no: but whether he approved the same or no,
by alleging a cause: for so says M. Mortons first accusation in these words
before alleged: Pope Greg. the 7. (says La^bertus) was excommunicated of the
Bishops of Italy, The unfaithful dealing of T.M. in alleging La^bertus his
words.
for that he had defamed the Apostolic Sea by Symony, and other Capital
crimes. By which words it is evident that M. Mortons intent was to make his
Reader believe, that Lambertus knew there was such a deposition, and besides
reproved not the same, in that he alleged so grave a cause and motive thereof.
In both which points M. Morton does maliciously deceive his Reader: for neither
does Lambertus expressly affirm the thing it self, (that is to say, that he
was excommunicated by those bishops, but only that his passionate enemies in
their fury and rage said so:) neither did he any way approve or allow thereof,
but impug^e it. Neither does he assign this Reason (for that he had defamed
the Apostolic Sea by Simony) as M. Morton affirms, and after again in other
words, because by Simony he had defiled the Sea Apostolic. For making up of
which sense M. Morton corrupts again the text of Lambertus, putting in (
quia) for ( qui) so as ever he must help the die in somewhat. The words of
Lambertus may be seen a little before in our Charge, to wit: That those
seditious Italian people that were banded against the Pope, and grieved with
the peace made between the Emperor and him, did fret and wax fierce both in
words, and casting their hands, and with scornful outcries to contradict his
Apostolical legation sent unto them: and did cast upon the Pope all the most
foul reproaches and maledictions that fury could suggest unto them. Which
words for the most part M. Morton leaves out, as you may see in his English
citation, and he adioyneth, whom all the Bishops of Italy had before justly
excommunicate, because by Symony he had de^yled the Sea Apostolik. But the
words of La^bert are, Sese exco^municationem illius nihili aestimare etc. that
they did esteem nothing his excommunication, whom all the Bishops of Italy for
just cause had excommunicated, who had by violence obtained the Sea Apostolic
by the heresy of Simony, and had defiled the same by murders, adulteries, and
other Capital crimes. In which words we find nothing spoken against the Pope
on the part of La^bertus, or as approved by him, but utterly reproved as
proceeding from rage and fury of those schismatic people. And is this a good
witness? and secondly we find no causatiue for that, or because by Simony he had
defiled etc. uttered either on the part of La^bert, or of the Schismatikes, but
a thing made out of the malice of M. Morton, who turns Qui Sedem Apostolica^;
into Quia Sedem Apostolicam per Symonia^ etc. to make it seem to be a reason of
their deposing Pope Greg. whereas Lamb. does not recite it as a reason (which
allwais supposes some ground of truth) but only as a mere malicious
calu^niatio^, co^tumely, and reproach proceeding from men put in fury by
sudden coffeehouse and despair. And thus has M. Mort. delivered himself
in the first point from falsity according to his fashion, in adding more
falsityes to the former. Let us see his second point which he terms the
foolishnes and so^tishnes of his Accuser.

About the folly objected to P. R.
126. This ^olly he foundeth upon this principle: That an Author may be cited to
testify some fact, without regard of his approouing or reproouing the thing:
and that so he cited Lambertus as testi^ying that Pope Gregory was
excommunicated by the Bishops of Italy, though not approouing the same as
lawfully done. Whereunto first we answer, that when nothing is fought but the
bare testimony of the fact, this ground may be admitted: as in the example
before alleged of the Child in the case of his Father, How Lamb. authority
might have been alleged without lying.
if a man would only make known that such and such crimes had been objected
against the Father, which there we mentioned, he might with sincerity allege
the testimony of his son that complained of the same, as we are wont to do in
the history of Saints lives, putting down their reproaches published against
them by adversaries; but in this, if we will proceed with Christian truth and
sincerity, we must alleadg such facts in such sense as the Relator or witness
meant them, to wit, showing that they were falsely, wrongfully and injuriously
obi^cted. And so in this our Case, if M. Morton had only alleged the testimony
of Lambertus for the fact and speeches of these passionate men against Pope
Gregory, and had added more over sincerely for the discrediting thereof, that
which the Author adds, to wit, that it it was false and spoken in passion and
fury of anger etc. and had told in like manner the contrary virtues that were
in Pope Gregory which Lambertus recounteth, it might well have passed: but
doing the plain contrary, and endeavoring to defame Pope Gregory by him that
greatly defe^deth and commends both his person and cause, it may be wit in M.
Morton, as wit goes with him, that calls me a fool for holding the
contrary: But sure I am, honesty it can not be, which is never separated from
truth and plain dealing.

127. And this shall suffice for this point, p^termitting so^e other trifles,
which M. Mort. touches in this place upon some stomach of revenge, as it
seems, though merely false, and without any ^oundation. And therefore passing
to his third point of infelicity, which he will needs lay upon me, for
obiecting this matter of Lambertus against him, we shall see, whether he has
any more substance in this, then in the former.

128. First of all notes me not only for not acute (as his words are) but for
absurd, Infelicity objected against the argument of P. R.
in that I do say, that Lambertus does highly commend not only the virtue, but
also the sanctity of Pope Gregory: as though (says he) virtue and sanctity
were different things, and might be separated. Wherein I know not how acute M.
Morton may seem to the judicious Reader, for so much as every man knows
lightly that virtue is commonly held but for the way to sanctity, and that via
and terminus are different things. And I presume M. Mort. himself will make
profession of some kind of virtue, though not pretend perchance to be yet a
full Saint, at leastwise in this common sense of Sanctity, wherein it is taken
and understood ordinarily for aggregation of all virtues in their perfection.

129. Well, I know that the word Sanctity is taken also in some other sense,
Diverse acceptio^s of Sa^ctity.
as namly for that Sanctity which we receive by our redemption and vocation by
Christ, in which sense all baptized Christians are called Saints by vocation,
though afterward in life they should be never so wicked even as S. Paul writing
to the Corinthia^s, 1. Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 1. and 15.
terms the^ vocatis Sanctis, Saints by vocation: though afterward he
signifies diverse of the^ to be laden with grievous and heinous sins, and of
these Saints there is store in the world.

130. Thirdly, Sanctity is taken also of Scholme^ for a special virtue, not
differing in substance from the verue of Religion, but only that it has a
certain generality in it, not only to apply our minds firmly to Gods service,
but also to li^t up all the works of other moral virtues unto the same service
and honor of God: as for example the act of abstine^ce or temperance which in a
moral man may be used to other moral ends, as to the health of body, opinion
of sobriety and the like, this special virtue of Sanctity directs the same
to the glory of Almi. God: and the like in the actions of all other moral
virtues. But for so much as concerns our matter, Sanctity was taken by me in
the first sense, wherein a man may be virtuous, and yet no Saint, according to
the definition of S. Dionysius Areopagita. The description of sa^ctity by S.
Dionysius c. 12. De divine. nominib.
Sanctitas quidem est, vt secundu^ nos loquamur, omni scelere libera
perfectaque and penitus in coinquinata munditia. Sanctity (to speak according
to our use) is a certain perfect and unspotted purity o^ life, free from all
touch o^ wickedness: which is somewhat more if you mark it then common virtue,
as M. Morton would have it. And thus much for his acutenes in reprehending my
speech in distinguishing virtue from sanctity, which it seems that either he
understood not, or considered not well of his reprehensio^ before he uttered
it: but to the matter it self for proof of my unlucky imputing falsehood unto
him in alleging the authority of Lambertus, he brings forth three
witnesses, to wit, Benno Cardinalis, Abbas Vrspergensis and Sigebertus, all
German writers, that reprehend the life of Pope Greg. the 7. called before
Hildebrandu^. But what infelicitie is this unto my imputation out of La^bertus?
It is felicity enough for my attempt (if M. Mort. will needs have it so) that
he has not been able to clear him self from open fraud in alleging Lambertus
against Pope Hildebrand, as now you have heard. This other is a new matter and
from the purpose: whether there be other Authors that speak and write evil of
Pope Gregory or no? it is sufficient for me to have showed that Lambertus did
not, but in his behalf and praise, and consequently that he was falsely
brought in for his discredit.

132. But yet to say somewhat of these three other Authors also alleged here
by M. Morton to prove my infelicitie, that in taking from him one Lambertus I
have gotten three others to come out against me, to wit, a Monk, an Abbot, and
a Cardinal: The bad Card. Benno and his feygned book by the Protestants.
I will answer first unto the Cardinal, to wit Benno, who being not made by
the true Pope Gregory the 7. but by the Antipope calling himself Clement the
3. at the procurement of the Emperor, that was his professed enemy, he cannot
be accounted either a true Cardinal, or a lawful witness, and therefore no
marvel, though in the book ascribed unto him by the Protestants of our days,
he be found to rail most inte^peratly against the true Pope Greg. about which
book of Be^no notwithstanding I refer me to the Judgment of another
Cardinal whose name begins with the same letters, I mean Card. Bellarmine,
who having diligently perused the said railing book, testifies that he found
it excessive railing, and so extreme full of lies, contrary to the writings of
all other Authors, that had written of the same Pope, either whiles he lived or
after his death until Luthers time (whereof he names 32. Anthors in
particular, and ten of the^ that wrote whiles he was living) as he protests,
that he was forced to doubt least some L^theran had written the same under the
name of the foresaid false Card. Benno. Wherefore of this man, being such as he
was and convinced for an open liar by so many witnesses, we say no more, but
leave him to M. Morton, as a fit Knight of the Post for his purpose.

133. As for the other two monks, Vrsperg. and Sigebertus, the same Card.
Bellarmines judgment is, Bellar. l. 4. de Ro^. Pontif. c. 13.
that albeit they being favorers of the Emperor in that faction, durst not
write over plainly in the praise of Pope Greg. and dispraise of his enemy the
Emperor their patron; yet does he show out of their works, that setting aside
a manifest error of Sigebert, that imagined Pope Gregory to be of opinion that
the Masle of a Concubinary Priest was not good (which he never said, but for a
punishment only commanded men not to hear such a naughty Priest) in the rest
Card. Bellarmine, as I said, does prove that in sundry other occasions both of
the^ did rather commend Pope Greg. the^ discommend him, as is evident out of
sundry places in their own works which Bellarmine cites.

134. But nothing does discredit more the bringing in of these two witnesses by
M. Mort. then the joining the^ to Benno, as though they had been of his opinion,
or had written against Pope Gregory as he did. Let us examine but only this one
place alleged here out of Vrsperg. and then let any man say, Preamb. p. 123.
what is to be thought of M. Mort. fidelity: thus he alleges him. The Abbot
Vrsperg. (says he) writes thus: P. Gregory was an usurper of the Sea of Rome,
not appointed by God, but intruded by fraud and money, a disturber o^ the
Empire, a subuerter o^ the Church. Vrsperg. in anno 1080. p. 224. edit. Basil.
anno 1569.
So he. But now let any man read the place and year by him quoted: and he shall
find the words indeed and wors^ related by Vrspergensis, as uttered against
Pope Gregory by certain enemies of his gathered together iussu Regis Henrici,
by the commandment of K. Henry, in form of a Council or Synod at Brixia, they
being in number 30. Bishops: but that Vrsperge^sis did affirm any thing of
himself, How Vrspergensis writes in favor of P. Greg.
or approve the same is not to be found, but rather the quite contrary. For in
the very same place and page, he shows how these things were co^tradicted and
refuted by the famous Anselmus Bishop of Luca then liuing^ A man (says he)
most excellent, well learned, sharp in wit etc. and that which exceeds all,
a man known to ^eare God, and o^ all holy conversation, in so much as both in
his li^e and after his death he was famous in doing miracles. So Vrsperge^sis
of him, that did defend Pope Gregory against these slanders which M. Morton
alleges as auerred by Vrsperg. and will not he yet blush at this new fraud of
his discovered? will he still continue of forge new lies against the Authors
express words and meaning? 135. But yet me thinks that the other which
ensu^th is more shameful, to wit, the joining of Seuerinus Binius for a fourth
witness to the former three, whereof he writes thus: I^ three witnesses be not
sufficient against the Pope, whereof one is a Monk, Preamb. p. 124.
another an Abbot, the third a Card. let us further understand, that fourthly
Seuerinus Binius in his new Editio^ o^ the Counsels, confesses that the
Bishops in a Council at Worms An. 1076. declared that Gregory was to be
deposed: And that the Council at Papia An. 1076. did excommunicate ^im: and
that the Counsel of Bishops at Brixia did depose him: the Asts of which
Counsel, as they are recited by Vrsperge^sis show these causes: because he was
an usurper o^ the Sea etc. And the Counsel at Mentz An. 1085. declared him to
be justly deposed. Thus we see that P. R. by denying one Counsel of Bishops of
Italy in Papia, to have opposed themselves against this Gregory, has contrary
to his desire, gayued with that one of Papia, three other Counsels, one of
Brixia, another of Worms, the last of Mentz. So unlucky has he been etc.

136. To this I answer first, that the whole supposall of this narratio^ (to
wit) that I did deny the Counsel or Conciliabulu^ of Pauia to have
excommunicated Pope Gregory is utterly false. M. Mortons whole supposal false.
For that this was not in question between us, as has appeared by the former
discourse, but whether Lambertus did relate and allow of the same, or no:
whereof neither point is found in him, to wit, neither that he relates the
fact, as out of his own asseueration, but only as objected by passionate
enemies, and much less does he approve the lawfulnes thereof but impugn it.
This was the state of our question, which now M. Morton seeing his error would
willingly chang: but nothing falls out more aptly for his conviction then the
bringing in of Seuerinus Binius in this place to be a fourth witness with Benno,
Vrspergensis, and Sigebertus for disgracing of Pope Gregory, by affirming that
he was condemned in four several Counsels here mentioned. But what if Binius
do expressly say, that all these Cou^cells were but factious metings and no
Counsels, and set up by the Emperor and the Antipope made by him, for malice
against the true Pope: and that they were wicked and schismatic Bishops that
met there in conspiracy against their true head? does this serve to M. Mortons
purpose for disgracing of Pope Gregory by Binius his testimony? Or does he
deal plainly with his Reader in telling him that Binius is a 4. witness that
joins with Benno, Vrspergensis, and Sigebert, in condemning Pope Greg?

137. As for Benno the counterfeit Card. no man denies but that he did
condemn Pope Gregory, if that Book be his that goes in his name: and the
like we must understand of Vrspergensis and Sigebert, if we believe M. Morton,
who says that they wrote out of their own judgment against him, Benno the
cou^terfaite Cardinal.
whereof notwithstanding we have showed the contrary: how then can he coople
Binius as a fourth witness to these three, which Binius he confesses to be
contrary in judgment, and to defend Pope Gregory most ^arnestly, calling these
Counsels Conciliabula, factious and schismatic conspiracies? Let us set
down here a comparison for better co^ceauing the matter. A comparison
expressing M. Morto^s case of unfaithful dealing.
If a Jew of our time should take upon him to disgrace the Apostle S. Paul, as
many of them have sought to do, for envy, that he was first a zealous follower
of their law, and should reckon up the conspiracies made against him in diverse
times and different places, how he was condemned by sundry metings of
principal men, both Jews and Gentiles, often laid in prison, often escaped by
flying, and the like: inferring thereof that he was a troublesome and evil man,
and should for witness hereof bring forth the testimonies, not only of some
ancient heretical enemy of his that lived with him, but other two also, who in
the accu^ers opinion were not his friends, and then for a fourth witness should
join unto them the testimony of S. Luke himself, that recounteth these things,
but in the Apostles high praise, and then should vaunt, and tell his Reader, as
here M. Morton does, that now he had four witnesses conspiring together in
the same matter: would you say that this man dealt otherwise then as a Jew
indeed, that is to say, perfidiously?

138. Let us hear then what this Binius cited here for the fourth witness,
says against, or rather for, and in the behalf of Pope Gregory. First he
speaking of a certain pious embassage or Legation sent by the said Pope to the
excommunicated Henry, he says thus: Quam cum numinis contemptor and cultor
per^idiae excepisset etc. Which embassage when the Emperor that contemned God
and followed perfidiousnes, had received, Binius tomo 3. Council. p. 1281.
and contrary to the law of Nations had beaten with w^ips the Legates that
brought the same, and had afflicted the^ with most grievous injuries, he
presently thereupon gathered together at Worms in Germany a Co^uenti^le of
excommunicated and Schismatic Bishops against the Pope, The testimony of
Binius for Pope Gregory.
in which Co^uenticle with the greatest co^tum^ly that could be devised, were
appointed set forth and published those things which Lambertus Schaffnaburge
does relate in his history, to wit, about the deposing of Pope Gregory etc.
This is his narration. And is not this a good fourth witn^sse to join with the
former for discrediting of Pope Gregory? and may not a man as well allege S.
Luke against S. Paul as Binius against this Pope in this cause? How absurdly
blasphemy is objected to P. R. for alleging an example of the Euanglists.
Or might not we object the sacred sufferings and persecutions of that holy
Apostle out of S. Luke by the same sort of arguments that M. Morton does here
the conspiracies of the wicked Emperor and schismatic Bishops against Pope
Gregory their Apostolical governor? though I do not compare the person of
Pope Gregory with the person of S. Paul, as M. Morton will presently
calumniate, but the manner of proceeding and arguing in their supposed
adversaries, the Jew and M. Morton. But we shall have occasion to speak more
of this in the next point concerning blasphemy: for needs he will have this my
reprehension of him, not only to be false, foolish and unlucky, as you have
heard, but also blasphemous: this point then we must in this last place
consider of.

139. In the end of my former charge I do set down an example to show the
absurdity of M. Morto^s disgracing of Pope Gregory out of the writings of
Lambertus and Frisingensis, Mitig. p. 217.
by a comparison taken out of the new Testament in these words. If an enemy
(said I) would discredit both Christ and Christian religion, and say, Your own
Evangelists do recount foul things against him ( as here this Minister says
that our Historiographer does o^ Pope Gregory) and namely that he was accused
by the Scribes and Pharisees for casting out devils in the power of Beelzebub
etc. which our Evangelists do recou^t indeed, but do condemn the^ also as
false and calumnious, were not this as good and as faithful a manner of
reasoning, as this other of T. Morton out of Lambertus and Frising. against
Pope Hildebrand, who is by them most highly commended?

140. Thus I said at that time: and now M. Mort. a^swereth that this comparison
contains blaspemy, What blasphemy is.
which to me seems strange. And if he had proposed the definition of blaspemie
together with his accusation, the question would quickly have been decided. For
that Schole-doctors do define blasphemy to be, D. Tho. 2.2. q. 13. art. 1.
Cum aliquid negatur de Deo, quod ei conuenit, vel asseritur de eo, quod ei non
conuenit. When any thing is denied to be in God which is in him, or when any
thing is affirmed to be in him, which agrees not unto him. By which definition
M. Mort. who^e accusation falls to the ground. For that in my comparison
nothing is falsely affirmed or denied to be in God at all: neither does the
comparison touch God himself in any affirmation or negation, but only a
certain manner of reasoning, that may be used by an enemy, concerning him;
which I do show to be like to that of M. Mortons: but let us hear his proofs.

Preamb. p. 125.
141. Whosoever (says he) shall exactly examine the Analogy of this
comparison, must needs acknowl^dg it to be in a manner blasphemous. Mark how
he begins to temper the matter, calling that in a manner blasphemous, which
in the title of his Paragraph he absolutely calls blaspemie. Let us hear his
reason: For either must Christ (says he) the Son of God be compared with
Pope Gregory, or ^lse the likeness consists in the comparison of the Reporter,
matching the holy ^uangelists and their Monks Frisingensis and Lambertus
together. Whereto I answer, that M. Morton misseth wholly the cushion: for that
in neither of these two is the comparison made, but in the manner of reasoning.
For as it were no good form of argument in an enemy to say, These and these
things were objected against Christ as your own Evangelists do testify, ergo,
he was no good man: So is it not in M. Mort. to say, These and these enormious
crimes were objected against Pope Greg., and recorded by your own Monk^s
Frising. and Lambertus, Ergo, he was a wicked man. Wherein you see that the
comparion by me here brought in, is only in the form of argument in the one
and in the other case, and neither between Christ and Pope Gregory, nor between
the Eua^gelists and our Monks is there any comparison made, except only in
this, that as Christ was wrongfully sla^dered, so was Pope Gregory, and many
other of his servants are daily: and as the Eua^gelists should be greatly
injured to be brought in for witnesses as accusing our Savior, who^ they most
dutifully reverenced and highly commended for that they recount slanders
objected against him, by enemies: so are Lambertus and Frising^ no less abused
in being cited ^or authors to disgrace Pope Gregory, whom they defended,
justified, and reverenced. One other comparison also may be between M. Morton
and the enemy, who do reason after one fashion, and do seek to deceive after
one manner.

142. These three later co^parisons I made not in my former speech, but only
the first about the form of argument: these other do follow ex natura rei: nor
is it blasphemy to frame a comparison between God and man, or between him and
inferior things to man, so the point be true, wherein the comparison is made.
And it seems great simplicity or peruersity in M. Mort. to hold the contrary:
for that all the Scripture is full of comparisons between God, heaven, man and
other Creatures; Comparisons may be piously made between God and creatures.
which things, though in themselus they be not co^parable for their natures and
qualities, yet may they be in some other points. As the kingdom of heaven is
compared to a mustard seed, and God to a husband man, yea to a covetous man, to
a thief that comes in the night, which in the proportion of their own
natures, worth, value, dignity or indignity are incomparable: yet in some
respect co^parisons may be made without all blasphemy, which I do note the
rather to the Reader, Math. 13.
for that it is a common refuge of M. Mort. and his fellows, Luc. 23.
when they are pressed with any similitude or co^pariso^, Matt. 20.
Luc. 19. Luc. 12.
to run from the point wherein the comparison is made indeed and to seek out
disparities between the things themselves in points wherein no comparison is
made: As if a man out of the Gospel should allege any one of the forsaid
similitudes; Luc. 13.
as that God is like the husbandman, in this point of cultiuating or dunging
his ground, his adversary should laugh at him, and say it were blasphemy to
compare such base things as du^ging, to the unspeakable majesty of almighty
God, A false trick or two in T. M. for a parting blow.
which were a vain cavil as you see, because in that point of dignity or
indignity, worthiness or baseness, the comparison is not made; but only in
cultiuating: and so is this of M. Morton. And with this we shall leave him for
this argument, only noting by the way, that notwithstanding all the disgrace he
has received for insincere dealing, yet ca^ he not pass over this place
without showing a trick or two in that kind, eue^ in recityng my words.

143. For whereas I said: If an enemy would discredit both Christ and Christian
Religion, and say your own Evangelists do recount etc. he recites my words
thus: If any man would discredit both Christ and Christian religion, and say
our Evangelists do recount etc. turning (an enemy) into (any man) and ( your
Evangelists) into ( our Evangelists) in the first person, and all this to make
my speech seem more odious by these slippery tricks and helping the dye
underhand, for that my similitude sounds differently from the mouth of an
enemy, and from a man of our own Religion. And finally I would ask M. Morton
why he did change these words, if he had no intent of falsehood, for so much as
the other were as few and as easily to be written as these: but because this
Paragraph was to charg me with blasphemy, and finding nothing in my words
sounding that way, he thought good by altering them, to make some little
appearance: which is an art most usual with him. Let him show the same but in
any of our writers, and I promise to stand to my offer before made of never
believing him afterward; which I confess, that I must perform in like manner
toward M. Morton, until I see him alter his course, and become more scupulous
of truth, and punctual sincerity in his writings.

THE SVMME AND final Reckon^ng of this whole Chapter.. XV.
TO come then to an end of this trial, and to see what substance there is on
either side: M. Morton taking upon him to answer to the charges of falsehood
and untrue dealing laid against him in my late Treatise of Mitigation, chose
out fourteen of those which he thought he could best answer, or make some
show at least of satisfaction unto them, which he has performed in the manner
that you have heard, to wit, first leaving out the greatest number of such as
pressed him most, as in the sequent Chapter you are to behold And albeit he
professed in the beginning to satisfy those that I most insisted in, yet that
has appeared to be false, and may be tried for such by any man that will but
look upon my book.

145. Secondly, for furnishing up the show of these fourten Charges pretended
to be discharged by him, he has laid hands of sundry that are very
impertinent, and scarce objected by me as points of moment. For which cause he
ha^dleth the^ over again and again, and some three tim^ as you have heard: as
namely the 9.10.11.12. and 13. where as once handling had bin sufficient,
especially for that others remained of far greater weight to have bin treated,
if he had listed or thought it easy.

146. Thirdly, of the rest which he pretends to satisfy (for touching so^e,
he confesses in effect his own weakness and imbecility, either de^ying that he
read the books and Authors, which he had cyted and urged against us, or
remitting us to other men for the answer, that had le^t him the said
authorities) are the 2. the 4. the 5. and 6. So as these two sorts making up
ten of his fourteen Charges, there remained to him but four more to discharge,
which how ma^fully he has performed I remit me to the view, whereby will be seen
(I doubt not) that he has not ^nly not wyped of the scarrs (to use his phrase)
of the former imputatio^s, but has made also many more, not only scars and
scratches, but also deeper wounds a new by making new escapes no less enormous
then the former: and co^seque^tly you may consider of the truth of his promise
and vaunt made in the entrance to this Chapter, to wit, that he would give such
satisfaction, as that not only the wound of slander may be cured, but even also
the s^spicious scars of imputation wiped away. Thus he promised then, but now
for lack of performance, both scarres and wounds are renewed, and deeply
impressed, as will appear more evidently by the ensuing Chapter, which is to
lay down a very pitiful list of many scarres and wounds left uncured by him,
that is to say many grievous charges of untrue dealing, that were objected unto
him, and urged by his adversary, are now wholly pretermitted, concealed, and
dissembled by him in this his Answer, when most effectually he should have
sought to heal them.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER CONTAINING A recapitulatio^ of many manifest untruths
wherewith M. Morton being charged by his Adversary P. R. did wittingly pretermit
to mention them in his last Reply, and thereby left suspision, that he could not
answer the^.
PREFACE
IT has appeared now by that which has been written before, that albeit the
first and principal end, for which T.M. framed this Book of Preamble was to
make some show of answering, Epist. dedicat. to the L. Sal^^b.
or shifting of some of the great multitude of untruths and falsehoods laid
against him, or to use his own words, to s^ay the prejudice of his Reader: yet
that the success thereof has been far wide from his expectation; for that he
has not only not cleared, but much more inta^gled himself therein, especially
in regard of these 2. or 3. points. First that he making a several Chapter for
answering the accusations of falsehood (which is the precedent) he chooses out
both the fewest and weakest of all the rest, and secondly answers the^ in
such sort, Preamb. p. 88.
as he adds new falshods to the old: and thirdly though he profess not to
have singled out such, which might seem unto him most easily answered, but
those which P. R. has most veheme^^ly p^^ssed and urged, as he says: yet does
he in very deed the quite contrary, choosing out both the weakest and least
insisted upon, as will appear by examination. For which cause though I desired
here to make an end: yet have I been enforced, for the presenting more lively to
the Readers eye the falsehood of this assertion, to set down some number of
other untruths laid against him in my Treatise, and for the indignity thereof
pressed and urged by me against him, as much, or more the^ any of these 14.
which he has chosen out, whereof diverse were of the lightest sort that I
objected against him, and many of the^ treated and discussed before, as now you
have seen. Let us run ouerthen if you please some number of other falsehoods
objected to him by me (for that to resume and discuss all would ask a several
Treatise) which are co^cealed by him in this his answer. The cause why is easy
to be co^iectured.

THE FIRST Pretermitted falsehood by Thomas Morton without mention or answer..
I.
ANd first I shall begin with that, which I objected Gabriel Vasquez concerning
the nature of heresy, Vasquez mistaken and slaundered about the nature of
heresy and pertinacy.
whereof I wrote thus. In the third page (quoth I) of his said reply (of Full
satisfactio^^ he beginning to talk of the nature of heresy, has these words:
We may not be ignorant first that seeing the nature of heresy is such, that it
is a vice proper to the mind, it may denominate the subject whatsoever an
heretic, without obstinacy, Mitig. pa. 219.
which is only a perverse obliquity of the will, and therefore a man may be an
heretic, though he be not obstinate. And for proof of this false doctrine he
cites in his margent, The first example of corruptions.
Vasquez Iesuita, whose words are: Malitia huius peccati intellectu non in
voluntate consummatur: The malice of this sin of heresy is prefected and
made consummate in the understanding and not in the will, Vasq. disp. 126. c.
3. in 1. Tom. About the the nature of heresy and pertinacy.
which our Mynister understanding not, and yet desirous, as in the preface to
the Kings Majesty he insinuates, to divide our tongues, and to make our
writers seem contrary the one to the other; has fondly slandered the learned
man Vasquez in this place, by making him seem to be patron of this his absurd
doctrine, that heresy may be without obstinacy, whereas Vasquez in the very
same disputation here by him cyted, expressly does imp^gne this doctrine and
establishes the contrary, defyning heresy thus: Ibid. c. 1^
Haeresis nihil aliud est, quam error in rebus ^id^i cum pertina^ia: Heresy is
nothing else, but an ^rrour in matters of faith with obstinacy.

Valentia 2.2. qu. 11. puncto 1. Turrec. 4. su^ma, par. 2. c. 1. and Doctores
omnes 4. d. 13. and D. Tho. 2.2. art. 2. vide etiam Cau. 14. q. 3. Can. Dixit
Apostolus and Can. Qui in Ecclesia.
3. Which an other learned man of the same school, by somewhat a more ample
definition declares thus: Heresy (says he) is an error contrari^ to the
Catholic faith, ^herunto a man that has professed ^he said faith in his
Baptism does adhere, with an obstimat^ mind: which definition he proves ex
communi mente D^c^orum, by the common consent of school doctors. And finally
not to stand upon a thing so clear among us, S. Thomas for decision hereof
has th^se words: de ratione haer^sis sunt duo, ^lectio priuatae disciplinae,
and pertinacia.

Two things are of the es^ence and intrinsecall nature of heresy, without
which heresy cannot be: the one, the choice or election of a particular
doctrine, discipline or opinion, contrary to the doctrine of the universal
Church: the other, pertinacy or obstinacy in defending the same, though the
party know, that it be against the doctrine of the Church, without which
knowledge and obstinacy there can be no heresy.

4. This is our Catholic doctrine about the nature of heresy, to wit, that it
cannot be without obstinacy, which is so common and triuiall, as it is now come
into an ordinary Proverb, to say: Obstinacy necessary to heresy.
well I may be in error, but heretic wi^^ I never be, for that I hold
nothing obstinately. And as for the words of Vasqu^z: That the malice of heresy
is consummated in the understanding, and not in the will: If our Mynister had
read the other words immediately going before, he might perhaps have understood
Vasquez meaning, Vasquez his discourse about pertina^ie.
for they are these. Vt aliquis sit v^^e reus h^resis etc. To make a man be
truly guilty of heresy, it is not necessary, that he be carried directly in
his affection or will against the authority of the Church, that is to say it is
not needful, that he have an express will and purpose to disobay or
contradict the Church, but it is enough that he do contradict the same re ipsa,
indeed, knowing that opinion which he defends to be against the authority of
the said universal Church, albeit he be not induced to this belief with a
direct will to impugn the Church, but either by desire of glory or other
inducement: so as indeed the malice of this sin is consummated in the
understanding, and not in the will.

5. This is the dis^ourse and doctrine of Vasquez in this place about the
nature and essence of Heresy, wherein he does not exclude either the
understanding or will, but includes them both expressly: for that as there must
be knowledge, which apperteyneth to the mind or understanding: so must there be
choice with obstinacy, which belongs to the will and affection: but his
scholasticall consideration is, in which of these two powers of our soul this
sin of heresy receaueth her consummation. For better explication whereof, let
us use this example.

6. If a man should hold or believe an erroneous proposition contrary to the
doctrine of the Catholic Church: as for example, that there were but one
nature in Christ, not knowing yt to be against the Catholic Church, yt were
false in yt self, and an error in his understanding, How heresy is
consummated in the understanding and not in the will.
but not Heresy, except also by act of his will, he should choose to hold it
with resolution and obstinacy even after that he knows the same to be against
the doctrine of the said Church: for then this knowledge (says Vasques) that it
is against the Church, makes it perfect and consummate Heresy: albeit the
matter pass not to a further act of will, to wit, that he chooses expressly to
contradict the authority of the Church therein, which should be a greater sin,
but yet is not necessary, for that the perfect nature of heresy is consummated,
by knowing that it is against the Church. And for that this notice or knowledge
belongs to the understanding, therefore Vasquez holdet^ that the last
perfection or consummation of this sin is in the understanding, and not in
the will, not meaning to exclude thereby obstinacy of the will (as ignorantly
T.M. does when he says, VVe^ may not be ignorant:) but to show in what power
of the mind the last perfection and consummation of this heinous sin
consists, to wit, that a man may be a perfect and consummate heretic by
holding ob^tinately any opinion against the Doctrine of the Church, after we
once know it to be against the said Churches doctrine, though we have not that
further malice also of express will and purpose to contradict thereby the said
Church, but only we hold the same, for that the opinion pleases us, or is
profitable, or honorable unto us, or thereby to contradict an other, or some
such like inducement, according to those words of S. Augustine to Honoratus:
Aug. l. de vtil. cred ad Honor.
Haereticus est, qui alicuius temporalis co^modi, and maxim gloriae
principatusque sui gratia, falsas ac nouas opiniones vel gignit, vel sequitur.
An heretic is he, who in respect of some temporal commodity, but especially
for his own glory and pre-eminence, does beget or follow false and new
opinions.

Aug. l. 4. con^i. Do^at. c. 16.
7. The same S. Augustine also against the Donatists proposes this example:
Consti^uamus (says he) aliquem sentire de Christo quod Photinus etc. Let us
imagine one to think of Christ, as Photinus the heretic did, persuading
himself, that it is the Catholic faith etc. Istu^ nondum haereticum dico
(^ayth he) nisi mani^estata sibi doctrina Catholicae fidei resistere maluerit,
and illud quod tenebat, elegerit. I do not yet say this man is an her^tick,
until after that the doctrine of the Catholic faith being opened unto him,
he shall choose notwithstanding to resist, and to hold by choice that which
before he held by error. In which words S. Augustine does evidently declare,
how necessary both knowledge and will are unto heresy: and consequently how
absurd and ridiculous the as^ertion of M. Morton is, S. Austins explication of
the whole matter.
that heresy being a vice proper to the understanding, may denominate the
subi^ct whatsoever an her^ti^ke, without obstinacy of will. For a^beit we
grant withal Deuines, that heresy is in the understanding as in her subject
(and so is faith also that is her opposite;) and further that her last
persection and consummation is from the forsaid knowledge in the understanding,
as Vasquez does explane yt: yet does not Vasquez or any Divine else exclude the
necessity of pertinacity also and election in the will: and consequently both
his words and meaning have been evidently falsified and calumniated by T. M. And
so much of this first charge, whereby you may see what books might be made
against him, if we would follow his ^^^pps in all his fraudulent traces.

8. This was my charge to M. Morton at that time, and yt was a great Charge as
you see, and more earnestly pressed then diverse of these other smaller matters,
which in the former Chapter he singled out to answer, though as you have heard
he professes the contrary. But why said he nothing to this, seeing it has more
difficulty in it, then many other laid together? Surely no other so probable
cause can be alleged, as the difficulty made him to fly the endeavor of
answering it. But let us see some others, of not much unlike quality to this.

THE SECOND Pretermitted falsehood by Thomas Morton.. II.
M. Morton against the learned Azor, Azor corrupted about the word
Pe^tinaci^er. Mitig. page 225. De i^st. pun. H^er. l. 1. cap. 10.
thus by me set down, in my former Treatise. In the very same page ( said I)
he going about to make us odious by our severe censuring of heretics, puts
down first these words of Alphonsus de Castro: He that understanding any
opinion to be expressly condemned by the Church, shall hold the same, is to be
accounted an obstinate heretic. Whereupon M. Morton plaieth his pageant thus.
What obstinate? It may be, some do but doubtingly defend it, what will you
judge of these? Whereunto he answers out of Azor: If he doubt thereof
willingly, he is certainly an heretic. But by our Ministers leave Azor adds
more. Azor corrupted.
Quoties quis voluntary and per^inaciter de fide dubitat, eo ipso est
Haereticus. As often as a man does doubt willingly and obstinatly of his faith,
he is thereby an heretic. For that faith is a sure and certain assent of
mind unto those things that are to be believed: and he that willingly and
obstinatly doubts of the truth thereof, ^an not have this firm and perfect
assent and consequently has no faith during the time of this wilful and
obstinate doubting.

10. And that you may vnderstaud of what importance this word Pertinaciter is,
that this man cu^ningly so cutteth out of Azor his words, you must know that he
in the very same Chapter holds that if a man doubt without pertinacity, being
ready to submit his judgment, when he shall be instructed in the truth, incurreth
not heresy at all. So as here the most substantial word is left out, and
craftily conveyed away by our deuider of tongues, whereby the Author is made to
say the quite opposyte to that he says and protests.

11. These were my words at that time. And now let the judicious Reader judge,
what cause I had to complain as I did, and yet got no satisfaction of M.
Morton at all, though the title of his former book was a full Satisfaction:
and this later Preamble was cast out for a supply or complement to the said
Satisfaction. Did not this objection deserve to be satisfied before diverse
other trifles, wherewith you have heard him now to fill up paper, and intertaine
his Reader? Let us go forward.

THE THIRD Pretermitted falsehood by Thomas Morton.. III.
AND for that we have begone to talk of Azor, Azor perverted about the Case of
Coue^try.
whom M. Morton some times will seem highly to esteem, we shall cite an
example or two of his abuse toward him, which is s^t down in my Treatise,
about a Case of coming from a City infected, or believed to be inf^cted, in
these words.

13. The first Case shall be (quoth I) that which our Mynister so often
proposes, and odiously does exaggerate about Couentry, saying: Mitig. 430. 7.

Tho Mortons Case of Couentry.


That our English Equiuocators do teach, that if a man come from Couentry, for
example, which town is held to be infected with the plague, himself dwelling
in a part of that City, which is free from infec^ion, and being asked at
London gates, whether he came from Couentry, they intending to ask him
concerning a place infected he may answer, no. For that herin he deceives not
the mind of the questioner, but answers directly to his intention. So
propounds he the Case, as he pretends, out of the Catholic Treatise of
Equivocation, which hitherto I have not seen, and consequently cannot affirm,
how truly or falsely the same is related: but he having so uttered the said
Case, does in opposition thereof cite the foresaid Jesuit Azor his sentence
against this, as though he said, that if we admit this Case: Azor l. 11. i^st.
c. 4.. Primo quidem.
Nihil tam falsum esse posse, quod non queat ab omni mendacio liberari: nothing
is so false, but that it may be freed from a ly: which words are indeed in
Azor, but not applied by him to this Case, but to another, saying: That is it
were lawful ^or us, to feign what words we would in an Oath without regard
to the circumstances of time, place and persons before mentioned, t^en nothing
were so false indeed, that might not be freed from all lying. But this Case of
ours goes not co^ioyned with these words of Azor, as M. Morton has
perfidiously here tied them together: but Azor speaking twice of this our
Case in one page, first in the name of others by way of objection, and again
in his own name by way of resolution, he says: Azor. ib.. tertia regula.
Libenter concedimus de eo, qui ad portas Vrbis rogatur etc. We do willingly
grant the example of him, who coming to the gates of a City and being asked
whether he came from a certai^e place, which by error is thought to be
infected with the plague, and is not, tuto citra mendacium iurare pot^st^ se ex
eo loco non venire: he may secur^ly swear without lying, that he comes not
^^om that place: so as he understand that he comes not from any place
infected with the plague, nor that himself ^s infected This is Azor his
judgment and resolution. And before him this Case was resolved by Doctor
Syluester, Nauar, Tolet, Roderiquez, Cosmus Philiarchus and diverse other
learned men: Syl Verb. Iuramentum 3. q. 2. Nauar. in Manual c. 12. nu 196.
as after him also by our often named Country man Gregorius Sayer: and the
reason of the lawfulnes of this answer is, for that the answer being sure,
that either the place is not infected from whence he came, or that himself
has brought no infection about him (for otherwise he should be perjured) it
were great injury unto him to be stayed at the gate wit^out cause. Tolet. in
Instruct. Sac^r. c. 21. l. 4. Rod^r. in sum. p. 1. c. 1^1. con. 4 Cos^us Phil.
p. 2. l. 3. c. 14. Say^r. l. 5. c. 4.^1.22.
And therefore for declyning this injury and injustice, it is lawful for him
to answer to the final end and intention of the keeper, and of the City or
Common wealth (whose intention only is to exclude infected people) and not to
their immediate words about the particular place.

14. And now all this being so, consider, I pray you ( said I) the shameless
forehead of this deceauing Minister, in citing Azor quite against himself, and
his own sense and meaning: and tying his words together that were spoken
separately to another end: and yet as though he had played no such iugling
trick, but had gotten some victory over us, hear his insolent speech about
this answer, set down by so many learned men as you have heard named.
Egregiou^ impudency of T. M.
An answer (says he) so grossly false, that a Jesuit, of high esteem in your
Church ^to wit Azor) writing against this spiritual iuggling of his subtle
lying brethren does confess, that if this kind of answer concerning a place
infected with the plague etc. be not false, then there is no speech so false,
but it may be freed from falsehood. By whom your Equiuocators (says he) may
learn, that if the man you fancied came not from a place infected with bodily
pestilence, yet this your Equiuoting proceeds from mynds spiritually infected
with the contagion of pestilent lying. So he

15. And I do willingly remit my self to the indifferent Reader, where this
contagion of pestilent lying reigns, either in these grave learned m^n, that
have decided this qu^stion without lying and against lying: or in M. Morton
that has multipli^d so many lies together in this place, as is a shame to
number them? For besides all that I have noted already, he cor^upteth also
h^re the v^ry text of Azor, which himself alleadg^th in his marg^nt, by
translating it falsely into English, where as Azor says in the Case proposed,
Si venit ex loco aliquo p^ste minime insecto, qui ^also habet^r pro ins^cto: he
^ngl^sh^th the same by le^uing out the words ( minime and ^also) saying: Diverse
Gr^sse untruths of T.M.
If ^e come from a place in^^c^ed: which alt^r^th the whole Case. For if either
the place, or h^mse^fe be in^ected, he cannot swear without perjury, as has
been said. Secondly, he says that Azor t^^ lesuite does write against the
spiritual iuggl^ng o^ his subtile-lying br^thr^n: and yet are neither the
principal Authors of this answer and resolution Jesuits, as by their names
you have heard; nor writes Azor against them, but with them, and for them in
this Case, conforming his judgment as you see to theirs, that a man coming
from such a place, may ius^lie swear in the ^or^e that has been said. Nor is
their answer subtle iuggling, as the Mynister slaundereth, but plain and
real dealing, yelding their resolution, together with the reason thereof, as
has been declared. And all the iuggling is on M. Mortons side, who declaming
against lying, does nothing but lie: and yet finally concludes most
rydiculously his speech thus: Therefore be you exhorted ^or the love of God,
who is truth, to recant your doctrine of Equiuocating, the M^tropolis o^ lies
Whereunto my answer is, that in my opinion T. Mort. is well worthy to be the
Metropolitan of that Metropolis: T. M. Metro^olitan of his lying Metropolis.
for if ever man, honest or dishonest, lay or clergy, l^arned or unlearned (to
use his manner of exaggeratio^s) did tell so many lies together, and in print,
and within the compass of so few lines, as Morton here has done, I am much
deceived etc. Thus I wrote at that time, and can M. Morton say that this abuse
is not much insisted upon by me for wringing out some answer? Let the Reader
be judge between us. He says in the beginning of his precedent Chapter, that
he took upon him to answer, not such points as were easiest to answer, but
such as I most insisted upon: which you see to be false in both points. Let us
pass to others.

THE FOVRTH Pretermitted falsehood by M. Morton.. IIII.
THERE follows another falsehood used against the same Author Azor, Azor
falsyfied as rejecting a Case which he plainly allows. Exodus 20.
more notable perhaps Mitigation: where having showed how impertine^tly M.
Morto^ had produced a place of Exodus, to wit, Thou shall not bear false
witness, to prove that every mental Equivocation was a lie, I went forward
with this speech.

17. But harken further ( quoth I) for that M. Morton will bring another proo^e
more strange then this. Mitig. 450. 18.
Your great Moralist Azor (says he) does condemn all Equiuocators herin (to
wit for mental Equivocation in an Oath) as perjured liars, or otherwise (says
he) there is nothing in an Oath, that may not be affirmed and denied without a
lie. Page 60. and 61.
Thus he. And I would demand M. Morto^ about this matter, whether he will
swear this to be true which he says of Azor? Azor notably belied by T. Morton.
For if Ministers and Priests go in equal rank in England, a Mynisters word
ought to be equal to an Oath: as a Priests word, laying his hand on his breast,
is with us: and then must I needs conclude Tho. Morton ^or a perjured liar
indeed, who has so perfidiously belyed Azor in this place, and that in so many
points. For first Azor handling in the Book and Chapter by him cyted, De
iure^urando cui videtur veritas aliquo modo deesse: lib. 11. c. 4.. Quinto
quaeritur.
Of an Oath which may seem in some sort to want truth, he does put down
diverse example^ (8. or 9. at least) wherein the swearer may swear truly in his
own s^nse, though false in the sense of him that exacteth the Oath. All which
are so many plain approbations of swearing equivocal propositions without
perjury, and so many public contradictions and confutations of Tho. Mortons
notorious slander auouch^d here against him, that he condemns all
Equiuocators for liars. Of which Cases here determined by Azor against M.
Morton, the first is, Si Sacerdos rogetur etc. If a priest be asked any thing
which he has heard in Confession, he may answer, Se ^ihil scire, nihil
audiuisse: that he knows nothing, he has h^ard nothing. And how the^ does
this great Morali^^ condemn all Equiuocators herin as perjured liars? Is not
this public^e lying in Tho. Morton? and that in print? And were not this
formal perjury, if he did swear it in any Court whatsoever? as namely in his
Lords Court of the Arches? And should he not be punished in that Court, as a
perjured person, if it were proved against him? And how then dares he to
commit the same so publicly without blushing? But let us leave him to his
Lords correction in this behalf, and so pass on to another point.

18. Secondly th^n, not only the sense and drift, but the words themselves set
down by T.M. out of Azor, Azor lib. 11. ^. 4.. Primo quidem.
are most fraudulently and falsely alleged: Quidam putauit (says he) ^as esse
cuiquam, vt vitam suam conseruet, hosti iurare, tantu^modo ^o sensu, quem mente
in^us concipit: possemus enim hac ratione quiduis negare, and nihil non absque
menda^io dicere. Some have thought it lawful (says he) to every man, for the
conservation of his life to swear to his enemy only in that sense which he
conceiueth inwardly in his own mind, which if it should be granted, then
might we by this means deny anything, and speak what we will without a lie.

19. These are alleged for Azor his words, and indeed the most of them are in
Azor, but not together as they lie here, but some in one place, and some in
another, spoken to different purposes, and in different sense from that T. M.
alleges the^ corruptly in this place. And for proof hereof, Wilful and
perfidious de^ling.
and of the egregious consenage of this Minister, it shall be sufficient to let
you know, that this special example alleged here as out of Azor, and as
rejected by him of one that swear to his enemy for saving his life in another
sense the^ his words did sound, is not rejected, but allowed and approved by
Azor. For that he having proposed the Case first under other learned men's
names, much after the sense as here is set down by M. Morto^, he comes at
length to resolve, and approve the same in his own name saying: quare libenter
concedimus id quod paulo ante dicebatur de co, qui, vt se saluum tueatur,
promittit latroni, Tyrano, aut hosti, daturum se illi pecuniae quantitate^ etc.
Wher^or^ we do willingly grant that, which before was proposed of him that by
Oath does promise unto a thief, a Tyrant, or his enemy for saving his life, to
give him a certain quantity of money, which yet notwithstanding in his mind he
has no purpose to do, he swearing with this reservation (of mind) dabo si
debeo: I will give yt, if I owe yt.

20. Now then consider, good Reader, the honesty and truth of T. Morton that
brings in Azor to condemn that as lying perjury, which he does not only
allow, as truth, and no lie; but proves also the lawfulnes thereof by many
examples, and especially by this of him that swears by Equivocation, which
example M. Morton brings in as condemned by Azor for periurious lying. What
will you say? or what will you do with such men? And do you note also that in
the former words of Azor he cutteth of La^roni and Tyranno, and this to peru^nt
a Case resolved against him afterward by Ci^^ro predonibus and pira^is, to
thieves and pirates perjury is not committed: what then (I say) is to be
thought, or said, or done with such men? Himself sets down a rule in his
epistle Dedicatory to the Kings Matie cyted out of ^ully, Tullies (...) aga^^st
liers.
which is, that such are as taken once in lying, may never after be credited
again, which he applies against the Catholics: but how justly it ought to be
practiced in him and his follows, that are taken at every turn in such
notorious wilful lying, is evident to the discreet Reader, etc.

21. So wrote I in my la^t Treatise, laying down the falsity and indignity of
this manner of dealing. And this I think also to have been sufficiently
insisted upon by me, which might have moved M. Morton to have yielded us some
piece of answer, if he had pleased, or had thought himself able: Whereunto he
was specially bound, for that in the precedent Chapter, as you have heard, he
cyted Azor for one of his three Jesuits that condemn all Equivocation: but it
seems that he cares little what he says in one place, so he may escape out in
another, where he is most pressed. And yet after all this in the very end of
his book, he makes new Chale^ges of sincere integrity, as freshly, as if he
hadneuer been taken in the turnings, windings, and contradictions, which now
you have heard and wondered at, I doubt not.

THE FIFTH Pretermitted falsehood by M. Morton.. V.
LET US pass from these two Jesuits to a third: Cardinal Tolet abused about
gross and affected ignorance
for ^t seems that M. Morton has a special grace in ^i^gracing these men,
though with his own little grace and credit. The falsehood objected against him
in this place is about a (...) of the w^^ds and sense of Cardinal ^olet by a
slight or two of M. Morton, thus by me recorded in my Treatise of Mitigation.

23. If follows presently in the same text (said I) where M. Morton
continues his pleasant vein of playi^g with us. Mitig. 225.
But i^ may ^e (says he) that he which doubts is ignorant: ^ill no ignorance
excuse him? Whereunto he ^rameth of himself this answer, cyting Tolet in the
margent for the same: Affected ignorance does argue him an obstinate Heretic.
Which if you mark, does not answer the demand, for he demands, whether no
ignorance at all does excuse him, and then answers; that affected ignorance
does not excuse him, but does rather argue him an heretic. Tolet abused.
Now those that be learned do know, that there be diverse sorts of ignorance,
and of diverse d^grees, whereof affec^ed is the most culpable: so as this is very
impertinent. For that albeit affected ignorance do not excuse him, yet some
other, less faulty may do yt. And this for the sense. But if we look upon the
words themselves of Tolet, Lib. 1. Instr. Sac. c. 19.
cyted by this man in the margent, we shall discover much more impertinency or
impudency rather: for they are these: Ignorantia crassa non excusat aliquem a
pertinacia: Gross ignorance does not excuse a man from pertinacy. Now gross
ignorance and affected ignorance are two different things, which may be
understood by this example: That one may be ignorant o^ Catholic Religion by
gross ignorance, in that attending to worldly a^^airs, he does not care to
inform hims^l^e: but he is ignorant by affected ignorance, that does purposely
fly to be informed. So as here still our ignora^^ Mynister either ex ignorantia
crassa or aff^ctata, tells us quid pro quo, in translating affected
i^norance, for gross ignorance. And then again in eng^^sh^ng, non ex^u^at
aliquem a per^inacia, does argue ^^m ^n ob^^^^^^ ^ereticke: ^or that it is one
t^ing to argue, and another not to excuse. And wh^r^s ^e^ore ^. M. held, that
pert^nacie appertained not at all to the nature of heresy, here contrary wise
he translateth pe^tinacia, an obstinate here^ick, making it to signify both
substa^tiue and adi^ctiue, subs^a^ce and q^a^ity. But yet further then this you
must note, that in cyting this sentence out of Tolet, he cunningly dissebleth
the Authors assertion set down clearly not six lines before these word^:
Pertinacia necessaria est ad consti^uendum homine^ ^ae^e^i^um: Pertinacie is
necessary to make a man an heretic^e: being the quite contrary proposition to
that of this man before set down in the first example of his corruptions in
the former part of his Reply etc.

24. This was myformer discourse and conviction against him. And was not this
worthy of some consideration in his answer? But we must go forward, for there
rests much to recount.

THE SIXTH Pretermitted falsehood by Thomas Morton.. VI.
AFTER Cardinal Tolet may succeed Bellarmine of the same dignity, and of no
less fame for learning and virtue, whom as you have heard him M. Morton in
the precedent Chapter (though he went about to excuse it: Cardinal Bellarm.
egregiously injured about the question of ancient gathering of Counsels.
) so more notably shall you see it here, which I insisted upon so earnestly,
moved with the indignity of the abuse, as I cannot but marvel, that M. Morton
with any credit could pretermit to answer somewhat thereunto. My words are
these:

26. But yet in the very next page after, he uses a far greater immodestie,
or rather per^idie in my opinion, in calu^niation of Cardinal Bellarmine,
Mitig. pa. 208.
whom he abuses both in allegatio^, translation, application, and vain
insultation: for thus he cites in his text out of him. Ancient general
Counsels ( says the Romish Pretense) were not gathered without the cost of
good and Christian Emperors, and were made by their consents. For in those
days, the Popes did make supplication to the Emperors, that by his authority
he would gather Synods: but after those times all causes were changed, because
the Pope, who is Head in spiritual matters, cannot be subject in temporal.
Bellarm. lib. 1. de Council. c. 13.. Habemus ergo.

27. And having alleged this resolution of Bellarmine, the Minister insulteth
over him in these words^ Who would think this man could be a Papist, much less
a Jesuit, how much less a Cardinal, who thus disableth the title of the
Pope, granting to us in these words: After these times (that is after six
hundred years) the truth of purer antiquities challenging Popes to be subject
unto Christian Emperors. And yet who but a Papist would (as it were in despite
of antiquity) defend the degenerate state, saying: After those times Popes
might not be subject in temporal matters? as if he should have said: A
childish insultatio^ of T. M. over Card. Bellarm.
Thou gracious favor of ancient Christian Emperors: Thou sound judgment of
ancient reverend Fathers: Thou devout subjection of ancient holy Popes: in
sum, Thou ancient purity and pure antiquity, adieu. But we may not so
bastardly reject the depositum and doctrine of humble subjection, which we have
received from our Fathers of the first six hundred years: and not so only, but
which (as your Barkley witnesses) the universal Christian world embraced with
common consent for a full thousand years. So he.

28. And do you see how this Mynister tryumpheth? Who would think that men of
conscien^e or credit could make such ostentation upon mere lies devised by
themselves as now we shall show all this brag to be? And as for D. Barkley
alleged ^n the last lines, Barkleius l. 6. a^^^ s. Monarch. c. 26.
let any man read him in the book^ and Chapter cyted and he will wonder at the
impudency of this vaunter: for he speaks no one word of gathering Counsels,
or comparison of spiritual authority between the Pope and Emperor,
concerning their gathering of Counsels or Synods: but of a quite different
subject, of taking arms by subjects against their lawful temporal Princes.
And what will our Minister then answer to this manifest calumniation so
apparently convinced out of D. Barkley? But let us pass to the view of that
which touches Cardinal Bellarmine, against whom all this tempest is raised.

29. First then we shall set down his words in Latin according as T. M. cyteth
him in his margent. Tunc Concilia generalia sievant (says he) non sin^
Imperatorum sumptibus, Bellar. l. 1. de Conc. c. 13.. Habemus ergo.
and e^ tempore Pontifex subijcie^at se Imperatoribus in temporalibus, and ideo
non poterant inuito Imperatore aliquid agere: idcirco Ponti^ex supplica^at
Imperatori, vt iuberet conuocari Synodum. At post illa tempora omnes causae
mutatae sunt, quia Pontifex, qui est Caput in spiritualibus, non est subiectus
in temporalibus. Then in those days general Counsels were made not without
the charges of Emperors, and in that time the Pope did subject himself unto
Emperors in temporal affairs, and therefore they could do nothing against
the Emperors will: for which cause the Pope did make supplication to the
Emperor, that he would command Synods to be gathered: but after those times
al^ causes were changed, for that the Pope who is head in spiritual matters is
not subject in temporal affairs. So he.

30. And here let us consider the variety of ^leights and shifts of this our
Mynister, not only in cyting Bellarmynes words falsely and against his meaning
and drift in Latin, Diverse sorts of corruption.
whereof we shall speak presently: but in perverting this Latin, that he has
so corruptly set down in his former English translation. For first having said
according to the latin, that general Counsels in these days were not
gathered without the cost of Emperors, he adds presently of his own, and
were made by their consents, which is not in the Latin: and then he cutteth of
the other words immediately ensuing which contain the cause, to wit, for that
the Popes subiecting themselves in those days touching temporalities unto the
Emperors ( as having no temporal States or dominion yet of their own) could
do nothing without them, and therefore did make supplication to the said
Emperors, that they would command Synods to be gathered: which T.M.
translateth that they would gather Synods, as though Bellarmine did affirm,
that it lay in the Emperors by right to do it: but after those times omnes
causae mutatae sunt, all causes were changed: but he should have said are
changed, as Bellarmyns true words are, omnes istae causae, all these causes are
changed, to wit, four sorts of causes, which he sets down why general
Counsels could not be well gathered in those days without the Emperors help
and authority, with causes are guilfully cut of by this deceiuer, as in like
manner the last words put down here by himself, Pontifex non est subiectus in
temporalibus, are falsely translated, cannot be subject in temporal. And
again afterward, Popes might not be subject in temporal matters, which is to
make Bellarmine contrary to himself, who says a little before, that the Popes
did subject themselves for many years: whereby is proved that they could do it.
But Bellarmyns meaning is, that in right by the prehemynence of their
spiritual dignity, they were exempted and not bound thereunto.

31. And thus much now for the corruptions used in the words here set down
both in Latin and English. But if we would go to Bellarmyne himself, and see
his whole discourse, and how brokenly and perfidiously these lines are cut out
of him and here patched together, as one entire context, contrary to his
drift and meaning^ we shall marvel more at the insolency of Tho. Morton,
tryumphing over his own lie, as before has been said. For that Bellarmyne
having proved at large, The sum of Cardinal Bellarmins discourse falsified
by ^. M.
and by many sorts of arguments and demonstrations, throughout diverse Chapters
together, that the right of gathering general Counsels belongs only to the
B. of Rome, and having answered all objections that could be made against the
same in the behalf of Emperors or other temporal Princes, granting only that
for certain causes in those first ages, the same could not be done (in respect
of temporal difficulties) without the help and assistance of the said
Emperors, that were Lords of the world; he comes to make this conclusion,
which here is cyted by T. M. but in far other words and meaning then here he
is cyted. You shall hear how he sets it down, and thereupon consider of the
truth of this Mynister. Bellar. l. 1. de Conc. c. 13. Habemus ergo.
Habemus ergo (says he) prima illa Concilia etc. We have then by all this
disputation seen, how those first Christian Counsels were commanded by
Emperors to be gathered, but by the sentence and consent of Popes, and why the
Pope alone in those days did not call Counsels, as afterward has been
accustomed: Athan. in. Ep. ad solitar. vit. agentes.
the reason was^ not for that Counsels gathered without the Emperors co^se^t,
are not lawful, as our adversaries would have it, for against that is the
express authority of S. Athanasius, saying: Qua^do vnqua^ iudicium Ecclesiae
ab Imperatore authoritatem habuit? When was it ever seen that the judgment of
the Church did take authority from the Emperor? But for many other most just
causes was the Emperors consent required therein etc.

So Bellarmyne.

32. And here now see, Four causes why Emperors consents were necessary for
gathering of Counsels in old time.
that Bellarmins drift is wholly against M. Mortons assertion: for that he
denies that ever the Emperors had any spiritual authority for calling of
Counsels, but only that they could not well in those days be made without
them, and that for four several causes: whereof the first was for that the old
Imperial laws made by Gentills were yet in use, whereby all great meetings of
people were forbidden, for fear of sedition, except by the Emperors knowledge
and Lords of the whole world, the Councell^ See ff de Col. ill. and l. convent.
de Epis^. and presbyteris
The third, for that general Counsels being made in those days by the
public charges and contributions of Cytties, and especially of Christian
Emperors themselves, as appears by Eusebius, Eusebius. l. 3. de vit. Co^st.
Th^od. l. 1. Hist. c. 16.
and other writers, it was necessary to have their consent and approbation in
so public an action, as that was.

33. The fourth and last cause was (says Bellarmine) for that in those days,
albeit the B. of Rome were Head in spiritual matters over the Emperors At
post illa tempora istae omnes caus^ mutatae sunt: But since those days all
these (four) causes are changed, and ipse in suis Prouincijs est Princeps
supremus temporalis, sicut sunt Reges and Principes alij. And the Pope himself
now in his temporal Provinces is supreme temporal Lord also, as other Kings
and Princes are: which was brought to pas^e by Gods providence (says
Bellarmyne) to the end, that he might with more freedom, liberty and
reputation exercise his office of general Pastourship.

34. And this is all that Bellarmyne has of this matter. And now may we
consider the vanity of M. Mortons triumph over him before, and how falsely he
deals with him, alleging him against his own drift and meaning: leaving out
also those four causes by mer^ cited, and then cutting of frauduiently the
particle (istae) these causes are now changed, which includes reference to
these four: and furthermore speaking indefinitely, as though ^ll causes, and
matters were now changed, seeks thereby to deceive his Reader, and to extort
from Bellarmyne that confession of antiquity on his side, which he never meant,
and much less uttered in his writings. What dealing, what conscience, what
truth is this? etc.

35. Thus I insisted then: and was not this sufficient to draw some answer
from M Morton, if he had resolved to answer the points of most moment and most
insisted upon, as he professes? But it shameth me to see him thus taken at
every turn. Let us go forward,

THE SEVENTH Pretermitted falsehood by Thomas Morton.. VII.
AFT^R Bellarmine yt shall not be amysse to bring in Salmeron another Jesuit,
The Jesuit Salmeron much perverted in sundry points. Mi^ig. pa. 191. Page 2.
whom M. will needs shake also by the sleeue, and show him a trick or two of
his art in sundry places of his Book, whereof one is somewhat largely handled
by me in this manner.

37. In the second page ( quoth I) of his pretended Confutation, M. Morton has
these words: In the old Testament the Jesuits are forced to allow, that the
King was supreme over the Pri^sts in sp^ri^uall a^faires, and ordering Priests.
For proof whereof he cit^th in the margent Salmeron a Jesuit, a very learned
man, that has left written in our days many volumes upon the Gospells,
Epistles of S. Paul, and other parts of Scripture, and was one of the first
ten, that joined themselves with the famous holy Man, Ignatius de Loyola, for
the beginning of that Religious Order: in which citation diverse notable
corruptions are to be seen. First, for that Salmeron proves the quite
contrary in the place by this man quoted, to wit, that never Kings were Head of
the Church or above Priests by their ordinary Kingly authority in
Ecclesiastical matters in the new or old Testament: and having proved the same
largely, he comes at length to set down objections to the contrary, and to
^olue and answer them saying: Salmeron disp. 12. in Ep. Pauli in gen.. Sed
co^tra.
Sed contra hanc solidam veritatem etc. But now against this sound truth by me
hitherto confirmed I know that many things may be objected, which we are
diligently to confute. First the^ may be objected that Kings in the old
Testament did sometimes prescribe unto Priests, what they were to do in sacred
things, as also did put some negligent Priests from the execution of their
office. To which is answered: Vbi id euenisset, mirum esse non debere: If it
had so fallen out, yt had been no marvel: for that the Synagogue of the Jews,
albeit it contained some just men, yet was it called rather an earthly then ^n
heavenly Kingdom: in so much as S. Augustine does doubt, Aug. l. 19. co^t.
Faust. cap. 31. in princ.
whether in the old Testament, the Kingdom of heaven was ever so much as
named, and much less promised for reward: and therefore those things that were
then done among them, foreshewed only or prefigured divine things that were to
succeed under the new Testament, the other being not divine but humane and
earthly. So Salmeron.

Corruption about the meaning.
38. Here then are sundry important corruptions and frauds uttered by T. M. the
one that the Jesuits and namely Salmeron are in^orced to allow the temporal
King to have been supreme over the high Priest in spiritual matters, under the
old law: whereas he does expressly affirm and prove the contrary, both out of
the Scripture it self, by the sacrifice appointed more worthy for the Priest,
the^ the Prince, and many other Testimonies, Disp. 12. page 324. and 325.
Leuit. 4. Deuteronomy. 17. Number. 27. Philo. l. de victimis par. 2. circa med. Joseph l.
3. antiq. cap. 10.
as that he must take the law and interpretation thereof at the Priests hands,
that he must ingredi and egredi ad verbum Sacerdotis, go in and out, and
proceed in his affairs by the word and direction of the Priest, and the like:
as also by the testimony of Philo and Josephus two learned Jews: and other
reasons handled at large in this very disputation, and in the self same place
from whence this objection is taken. And this is the first falsyfication
concerning the Authors meaning and principal drift.

39. The second corruption is in the words as they ly in the latin copy, and as
by me before mentioned: Corruption about the words
Vbi id euenisset miru^ esse non debere. If any such thing had fallen out as
was objected, to wit, that Kings sometimes had prescribed to the Priests what
they should do in Ecclesiastical things, deposed some etc. yt had been no
marvel: for so much as their Ecclesiastical Kingdom or Synagogue was an
earthly and imperfect thing, but yet this proves not that it was so, but only
it is spoken upon a suppositio^: which suppositio^ this Minister that he might
the more cu^ningly shift of and avoid, left out of purpose the most essential
words thereof, vbi id euenisset, if that had happened etc. as also for the same
cause to make things more obscure, after those words of Salmeron that stand in
his text, Synagoga Iud^orum dicebatur terrenu^ potius quam caeleste regnum: The
Synagogue or Ecclesiastical government of the Jews was called rather an
earthly then an heavenly Kingdom (where as contrariwise the Ecclesia^ticall
power in the Christian Church is every where called Celestial:) after those
words (I say) this man cutteth of again many lines that followed^ together
with S. Augustines judgment before touched, which served to make the Authors
meaning more plain, Sundry sleights.
and yet left no sign of (etc.) whereby his Reader might understand that
somewhat was omitted, but joins again presently, as though it had immediately
followed; Itaque cum populus Dei constet corpore and animo, carnalis pars in
veteri populo primas tenebat. Whereas Gods people does consist of body and mind,
the carnal or bodily part did chie^ly prevail among the Jews: and herewith
ends, as though nothing more had ensued of that matter, thrusting out these
words, that imediatly followed, and made the thing clear, which are: Et ad
spiritualia significanda constituebatur: and that kind of earthly power was
appointed to signify the spiritual, that was to be in the new Testament:
Whereby is evidently seen that Salmeron understood not by carnalis pars, and
regnum terrenum, the temporal Kingdom of Jury, as this Mynister does
insinuate to make the matter odious: but the Ecclesiastical government of the
Sinagogue under the old law, in respect of the Ecclesiastical power in the
new, whereof the other was but an earthly figure or signification.

40. But now the third corruption, Corruption about the translation. Confut.
page 2.
and most egregious of all is in his English Translation out of the Latin words
of Salmeron: for thus he translateth them in our name: In the Synagogue of the
Jews (says Salmeron) was a State rather earthly then heavenly: so that in
that people (which was as in the body of a man, consisting of body and soul)
the carnal part was more emynent: meaning the temporal to have been supreme.
In which translation are many several shifts and frauds. For where as
Salmeron says: Synagoga Iudaeorum dicebatur potius terrenum, quam caeleste
regnum. The Synagogue or Ecclesiasti^all power among the Jews was called
rather an earthly, th^n a heavenly Kingdom: he translateth yt: The Synagogue
of the Jews was a State, rather earthly then heavenly. And this, to the end he
might apply the word of eart^ to the temporal Prince, Malicious
interpretations to make us odious.
and heavenly to the Judicial Priests, which is quite from Salmerons meaning.
Secondly those other words of Salmeron being, Cum populus Dei constet ex
corpore and animo: Where as the people of God do consist of body and mind,
meaning thereby as well Christians as Jews: and that the Jews are as the bodily
or carnal part of the man, and the Christians the spiritual, and consequently
their Ecclesiastical authority earthly, and ours heavenly: this fellow to
deceive his reader puts out first the word (Dei) the people of God, which
could not but signify Christians in Salmerons meaning, and then translateth, In
that people (to wit the Jews) the carnal part was the more eminent, meaning
(says he) the temp^rall: which is fals^, for he speaks expressly of the
Ecclesiastical power among the Jews, which he calls carnal and terrene, in
respect of the spiritual Ecclesiastical among the Christians, and not the
temporal or kingly power under the old Testament, as this man to make us
odious to temporal Princes as debasing their authority would have it thought.
And Salmerons contraposition or antithesis is not between the temporal and
Ecclesiastical government among the ^ewes: but between their Ecclesiastical
government and ours, that of the Synagogue, and this of the Christian Church,
whereof the one (he says) to be terrene and earthly, the other spiritual and
heavenly: the one infirm, the other powerful over souls etc. So as all these
sorts and kinds of corruptions being seen in this one little authority, you
may imagine what will be found in the whole Book, if a man had so much patience
and time to leese, as to discuss the same exactly throughout. So in that
place. And did not this require some answer also among the rest? Had it not
been good that M. M^rton had ^ent us some few lines of satisfaction to this,
instead of so many idle triflings, as he has prosecuted largely in this his
Reply? But it is easily seen, that he sought for choice matter, whereby to
intertayne his reader, and seem to say somewhat.

THE EIGHT Falsehood pretermitted by Thomas Morton.. VIII.
Salmeron, Salmeron again abused by egregious cauillatio^.
though by order I should have mentioned yt before: thus it is la^d forth in my
Book of Mitigation. Mitig. page 143.
It follows in the same place (said I) as a second Romish pretense, produced
by M. Morton, That the old ^estament was a figure of the new in Christ, and
th^rf^re that in the new, the spiritual power (as the Popedom says he) must
be the chief or substantive etc. which short sentence he patcheth out of two
different authors Salmeron and Carerius, part of one and part of another, and
then frames this grave answer thereunto: Salm. disp. 12. in Ep. Paul. Carer^
l. 2. cap. 1.
In this objection (says he) there is more childhood then manhood, ba^ish
grammar then sound divinity. So he. And will you hear his manhood in sound
divinity? It follows immediately. The old Testament indeed (says he) in his
earthly elements was a figure o^ this s^irituall and heau^nly, but o^ the
truly heavenly, the day of that eternal Sabbath, and the celesticall
Jerusalem, the mother-Citty of the Sai^ts o^ God. Heb. 4.
Behold his manhood in sound Divinity!

42. Let it be so, that the old Testament was in many things a figure of the
heavenly Sabbath and celestial Jerusalem: but what, Sir, will you conclude of
this by your sound divinity? was it not a ^igure also of many things upon
earth, which should be fulfilled in the new Testament? How the old Testament
was a figure of the new.
Were not their Ceremonies and Sacrifices a figure of our Sacraments and
Sacrifice? their Manna of our Eucharist? their Circumcisions and washings
figures of our Baptism? does not S. Paul in the 9. an 10. of his first Epistle
to the Corinthians set down many examples to this effect? as that of
Deutronomy, Non alligabis os boui trituranti: 1. Cor. 9.
Deuteronomy. 25.
thou shall not bynd up the mouth of the ox that labors, applying it unto
our Preachers of the new Testament that must have their maintenance? as also he
expounds the passing of the Red Sea by the Israelits, their being baptized in
the Cloud, their food of the Manna, their drinking out of the Rock which
prefigured Christ, and diverse other things, whereof he says: Haec autem in
figura facta sunt nostri: these things were done in figure of our present
St^te. And again: Haec autem omnia in figura contingebant illis: 1. Cor. 10.
All these things did happen to the Jews in figure, but were to be fullfilled
truly and really according to the spiritual meaning in the new Testament Is
not all this so? Were not these things to be fulfilled as well upon earth as in
heaven? How then does our Mynister put that aduersatiue clause (but of the
truly heavenly,) as though the old Testament in her earthly elements had
pre^igured nothing to be fulfilled but only in heaven? Is this sound Divinity?
Is this Manhood? Nay is it not rather babish Childhood, that seems not to know
the very first elements of true Divinity?

43. I let pass the shameless corruption which he uses in translating the very
words cyted by him out of Salmeron, for proof of his objection made in our
behalf: and I call yt shameless, for that every Child which understands Latin
may see the Ministers shift therein. The Authors words are these as this man
here recounteth them: Et hoc regnum terrenum vmbra tamen suit spiritualis
regiminis in Ecclesia Christiana: Confut. pa. ^^
and yet this earthly Kingdom (of the Jews) was a shadow of the spiritual
government, that was to be in the Christian Church: meaning thereby the most
excellent spiritual power and government over souls, which Christ was to
institute in his Church, at his coming in flesh, to wit, the power of
absoluing from sins upon earth, the assistance given by the Sacraments, and
the like, were shadowed in a certain manner by the earthly Ecclesiastical
Kingdom among the Jews. And how does T. M. now translate these words and
frame our objection out of them. The old Testament (says he) was a figure of
the new in Christ, therefore in the new, the Popedom is the substantive etc.
Here are two short propositions you see, the Antecedent and Consequent, and
both framed with falsehood: for that the Antecedent set down, as out of
Salmeron, is not that which he affirms in his Latin words, as already we have
showed: though otherwise in it self the proposition be true, to wit, that the
old Testament was a figure of the new in Christ: nor will (I think) T. M.
deny it. There follows then the Consequent or second proposition ( that
therefore in the new the Popedom is the substantive) which is no less
corruptly inferred in our name, Cauillatio^ of T.M.
then was the Antecedent affirmed: for that we do not infer, nor yet the
Author Carerius in the said second proposition or Consequence by him alleged,
that for so much as the old Testament is a figure of the new, therefore in the
new, the Popes spiritual authority is the substantive etc. for that this were
a weak inference, as every man sees. Nay Carerius makes no infere^ce at all
in the place by him alleged, but only uses that similitude, which before you
have heard of the substantive and adjective: So as this inference is only a
fiction of the Minister to make himself and other men merry, and to give
occasion to play upon his adversary, with reproach of Childhood and babish
grammar, as now he has done: but indeed the true Consequence that may be made
upon the Catholic Authors words which hitherto he has alleged, is only
this: that for so much as the Kingdom and government among the Jews, even in
Ecclesiastical things, was but earthly, and a figure or shadow, in respect of
that which was to be over souls, in the Christian Church, it follows, that
this in respect of spirituality was to be much more emynent then the other, as
the thing figured, then the figure or shadow it self. And what inconvenience
has this doctrine that it should be called Childhood and babish grammar? So
much I set down in my former reprehension of M. Morton for this abuse of
Salmeron, all which he now in his last Reply thought best to pass over with
silence: for that belike he esteemed it not sufficiently insisted upon by me,
thereby to press him to answer it. But this may be amended at another time:
and so I pass on now to recount others of like sort.

THE NINTH Pretermitted falsehood by Thomas Morton.. IX.
THERE follows now against Dolman a like slight, thus recorded by me in my
book. M. Mortons second reason why his Majesty's Catholic and Protestant
subjects may not live together in England is: About Dolman and other writers
abused by him.
For that all Popish Priests (says he) d^ attribute a double prerogative over
Kings, that is to say, a Democraticall and Monarchical sovereign Civil
power: the first to the people, the second to the Pope. And for proof of the
first concerning the people, he alleges four several authorities of
Catholic writers, Mitig. page 65.
but so corruptly and perfidiously, as if nothing else did show his talent of
cogging and treacherous dealing, this were sufficient to discover the same:
though afterward greater store will occure, we shall run over briefly all
those four.

45. First he says that Dolman in his Con^erence about Succession has these
words: The common wealth has authority to choose a King, and to lymit him
laws at their pleasure: Dolman. par. 1. page 13. ^yted in Discou. page 9.
which if it were truly alleged, as it lies in the Author, yet here is no
mention o^ the people, or of Democraticall state, but only of the Common
wealth, which includes both nobility and people, and all other States.
Secondly Dolmans words are not of choosing a King, but of choosing a form of
government, be it Democraticall, Aristocraticall, or Monarchical. Let us hear
the Author himself speak. In like ma^^^r (says he) it is evident, that as
the Common wealth has this authority to choose and change her government (as
has been proved:) so has it also to lymit the same, with what laws and
condi^ions she pleases: whereof ensues great diuers^^y of authority and
power, which each one of the ^ormer gouerments has in it self. So he. Where we
see that Doleman speaks of the power which a Common wealth that is deuoid of
any certain government, to choose unto themselves that form that best likes
the^, with the limitatio^s they think most expedient: and so we see in
England, France, Polonia, Germany, Venice, Genua, and in the Empire it self,
different forms and manners of government, with different laws and
lymitations, according to the choice and liking of each Nation. This Dolman is
corrupted by T. M. both in words and sense. About Dolman^ text abused in words
and sense.
For he neither speaks nor means as the false Minister avouches him, of
gyuing Democraticall power to the people over Princes established.

46. So wrote I in my former book. And albeit I do not insist and dwell upon
the matter so long as upon some other sleights: yet does it contain notable
falsehood, if you consider it well; first to allege the words of an Author that
are not his: and the^ to infer thereof, that, which neither the words
themselves do bear, nor the Author ever dreamed of.

47. And here I might allege diverse other Writers, but especially Jesuits
wrongfully abused by him, both in cyting of their works and words, and
falsifying their meaning: as namely those three whom he brings in for witness
in the end of the fourth Chapter against Equivocation, even in those places,
where they do most resolutely affirm Equivocation to be lawful: namely Azor,
Emanuel Sa, and Maldonatus: but these will have their place afterward. And so
from Jesuits I pass to other Authors, who have received the like sort of
dealing from him.

THE TENTH Pretermitted falsehood by Thomas Morton.. X.
AS you have heard how M. Morton has dealt fraudulently with the Jesuits, so
shall you see him use the same measure also toward others, as namely toward
the Paduan Doctor Carerius, Carerius injuriously handled about his opinion of
Priesthood and Kingly authority. Mitig. c. 6. nu. 60. page 234. Mi^ig. page 141.
out of Celsus vere, for Celsus vero, though I objected the same but slightly,
and by the way, and said expressly that I held yt for a tri^le. But now you shall
hear a more grave and grievous charge made against him for worse abusing of
the same Carerius. Thus it lies in my book.

49. The next sentence ( quoth I) or objection after the former preface (which
is the very first of his discourse) is framed by him (but yet in our name)
under the title of the Roman pretense in these words. The high Priests in the
old ^estament (says he) were supreme in civil Causes: Ergo, they ought to be
so also in the new. For which he c^teth one Carerius a Lawyer, that wrote of
late in Padua, de potestate Romani Pon^ificis, Page 2.
defending the former opinion of Canonists for direct dominion, and cites his
words in Latin thus: Carer. l. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 18. and Sander. in visib.
monarch.
Dico Pontificem in veteri Testamento suisse Rege maiorem: and Englisheth the
same as before you have heard, That the high Priest was supreme in Civil
causes: which words of Civil causes, he pu^teth in of his own, and if you
mark them, do mar the whole market. For that Carerius has them not either
in words or sense, but teaches the plain contrary in all his discourse, to
wit, that he means in matters appertayning to Religion and Priesthood, and
not of temporal Principality: which temporal principality this Author
grants to have been greater in the old Testament in dealing with
Ecclesiastical men and matters, then in the new: and to that effect is he
cited presently after by the Mynister himself, contrary to that which here he
feigneth him to say. But let us hear the words of Carerius. Tertio dico (says
he) etiam in Testamento vete^i, fuisse Ponti^ic^m Rege maiorem: quod quidem
probatur etc. Thirdly, I say, that the high Prie^t was greater also in the old
Testament then the King: which is proved first out of the 27. Chapter of
Numbers, where it is appointed by God, that Iosue, and all the people should be
directed by the word of the high Priest Eleazar, saying: The dignity of
Priesthood proved to be more the^ Regal.
When any thing is to be done, let Eleazar the high Priest co^sult with God,
and at his word as well Iosue, as all the Children of Israel, and whole
multitude shall go forth and come in etc. And secondly the same is proved out
of the fourth of Leuiticus, where four kind of Sacrifices being ordained
according to the dignity of the persons: the first two are of a Calse for the
high Priest and Common wealth: the third and fourth of a he and shee-goat for
the Prince and private persons. Whereby Carerius infers a most certain
dignity and pre-eminence of the Priests state above the temporal Prince,
though he say not in Civil causes, as this Mynister does belly him.

50. And whereas Carerius had said in two former answers, first that in the old
Testament, Ecclesiastical and secular jurisdiction were not so distinct but
that both might be in some Cases in the King: and secondly that in the law, the
new spiritual power was more emyne^t the^ in the old, he comes thirdly to
say, that in the old law, the high Priest in some respects was greater also
then the King, which cannot be understood of Civil ^ower, except the Author
will be contrary to himself. And ther^ore that clause was very ^alsely and
perfidiously thrust in by the Mynister, False dealing against Carerius.
and this with so much the less shame, ^or that in the end of the same Capter,
he cites the same Author to the plain contrary sense saying: Confut. p. 2.
Carer. l. 2. cap. 1.
In veteri lege Regnu^ erat subs^anti^um, and Sacerdo^iu^ adiectiuu^ etc. That
in the old Law the Kingdom was the substa^tiue that stood of it self, and
Priesthood was the adjective that leaned thereon: but contrariwise in the new
law, Priesthood and spiritual jurisdiction is the substantive or principal in
government, and temporal principality is the adjective depending thereof for
direction and assistance: the one, both by nature, and Gods law being
subordinate to the other, to wit, the temporal to the spiritual. And thus
much concerning this guyle by flat falsehood. Now to a trick or two of other
sorts of shifting, by him used for deluding the Reader.

51. This was my reprehension and complaint then, and if M. Morton had dealt
really, he would rather have thought how to have answered somewhat to this
substantial imputation, then to have trif^ed so often with the other of vero
and vere, out of the same Author, but that he had some shadow how to shift of
that, by a show of a later erroneous print of Cullen, but none at all for this.

THE ELEVENTH Falsehood dissembled by Thomas Morton.. XI.
Paduan Doctor of law Carerius, follows the famous Religious Doctor of the
Order of S. Dominicke, Franc. de Victoria abused touching the exemption of
Clergy men.
named Franciscus de Victoria, whom in like manner he does egregiously abuse,
as by my former complaint may appear, which I delivered in these words.

53. It follows in the 16. page thus: Your devise (says M. Morton) of
exemption of Priests (from the ^urisdiction of temporal Princes in certain
Cases) is too crude to be disgested by any reasonable Divine, Mitig. page 199.
for (as ^our Victoria says) Priests, besides that they are Mynisters of the
Church, they are likewise members of the Common wealth: and a King is as well
King of the Clergy as of the Laity: therefore the Clergy is subject to the
Civil authority in t^mporall things, for such matter is not ruled by any power
spiritual. A plain demonstration. So he. And I say the same, that indeed it
is a plain demonstration of M. Mortons egregious falsehood and abusing his
Reader. First in making him believe that the learned man Franciscus de Victoria
does favor him or his in this matter of exemption of Priests, whereas in this
very place here cyted by T.M. his first proposition of all in this matter is
this: Franc. de Vict. relect 1. de potest. Eccl^^iae sect. 4.
Ecclesiastici iure sunt exempti etc. I do affirm that Ecclesiastical men are
by law exempted, and fr^ed from Civil power, so as they may not be conuented
before a secular Judge, either in criminal or Civil causes, and the contrary
doctrine to this is condemned for heretical among the articles of John
Wickliffe, in the Council of Constance. So he. And now see whether Victoria
make for him or no; or whether he disgested well this crude doctrine of
Pries^es exemptio^, as this Mynisters phrase is.

54. Secondly, if we consider either the English translation here set down
out of the words of Victoria, Variety of corruptions.
or his Latin text for ostentation sake put in the margent by M. Morton; we
shall find so many and monstrous foul corruptions, intercisions, geldings and
mutilations, as is a shame to behold: and I beseech the learned Reader to have
patience to confer but this one place only with the Author, Relect. 1. sect.
4. no^ sect. 7.
and he will rest instructed in the man's spirit for the re^t: but he must find
them as I have now cited them here in the margent, and not as T. M.
erroneously quoteth them, if not of purpose to escape the examine. For that
Victoria having set down his precedent general proposition for the exemption
of Clergy men, Victoria his propositions about exemption of Clergy men, and and
^^ M. his corruptions therein.
that they were exempted Iure, by law, he pass^th on to examine in his second
proposition, Quo iure? by what law, Divine or humane they are exempted? And in
his third he holds, that aliqua exemptio Clericorum ^st de iure diuino: that
some kind of exemptions of Clergy men from Civil power, is by divine law, and
not humane only: and fourthly he comes to this which here is set down by
T.M. but not as he sets it down. Our ^ourth proposition (says Victoria) is
that the persons of Clergy men are not absolutely and in all things exempted
from Civil power, ^ither by Divine or humane law, which is evident by that
clergy men are bound to obey the temporal laws of the City or Common
wealth, wherein they live, in those things that do appertain to the temporal
government and administration thereof, and do not let or hind^r Ecclesiastical
government.

55. These are the words of Victoria, as they lie together in him, and then
after some arguments interposed for his said conclusion, he adds also this
proof. That ^or so much as Clergy men besides this that they are Mynisters of
the Church, are Citizens also of the common wealth, they are bound to obey the
temporal laws of that Common wealth or Prince in temporal affairs: and then
ensues the last reason (here set down in English by T. M.) in th^se words.
Moreover (says Victoria) for that a King is King, not only of Laymen, but of
Clergy men also, therefore, aliquo modo subi^ciuntur ei: in some sort they are
subject unto him. Which words aliquo modo, in some sort, the Mynister leaves
out. And is this plain dealing? And the^ it follows imediatly in Victoria:
And ^or that Cl^rgie men are not governed in temporal matters by
Ecclesiastical power, therefor they have their temporal Prince, unto whom
they are bound to yield obedience in te^porall affairs. And this is all that
Victoria has in this matter, and in ^hese very words. And let any man consider
the patching, which T. M. uses both in English and Latin in this place, to
make some show for his feygned demonstration out of Victoria, and he will see
how poor and miserable a man he is, and how miserable a cause he defends.
And in particular, let the very last proposition be noted which he cyteth and
Englisheth, as out of victoria, to wit, the Clergy is subject to the Civil
authority inte^porall things, ^or such matter is not ruled by any power
spiritual: whereby he would have his Reader to imagine, that no spiritual
power may have authority to govern temporal matters: whereas the words of
Victoria are: Clerici quantum ad temporalia non administrantur potestate
Ecclesiastica, that Clergy men ^or so much as apperteineth to temporal
affairs, are not governed by Ecclesiastical power, but by the temporal,
which there bears rule. So as this fellow by a subtle slight changing the
nominative Case from Clerici non administrantur, to temporalia non
administrantur, frames his plain Demonstration out of plain cosenage and
forgerie. And is this naked innocence etc? Thus far I had in my former
Treatise. And here you see, I was earnest enough in urging and pressing for an
answer, if it might have been had: but none came at all, but other trifling
toys in steed thereof: and that in great store, as our former discourses, have
declared: and yet we must go forward to recount more^

THE TWELFE falsehood pretermitted by Thomas Morton.. XII.
WE shall pass from private Doctors to an S. Boniface: ^. Boniface Archb.
falsified notably in the question, Whether a Pope may be an heretic.
whom M. Morton seems to make a Pope also, for that his speech is alleged
in one of the Popes Constitutions. My former charge against M. Morton about
that matter, was this that ensues.

57. Now (said I) to the second, wherein he says, that one of our Popes placed
also in the Calends of our Martyrs, does affirm, that though a Pope should
carry many people with himself to hell, no mortal man may presume to say,
why do you so? Mitig. page. ^^^.


I do greatly marvel with what conscience, or if not conscience, with what
forehead at least, these men can write and print, and reiterate so often in
their books, things that they know, or may know, to be merely fa^se and forge?
Is not this a sign of obstinate wilfulnes, and that neither God nor truth is
sought for by them, but only to maintain a part or faction with what slight
or falsehood so ever? I find this very objection set forth in print not many
years agone by Sir Francis Hastings in his Watchword and Defense thereof,
Shamles facing of untruths
and the same avouched stoutly after him for a time by Matthew Sutclisse the
Mynister, Advocate and Proctour of that De^ence: but afterward I find the same
so confuted at large by the VVarn-word, and so many lies, falsehoods, and
evident frauds discovered therein, as the said M. Sutclisse in his Reply
entitled, A full and round answ^re, though good roundly to let it pass
without any answer at all, which I can find in his said book, though I have
used some diligence in search thereof: which I do add, for that he changes the
whole order of answering, from the method of his Adversary, to the end not to
be found: and so answers nothing in order or place, as it is set downed by
him, whom he prete^deth to answer, but rather taking a new, vast, and wild
discourse to himself, A note of M. Sutcliffs manner of answering.
snatcheth here a word and there a word to carp at, not as they lie in his
Adversaries book, but as it pleases him to admit them, now from the end of
the book, then from the beginning, then from the myddle. And with this
substantial method he takes upon him to answer all books that come in his
way: for so he has answered of late the book also of Three Conuersions of
England, and may do easily all that is written by Catholics, if carping only
and scolding be answering.

58. Wherefore to this instance here resumed by T. M. though I must remit him,
or rather the Reader, for larger satisfaction to the said Catholic Treatise,
entitled The VVarnwoord; Warnword, Encounter 2. c. 13. n. 18.19.20. etc.
yet here briefly I am to tell him first, that he erreth grossly in affirming
in this place, the Author of this Canon cited by him, Si Papa, to have been a
Pope: for that the said Canon was gathered by Gratian out of the sayings of S.
Boniface Martyr, as in the title of the said Canon is expressed: which
Boniface, The error about S. Boniface the English Martyr.
was never Pope, but a virtuous learned Englishman, that lived above 850.
years agone, and was the first Archbishop of Mentz or Moguntia in Germany: of
which people, and Country he is called by all ancient writers the Apostle, for
that he first publicly converted that Nation, erected that primate Sea, and
suffered glorious Martyrdom by the Gentills for the faith of Christ. Wherefore
the scoff of T.M. calling him our Pope placed in the Calends of our Martyrs,
besides the ignorance tastes also of much profane malice and impiety.

59. Secondly, I say, that these words of his are corruptly set down, as over
commonly else where, and that both in latin and English. In latin, for that he
leaves out the beginning of the Canon, which shows the drift thereof, whose
title is: Damnatur Apostolicus qui suae and ^raternae salutis est negligens.
The Pope is damned, which is negligent in the affair of his own salvation and
o^ his brethren: and then begins the Canon, Si Papa suae and fraternae
salutis negligens etc. showing that albeit the Pope have no Superiour-iudge in
this world which may by authority check him, unless he fall into heresy: yet
shall his damnation be greater then of other sinners, for that by reason of his
high dignity, he draws more after him to perdition then any other. Whereby we
may perceive that this Canon was not written to flatter the Pope, as
Protestants would have it seem, but to warn him rather of his peril,
together with his high authority.

60. After this the better to cover this pious meaning of S. Boniface, T.M.
alleging two lines of the same in Latin he cutteth of presently a third line
that immediately ensues, to wit, Cum ipso plagis multis in aeternum
vapulaturus: that such a Pope is to suffer eternal punishments, and to be
scourged with many stripes together with the Devil himself, if by his evil
or negligent life, he be the cause of others perdition: which threat this man
having cut of he joins presently again with the antecedent words, these as
following immediately in the Canon: Huius culpas redarguere praesumet nemo
mortalium: This man's faults (to wit the Pope) no mortal man shall or may
presume to reprehend, and there ends. In which short phrase are many ^raudes.
For first he leaves out ( i^ti^) here in this life: and then for ( praesumit)
in the present tense, that no man does presume to check him in respect of the
greatness of his dignity, this man says ( praesumet) in the future tense, that
is, no man shall presume, or as himself translateth it, may presume to cotroll
him, which is a malicious falsehood. And lastly he leaves out all that
immediately follows containing a reason of all that is said: Quia cunctos ipse
iudicaturus, a nemine est iudicandus, nisi depre^endatur a fide deuius etc. for
that whereas he is Judge of all other men, he cannot himsel^e be judged by any,
except he be found to swerve from the true faith. Here then is nothing but
fraudulent cyting and abusing of Authors.

61. But now thirdly remains the greatest corruption and abuse of all in his
English translation, which is, that which most imports his simple Reader that
looks not into the Latin, and this is that he translateth the former sentence
of the Canon thus as before you have heard: Though he should carry many people
with him to hell: yet no mortal creature may presume to say why do you so?
Great impudency
But in the Latin neither here, nor in the Canon it self, is there any such
interrogation at all, as why do you so? And therefore I may ask T. M. why do
you lie so? Or why do you delude your Reader so? Or why do you corrupt your
Author so? Or why do you translate in English for the abu^ing of your Reader,
that which neither your self do set down in your Latin text, nor the Canon yt
self by you cited has yt at all? Is not this wilful and malicious fraud?
Wherein when you shall answer me directly and sincerely, it shall be a great
discharge of your credit with those, who in the mean space will justly hold
you for a Deceiuer.

62. Thus I pleaded with M. Morton at that time, and was earnest enough as you
see, if not over earnest, but all will not get an answer. Now we shall expect,
that in his promised Reioinder he will answer all together, and that he may
the better remember to do it, I thought convenient to give him this new record
for remembering the sam^.

THE THIRTEENTH falsehood wittingly pretermitted by Thomas Morton.. XIII.
S. Boni^ace an Archbishop and the Pope^ Legate we shall pass to a Pope
indeed, namely S. Leo the first, S. Leo deceitpfully alleged about the Oath
of Supremacy.
a man of high esteem in the Church of God, as all Christians know: and
therefore the abuse offered to him by M. Morton is the more reprehensible,
whereof I wrote thus in my last Treatise.

Mitig. page 203. Page 26.
63. The eight Father (says M. Morton) is Pope Leo, writing to a true Catholic
Emperor, saying: You may not be ignorant that ^our Princely power is given
unto you, not only in worldly regiment, but also spiritual, for the
preservation of the Church. As if he said not only in Causes te^porall, but
also in spiritual, so far as i^ belongs to the outward preservation, not to
the personal administration of them: and this is the substance of our English
Oath. And further neither do our Kings of England challeng, nor Subjects
condescend unto. In which words you see two things are contained: first what
authority S. Leo the Pope above eleven hundred years agone ascribed unto Leo
the Emperor in matters spiritual and Ecclesiastical.^ The second, by this
man's assertion, that neither our Kings of England challeng, nor do the Subjects
condescend unto any more in the Oath of the Supremacy, that is proposed unto
them: which if it be so, I see no cause why all English Catholics may not
take the same in like manner, so far forth as S. Leo allows spiritual
authority to the Emperor of his time. Wherefore i^ behooves that the Reader
stand attent to the deciding of this question: for if this be true, which here
M. Morton avouches, our controversy about the Suprema^y is at an end.

64. First then about the former point, let us consider how many ways T. M.
has corrupted the foresaid authority of S. Leo, partly by fraudulent
allegation in Latin, and partly by false translation into English. Many
falsehoods.
For that in Latin it goes thus, as himself puts it down in the margent:
Debes incunctanter aduertere, Regiam potestatem non solum ad mundi regimen, Leo
ep. 75. ad L^onem Augusti^^
sed maxim ad Ecclesiae praesidium esse collatam. You ought (o Emperor)
resolutly to consider, that your Kingly power is not only given unto you for
government of the world or wordly a^^aires, but especially for defense of the
Church: and then do ensue immediately these other words also in S. Leo,
suppressed fraudulently by the Mynister, for that they explicate the meaning of
the Author: Vt ausus nefarios comprimendo, and quae been sunt statuta defendas,
and veram pacem hijs quae sunt turbata, restituas. To the end that you may by
repressing audacious atte^pts ^oth defend those things that are well ordained
and decreed (as namely in the late general Council of Calcedon) and restore
peace where matters are troubled ( as in the City and Sea of Alexandria,)
where the Patriarch Proterius being slain and murdered by the conspiracy of
the Dioscorian heretics lately condemned in the said Council, all things are
in most violent garboyles, which require your Imperial power to remedy,
compose and compresse the same.

65. This is the true meaning of S. Leo his speech to the good and religious
Emperor of the same name, as appears throughout the whole Epistle here cited
and diverse others. Ibid. c. 5.
Nonne perspicuum est (says he) qui^us P^e^as Vestra succurrere and q^^bu^
obuiare, ^e Alexandrina Ecclesia etc. ^s it not evident whom your ^mperiall
piety ought to ass^st and succor, and whom you ought to resist and repress,
to the end the Church of Alexandria that hitherto has been the ^ouse of prayer,
become not a den of thieves? Surely it is most mani^est that by this late
barbarous and most furious cruelty (in murdering that Patriarch) all the light
of heavenly Sacraments is there extinguished: Intercepta est Sacrificiij
oblatio, defecit Chrismatis sanctificatio etc. The oblation of Sacrifice is
intermitted, The Christian sacrifice ceased in Alexandria.
the hallowing of Chrisme is ceased^ and all divine mysteries of our religion
have withdrawn themselves from the parricidiall hands of those heretics, that
have murdered their own Father and Patriarch Proterius, burned his body, and
cast the ashes into the air.

66. This the^ was the cause and occasion, wherein the holy Pope Leo did implore
the help and secular arm of Leo the Emperor, for chastising those turbulent
heretics: to which effect he says, that his Kingly power was not only given
him for the government of the world, Notable corruption of S. Leo his meaning.
but also for the defense of the Church, which our Mynister does absurdly
translate, not only in worldly regiment, but also spiritual for the
preservation of the Church: turning ad into in, and praesidium into
preservation, and then makes the Commentary which before we have set down: As
if he had said (quoth he) not only in causes temporal, but also in spiritual,
so far as it belongs to outward preservation, not to the personal
administration of them.

67. Thus far I wrote hereof before, and proceeded also further, showing not
only that he had corrupted both the text, sense and meaning of S. Leo, but also
that fondly he had affirmed, that the Oath of Supremacy exacted by King Henry
and some of his followers in England, was, nor is any thing else but the
acknowledging of so much authority spiritual as S. Leo granted to the Emperor
of his days. Whereupon I do join is^ue with him and promise that if he can
prove it to be no other, then that; all Catholics in my opinion will accept
the same, and so come to union and concord in that point. And thereupon I did
urge very earnestly that this assertion might be mainteyned, Mitig. pag^ 208.
saying among other things: Me thinks such public doctrine should not be so
publicly printed and set forth, without public allowance and intention to
perform and make it good. If this be really meant, we may easily be accorded:
if not, then will the Reader see what credit may be given to any thing they
publish, notwithstanding this Book comes forth with this special
commendation of, published by authority etc. Which words in my judgment should
have moved M. Morton to have said somewhat to the matter in this his answer,
and not to have passed it over so slyly, as though never mention had been made
thereof. But every man will guess at the cause, and so we shall expect it at
some other time.

THE FOVRTEENTH Pretermitted falsehood by T. M.. XIIII.
LET us come back from Pope Leo unto another Genesius Sepulueda, Sepulueda
abused about Equivocation.
whom M. Morton in words calls ours, but yet would make him his, if he could,
in the question of Equivocation: and for that he will not come of himself so
far as he would have him, he gives him a" wrinch or two to force him to draw
nearer, whereof my former accusation was this that ensues. Mitig. page ^84. n^.
57.


69. And lastly (quoth I) where M. Morton concludes the whole matter by the
testimony of our Doctor Genesius, as he calls him, I have told before how he
is ours, and how in some sort he may in this controversy be called his, though
he detested his Religion, as by his works appears. Ours he is, as in all
other points of Religion, so in the subs^antiall and principal point of this
question, for that he defends the use of Equivocation in concealing some
secrets, but denies it in others, wherein he favors somewhat the adverse
party, with small ground, as in the next Chapter shall be declared. But what
says this Doctor Genesius? Genes. Sepulu^ l. de^rat. dicend. testim. ^. 3.
He will tell you (says M. Morton) that this sense (of this text of Scripture)
which you conceal, is not only contrary to the sentence o^ all Fathers, but
also against all common sense. And is this possible? Will Sepulueda deny all
those Fathers, alleged by me before for our interpretation, to be Fathers?
Will he say, that their exposition is contrary to all common sense? does not
Genesius himself in the very Chapter here cited allege both S. Hierome and S.
Augustine for this interpretation, and allows the same? What shameless dealing
then is this of our Mynister to charge Genesius with such folly or impiety
which he never thought of? For Genesius denies not either the sense or
interpretation of the place, and much less says, that it is contrary to the
sentence of the Fathers, and least of all to common sense: but denies only the
application thereof for use and practice to certain Cases, wherein he admits
not Equivocation, and says, that upon this interpretation to bring in such a
new law were greatly inconvenient (wherein afterward notwithstanding we shall
show him to have been greatly deceived:) and his Latin words are: Contra non
modo veterum and grauissimorum Doctorum, sed communem hominum sensum quasi
legem inducere: to bring in as it were a law, not only against the judgment of
ancient and most grave schole Doctors (for of the^ only he speaks in that
place) but also against the common sense or opinion of men.

70. This is Genesius his speech, wherein though his judgment be rejected by
other Scholmen as singular and paradoxicall in this point, as after shall be
declared: yet is he egregiously abused by M. Morton, Genesius much abused by M.
Morton.
who first makes him to say of the interpretation and sense of this place of
scripture, that which he speaks only of the application thereof, to use and
practice in tribunalls. And secondly he makes him to discredit the Fathers
which himself alleges: then he englisheth ancient Fathers for ancient
School doctors: and last of all adds consensum of his own, leaving out
hominum, to make it sound common sense: and other such abuses, which any man
may see by conferring the place. And these are other manner of sins then
simple Equivocation, if the art of falsifying or forgery be any sin with him
at all. And so much for this place of Scripture. Thus wrote I in my said
Treatise, being earnest, as you see, to draw some answer from M. Morton: but
it would not come. It must be our patience to expect the same at his more
commodity hereafter.

THE FIFTEENTH Falsehood pretermitted by Thomas Morton.. XV.
FROM Sepulueda we pass to another Spanish Doctor his equal or rather much
better learned, named Sotus, whom M. Morton erroneously takes for Scotus,
under the title of subtle Doctor, and abuses him Mitigation in these words.

Sotus manif^stly preuerted against his own assertion about Equivocation.
Mitig. page 433.

Sotus l. 5. de just. q. 6. art. 2.


72. Behold (says M. Morton) one Doctor among you so subtle, that for that
faculty he has by figure of excellency been called The subtle Doctor, who
does conclude all your Equiuocators for Liars, saying: To say that I did not
that which I know I have done, although I speak it with this lymitation or
reseruatio^ of mind, vt tibi significem, it is not Equivocation but a lie. And
then he quoteth Sotus in his books De iure and ius^itia, setting down also in
margent the Latin words conform to this. But all is treachery, falsehood and
lying in this impertinent impugner of Equivocation. For first by the subtle
Doctor according to the phrase of Catholic Schools, every child knows to be
mea^t Joan. Scotus, and not Dominicus Sotus, who lived more then 200^ years
after the other, and was of the order of S. Dominicke, the other being of S.
Francis: so as this is folish and ridiculous error, if it be error: but the
other is clearly false and malicious, that these words as here they are cited,
are in Sotu^, Sotus falsely abused by T. M.
which M. Morton will never be albe to show for ^auing his honesty in this
point: and much less will he be able to prove, that Sotus does conclude all
Equi^^cators for liars, which is an other incredible impudency in him to
affirm. For that Sotus in this very book, question and article by him cited
does te^ch and prove largely the plain contrary, ^o wit, that to equivocate is
lawful in diverse Cases, to which e^^ect we have cit^d him before, when he
says in general: Poss^nt and debent sic contra ius requisiti quac^^que vti
amphibologia. They which are unlawfully required to speak or swear as we have
declared, may and ought to use any kind of Amphibologie or Equivocation.

73. This is his general assertion: but a^terward in particular he puts
many examples to prove the same. And first he sets down this proposition:
Dum testis de alieno actu interrogatur, potest ri^^ respondere, Se nescire.
When a witness is ( unlawfully) demanded of another man's actio^ which he
knows, he may justly answer he knows nothing: the reason whereof he says
is this. Quia oration illa, nescio, recipere hunc sensum citra mendacium potest,
nescio, vt tibi modo dicam For that the answer, I know nothing thereof, may
without falsyty admit this sense, I know it not ^o tell it you at this time.
Sicut silius hominis nescit diem iudicij, vt dicat, as Christ knew not the day
of judgment, to tell or utter yt to his disciples. Matth^ 13^
And does it seem to you, that Sotus in this place does go about to conclude
all Equiuocators for liars, as M. Morton affirms? If he did, he concludes
one Savior Christ also in his sense. What extreme impudency is this in a
Myni^ter? But let us hear Sotus yet further in this matter.

74. In his book De tegendo Secreto, the third member and third question, he
repeateth again the very same Conclusion here mentioned: Sotus expressly
impugneth T. M. Lib. de teg. Se^r. nu. 3. q. 3. Concl. 4.
That a witness being iniustly demanded whether he knows such and such a
thing of another, may answer he knows nothing, though he secretly know it:
and then going further, he demands: Whether I having seen Peter kill John,
and being after examined upon the same iniustly, whether I may say, I know
nothing thereof? To which he gives this answer: Respondetur, quod iure possum
respondere, nescio: quia iure intelligitur, nescio, vt dicam: aut nescio eo
modo, quo iure debeam di^ere. I affirm (says he) that I may rightly ans^ere I
know nothing thereof, ^or that by law it is understood, that I know it not to
tell it: or, I know it not in such manner, as by law I ought to utter the same.
T. Mortons Doctor Genesius refuted by Sotus.
And pr^sently he re^ut^th T. Mo^tons Do^tor Genesius Sepulueda, that calls
this pulchrum comme^tum, a fair gloze, and putting him in number of Iuniores
quidam, certain younger fellows, that would reprehend that which they
understood not, says: Hij aut non capiunt, aut dissimulant vim argumenti:
These ( yonglings) either do not understand, or do dissemble the force of the
argument, for this our doctrine etc.

75. Thus wrote I in my former book, and having convinced so evident
falsificatio^s, as ^ere have been laid down, quite contrary to the meaning and
sense of the Author alleged, I marvel that some little place had not been
allowed for some piece of answer to this also among the rest. But belike M.
Morton was not ready.

THE SIXTEENTH Falsehood pretermited by Thomas Morton.. XVI.
Sotus we come to the Flemish Doctor Cunerus, Cunerus ^asifyed against his own
meaning about the nature of religion.
for that from all sorts of men, and from all Countries M. Morton draws
t^stimonies, either gathered of himself or by others: but always bestows
some sleight of his own bugget to pervert them from their own meaning. Now
then hear (good Reader) what I alleged in my late Treatise as practiced
against a place of Cu^erus, noe less injuriously, then against the former.

77. Within few lines after this M. Morton begins his third Chapter with
these words: Mi^ig. page ^23.
That is only true Religion (say your Romish Doctors) which is tau^ht in the
Romish Church, and therefore whosoever mainteyn^th any doctrine condemned in
that Church, must be accomp^ed ^n obstinate heretic. And in the margent he
cites Cunerus, Cunerus de offic. Prin^. cap. 13.
alleging his Latin words thus. Haec est Religionis sola ratio, vt omnes
intelligant sic simpliciter esse credendum atque loquendum, quemadmodum Romana
Ecclesia credendum esse docet, ac praedicat. which words if they were truly
alleged out of the Author, yet were they not truly translated: For if only
true Religion (a corrupt translation of Religionis solaratio) be applied to
particular positions and articles of Religion: then we grant that such true
Religion may be also among heretics, and not only taught in the Roman Church,
for that as S. Austine well notes, Aug. in Psalm. 54. in verb. Psalm. In multis
erant mecum. and Ep. 48.
Heretics also hold many articles of true Catholi^ke Religion. But here the
corruption and falsifycation goes yet further, and it is worthy the noting:
for that Cunerus having treated largly against the insurrections and rebellions
of those of Holland and Z^land for cause of Religion and other pretenses
against their lawful King, takes upon him in his thirteenth Chapter to lay
down some means, how in his opinion those dissentions may be compounded,
giving this title to the said Chapter: Quae sit vera componendi d^ssi^ij ratio:
what is the true way of composing this dissension. And then after some
discourse sets down this Conclusion: B. Cunerus egregiously perverted
Haec igitur in Religione concordiae sola est ratio, vt omnes pio ac simplici
animo, pure ac integr^ sic sap^ant, viuant, loquantur ac praedicent,
quemadmodum Sancta Catholica Romana Eccl^sia, quae Dei prouidentia magistra
veritatis orbi praeposita ^st, docet, loquitur, ac praedicat. This therefore in
Religion is the only way of concord, that all men with a pious and simple mind,
do wholly and purely conceive, live, speak and preach, as the holy Catholic
Roman Church, which God by his providence has given for a teacher of truth
unto the whole world, does teach, speak and preach.

78. And now consider you this dealing, that whereas Bish. Cunerus says: Haec
est in religione concordiae sola ratio; this is the only way or means of
concord in Religion; this man alleges it in his margent, Haec est Religionis
sola ratio: this is the only way of religion, as though concord and Religion
were all one: and then by another trick of crafty translation in his English
text, that is only true religion; as though true religion and the way or means
to come to true Religion were not different. And then for all the rest how it
is mangled, and how many words and sentences are put in by this Minister, which
are none of Cunerus: and how many of his altered and put out, is easy for the
Reader to see by comparing the two Latin texts before alleged, and thereby to
consider how facile a matter it is for this fellow to divide tongues: A course
(says he) which I profess in all disputes, when he deuideth and separateth
the words from their Authors, and the sense from the words, and the whole drift
from them both: a very fine course and fit for a man of his profession. So much
wrote I at that time: which had as you see some acrimony to draw out some
satifaction from M. Morton, if he had been as full thereof, as the title of his
former book of Full satisfaction pretends.

THE SEAVENTEENTH Pretermitted falsehood by T. M.. XVII.
NOw we come to another abuse apperteyning to two men indifferently, to wit
Cassander ^ German School^maister and Bellarmine an Italia^ Cardinall^ but we
shall ascribe it rather to the Germ^n for this present, for that we have spoken
often, and have had diverse examples about Cardinal Bellarmine Cassander and
Bellarmyne abused at once about the means of concord between Catholics and
heretics Mitig. page 238.
Thus then I did propose the matter in my former Treatise.

80. Albeit I have not yet passed over ( said I) the half of the first part of
this first Treatise of M. Mort. Full satisfaction: for it is divided into sundry
Treatises, and that in this^ first half also I have pretermitted willingly
many other examples, that might have been alleged: yet fynding my self weary
to prosecute any further so large a Labyrinth of these intricate iuggling
tricks, used by this Mynister in his whole corpse of citations, which do consist
principally thereof: I mean to draw to an end, adding only one example more in
this place, about a matter more nearly concerning our argument, which is of
Reconciliation of Protestants with Catholics in points of Religion, Page 55.
which T.M. willing to accuse I^suits, as the only hinderers thereof writes
thus. Bellarm. l. de laicis cap. 19.
Only by the insolency (says he) of Jesuits, all such hope of reconciliation
is debarred, as is plain by Bellarmyne: for whereas that most grave learned
Cassander, C^ssand. l. de offi^. pij viri.
honored o^ ^^o ^mperours ^or his singular learning and piety, did teach, That
Emperors should endeavor a reconciliation betwixt Papists and Protestants,
because (says he) Protestants hold the Articles of the Creed, and are true
members of the Church, although they dissent from us in some particular
opinions: the grand Jesuit does answer, that this judgment of Cassander is
false, for that Catholics cannot be reconciled with heretics, heretically
meaning Protestants. So he.

81. But here I would ask him, why he had not uttered also that which
immediately follows in Bellar. that John Calvin had written a book against
this ^rrour of Cassander, and that among Catholic writers Ioannes a Louanio
had done the same, and showed that it was an old heresy of Appelles, as
Eusebius testifies, Eusebius 5. Hist. c. 13. Euag. l. 3. Hist. c. 14. and 30.
and of other heretics a^terward under Zeno the Emperor, named Pacifyers, as
Euagrius testifyeth: who held that Catholics and heretics might be composed
together: why (I say) did T.M. co^ceale this? As also the many great and strong
arguments that Bellarmyne alleges to prove his assertion? And why would he
lay all the fault of not agreeing, upon the insolency o^ Jesuits, seeing
Ioannes a Louanio was no Jesuit, nor Calvin neither.

82. But to leave this and to come to the thing it self, and to take some more
particular view of the false behavior of Tho. Morton in citing this authority:
yt is strange, that in so small a matter, he would show so great want of truth,
or true meaning as here he does. For first to pretermit that he goes about to
deceive his Reader by the opinion of gravity and learning in George Cassander
of Bruges, Cassander what manner of man he was.
who was but a Grammarian in his days: and that he was a Catholic, who is
censured for an Heretic prima classis in the index of prohibited Books: and
not only for heresies of this time, but also, Mitig. page 239.241.242.
quod dicit Spiritum Sanctum minus aduocandu^ and adorandu^ esse, for that he
says that the holy Ghost is less to be called upon or adored etc. as the
Index expurgatorius testifyeth: Index expurg. in l. Cassandr. De Off^^io pij
^i^i fol. 314.
Besides all this, I say, M. Mort. corrupts manifestly in the sentence before
alleged, the words and plain meaning of his Author, to wit Bellarmine, from
whom he cites Cassanders judgment: for thus they lie in him: Tertius error
(says he) est Georgij Cassandri in libro de Officio pij Viri: vbi docet debere
Principes inuenire rationem pacis inter Catholicos, Lutheranos etc. Sed interim
dum non inueniunt debere permittere vnicuique suam fidem, Bellarmin. l. de
laicis cap. 19.
modo omnes recipiant Scripturam and Symbolum Apostolicu^: Sic enim omnes sunt
verae Ecclesiae membra, licet in particularibus dogmatibus dissentiant^

83. The third error is of George Cassander in his book Of the office of a
pious man, where he teaches that Princes ought to seek out some means of
peace betwixt Catholics, Luthera^s, Caluinists and other Sects of our time:
but in the mean space whiles they find no such means, the ought to permit
every one to follow his own particular faith, so as all do receive the
Scripture and common Creed of the Apostles: for so all are true members of the
Church, albeit they disagree among themselves in particular doctrines. These
are Bellarmines words. Now let us see how they are mangled by M. Morton both
in Latin and English, as by him that has the notablest talent therein
(notwithstanding his solemn protestations to the contrary) that ever I read in
my life.

84. He puts down first the latin words in his margent thus: Full
Satisfact. page 55.
Debent Principes inuenire rationem pacis inter Catholicos, Lutheranos,
Caluinistas etc. qui omnes, dum Symbolum tenent Apostolicum, vera sunt membra
Ecclesiae, licet a nobis in particularibus dissentiant. Which words M. Morton
does very d^ceiptfully English thus: Emperors should endeavor a reconciliation
betwixt Papists and Protestants, because Protestants hold the articles of the
Creed, and are true members of the Church, although they dissent from us in
some particular opinions.So he.

85. And here now you see, first to be omitted cunningly and wilfully by this
crafty Minister the words of much moment, before mentioned; Cassanders
judgment not allowed by English Protesta^t^
to wit, That whiles Princes do not find a fit mean of peace, they ought to
permit all to live according to their particular says: which sentence of his
grave and learned Cassander not seeming to himself allowable in our English
State, or to his own brethren the English Caluinists, that now having gotten
the government, will suffer no other Religion but their own, he thought best
to suppress and cut them quite out. Secondly instead of the conditional
speech used by Cassander, modo omnes ac^ipiant Scripturam etc. so that all do
receive the Scripture and Apostolical Creed, he puts it down in English
with a causitiue clause, as if it were, quia omnes Symbolum tenent etc. All
Which Sects, because they do hold the Articles of the Creed, are true members
of the Church, leaving out the word Scripture, and the English of ( dum) that
is, whiles they receive the Scripture, and thereby does, as you see, pervert
the other wholly in sense. For who will not hold it absurd, that Catholics,
Lutherans, Caluinists and other Sects of our time, though in words they do
admit both Scripture and Apostolical Creed: yet differing in sense, and so
many doctrines as they do, are all to be held notwithstanding for true members
of one and the self same Church? Can any thing be more ridiculous then this?

86. Thirdly he does most notably cogge in thrusting in the words ( a nobis)
from us, which are not in the original, meaning thereby to make Cassander seem
a Catholic, and to speak in the behalf of Catholics, which is plain
cosenage: and to this end also he leaves out dogmatibus. And finally you see,
that he shapeth every thing to his own purpose and by making C^ss^nder as a
Catholic, seem to wish and endeavor this union, and Bellarmine to reject it,
he would confirm his former calumniation, that only by the insolency of
Jesuits, all such hope is debarred.

The ^leight of his English translation.
87. And thus much for the corruption of the latin text. But his English has
other corruptions also, according to his ordinary custom. For first he
translateth Debent Principes, that Emperors should endeavor a reconciliation,
to confirm thereby his former vanity, that Cassander was so great a man with
Emperors, as he talks not but to Emperors, whereas the word Principes used by
Cassander does comprehend all sorts of Princes. Secondly he translateth
Catholicos, Lutheranos, Caluinistas^ etc. which words of ( and caetera)
comprehend all other Sects of our time as Anabaptists, Arrians, Trinitarians,
H^ssites, Picardians and the like: he translateth them, I say, Papists, and
Protestants, as though all those Sects of our time were to be comprehended
under the name of Protestants of the English faith: or as though Cassander, if
he were a Catholic, as here he is pretended, would call us Papists.

88. Thirdly whereas in his own Latin here set down, he says: Qui omnes dum
Symbolum tenent etc. All which, to wit, Catholics, Lutherans, Caluinists and
other Sectaries, whiles they hold the Apostolical Creed, are true members of
the Church: he does English it thus, because Protestants hold the Articles of
the Creed, and are true members of the Church, Bellarmins opinion falsified.
excluding Catholics from believing the said Articles, or being true members:
which in his own Latin (and that of Bellarmines) also are included. And
fourthly is the corruption before mentioned ( although they dissent from us in
some particular opinions) which in Bellarmine is although they dissent among
themselves in particular doctrines. And finally the words by him cited of
Bellarmines judgment, which he controlleth, to wit, falsa est haec sententia
Cassandri: non possunt enim Catholici reconciliari cum haereticis, are not so
in Bellarmine: but these, potest facile reselli haec Cassandri sententia:
primum enim non possunt Catholici, Lutherani and Caluinistae eo modo conciliari
etc. This sentence of ( Cassander) may easily be refelled: first, for that
Catholics, Lutherans, and Caluinists (for example) cannot so be reconciled as
Cassander appoints, to wit, by admitting only the words of the Creed, for
that we differ in the sense and sometimes in the Articles themselves, as in
that, descendit ad inferos, he descended into Hell: and in like manner we agree
not about the sense of those other Articles, I believe the Catholic Church,
and Communion of Saints, Remission of sins etc. So Bellarmine: all which this
fellow omitteth.

89. And so you see there is no truth or sincerity with him in any thing.
Neither can these escapes b^ ascribed any way to oversight, error, mystaking
or forgetfulness: but must needs be attributed to wilful fraud and malicious
meaning, purposely to deceive, as the things themselves do evidently declare.
For which cause I shall leave him to be censured by his own brethren, but
specially by his Lord and Master, for so notable discrediting their Cause, by
so manifest false manner of proceeding.

90. These were my words in the other Treatise whereupon I insisted the more in
regard of the multiplicitie of frauds discovered. And so M. Morton had not any
just pretense to say (as he insinuates) that this with the rest of the Charges
laid against him, and pretermitted by him, were either of less importance, or
less insisted upon then those other fourteen which he chose out to answer.

THE EIGHTEENTH Falsehood pretermitted by Thomas Morton.. XVIII.
Royardus and Cunerus perverted against their words and meaning about obedience
to temporal Princes.
AS the former example apperteyned unto the abuse of two together: so does this
that next wear to allege which are indeed two distinct things: but that
drawing to an end I am forced to join diverse together. Wherefore I accused him
in my former writing to have corrupted two Authors jointly, Royard a Friar, and
Cunerus a Bishop: which accusation I set down in these words.

92. And here will I pass over ( said I) many things that might be noted out
of the sequent pages namely 30.31.34. where he does so pervert and abuse both
the words, discourse, and sense of diverse Authors alleged by him, as is not
credible to him that does not compare the^ with the books themselves from
whence they are taken. Mitig. p. 232. Page 30.3^.34.
As for example, Royardus the Franciscan Friar is brought in with commendation
of an honest Friar, for that he says; That a King when he is made by the
people, cannot be deposed by the^ again at their pleasure: which is the same
doctrine, that all other Friars and learned Catholics do hold, so long as he
conteyneth himself within the nature of a King: for that otherwise (which is
the question in controversy) Royard himself says parendum ei non esse, that
he is not to be obeyed: Royard. Sermon. 1. in Domin. 1. Aduent.
but this is not to be judged by the people and their mutiny, as Protestant
Doctors do teach.

93. And to like effect he cites a discourse, Sermon. 2. in Domin. 23. post
Pentecost
though most brokenly out of B. Cunerus writing against the Rebels of Flanders,
and testifying, that it lies not in the peoples hands to reject their Prince
at their pleasure, as those Protestant subjects did: and then M. Morton as
though he had atchiued some great victory triumphs exceedingly, saying: That
for so much as Friars in our Counsels have no voice, but only Bishops, he has
brought forth a Bishop against us; whom for that the moderate Answerer had
named a little before, this man scornfully tells him Caesarem appellasti, ad
Caesaremibis. You have appealed to Cunerus, Royardus and Cunerus abused.
and now he shall be your Judge against you. And is not this great folly and
insolency? for that Cunerus in all that his book says nothing against us,
Act. 25^
but altogether for us, to repress the rebellion in Flanders, as ha^h been
signified. And secondly, notwithstanding all this exact obedience, which both
he and we prescribe and require at subi^cts hands toward their lawful
Princes, he has a special C^apter which is the third after this alleged here
by T. M. wherein he does expressly and larg^ly prove, that in some Cases when
Princes fall into intolerable disorders, Cap. 8.
there is authority le^t in the Common wealth and Church of Christ to
restrain and remove the^. What falsehood is this then to allege Authors thus
directly against their own sense, meaning, and whole drift? Does this become a
Minister o^ simple truth? Is this for a man that so much abhors
Equivocation? So said I to M. Mor^o^ at that time, when I expected that he
would have returned me some answer to my demand. The like I do repeat again
now, and shall attend what may come from him herafter.

THE NINTEENTH Falsehood pretermitted by Thomas Morton.. XIX.
Sayer grossly abused about Haereticus pertinax.
FROM strangers we return to a Countryman of our own, no less abused by M.
Morton, then any commonly of the former, which I set down in these words.

95. But the greatest corruption in this page said I (and it is notable indeed)
is of the words, sense and meaning of our learned Countryman Sayer, Mitig.
page 227.
of whom T. M. writes thus. In beiefe our Countryman upon this Case of
conscience says: Sayer in ^as^b. consc. l. 1. c. 9.. 30.
An obstinate heretic is as well he that is presumed so to be, as he that is
manifest. And again in the same page: Seeing therefore that (as your great
Casuist has said) every one presumed to be an Here^i^ke, is taken for an
obstinate, who can be free from your censures? And then cites in the margent
these words of Sayer: Contumax haereticus est tam praesumptus quam mani^estus.
An obstinate heretic is as well ^e that is presumed to be so, as he that is
manifest, or known for such: which may seem to be a great injustice in our
doctrine. But if I do not show this devise to be one of the most manifest and
faithles deceiptes and corruptions that ever any honest man put in paper
against his Adversary, the^ let me be censured for too sharp a reprehe^der.

96. For first^ Sayer has no such matter at all concerning obstinacy in
heresy, A notable falsificatio^ of Sayer.
his whole purpose being only to declare who may be excommunicated by a Judge
for contumacie in not appearing (which is a different thing from obstinacy or
pertinacie) and this whether he be heretic or Catholic: nay he speaks
either only or principally of Catholics, who do show contumacie in any Court
or Tribunal, in not appearing, and answering, according as they are cited and
summoned by a lawful Judge: and so he defines Contumacie in these words: The
definition of contumacy.
Contumacia (says he) nihil aliud est quam inobedientia quaedam qua ius
dicenti non paretur. Contumacie is nothing else, but a certain disobedience,
whereby he is not obeyed that ^itteth in judgment. So as here is no mention or
meaning of obstinacy in heresy. And further he puteth down two sorts of
contumacie thus: Co^tumax duobus modis esse potest, nimirum mani^estus and
praesu^ptus: A man may be contumacious in two sorts or manners, either manifest
or by presumption: and he gives diverse examples of both^ as namely: If a man
cited do refuse openly to appear or obey his Judge, this man's co^tumacie or
disobedience is public and manifest, and thereby he is made contumax
manifestus: but if he do not refuse openly, but by idle dilations and shifte^
does put of, or delude the Court, he is contumax praesumptus, that is, presumed
to be contumacious, and so may exco^municatio^ (if it be a spiritual Court)
proceed against him, as if his contumacie were manifest.

97. Now then what has all this to do with Contumax haereticus ta^ praesumptus
quam mani^estus? Has Sayer any such word or sentence? The difference between
co^tumacy and pertinacy.
No truly: or shall we think Tho. Morton to be so simple both in Gra^mar,
Law, and Deuinitie, as that he does not know what difference there is between
contumax and pertinax? whereof the one is a fault in obedience toward our
Superiors, as now has been showed, the other of tenacity of opinion, as before
we have declared? Of if Tho. Morton will not confess this ignorance, but that
he knows the difference of the words and of their significations, sense and
applications here used by the Authors then must he confess wilful deceit in
using one for the other, Many false sleights.
and much more in twice translating the words Co^^umax haereticus in this one
page, for an obstinate heretic: and much more yet in foisting in the word
haereticus, which Sayer has not: and most of all in making his Reader believe
that contumax, praesumptus, and mani^estus does signify in Sayer one that upon
presumption only is judged to be as obstinate an heretic, as if he were
manifest: whereof Sayer neither spoke nor meant, but in a quite different sense
(not appertayning to heresy at all) says: That a man may be condemned as
contumacious by presumption, if he appear not before his lawful judge, or
uses sleights, diuerticles or delays, as well as if openly he refused to
appear. Now then consider what a Mynister of truth this is, and of what naked
innocence, thus perfidiously to delude his Reader: and yet to come forth after
all with this dissembled Hypocrisy, Now let me be beholding unto you (says he)
for an answer. And so I think he is, but if not sharp enough for so
shameful an abuse, it may be amended and augmented hereafter upon like
occasions, Page 4.
which every where are offered throughout his whole book. And there were no
end if I would answer him to all. Hitherto was my former reprehension to M.
Morton for his shameful dealing, which seemed to me to import either great
ignorance, or intolerable lack of conscience in going about to deceive his
Reader. Some word of answer had been worth the writing in so great a Charge:
but he thought it not expedient.

THE TWENTIETH Falsehood pretermitted by Thomas Morton.. XX.
FROM Christians and Cou^trey-men he passes to Heathens and commits such
notorious falsehoods against one of them, even then and there, Cicero falsyfied
in the question of swearing to a thief etc.
where he speaks of faithful dealing against perfidiousnes, as may justly
make any man admyre, what he did suppose his judicious Reader would think of
him, when he should see the fraud disclosed, of which fraud I wrote thus in my
former Treatise, beginning first with the relation of his own words in this
manner.

99. There was a man ( says M. Morton) who together with nine other prisoners
being dismissed out of the prison of Carthage upon his Oath, Mitig. p. 462.
that he within a prefixed time should return again: Full satisf. p. 90. p. ^.
as soon as he was out of prison, he returned as though he had forgotten
something, and by and by departs home to Rome, where he stayed beyond the
time appointed, answering that he was freed from his Oath: But see now the
opinion of his own Countreyma^ Cicero, The cause s^t down by ^icero of
prison^rs let forth upon their oath by ^^niball.
concerning this Equiuocatio^ of return. This was not well done (says Tully)
for that craft in an oath does not lesse^ but make the perjury more heinous.
Wherefore the grave Senators of Rome sent this cosening mate back again to the
prison of Hanniball their enemy, from whom he had escaped etc.

L. 3. Offi.. Regulus.
100. Thus relates M. Morton the Case, and then makes this malicious
Conclusion against us: This was the honesty of the ancient heathenish Rome,
which must rise up in judgment against this present Rome to condemn it, which
has changed that faithful Roman faith in fidem Punica^ into Carthaginia^
^ayth, which now by custom of speech is taken for per^idiousnesse it self.
And would not you think that M. Mort. did hold himself very free from this
perfidiousnes, who obiecteth the same so freely against us? And not only
against us, but to the whole Church of Rome it self, and to the universal
Catholic Religion conjoined therewith? Mark then the deportment of this man
in this one point, and if you knew him not before, learn to know him by this^

101. First then I would have some Grammar scholar that studieth Tullies
Offices, to turn to the places here quoted, Cic. 3. Offic.. Regulus and. Sed
si.
and comparing them with that which this Minister sets down in english,
consider how they hang together, and how he picketh out one sentence in one
place, and another in another, and leapeth forth and back to make some
coherence of speech contrary to the Authors order, sense and method, as is
ridiculous to behold, and fit for the cosening mate, of whom he talks in his
text. And secondly after this, is to be noted, tha^ he sets down the
narration it self of ten men delivered upon their Oath by Hanniball, not as
Cicero does out of two historiographers Polybius and Accilius, and in
particular against the faith of both their histories, and Tullies asseueration,
which says that those ten were dismissed by Ha^niball out of his Camp post
Ca^nensem pugna^ after the famous battle of Ca^na in Apulia, Mort. ignora^tly
says, they were dismissed out o^ the prison of Carthage, whereas they of all
liklyhood had never seen Carthage in their lives.

102. But the most notorious cosenage is, that he peruerteth all Cicero his
meaning, words, sense, and discourse in this matter, alleging them quite
contrary to himself, as before you have heard him do many other Authors, so as
he belieth and corrupts them all, both profane and divine. And if in this one
point, he can deliver himself from Punica fides, I will say he plays the man
indeed. T.M. pressed with Punica fides about falsification.
For first Cicero whom here he would seem to bring against us, does fully
agree with us, for that we say in the Case of those ten Romans delivered by
Hanniball upon their oath to return again, if they should not obtain that
with they were sent for (which was to persuade the Senate to redeem diverse
thousands of other Roman soldiers, whom Hanniball had taken in the said
victory at Canna:) we hold, I say, first, that if they swear absolutely to
return again, if they obtained not their suite, they were bound truly and
sincerely to perform the same. And secondly, that they being now justly by law
of arms prisoners of Hanniball, they were bound to swear sincerely to his
intention, and not to any other reserved meaning of their own, as in the
former Chapter has been declared. And this very same doctrine also teaches
Cicero by light of nature, in these words, perfidiously ^ut of and left out by
this Minister in the very same place, out of which he takes the rest. Est
aute^ (says he) ius etiam bellicum, fidesque i^siurandi saepe hosti seruanda:
quod enim ita iuratum ^st, vt men's con^iper^^ fi^ri oportere, id seruandum est:
quod aliter id si non (...), nullum periurium ^st. There is al^o a law of arms
says he) and a faith in our swearing to be observed ofte^tymes, ^uen unto our
enemy. For that which is so sworn by us, ^s our mind does conceive that it
must be done, that is to be observed: but if it be otherwise sworn, that is no
perjury, if he per^orme it not.

103. Behold here the very same distinction which Catholic deuines put down
of swearing according to the intention and understanding of the swearer, or of
him to whom it is sworn: and that the former is that byndeth and makes
perjury, Cicero most plainly against T. M. and for Catholic doctrine.
if it be not performed, and not always the second, to wit, when any violence
or force is used: which Cicero does express in the very next immediate words
by the self same example that Azor used before: Si praedonibus pactum pro
capite pret^um non attule^is, nulla ^raus est: ne, si iuratus quid^m id non
seceris etc. nonenim ^alsum iurare peierare est. Sed si ex animi tui sentemi^
iuraueris, sicut verbis concipitur more nostro, id non sac^r^ periurium est.
Site enim Erupides: Iuraui lingua, men^em iniuratam gero. If you should not
pay the price or ransom unto public thieves, which was agreed between you
for saving of your life, it is no deceit, no, though you had sworn to
perform it: for that it is not perjury to swear false (in any sort
whatsoever.) But if you swear a thing which you determine in your mind and do
utter it in words, according to the common custom of ^peach, and do not
perform it, this is perjury. For well and fytly to the purpose says the Poet
Euripides, I have sworn with my tongue, but my mind has not sworn. So he.

104. And consider now here I pray you, the Punica fid^s of our Minister
against our Roman faith. He says that Cicero and other heathenish Romans shall
rise up against us at the day of Judgment, for that they condemn all
reservation or doubt^ull sense in an oath, T. Mort. co^uinc^d of egregious
cosenage.
and do condemn it for perjury: whereas Cicero affirms, that there is neither
perjury nor fraud therein. And the same Philosopher allows the very same
example of swearing with a reserved intention to a public thief, without
either meaning or obligation to perform it, which M. Morton obiecteth to Azor
in the precedent Chapter, though craftily leaving out the words Latroni and
Tyranno, for avoiding the force of this place, as before is noted, saying: that
Azor did condemn for lying all such Equivocation against his subtle brethren:
whereas he both affirms and proves the same, no less then Cicero does here
in this place, as before has been showed. Who then shall rise in judgment
against T. Morton for all this wilful lying? No doubt but Satan himself, that
is the Father of liars in this life, and shall be their tormentor in the next.

105. Thus far at that time I wrote against M. Morton. And truly when I read
it over again, together with many other points before mentioned and do
consider how weighty matter of accusation they do conteyne, and how much I do
insist upon them to make the deformity thereof appear in the Readers ey^s, and
in those also of M. Morton, if it were possible, and thereby to draw from him
either some sound answer, or a simple confession of his errors, so far as
such they may be called: or rather of his witting fraud to beguile his Reader,
which were the best and truest form of answer, if almighty God would give him
light to see the same (though I will presume that he sinned not wholly against
his conscience therein, but framed rather ^is conscience so, as he might think
it law^ull perhaps to streyne truth for helping such a cause as his is:) yet I
can not but marvel, that he would pass over with silence all these grauer
matters, and betake himself to sleighter things in this his last Answer,
telling notwithstanding his Reader, that he chose out 14. principal points to
answer, such as I insisted most upon: which by experience has bin euinced to
be most false by these 20. which I have alleged, as wittingly pretermitted by
him, and might sundry more, whereof the most are more weighty, and much more
insisted upon then any of the former.

THE ONE and twentieth, and two and twentieth falsehoods pretermitted by M.
Morton. XXI.
M. Morton, Of two abuses offered in citing D. Barkley.
whereof each one, or most of them do conteyne sundry branches under them: yet
that you may know that this number of 20. is not precise, but that many others
may be added also, if a man will but run over my said Treatise: I have
thought good to note 2. more here together concerning one and the self same
man, to wit, Doctor Barkley a Scottishman. The first, in that he relates a
certain choleric speech of the said Doctor Barkley used against an argument
of Doctor Boucher, as though it had been spoken against Bellarmine, whom it
concerned not^ My words were these.

107. Here then you see ( quoth I) how many wilful corruptions there be, first
to bring in D. Barkley rating of Cardinal Bellarmine which magna sane
impudentia est etc. whereas he talks not against Bellarmine at all: nor
indeed is Bellarmines manner of speech contrary to that which Barkley will have
to be the meaning of the History: Mitig. page 198.
for that Barkley does not so much stand upon the thing in co^trouersy for
Priests authority, Enumeration of falsities.
but upon the manner of proof by the examples alleged by D. Boucher, of
Jeroboam, Ozias, Athalia and some other Princes, in whose punishment God used
Priests for means and instruments. Non ignoro (says he) ius esse Ecclesiae in
Reges and Principes Christianos, nec quale ius sit ignoro, sed id tam alien is
argumentis ostendi, prorsus ignoro: imo non ostendi plane scio. I am not
ignorant (says Doctor Barkley) that the Church has right over Christian Kings
and Princes, nor am I ignorant, what manner of right it is: Ibid. c. 11.
yet do I not see, how the same may be proved by such impertinent arguments;
nay I know rather that it can not be so proved: which words going but very few
lines before those that T. M. alleges, he could not but see, and yet left
them out, and then begins against us his English text thus. Your own Doctor
calls this your assertion most false, and contrary to the direct History of
the Bible, to wit, that Ozias was deposed of his Kingdom by Azarias the high
Priest.

108. And this is the first abuse, as to me it seems, inexcusable. The second
is about an authority of S. Ambrose, craftily cut of from the speech of the
said D. Barkley by M. Morton whereof my accusation in my former Treatise was
this.

109. But yet if we would exa^ine (quoth I) the particular authorityes that be
alleged about this matter, Mitig. p. 202.
though nothing making against us, as has been said, and consider how many
false shifts are used by T. M. therein, you would say he were a Doctor indeed in
that science, for that a several Treatise will scarce contain the^. I will
touch one for example sake. He cites D. Barkley bringing in the authority of
S. Ambrose that ^e resisted not by force his Arrian Emperor, when he would
take a Church from him for the Arrians: but he sets not down, what a^swere
of his D^ Barkley does alleadg in the very self same place, which is,
Allegatur Imperatori licere omnia etc. It is alleged, Full satisfact. p. 24.
Barkleus l. 3. c. 5.
that it is lawful for the Emperor to do all things, for that all things are
his (and consequently that he may assign a Church unto the Arrians:) whereto I
answer, says S. Ambrose: Trouble not your self o Emperor, nor think that
you have Imperial right over those things that are divine. Do not exalt your
self, but if you will reign long, be subject to God: for it is written, that
those things that belong to God, must be given to God: and to Caesar only those
things that belong to Caesar. Ambr. l. 5. Ep. 33.
Palaces apperteyne to the Emperor, but Churches to the Priest. The right of
defending public walls is committed to you, but not of sacred things. Thus D.
Barkley out of S. Ambrose in the very place cited by T. M. which he thought
good wholly to pretermit and cut of, A clear authority of S Ambrose, imbezeled
by T. M.
and yet to make a flourish as though D. Barkley had cited S. Ambrose to prove
that the temporal Prince and Emperor was in noe case, nor in any cause
spiritual or temporal, to be withstood or resisted. And what will ye say of
this manner of dealing? Out of what conscience may it proceed? But let us see
another Charge that contains ten falsehoods together, and so with that we
will make an end.

OF TEN OTHER Falshoodes set down together and dissembled by Thomas Morton..
XXIII.
AS the former Charge had two examples together, so this last has ten at a
clap (to make up 32.) which I set down in my former Treatise in these words.

111. There follows (said I) within 2. leaves after a heap not only of
falsehoods, Of diverse authors falsified about the depositio^ of Popes.
but also of impudencies. For whereas his Adversary the moderate Answerer had
said, That not only Kings but Popes also for heresy by the Cano^ laws were to
be deposed: he answers thus: Mitig. 235. Full satisfact. p. 38.
The Authors of the doctrine of deposing Kings in Case of heresy, do profess
concerning Popes, That they cannot possibly be heretics, as Popes, and
consequently cannot be deposed: not says Bellarmine by any power
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, Bellarm. l. 4. de Romans Pon. c. 2.
no not by all Bishops assembled in a Council: not says Carerius, Carer. l.
1. c. 24.
though he should do anything preiudi^i^ll to the universal state of the
Church: not says Azorius though he should neglect the Canons Ecclesiastical,
Azor. l. 5. c. 14.
or pervert the laws of Kings: not says Gratians gloss, Great. can. Si Papa
did. 40.
though he should car^y infinite multitudes of souls with him to hell. And
these f^renamed Authors do avouch for confirmation of this doctrine, the
universal consent of Romish Deuines and Canonists for the space of an hundred
years.

112. So he. Whereto I replied, that in these words are as many notorious and
shameless lies as there be assertio^s and Authors named by him for the same. For
first (quoth I) the four writers which he mentions there in the t^xt, to
wit, Bellarmine, Carerius, Azor, and Gratia^, do expressly, clearly, and
resolutely hold the contrary to that he affirms out of them: for that they
teach and prove by many arguments^ that Popes both may fall into heresies, and
for the same be deposed by the Church, That Popes may fall into heresy and be
deposed for the same.
or rather are ips^ facto deposed, and may be so declared by the Church. And
their words here guilfully alleged by Tho. Mort. as sounding to the contrary,
are manifestly spoken and meant of manners only, and not of faith, that is to
say, if they should be of naughty life, yet have they no Superior to depose
them, for that cause, (they being immediately under C^^ist) though for heresy
they may be deposed: which instead of all the rest you may read largely handled
in Bellarmine in his second book de Pontif. where among other proofs he
cites this very Canon of Gratian here mentioned by T. M^ saying: ^^llarmin. l.
2. de Pontif. c. 30.
^aereticum Papam posse iudicari express habetur Can. Si Papa, did. 40. It is
expressly determined in the Canon Si Papa, Four notorious lies together.
that a Pope falling into heresy maybe judged and d^posed by the Church. And
more. That in the 8. general Council and 7. Session, Pope Honorius was
deposed ^or heresy. So Bellarmine. And the same doctrine hold the other two
cited by our Minister, to wit, Carerius, and Azor. So as here be four
notorious lies together, that by no shift or tergiuersation can be avoided:
for that T. M. could not but manifestly see, that he alleged these four
Authors quite contrary to their express words, drift and meaning. What then
will you say of this ^ellow, and his manner of writing? Shall he be credited
hereafter?

Greg. de. Val. anal. l. 8. cap. 3. Salm. com in Gal. 2, disp. 24. Can. l. 16.
loc. Theol. cap. 8. Stapl. doct. T^in^. l. 6. initio. Coster. de Pontif. in
^n^^i^. ^ap. 3.
113. But yet not content with this, he cites other four or five Authors
besides in the margent, to wit, Gregorius de Valentia, Salmeron, Canus,
Stapleton, and Costerus: all which in the very places by him cited are
expressly against him. And is not this strange dealing? Let Canus that goes
in the myddest speak, for all five, who having proved first at large the
opposite proposition to T. M. to wit, that Popes may fall into heresy and be
deposed for the same, concludes thus his discourse: Non est igitur negandum
^saith he) quin Summus Pontisex haereticus esse possit. It cannot ther^ore be
denied but that the Pope may be an heretic, adding presently: whereof one or
two examples may be given, but none at all that ever Pope though he fell into
heresy did decree the same for the whole Church. By which last words of Canus
is discovered the ridiculous fallacy of T.M. alleging here out of our fore^aid
writer, That Popes cannot possibly be heretics as Popes, and consequently
cannot be deposed. whereof they say the flat contrary, as you have heard, That
Popes may be heretics as Popes, Though Popes may fall into he^esy: yet shall
not they be pretermitted to decree it.
and consequently may be deposed. But yet that God (as Popes) will never permit
them to decree any heretical doctrine to be held by the Church.

114. Consider then I pray you (said I) what a fellow this Minister is in
abusing thus so many Authors so manifestly: but especially do you note the
impudency of his Conclusion. And these ^orenamed Authors (says he) do avouch
for confirmation of this doctrine, the universal consent of Romish Deuines and
Canonistes for the space of an hundred years. Full satisf. p. 38.
So he. But I would ask him of what doctrine? That Popes cannot be heretics
or be deposed for the same? You have heard them now protest the contrary, and
you may read them in the places here cited, out of all the nine several
writers before mentioned, who by their express contrary doctrine do prove T.
M. to have made nine several lies against them in this his assertion, and now
the tenth and most notorious of all, Ten lies made at once.
is this his Conclusion, That they do avouch ^or confirmation o^ that which he
obiecteth the universal consent of Romish Deuines and Canonists for the space
of an hundred years: which besides the ^anifest falsity thereof seen in their
own words and works here by me cited, it co^teineth also great folly and
simplicity to say, that they avouch the consent of Romish Deuines and Canonists
for an hundred years: for that their proofs are much elder: and Bellarmine
among the rest for deposition of Popes, does cite the 8. General Council
under Pope Adrian the second for above six hundred years agone: and the Canon
Si Papa, out of our Country man S. Boniface Archbishop of Ments and Martyr
above seven hundred years agon, and collected by Gratian and confirmed by
Popes, as part of the Canon law, above four hundred years agone. So as to say
that now they avouch Authors o^ an hundred years old, against that, which for
so many hundred years before was held and established, is mere folly or
rather foolish malice.

115. Thus I wrote in my former Treatise of Mitigation, whereby, as by all the
rest that here has bin set down, the Reader will see, what store of grave
matter M. Morto^ had to answer for his own defense, if indeed he had meant to
defend himself really and substantially, and not to have slipped out under the
shadow of a Preamble for answering his adversary: but indeed laying hands only
upon a few and the lightest imputations that he could pick out. And yet by the
way the Reader must note, that every one, or the most of these examples of
falsehood here objected do co^teine diverse and sundry points, which being laid
together do make (I dare avouch) a double number to that, which here we have
set down, if they were severed and singled out after the manner of M. Mortons
mincing his imputations before produced about Goodman, Knox, Buchanan, Sir
Thomas Wiat, and the like, severally set forth to the show. So as according to
this reckoning we may boldly say, that he has left out here above threescore
witting and voluntary untruths, which he knew could hardly, or never handsomely
be answered. And besides these ^e has purposely also left out the mention of
other matters no less weighty then the former, though not in the same kind of
falsehood and lying, yet no less cu^ningly pretermitted, subtracted, or
concealed to the advantage of his cause, in this last Reply of his, the^ any
lightly of the former, which we are to lay forth in the Chapter that ensues.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER WHEREIN ARE SET DOWN DIVERSE SORTS OF M. MORTONS
OMISSIONS, besides the former: and namely in not defending certain Clients of
his, whose credit was commended to his protection in the Tr^atise of
Mitigation. And among others, SIR EDWARD COOK, now L. Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas.
THE PREFACE.
HITHERTO have we beheld the omissions or rather pretermissio^s (to wit
omissions volu^tary) used by M. Morton in answering the chief accusations laid
against him in matter of falsity, and untrue dealing; now you are to see others
of another kind, which though in my opinion they do proceed out of the same
motive (which was by delaying the answer, to avoid the necessity of answering
at all) yet are they in a different subject or matter, not so much concerning
corruptions and falsifications immediately, as the other, but about sundry
principal parts of my Treatise (yea all in effect) no less craftily
concealed then the rest, though with a certain pretense and faint promise to
answer them afterward. But for that I have just cause to suspect this promise,
as a dilatory shi^t and subtle ^ua^ion, whereby to deteine from the Readers
knowledge what I wrote in may said Treatise, making him to think by the
perusal of this his Preamble of Reply that I had handled nothing therein worthy
the relation or confutation, besides those trifles which himself pleased before
to lay forth: for this cause (I say) I am forced here to detain my self a
little longer in repeating again some chief points of my said Book, which M.
Morton has passed over with silence leaving only a hope, as has been said,
that in time he will satisfy them.

How prudent creditours do proceed with doubtful debtors.
2. But in this case I mean to proceed as Creditors do with old and doubtful
debtors, which is, to examine the acco^pts, and make up the Reckoning, while
the debts ar yet so^what fresh in memory. For better declaration whereof I will
use this example, or comparison. If a merchant in London, or else where having
many charges of debts laid upon him, should promise, that (at such a time, when
accounts are wont to be clered, and made straight) he would answer al, and
the^ the prefixed time approaching he should suddenly withwraw himself,
leaving some small and scattered su^mes (and those also of very bad coins) to
satisfy for great and many obligations, promising further that in time he
would yield abou^dant satisfaction for all the rest.

3. In this case I would demand, what the prudent Creditors would do, think,
or suspect, especially finding the su^mes of money left to be so small, and of
so bad coin, as now has been said? Two things do occur unto me, that they
would do for their better assurance. First to inform themselves well, what
store of debts the said party was to be charged withal. Secondly quid habeat
in bonis, what substance he might be presumed to have for satisfying thereof.
And this I take to be the very Case also between me and M. Mort. who being
charged with very many debts and obligatio^s of answering matters objected
against him in my foresaid Treatise, he took a respite until the ordinary
time of payment, which was the time of his Reply: which time coming, he gave
us instead of a book a Preamble only (though a large one) answering not to the
tenth part of that he was indebted: and this so weakly and fraudule^tly,
handling matters impertinent, as no way it can pass for current coin, as now
in part you have seen, and shall do more in that which ensues.

4. Wherefore I am constrained to perform the parts of the forsaid Creditors,
making first a survey of the chief debts liable against him, and which he is
to answer, and then to examine what liklihood of payment, or satisfaction he
may be thought to have, for effectuating the same: both which points you have
in part seen already put in execution by me in my former discourse. For you
have heard the many charges laid against him for falsity and untrue dealing and
you will h^rdly I think conceive, where he will have the substance to answer
them. Now we are to make the search in another sort of debts, wherein I persuade
me that the like in many points, though not altog^ather the same will fall out,
to wit, that the debts will be found clear, and the satisfaction not easy:
wherein I refer my self to that which is to ensue.

OF THE PRETERMISSION of the chiefest points concerning the argument and
subject of Rebellion, in my Treatise of Mitigation.. I.
WELL then according to this designement let us look into the principal
heads of matters treated by me concerning the first part of our argument about
Rebellion: to wit, whether Catholic people above others be found obnoxious to
that heinous crime, and this also by force of their Catholic doctri^e, and
belief; for that this was the chief but, whereat M. Mortons first seditious
libell of Discovery did level, bringing in ten pretended reasons, but indeed
calu^niations for some show of proof thereof: Mitig. c. ^^
which being confuted largely by me for almost twenty pages together, and
couinced not only not to be reasons of any substance or force against us, but
plain calu^niations and arguments rather against himself and his people, did
impose, as you see, a great obligation upon him for answering the same in this
his Reply: but he thought good volutarily to pretermit the^, and in^^eed thereof
to institute almost ten other different Paragraphes about the wit, learning,
memory, skill in Logic, Greek and Latin, charity, modesty and truth of his
Adversary P. R. as before you have seen handled: So as this first maine debt
remains in effect vndischarged: and what probability there is, or may be, how
well it will be paid hereafter, is not hard to guess: at least I, as his
Creditor, have cause to suspect the matter, and that this putting of or delay
upon expectation of a ^urther Reioynder to come forth, was but a devise to
euacuate the payment.

6. And for so much as the first of these ten reasons against us is ^ounded by
him upon the pretended opinion that he says we have of English Protestants,
that they are Heretics, and that Protesta^cy is damned heresy, and consequently
are liable, and obnoxious to all the Canonical penaltyes, which are set down
against men convicted of that crime, by the Canon law: albeit I showed unto him
that this consequence in rigor was not necessary, for that all Protestants
were not nominatim exco^municati and denunciati, by name excommunicated, and
denounced for such: yet for so much as concerned the guilt of heresy, as it is
a choice of a particular sect and difference of Religion from that which the
known Catholic Church does hold, and profess, I alleged sundry
authe^ticall proofs as well out of the definition of heresy, and an heretic,
set down by S. Augustine unto Honoratus infected with the heresy of the
Manicheans, What is heresy according to S. Austin.
and out of the same Father against the Donatists, defining who is properly an
heretic (to wit) Qui manifestata sibi doctrina Catholicae ^idei, resistere
maluerit, and illud quod tenebat, eleg^rit: he that after the doctrine of the
Catholic faith ( generally held) is made known unto him shall determine
notwithstanding rather to resist and make choice of that, which before he held.
As also I showed and demonstrated the explication of this definition unto
English Protestants, and professors of the English Religion of our days, out
of great variety of other Pro^testant Authors of other Countries, who all
affirm, and determine that the Religion and doctrine of John Calvin, which is
now most followed in England is form^lly and truly heresy, and consequently
the Pro^essors and manteyners thereof must needs be heretics: Stancar. l. de
Trinit. and Mediatore.
for which I alleged not only the Censure o^ Franci^^us Stancarus a chief
Protestant Superin^end^nt in Polonia, who says, that they are deplora^issimi
haeretic^, most desperate heretics, but also the Censure of a whole Lutheran
University in Germany named Tubinga, whose chief Reader of Deuinity Philippus
Nicolaus in the name of the whole University decre^th, Philip Nicolaus l. co^t.
Caluinum in prafat. etc. p. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10. etc.
that Caluinists are damnable heretics, intituling his book thus:
Fu^damentorum Caluinianae sectae cum Arianis and Nestorianis communium
detectio. A discovery of the ^ou^dations of the Caluinian sect, which are
common to them with the Arians and Nestorians: In which book this Doctor
proves throughout many Chapters together that Caluinists are no less
Heretics, then the said Arians and Nestorians: that they agree with them at
least in 17. or 18. articles: alleging also Luthers Authority to the same
effect, Luth. lib. Contra Sacr^ment^r. in Ep. ad Marchion. Pruss.
who says, that they are alieni ab Ecclesia Dei, and Sathanae membra, cut of
from the Church of God, and members of Satan.

7. And after this I added further to this effect: I will pass over (quoth I)
the testimony of many other learned protestant Ministers, Doctors, and
teachers, as namely Conradus Sclusselburgius, who affirms Caluinists, To
believe and teach rightly no one article of the Creed: as also I will do that
of Heshusius, affirming, That their associatio^ is a most blasphemous and
sacrilegious sect: that of Hunnius, That it is most damnable, and the right way
to hell: that of Ioannes Schutzius, That it is the sink of all wicked
heresies; that of Ioannes Modestus, that affirms Caluinists, To be as bad as
Jews and Mahomets: that of Ioannes Matthias, and of Albertus Grauerus, and
others, that affirm all those that follow the doctrine of Calvin, to be
professed enemies of Christ. All which I do cite in my last book against M.
Mort. quoting their names, Mitig. p. 58.59.60.61.62. etc. Item p. 107 108.109.
etc.
works and Chapters, and years when they wrote, more largely, and particulerly
in the pages here set down in the margent. All which men being chief
Doctors, Readers, Preachers or Pastors of our Protestant people, and such as
our Protestant Ministers of England hold for their brethren against us that are
Catholics, do easily wype away with these their as^euerations, the childish
clamor of M. Morton against Catholics for holding his Caluinia^ doctrine to be
heresy, seeing that so many learned and grave Protestants enlightened with the
spirit of God (as they must needs grant) do hold and auerre the same.

8. And why then had not he answered somewhat to this Charge, being so weighty,
and substantial as it is? Why had he not given some satisfaction? Or at
leastwise mentioned the same in this his last Reply? Was not this as necessary
a subject to be handled as to put himself to discuss the wit, memory, skill,
and other qualities of his Adversary? Or when do you think will he be able to
answer this matter? Or what substance has he, or may be presumed to have for
making this payment?

9. Nay, that his substance is small, or rather none at all for discharging
these debts, may well appear, for that he being further pressed by me
afterward about the like argument of John Caluins being an heretic, and that
most heinous and damnable by the public testimony of his said Protestant
brethren the Lutheran Doctors, and this not only in the common known
controversies between the^, about the Real presence, and other Sacraments,
for which by Luther they were called Sacramentaries: but even about the highest
articles of the blessed Trinity, Divinity of Christ, and equality with his
Father, Godhead of the Holyghost and the like; he has shifted of the same in
this his Reply by no less silence, then the former: not so much as naming the
matter, but in general terms telling us that he will pay all his debts in
time: and yet did I urge him as much as might be, to draw from him some
answer. For thus I said unto him, when he had accused al our writers of
extreme malignity in ce^suring Calvin and Caluinists for heretics, insinuati^g
also in his book of Full satisfaction, that the former Lutheran Doctors,
whereof some had been objected before by the moderate answerer, had been
corrupted, and depraved by us, M. Mort. defends himself with silence.
(a poor shift you see, when their own books are extant in print, and the
places known of their printing) I told him, I say, that I would bring against
him a new book of a famous late Lutheran Doctor, and Reader of Deuinity called
Aegidius Hunnius printed at Wittenberg upon the year 1593. which should
confirm this and much more. My words were these.

Mitig. p. 248.
10. We shall here (quoth I) with as much breuity as may be, bring ^orth the
Judgment of another renowned Protestant Doctor co^curring with the forsaid, he
being a public Reader of Deuinity in another famous University of Germany,
namely Wittemberg, where Martin Luther himself once held the chair, as Calvin
did in Geneua, and this Doctor whose name is Agidius Hunnius in a several
Treatise set forth about a dozen years gone, D. Aegidius Hu^nius his book of
Calvin.
entitled by him, Calu^us Iudaizans, and dedicated unto one David Pareus a
principal Caluinian Doctor, sets down the argument of his book thus, in
the first front thereof: This book is to show (says he) that John Calvin has
most detestably presumed to corrupt (in ^auour of Jews and Arians) the most
clear places, Anno 159^. Wittenberg. apud viduam Matth^i VVelaci.
and testimonies of Scripture, concerning the glorious Trinity, Deity of
Christ, of the Holy Ghost, and above all, the predictions of Prophets ^or the
coming of the Messiah, his Nativity, passion, ascension, and sitting at the
right hand of God etc. with a clear confutation of his false corruptions
therein etc.

This is the title and argument of the book, which he does prosecute for
almost two hundred pages together, dividing the same into two parts: the
first wherein he shows, how John Calvin most wickedly, and maliciously under
pretense of interpreting the Scripture in different sense from the ancient
Fathers, did go about covertly to weaken, infringe, or take from the Christi^ns
all the strong^st arguments which they had, or have out of the Scriptures for
the Godhead of Christ, and his equality, and consubstantiality with the Father
etc. And in the second part of his book Doctor Hunnius shows that the said
Calvin uses the same fraud, and malice by overthrowing all the predictions,
and fortellings of Prophets about Christ, is he was man.

11. Thus far I wrote at that time, and then produced somewhat largely and
particulerly 18. examples partly out of the old, John Calvin an angel of
darkness with the Luthera^s.
and partly out of the new Testament, maliciously perverted by him in favor of
Jews and Arrians, against the truth and certainty of Christian Religion,
leaving out 20. more, which Doctor Hunnius does handle, and in the end
concludes thus: Quapropter vt receptui canam, detectu^ satis superque iudico,
Angelum illum tenebrarum Ioannem Caluinum, qui ex abyssi puteo emergens etc.
Wherefore that I may now (says he) retire my self, I do judge that Angel of
darkness John Calvin to be sufficiently, and more then sufficiently discovered,
who being raised from the pit of hell to the perverting of mankind, has partly
by his detestable desire of wresting Scriptures and overthrowing the bulwarks
of Christian Religion, which it has against Jews and Arians: partly also by
his impious pen against the holy and sacred Majesty of Jesus Nazarenus, now
exalted in heaven; partly also by his perverse doctrine of the Sacraments, and
horrible monstrous paradoxes of his absolute predestination, has obscured in
these our later days no small part of the light and sun of Gods truth, and
drawn with him a great number of stars, as the Apocalypse says, headlong
into hell: from whom God everlasting by his mercy sign and protect his
servants, least they may be in^ected with this most pestilent plague o^
Caluinian error, and convert those that are infected, unto Jesus Christ the
Pastor of their souls, to the end they perish not in their error, but be
saved everlasting with those that faithfully do love God: And this I had to
warn the Church of Christ of the most wicked deceipts of John Calvin.

12. Hitherto are the words of Doctor Egidius Hunnius which you see with what
vehemence of spirit and protestation he utters them against the heresies of
Calvin and Caluinists, A consideration of much weight.
so as they may easily be seen to come from his heart, and full determination
of his settled judgment, who being so principal a Protestant, and learned
Doctor, and Professor of Deuinity, and held for a brother of the self same
Church by which M. Morton means to be saved (if he have any such meaning) I
marvel what impression it makes in him, or whether it makes any thing at
all, which I should have been glad to have understood by a word or two of his
answer: but nothing comes from him; and so this debt must be laid up with
the rest, until the day of payment come, which when it may be, or how much, or
what he will be able to pay, How Caluinisme is heresy by the judgment of
learned Protestants.
yea (though he de^erre it until doomesday) is a matter easily to be
coniectured, by such as ca^ cast up accounts, and look into debtors abilityes,
or possibilityes for their discharge. But yet one thing is clear without any
answer of his, and I would have it noted by the reader, that all his
inuectiues to his Majesty against us, for calling and holding them as heretics
out of the fo^said definition of S. August^n, and other Fathers do fall to the
ground, as vain and frivolous, for so much as so principal men of their own
brotherhood do affirm the same, as now you have heard. And thus much about the
first head or question, whether the Protestant Religion of England, so f^r
forth at leastwise, as it follows the doctrine of Calvin, be truly accounted
heresy, or no? And consequently damnable to the holders thereof.

Two other heads of controversy.
13. Two other great heads of co^trouersy there were between us in this first
part of my forsaid Treatise about Rebellion: the first, whether the doctrine of
Catholics, or of Protestants did more favor obedience unto their temporal
princes, and secondly which part did most practice the same. And about the
first for Catholic doctrine, it is largely proved by me throughout the whole
first part of my Treatise, that it is exact in all respects for obliging men to
do all due obedience both unto temporal and spiritual superiors, Catholic
doctrine touching Obedience to Princes
not only when they are good and virtuous, but also dis^^lis, that is, bad and
fastidious, as the Apostles word is; and that we must obey the^ out of
conscience, as Ministers of God, from whom they have their authority, and
power. And when the exorbita^t defects of any Prince, or governor shall impose
necessity of redress or restraint, it may not be by private Authority, or
popular mutiny: but by order, judgment, and public authority. Whereas on the
other side the Protestant doctrine is showed out of their own words, writers,
and authors, to teach the quite contrary, which authors I do cite, as namely
Calvin, Beza, Hottoma^, and others in France, by the testimonies of Launay,
Belforest, and other French writers, Mitig. p. 38.39. etc. and p. 116.117. etc.
and in England and Scotland, Goodman, Gilby, VVhittingham, Knox, Buchanan, and
others, by the testimonies of their own writings, and stories, and of the
Archbish^ of Canterbury out of his first Book Of dangerous positions, and of
D. Sutcliffe in his Survey o^ pretended discipline, against the Purita^s,
Protestants doctrine about restrayning and punishing Princes.
that is, the most zealous sort o^ Caluinists, all which have set down their
resolute opinions, that it is lawful, when the Prince offers injuries, or
becomes, as they call it, a Tyrant, especially in matters of Religion: they
hold it lawful, I say, by their Deuinity, for the Nobility, or people, or
private men, as they have, or may have commodity to do it, to make revenge
either upon his person or otherwise, yea by death it self.

14. And as for the second point, which is the practice of this doctrine, I do
show such a notorious difference between Catholic, and Protestant people, out
of the experience of this our present age, as nothing can be more conuincing
out of public histories, and men's memory ye^ alive, that there has been more
violence offered by the Protestant people and subjects, to their lawful, and
true Princes by arms, actions, co^spiracies, rebellions, and other forcible
means, within the compass of almost one half age in the Northern p^rts of the
world, The practice of Protestants against P^^nces.
to wit, Germany, France, Flanders, England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweueland,
Polonia, and other parts, then was prac^ised, or heard of in a thous^nd years
before, throughout all the Christian world. Wherein, for that his Majesty of
England, that now is, unto whom my Adversary presumed to dedicate his book,
S^^ Mitig. p. 44.45. ^ d^^^^^ps ^^^m p. 116.117. etc.
can be the best, and most honorable, and authentical testimony of any Prince
perhaps l^^^^g: in regard of the many troubles and perils, which he and his
Royal lineage have passed therein. I do stay my self longer upon the
contemplation of broils raised by that means in Scotland, both before the
birth of his Majesty, and afterward, which is so lamentable a story as no man
can read it, but with horror, and infinite regre^t of mind.

15. These things being laid forth by me, and many other, to this effect, which
for breuities sake I do pretermit here to repeat, had it not been convenient
that M. Morton in this his last Reply (seeing he would needs reply) should have
signified in some few words unto us, how he would or could satis^ie this main
charge and debt: especially, for so much as this touched the very heart of his
cause in this first argument about rebellion. Great om^^ons of M. Morton in his
Reply.
For albeit his Reply be but a preamble, yet is it a large one, of above a
hundred and twenty pages in quarto, whereof he might well have bestowed some
one or two in acknowleging at least unto his Reader, what I had touched
concerning this main point, that is so important. But it seems that he would
have his Reader imagine, that no more substantial matter was treated by me,
then he has set down, in those skirmishes, and other trifling contentions, in
this his preamble before discussed

16. But his greatest omission, and pretermissio^ indeed, was in this matter,
the concealeme^t of what soever in e^fect I had said for laying open the
absurdities, hurts, and inconveniences, that did, and must needs ensue to the
Realm and Common wealth by this intolerable license, taken up by
rayling-Ministers to traduce and slander at their plea^ure ^o many thousa^ds
of quiet, and well-meaning people, and faithful Subjects of his Majesty, by
way of Sycophancie, drawing them into suspicions of Rebellions, Treasons,
conspiracies, and faithles meaning toward their Prince and Country, and this
in r^gard of their religion, faith and conscience, which lies not in their
power by force to alter, but with the everlasting perdition, and ^uine of their
souls.

17. This I showed how damnable a course it was, how seditious, and pernicious
to all quiet S^ates: and I declared in particular, what stinging exasperations
there had been laid upon English Catholics for many years together out of
such motives as these ar^: how grievous, and dangerous a thing it is to drive
men to desperation: A wicked and pernicious course of exasperating^ and driving
to desperatio^
how little thanks, or reward he deserves, that casts in fyre-brands to
kyndle sedition, and deuideth any Princes subjects among themselves, and from
their said Prince: how potent and happy his Majesty of great Britany were, if
such makbates would suffer him to enjoy his greatness and felicity, and to be
beloved and served of all his people jointly: that the pursuing of Catholics
with that ^agernes, that now is seen, for their only religion, and this in the
sight of the whole Christian Catholic world, that is of the same religion,
cannot but work pernicious, and prejudicial effects both at home and abroad,
in begetting sinister, and auerse affections, and judgments, worse words and
writings conform thereunto: how that when Protestants began their sect, and
were underlings to Catholics, all their books preachings and speeches tended to
show, and prove that it was against the gospel of Christ, and contrary to all
reason, Religion, equity, and piety to vex men for their conscience: and that
now they having the government in their own hands it cannot be but extreme
dishonorable unto them to use such continual vexations, and angariations unto
Catholics for their said Religion, which they never changed, nor invented of
themselves, but continued in that, wherein their ancestors had both lived and
dyed, from the first planting of Christian faith in that Island.

18. Many of these points did I touch and handle more largely in this first
part of my Treatise, concerning obedience and Rebellion, Preamb. page 36.
and did expect that M. Morton would have returned me some part of substantial
answer in this his Reply. But this credit also remains vndischarged, as the
rest: and we must expect the full payment at his further leisure, and ability.
Yet some few scatterings he left about this matter in his third Inquiry, and
eleventh Paragraph which we have discussed before in the second Chapter of this
our Answer, and have found it to be of no force at all, to give satisfaction
to any of these points which here we have mentioned. And therefore we conclude,
that in effect he has omitted and pretermitted all the principal points
handled by us in this affayre. Let us now pas^e to the second general argument
of my said Treatise of Mitigation, which is about ^quiuocation: and let us s^e,
whether M. Morton have used the same sleight of concealment therein also, as in
the former.

OF M. MORTONS Pretermissions in the second argument of my Treatise, about
Equivocation.. II.
YOU have heard how many principal points M. Morton has passed over with a
deep silence (as it were) in the first argument of my Treatise, concerning the
controversy of Rebellion: Now let us turn our eyes upon the second subject,
which is of Equivocation, against which he made such great clamours and
outcries in his former empty book of full Satisfaction, as if it had been the
most strange, new, absurd ridiculous, and blasphemous doctrine in the world.
For clearing of which point I was forced to write five or six large Chapters,
and bestow almost three hundred pages to repress his said clamours, vain
exasperations, and childish insultations against the same, reducing first the
whole matter to five serious, and important considerations as it were, for an
entrance into the whole Treatise. The first, how peruersely, and calumniously
M. Morton and his fellows do deal with us to make us odious in this
controversy, mistaking of purpose the true state of the question of which point
I wrote then as follows.

20. And first of all (said I) to the end the indifferent Reader may understand
with what kind of adversaries we are to deal in this matter, Mitig. p. 274.275.
I think it necessary for declaring their peruersity and preventing some
calumniations, to make a certain brief protestation or explication here, at
the beginning, About the peruersity of our adversaries.
that we do not take this defense of Equivocation in hand, either for patronage
of lying, as this new discovered false Minister does every where most
slanderously in (...), nor for that we delight in this art, or manner of
evasion by Equivocation, though it be no lie at all, but rather do allow, and
like ^ar better o^ simple, plain, and resolute speech in all Catholics,
concerning as well matters of ord^nary conversation, as of their conscience and
religion, especially at this t^me when God has given them so singular an
occasion to profess the same to his great honor, How Equivocation is defended.
and their own everlasting good, and increase o^ m^ri^t: yet ^or that
perfection is one thing, and obligation is another, we may not bind men to
more, then Gods precept byndeth, which is never to lie, or utter anyvntruth.
But as for the other of Amphibology, doubtful speech, or Equivocation, i^ law
o^ nature, diu^ne, and humane, do in certain cases permit it unto men, (as
afterward shall be showed) either for concealing of things secret, or for
necessary defense of innocence, we may not without injustice take that right
from them, which by so many titles they may duly challenge.

21. It were greatly to be wished by all good and peaceable men, that the most
excellent ^orme of Christian speech prescribed b^ our Savior, Matthew. 5.
Yea yea: No no, were used by all in common conversation, and no other; as also
Nolite iurare omnino, s^eare not at all: Gratian. Causa 22. c. 2.
but yet for that the infirmity of man is such ( says S. Augustine) as one
will hardly believe another without an oath, the Church of God has allwaies so
interpreted those words of Christ, so as they take not all liberty of swering
from Christians in necessary cases, albeit perfect men would pass with the
same. And this is S. Augustines reason in sundry parts of his works, and is
translated into the Canon law by Gratia^, and consequently also allowed by
Popes, and the sea Apostolic etc.

22. Thus I wrote at that time alleging many other authorityes and examples
of Scripture, for proof of the same, showing that many things are commended
for perfection, but yet are not commanded by ordinary obligation: as, Diverse
things are commendable, and of perfection, but not of ob^ligation.
bonum est homini mulierem non tangere 1. Cor. 7. It is good ^or a man not to
marry at all. And then: If a man do marry, not to make any divorce at all,
Matthew. 19. And so likewise it were good not to strive, or go to law at all, 2.
Cor. 6. And it were perfection for a preacher not to take any wages, or
temporal rewards at all, but maintain himsef by the labors of his own
hands, as S. Paul did, which he called his glory, 1. Cor. 15.

23. All these things I say, were good and higly to be co^me^ded, but yet the
contrary thereof is not to be condemned for sin, but permissible: and the li^e
in Equivocation. Unto which consideration I adjoined 4. others. First that the
allowa^ce, and use of this Amphibologie, or Equivocation was known, and
practiced in Catholic Christian Schools over the world for above 400. years
past, Five consideratio^s about the use of Equivocation.
by M. Mortons own confession. The second, that the men that both taught, and
used the same, were holy, learned, and grave, and great lovers otherwise of
truth, and consequently would never have approved, or exercised the same, if it
had been so great an iniquity, and offensive to God, as M. Mort. and his
fellows do pretend.

24. The third consideration, or rather fourth in order is, that there be many
cases, which do fall out in man's life, (as afterward more at large, and in
particule^ is declared) wherein a man is bound in conscience to use the refuge
and help of this kind of doubtful speech, or Equiuocatio^, for defense of
innocency, and avoiding other greater inconveniences. And lastly the fifth
consideration is of the great severity in detesting all sorts of lying both
great and small, mortal, and venial, which those men had, that permitted
notwithstanding the use of Equivocation, as S. Augustine and others, in such a
rigor, as for saving a man's life, either our own, or our neighbors, we ought
not to commit the least sort of lying that can be imagined, which is an evident
argument, that they did distinguish between lying and Equivocation, which M.
Morton every where holds to be the same, and would have us to be of that mind
too. And for approving the one condemns us of the other, against all right,
and reason as you see.

25. And these were my first five Considerations for stopping M. Mortons
clamours, exaggerations, and exclamations, and reducing him to a more moderate
temper in treating this controversy. Preamble p. 82.83.
And it had been good, that in this his Reply he had bestowed some ^ew words
upon the answering of these reasons. ^^uth it is, that he makes mention of the
one of them, which is the 2. by way of an objection, as though I had presumed
him to co^^es^e more the^ he does, about the 400. years, wherein the doctrine
of ^quiuocation had been received, but this is ans^ered before in the fourth
Chapter, and showed to be a mere cavil; and consequently, we may truly say,
as we do, that M. Morto^ has not answered any thing at all to these five
considerations, at least four of the^, nor yet so much as mentioned them in
this his last Reply, nor given notice to the Reader, that any such thing was
^et down in my behalf.

26. Next unto this entering into the substance of the matter it self, I do
discuss the principal points belonging to this controversy, Mitig. c. 8. and
9. p. 307
as namely what Eq^iuocation truly is: what is the definition of truth; what of
falsit^e; what of lying: what differences they have, and wherein they do agree,
showing the same by many reasons, and authorities not only of Philosophers,
where the matters do appertain unto them, but out of ancient holy Fathers
also, and variety of examples taken out of holy Scriptures, and of the words
and factes of Christ our Savior, and his Apostles themselves: and this very
largely, and copiously throughout diverse Paragraphes, whereby it is made most
evident that the holiest men that ever were upon earth, did equivocate
sometimes in their speeches, Forcible proofs for equivocation.
and used clauses of reseruatio^ in a far different sense from that which the
hearer did apprehend. And yet for that they had a true meaning in their own
mind, it cannot be reprehended without impiety, both in respect of their
excellent persons for sanctity, and the received sentence of S. Augustine, Non
facit linguam ream, nisi men's rea; Aug. ser. 28. de verbis Apostol.
Nothing makes the tongue guilty of lying but a guilty mind, when one thing is
meant, and another spoken.

27. As for example when S. John Baptist was dem^nded, Propheta es tu? Are you
a Prophet? Joan. 1.
and he answered, No. And yet does Christ call him a Prophet expressly Luc. 7.
And so did Zachary his Father, See mitig. c 9.. 2. page 362. and deinceps.
before he was borne Luc. 1. yea more then a Prophet Matthew. 11. which is showed
to import as much as when a Priest is vnlaw^ully demanded, Are you a Priest?
And he answers, No: for as S. John Baptist had a me^tall reservation in his
words, and thereby an Equivocation (as is showed out of the exposition of
Origin, S. Chrysostom, S. Cyril, S. Augustiue, Theophilact, Euthymius,
Rupertus and others) so says the Priest in his answer: and consequently
Equivocation is a different thing from lying, Full satisf. p. 48.49.
and not so hellish, heathenish, heinous, and monstrous, as inte^peratly M.
Mort. calls it.

28. After this do follow many other examples, as that of our Savior in S.
John's gospel, Ego non iudico que^quam: I do not judge any one. And yet himself
says in the same gospel, Pater omne iudiciu^ dedit ^ilio, Joan. 8.
my Father has given all judgment unto (me) his Son. Joan. 5.
And again in the Acts of the Apostles S. Peter avouches that Christ is
appointed Judge by God his Father, both of the quick and the dead: which S. Paul
confirms in diverse places, Act. 10
as Romans 13. 1. Cor. 3. So as that first ^peach of Christ that he judged no
man, cannot be verified, but by a mental reservation: which what it was, the
holy Fathers and expositors do labor to explicate. And the like to this, is
that speech of Christ, of the daughter of the Archisinagogue, Math. 9.
Marc. 5.
The maid is not dead but asleep, and yet she was truly dead: Luc. 8.
and the hearers were deceived in Christ's meaning, which could not be true, nor
was held for true in the literal and external meaning, but by some mental
reservation, which S. Augustine, and other holy Fathers do labor to seek out
what it was; and in that sense it was to be understood. And many other examples
to like effect are produced, and discussed, both out of the old and new
Testament, whereby it is made more clear then the sun, that this kind of
speech in answering by Equivocation and doubtful speech when need requires,
that is to say, when one sense sounds in the words conceived by the hearer,
and another is reserved in the mind of the speaker upon just causes, is no lie,
but a truth, and most lawful, and that it were impiety, and blasphemy to hold
or say the contrary in sundry persons, and speeches, which holy Scriptures do
recount.

29. Now then why has not M. Morton in this his last Reply given some
satisfaction about this great debt: When T. M. is like to pay this debt.
I know his answer will be, to say, that he will do it in his promised
Reioynder, which shall be his last day of payment: but there remains to be
considered, what liklyhood there is, that he will be able to pay at that day:
especially for so much as he having in his last full Satisfaction attempted to
answer some like places alleged before in a little ^reatise of this matter
written as he says by M. Garnet^ was not able to satisfy any one
substantially, and to the contentment of any mean judgment, Mitig. p. 3^0.
as I do show at larg throughout the third part of my ninth Chapter: adding
further in the fourth part thereof many more authorityes both of Scriptures, and
holy Fathers to convince M. Morton, that Equivocation is to be freed both from
the name and nature of lying, falsity or falsehood. All which in like manner is
concealed by him in this his frivolous Preamble.

30. Wherefore having cleared all this matter by Scrip^ures, holy Fathers,
evident arguments and reasons, from the imputations and calumniations of M.
Mor^o^, ^ do further set down the assertions, grounds, and determinatio^s of
School-Doctours, Deuines, Canon and Civil lawyers, with their reasons, Mitig.
c. 9.10.11.
foundations and practice: as also I do prove the same by the practice of our
very adversaries themselves. And moreover I do set down sundry particular
cases, and occasions, wherein Equi^ocatio^ may and must needs be granted
lawfully to be used. And ^inally I do a^swere and solue all M. Mor^o^s
pretended arguments and obiectio^s made against us, and this common doctrine,
with such perspicuous euidency, as to me it seems, that no man can doubt
thereof hereafter. And last of all I do conclude with a large exhortation to
Catholic people, that notwithstanding the lawfulnes of Equiuocatio^ in sundry
cases: yet for the seeming injustice, that it may appear to have, and thereby
also give disedification to them, that understand not the true ground and
reason of the lawfulnes: for this cause (I say) and for that in confession of
our faith (whereof the necessity is frequent in these our days of persecution)
it is no ways to be admitted or tolerated: therefore I do counsel them to be
very sparing in using the liberty of this Equivocation, when they are not
pressed thereunto, for avoiding some greater evil.

31. All which limitations, restrictions, and explications of our Christian
sincere meaning, and hatred of lying, M. Morton does conceal from his Reader,
M. Mort. iniquity in dealing maliciously with us.
and still cries out, that we are Patrons of lying, no^ will he understand the
difference, nor hear our defense. And though he do hear and vnders^^nd us,
y^^ will he conceal it from the Reader, and go on with his clamor, as before:
nay, which is more strange, he will make proclamation, as he does in this his
preamble, that he has gained the victory in both causes, as well of Rebellion,
as of Equivocation: and yet has he in effect said no more about the former,
Act. 5.
but what you have heard touched before, which is plain nothing. And concerning
the second, he has chosen out the Example only of the poor woman Saphyra,
that according to his imagination answered to S. Peter in the Acts of the
Apostles with an Equivocation, concerning the selling of her lands, but as we
hold and prove, with a lie, and not with Equivocation. And what is this to so
long and large a discourse as mine was? Wherefore M. Mortons voluntary omissions
in this matter are notorious, and in my judgment are ^uident signs of great
weakness in his cause. Now we are to see others also of an other ^ort which we
shall handle in this next Paragraph.

OTHER OMISSIONS OF M. Morton concerning the defense of ten other Protestant
writers charged with false dealing: which defense being remitted over unto him,
was wholly pretermitted and concealed by him.. III.
IN the the 12. and last Chapter of my Treatise of Mitigatio^, for that M.
Mort. had continually in his former pa^phlets and Treatises both o^ Discovery
and Full satisfaction inueighed bitterly against all kind of Equiuocatio^ as
falsehood and lying, and against Catholics, as lovers, and fautors thereof; I
thought best to descend unto some particulers with him, for the removing this
unjust reproach, and for laying it where it was due, to wit, upon
Protestant-writers themselves, granting, that as in a large sense, and
improperly, Equiu^cation might be called lying and deceyuing, when the due
conditions and circumstances of true Equivocation are not observed (which are,
to have a just cause, and true meaning;) so I said, that this kind of unlawful
Equiuocati^ does always lightly fall upon the Protestant side, and not upon
Catholics. Which as I had showed before in multiplicity of occasions against M.
Morton himself (as now you have seem and heard in the ^ormer eleven Chapters
of that book of Mitigation:) so in this last, I thought it not amiss to
assign him some parteners in his condemnation showing that others also of his
brethren were of like spirit in lying with him, though perhaps himself had
out-gone most of them now in that damnable liberty.

33. And then for more easy understanding hereof I divided Equivocation into two
sorts, the one lawful, and the other unlawful, as has been said: and this
unlawful, I subdeuided again (as also lying) into material and formal
unlawful Equiuocation^ the later being much more heinous then the former: for
that the speaker knows that he does unjustly deceive by Equivocation. And
albeit I do exemplify there in many particulers against M. Morton, wherein I do
challenge him to have often used the worst sort of these formal lying
Equivocations, whilst he impugneth the other sort, that lawfully and without
lying is used some times, and in some cases by Catholics, and was by the
Apostles, Prophets, and Christ himself, as now you have heard, Supra. c. 1.. 4.
yet in this his Reply he pretermitting to answer to the things themselves
objected, picketh only quarrels at the form of the division and subdiuision,
as you may see before in our first Chapter, where the matter is handled largely
and the cavil laid open, and refuted. But to the end that M. Mort. omissions,
and sly dealing in the principal points may better appear, it shall not be
amiss perhaps to set down some particulers wherewith he was charged at that
time.

The Charge.
Mitig. p. 486.

Formal lying Equivocation in T. Mort.


34. As for example ( said I) when he writes in his late book of Full
satisfaction, No one iota of Scripture, (...) one example in all antiquity, no
one reason in the natural^ wi^ of man, no one Author, Gre^ke or Latin, no one
Father, no on^ Pope Christian or Antichristian, does make for Equivocation (as
we defend it) or any color thereof: neither did they so much as (...) any such
thing. Here is first seen a notorious untruth of the assertion it self, and
consequently it is a mat^riall lie, and material Equivocation: for that the
matter deliue^ed is untrue. And secondly it is most probable that Tho. Mort.
must needs know it to be a lie, having seen so many Authors and reasons
alleged ^or it by the Catholic Treatise which he pretends to co^^ute.
Whereof it follows, that it was a ^o^mall ly^ also, and a ^ormall lying
Equivocation in the highest degree of deceit and falsehood.

35. And so in like manner in the fo^mer Chapter when he alleges Azor,
Dominicus Sotus, and Cicero, directly against their own meaning, words and
drift in the very same places, which he cites, and takes words out of the^
for his pretended purpose, he could not but see and know that it was a lie to
cite them to the contrary: and yet he thought best to do it, and tell his Reader
that they were of a contrary opinion. This then is formally to lie, and
Equivocate in the worst and superlatiue degree of false Equivocation.

36. About which point the Reader may be remitted to the second Chapter of this
treatise, and last Paragraph thereof, where he shall see diverse examples laid
together, and among other, that which he reports of the death of our English
Pope Adrian choked (as he says) with a fly, and cites Nauclerus for the
same: who though he mention, yet refuteth expressly that ^able, which T.M.
concealed: where he is showed in like manner to corrupt notably a passage of
Doctor Boucher, auouching him to say that which he expressly impugneth about the
killing of a Tyrant by a private man, and private authority.

37. And the like corruption he is convinced to have used in citing Gratian the
Collector of the Canon law^s, and his Glosses, perverting their words, T.
Mort^ talents in lying Equivocation.
and whole sense, as is there set down, with sundry other examples, which show
that the man did not lie of error, or oversight, but meerlie out of malice to
deceive the simple and credulous Reader, knowing in deed, that he did lie. And
the same is demonstrated by many examples most apparent, and evident throughout
the whole sixth Chapter of this book, and other places: so as if we had no^
other proof of this spirit, but in Tho. Morton himself, it were sufficient to
prove our purpose, for that of all other lightly of his coat, he professes
most innocence, simplicity, and sincerity in this behalf, and by this does
principally prove our purpose, which is, that they Equivocate and lie, both
wittingly and willingly, and then most of all, when they make greatest
protestation of truth.

38. As when T. M. talks of his naked innocence in his Epistle to the Kings
Majesty, of detesting Equivocation from his soul, of styling himself A
Minister of simple truth: and finally his usurping of those protestations of S.
Paul before mentioned, That in all things he spoke the truth, and lied not,
which Thomas Morton, as we often have proved before, could not choose but know
to be a wilful lie indeed, having seen and read the A^thors which so
manifestly he be^yeth, as never in this he will be able to clear himself. And
heerof we do finally infer, that he and his do equivocate in the worst kind,
which by us and ours is never used: and so while he declameth against law^ull
Equiuocatio^ and practices unlawful, he shows himself a plain
preuaricator.

39. And for that this matter is of so great importance for the Reader well to
conceive in these days of controuersyes between us, Asigne distinctiue
between Protestants and us.
I mean to stay my self somewhat in this Chapter upon this point, and to show
that indeed it is a substantial sign distinctiue between all Sectaries and
Us, at this time, and that in matters of controversy our writers shall never be
found guilty in these kinds of false lying, and malicious ^quiuocations, where
not only untruth is uttered, but it is wittingly also uttered, the writer
knowing that he writes untruth, as often now has been said. Which manner of
dealing infers two points: the one that such a writer or speaker has no
conscience that utters things against his own knowledge, and which God sees
to be false, and falsely meant in his heart: and the other that his cause has
no ground of substantial truth, which cannot be defended without such wilful
lies.

40. In this the^ if you please let us insist a while, and let Tho. Mort. bring
forth any Catholic Author whatsoever, that wrote against Protestants since
these heresies began, that has been taken in this impiety, I mean, that has
set down in print any such falsity, as cannot be excused either by ignorance,
oversight, negligence, error of print, translation, diversity of editions, A
just challenge to M. Mort.
or the like, but that it must needs be presumed that he knew the untruth, and
yet would set it ^orth: of this kind (I say) let him show me bu^ one example
among all Catholic writers of our time, and I will in my conscience greatly
mistrust and discredit the Author, whether it be another or my self: but if he
show me two or three in any writer of this kind, I shall never be able to
believe him more. And whereas the number and variety of Catholic writers is so
great as the world sees, it were no great labor to show it in some, if that
spirit did reign amongst them, as it does in Protestant writers, out of whom
great volumes might be framed of this one point, if a man would embrace them
all throughout all nations: but I meaning to speak of Englishmen, and those
very few in respect of the multitude, and not having all their works by me at
this present, am forced only to use some few notes taken heertofore out of
their books, which notwithstanding shall suffice for this short view, which we
pretend. And for better method and memory, I have thought good to reduce my
notes at this time to three sorts of men, that have written against us. First
Protestant Bishops: then Ministers: and ^astly Laymen, but of good sort, I
mean Knights: and of each one of these shall we make our several paragraphs.

41. Thus far I wrote at that time: and as for the first part of that which I
did set down, that M. Morton had been taken in many and inexcusable false
Equivocations, which in effect are the same with lying; if before it was
evident by the particular examples here alleged and many others, I do presume
that now it will be much more manifest after his Reply, and this my reioynder
made unto the same. For that not only his former faults committed in this kind
in his former Treatises o^ Discovery and Full Satisfaction, are more orderly
laid forth, as by the precedent part of this Chapter appears, then they were
in my Treatise of Mitigation, but many ^ew escapes are detected in like manner,
as will ^ppeare in the seque^t Chapter dedicated only to this particul^r effect.

42. And as for the second point to d^^lare that this spirit of false dealing
joined with nec^ssity and mysery of their bad cause is comm^^ not only unto him
but unto many of his brethr^n, and must needs be unto all of them, whenever
they tak^ pen in hand to defend the same, for that one lie cannot be defended
without another, Ten Protestant writers brought in for lying Equiuocators.
as has been said: therefore I do produce te^ several witnesses, two of them
called Bishops M. Jewel and M. Horn: five inferior Ministers M. John Fox, M.
Cal^ield, M. Hanmer, M. Charke, and M. Perkins, and might have named 5. times
more: three lay men also and Knights that have written against us, Sir Francis
Hastings, Sir Philip Mornay, and Sir Edward Cook, alleging not one, but
sundry examples out of each o^ their works: and might enlarge my self to a
volu^e i^ that argument if I would say what I have found in their, and their
brethrens works in this kind, standing only and precisely upon this, that they
be such examples, as there is not only material falsehood found in the thing,
but so apparent also, as it must needs be presumed the party knew it to be
such when he wrote it, and consequently was formal lying, and false
equiuocating indeed.

43. As for example: when M. Jewel in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's time to
draw her and the Realm to change Religion, M. Jewels egregious Equivocation.
and become Protestant, did preach at Paul's Cross and in the Court, and with
a most confident semblance, and sundry tears, did cast fo^th 28. several
articles against Catholic Religion, saying, that if either the English, or any
other learned Catholics in the world could show but one place of Scripture,
one Father, one Doctor, one allowed example of the Primitive Church within the
first 6. hundred years after Christ for clear proof of any one of these 28.
articles, he would yield and subscribe, and be no more a Protestant, adding
also these words: In his sermon in the Court, and at Paul's Cross.
I speak not this in vehemence of spirit or heat of talk, but even as before
God, by way of simplicity, and truth, least any of you should happily be
deceived, and think there is more weight on the other side, then in conclusion
will be found etc. Which protestation he repeated diverse times and in diverse
sermons. And then yet further he brake into this vehement Apostrophe: O
merci^ull God! who would think that there could be so much wilfulnes in the
heart of man! O Gregory! O Austine! O Hierome! O Chrysostom! O Leo! O Dionyse!
O Anaclete! O Sixtus! O Paul! O Christ! if we be deceived herein, you are they
that have deceived us etc.

44. In which words and protestations I did show by 5. or 6. conuincing reasons
that there must needs be much hypocrisy, dissimulation, and Equivocation
against his own conscience: and that consequently every member and branch of
this deceipt^ull speech must needs conteyne a formal lie, Diverse reasons
c^^uincing that M. Jewel spoke wittingly against his conscience.
and known for such to himself, when he uttered them: for that he could not
be ignorant how many, not only places and sentences the ancient Fathers, for
example, had against diverse of these Protestant articles that he holds, but
whole Treatises also against some. And as for that of the Real Presence, which
was one of his most principal, he had been present himself, not many years
before, and one of the Notaries also in the disputation of Cranmer, Ridley, and
Latimer, at Ox^ord under Q. Mary, wherein there were so many, and so p^rspicuous
places, and discourses of ancient Fathers brought against them for the said
Real Presence, as they remained wholly confounded, as may be seen by him that
is diligent, and will stand attent, by the relation thereof, s^t forth by John
Fox himself, in his Acts and Monuments, and more pithily collected out of him
in a several printed Treatise set forth these years past by N.D. in the ^hird
Part of the Three Conuersions of England

45. And finally when Doctor Harding, and many other learned Catholics began
to write against M. Jewel, and this hypocrisy of his, they came forth with so
huge a number of authentical authorities in all these kinds, which he names
here, Scriptures, Fathers Doctors, Counsels, examples of the primitive Church
within the first six hundred years, as they forced him to procure a
prohibition of their books by the State. And the^ was he urged about these
speeches of his: Mitig. p. 501.
Now it stands upon you to prove but one affirmation against me, and so to
require my promise of subscribing. And again: If you of your part would
vouchsafe to bring but t^o lines, the ^hole matter were co^^luded. And yet
further: Show forth but one Doctor o^ your side, yea one sentence in ^our
de^^nce etc. All which I do prove to be notorious cogging, and dissimulation:
for that many other Protestants more learned then him self do acknowledge the
Fathers to have many sentences against him, and cannot be stood unto by them,
without overthrow of their cause. And among others I do allege these words
of Doctor Whitaker We repose no such confid^nce (says he) in the Fathers
writings, D. Whitaker in his answer to D. Sanders Demo^strations. p. 21.
that we take any certain proof of Religion from them, because we place all
our faith and Religion, not in humane, but in divine authority. If ther^ore you
bring us, what some Father has thought, or what the Fathers universally all
togeat^er have delivered the same, (except it be approved by testimony of
Scriptures) it avails nothing, it gayneth nothing, it conuinceth nothing. For
the Fathers a^^ such witnesses, as they also have need of the Scriptures to be
their witnesses. I^ deceived by error they give ^orth their t^stimony
disagreing from Scriptures, albeit they may be pardoned, er^ing ^or want of
wisdom, we cannot be pa^doned, if because they ^rred we also ^ill err with
them. So Doctor Whitaker, more learned perhaps in the Fathers then M. Jewel,
though not so confident. For if he had found by his experience, that no Father
had any one place or sentence against Protestant religion, he would never so
much have discredited them all, as here he does. Wherefore the false
Equiuocatio^ of M. Jewel is notable in this place.

46. But besides this, I do lay forth six several examples of egregious
wil^ull corruptions taken out of M. Jewels books and words, which are ou^r
long to be repeated here: two or three also of M. Horns practice in that
behalf who possessed the bishopric of Winchester for some years: Six
several examples of M. Jewels Equivocation.
sundry out of M. Calfield: diverse out of M. Charke, and M. Hanmer: and no
less notorious, and wilful out of M. Perkins: some very markable out of Sir
Francis Hastings: a great number intolerable out of Sir Philip Mornay, who was
challenged by the Bishop of Eureux for 800. and affro^ted with threescore at one
offer, and convinced of nine in one days conference before the present King of
France, and his Counsel.

47. And finally I adioyne to the former, for my last witness of false
dealing, Sir Edward Cook late Attorney General to his Majesty, Sir Edward
Cook.
and not long since manifesting himself to the world for a writer against
Catholics, whose spirit I do show by sundry examples to be like the rest in
that behalf: leaving the defense both of him, and the others to M. Mortons
patronage, who has had so little care of their credit, as it seems, that he
has not so much as once mentioned them, or any one of the^ in this his Reply,
but leaves every one to shift for himself, which omission cannot but seem
somewhat prejudicial unto them, for that every man will thereof infer, that
their causes were so bad, as he durst not take their defense in hand: but
especially will this seem to be true in the cause of Sir Edward Cook, whom
M. Morton had more obligation to de^end, in that in his book of full
Satisfaction against me, he served himself of diverse examples, and authorityes
taken out of the said Knights book, and always repo^table Reports, as
there he calls them. Which he having seen answered since that time, in my
Treatise of Mitigation, and showed to be impertinent, and nothing to the
purpose, had obligation thereby to have defended somewhat in this his Reply,
either the things themselves, or the Author, or both: but neither of them has
he done, and therefore do I mean to handle this omission severally in the
sequent Paragraph.

OF M. MORTONS OMISSIONS Concerning the defense of Sir Edward Cook, wholly
pretermitted by him.. IIII.
ALBEIT perhaps M. Morton may say, that his meaning was, to take in hand the
d^fence of his Client Sir Edward Cook in his other promised Reioynder, and
therefore said nothing of him now in this his Preambling Reply: yet having now
seen him very hardly charged in two several Books, the one of the Catholic
Divine in a^swering to the fi^th part of his Reports: the other, the Treatise
of Mitigation, with the like imputations of untrue dealing, as are laid against
M. Morton himself, it seemed that it had been a point of friendship (if not of
duty) to have said somewhat for preventing and staying at least the Readers
prejudice, as in his Preface he said he did for himself, especially for so
much as he had seen now and read all those places which he borrowed out of M.
Cook to furnish one whole Chapter of his full Satisfaction, Full satisfact. c.
17. fol. 40.
fully answered and confuted by the Catholic Divine in his foresaid Book, In
the Answer to Reports in the lives of Edward the first, Ed. 2. etc.
which M. Mor^^^ might have at leastwise mentioned, among so many other points
of less importance, which he handles, if his heart had not served him to take
upon him the whole defense.

49. But all these indeed are signs of feeblene in both parties, I mean as
well in the Patron (...) the Client, for that it is no less strange, that Sir
(...) Cook himself having set forth a certain Preface for some excuse of
himself, and this after my Treatise of Mitigation (wherein he was so deeply
charged with sundr^ gross and wilful falsehoods) had been seen and read by
him, and yet to say never a word of this charge, nor how he could discharge it:
this silence (I say) is no less strange unto me then the other of M. Morton,
but rather more, for that Sir Edward was to defend himself, M. Morton another:
and propria magis premunt, our own affairs do more press us then other men's.
Wherefore to the end that I may somewhat oblige both M. Morton in his promised
Reioynder to be more myndfull of this matter, and Sir Edward himself (if he
mean to write any more Books against us) to clear somewhat this Charge that
was laid against him, I shall repeat the same again here as it was there set
down in my other Treatise: Thus the^ I wrote at that time.

50. Our last example (said I) shall be of Sir Edward Cook lately the Kings
Attorney, Mitig. p. 535.
who having taken upon him these years past to be both a sharp writer and
earnest Actor against Catholics, The Charge laid against Sir Edward Cook.
seems therewith also to have drunk of this spirit in such abou^dant measure,
as he is like in time to ouerrunne all the rest, if he go foreward as he has
begun. For that being admonished not long a go, by one that answered his
last Book of Reports, of diverse notorious his excesses committed in this
kind, he is (men say) so far of from correcting or amending the same as he has
not only in a late large declamatio^ against Catholics, See the answer ^f the
Cath. Divine to the 1. p. of Sir ^^ward Cook^. Reports c. vltimo.
in a Charge given by him at Nor^ich, repeated and avouched again the same
excesses, but has added others also thereunto of much more apparent ^alsity. As
for example, he was admonished among other points, that it was a notorious
v^truth which he had written and printed, that for the first ten years of Q.
Elizabethes Reign, no one person of what religion or Sect soever did refuse to
go to the Protestants Church and Service: which the Answerer confuteth so
clearly and by so many witnesses, as a man would have thought that the matter
would never have been mentioned more for very shame: and yet now (they say) that
the Attorney being made a Judge has not only repeated the same, but avouched
it also again with such asseueration in his foresaid Charge, as if it had
never been controlled or proved false.

51. Nay further they write, that he adjoined with like asseueration diverse
other things, no less apparently false then this: As for example: A notable
fiction against Pius V.
that Pope Pius Quintus before he proceeded to any Ecclesiastical Censure
against Q. Elizabeth wrote unto her a Letter, offering to allow and rati^y the
English Service, Bible and Communion book, as now it is in use in that
kingdom, if she would accept it as from him: which she refusing to do, he did
excommunicate her. By which tale he acquiteth notwithstanding Catholics (if you
mark it) from procuring that Excommunication for rebellion, which elsewhere he
often obiecteth most odiously against them. For if upon this cause she were
excommunicated, what part had Catholics therein? But yet I must needs say, that
the fiction is one of the most unlikely things, and the most impossible in
moral reason, that any man can devise. For that Pope Pius Quintus, albeit some
man would imagine him to be so good a fellow, as to care for no Religion (who
is known to have been most zealous) yet had he adventured his Popedom by
making such an offer. Decret. p. 1. did. 40. ca. 6. Si Papa.
For he should have allowed of diverse points in the Communion book, which are
held by the Catholic Church for heresy, and so condemned by the Council of
Trent and other Counsels. And now you know it is a ground among us, that a
Pope that should be an Heretic, or approve of heresy, thereby cease to be
Pope: how improbable then is this of Pius Quintus his offer? And why had not
this Letter in so many years been published to the world for the credit of the
English Service, and discredit of the Popes? And yet the voice is, that the
Lord Cook did so earnestly avouch this matter, as he pawned therein not only
his credit and honesty by express terms of protestation, but even his ^aith
also to God and man: a great adventure no doubt. And for that I assure my self
that the greater part of the Auditory being discreet men, did imagine it to be
quite false, as I and others in effect do know it to be: it mu^t needs be a
great blemish to my Lords credit at the beginning of his ^udgship, that in
other things also he be not believed.

52. But I understand that the Book of this speech or charge now printed is
expected shortly, The L. Cooks charge against Catholics.
together with some other appertayning to the same man, and then it may be,
that some body will examine matters more particulerly (especially those that
appertain to the iniuring of Catholics) and afterward return with the
agrieuances to the Judge him self (seeing he is now a Judge) to give sentence
of his own ouersightes. Albeit I must confess that as well my self, as
diverse other men have lost great hope of his Lordship by this accide^t: for
before we did think that his ouerlashing in speeches when he was Attorney did
proceed in great part of the liberty of that office, and that when he came to
be Judge he would reform his Conscience ratione Status, in regard of his state
of life: but now it seems that he is far worse: though this I say shall be left
by me to others to be discussed upon the sight of the foresaid printed Books.

53. My speech at this time shall be only about that which passed in his Book
of Reports while he was Attorney, and which has been disputed these months
past between him and a Catholic Divine of our party in his answer to the
said Reports, which Answer is in England. And albeit thereby may easily be
seen the tale^t which M. Attorney had, while he was Attorney in this kind of
worst Equivocation (notwithstanding his often declamations against the other
sort, that with due circumstances we have proved to be lawful) yet will I
here adioyne one example more, but such a one as is worth the noting and
bearing away. And it is this.

54. That whereas in answering of diverse laws, statutes and ordinances which
the Attorney alleged out of the Reigns of sundry a^cient Kings, to prove
that they did exercise spiritual authority and jurisdiction, the Divine
sometimes not having the law books by him out of which the said laws or
authorities were cyted, supposing the allegations to be ordinarily true (^or
who would suspect lawiers to be false in their citations, The Divine deceived
by the subtility of the Lawyer.
that were wont to be accounted most exact in that point) did answer the same
with that sincerity of truth and reason, as to a man of his profession
apperteyned: though sometimes also he was forced to suspect some fraud, and
therepon requested such as had commodity in England to see the Books, that
they would peruse the places and take them out Verbatim: which some have done,
and have found such store of Equivocations and false dealing in the alleging
thereof, as never could be imagined in a man of his calling. I shall only set
down one example, and it shall be the first that is cited by him in the whole
Book, to wit, of the Charter of King Kenidphus of the West Saxons, unto the
Abbey of Abindon in Barkshire; which Charter M. Attorney set down with this
Preface. To confirm (says he) those that hold the truth, and to satisfy such
as being not instructed know not the ancient and modern laws etc. these few
demonstratiue prooses shall serve.

55. And then begins he with the said Charter of king Kenulphus before the
conquest, K. Kenulphus his charter notably falsified by M. At. Reports fol. 9.
meaning to prove thereby, that the said king did give unto the said Abbey of
Abindo^ spiritual jurisdiction by virtue of his temporal Crown, exempting
the same from all authority of the Bishop: which indeed was done by the Pope;
and so the Charter it self does plainly express, if it had been truly related
by M. Attorney. And for that the Case is not long I shall set it down
Verbatim, as the Attorney has it in his Book page 9. only putting into
English that which is recited by him in Latin, and left without any translation
to make the matter more obscure: and then shall we lay forth also the true
Case, whereby will be seen how true a dealer M. Attorney is in those his
writyngs and protestations, which after we shall more largely consider of. Thus
then begins the Charter.

56. Kenulphus Rex etc. per literas suas Patentes, co^silio and consensu
Episcoporum and Senatoru^ Gentis suae, The charter as M. Attorney alleges it,
anno 755.

Sta^ford l. 3. c. 39. fol. 1012.


largitus fuit Monasterio de Abindon in Comitatu Bark. and cuidam Ruchino tunc
Abbati Monasterij etc. quandam ruris sui portionem, id est, quindecim mansias,
in loco qui a Ruricolis tunc nuncupabatur Culnam, cum omnibus v^i^itatibus ad
eandem pertinentibus, tam in magnis quam in mod^cis rebus, in aeternam
haereditatem. Et quod praedictus Ruchinus etc. ab omni Episcopali iure in
sempiternum esset quietus: vt inhabitatores eius nullius Episcopi aut suorum
Officialium iugo inde deprimantur: Sed in cunctis rerum euentibus and
discussionibus causarum, Abbatis Monasterij predicti decreto subiiciantur: ita
quod etc. Thus goes the Charter as M. Attorney alleges it, which in English
is as follows.

57. King Kenulphus etc. by his letters Patents with the Counsel and consent
of the Bishops and Counsaylours of his Nation, did give to the Monastery of
Abindon in Barkeshire, and to one Ruchinus Abbot of that Monastery a certain
portion of his land, to wit, ^ifteene Mansions, in a place called by the
Country men Culnam, with all pro^its and commodities, gr^^t and small
appertayning thereunto, for ^ue^las^ing in^eritance. And that the ^oresaid
R^^^inus etc. should be quiet from all right of the Bishop for ever: so as the
inahbitants of that place shall not be depressed for the time to come by the
yoke of any Bishop or his Officers, but that in all events of things and
Controu^rsies, of Cases, they shall be subject to the d^cree of the Abbot of the
said Monastery. So as etc. And the^ does M. Attorney continue his speech thus:

Mark M. Attorneys inf^rence upon his own falsifi^ation.
58. This Charter was pleaded in 1. H. 7. and vouched by Stan^ord as at large
appears: which Charter granted above 850. years syt^ece, was after confirm^d
per Edwinum Brita^ni^e Angioru^ Regem and Monarcham, anno Domini 955, By which
appeare^h, that the King by this Charter made in Parliament (for it appears
to be made by the Couns^ll and cons^^nt of his Bishops and Senators of his
Kingdom which were ass^m^led in This is false.
Parlam^nt) did discharged and ex^mpt the said Abbot from the jurisdiction of
the Bishop etc. And by the same Charter did grant to the same Abbot
Eccl^sias^icall jurisdiction within his said Abb^^, which Ecclesias^icall
Jurisdiction b^ing This also is false.
derived f^o^ ^he C^o^^, contynned until the dissolu^ion o^ the said Abbey in
the Reign (...) "K. Henry the eight. So he.

59. And by this you may see, what an important Conclusion he does in^erre of
the Kings supreme Jurisdiction in spiritual affairs at that time: whereunto
the Divine coming to answer, and supposing that M. Attorney would not ^alsify
or belly his Authors, M. At. solemn protestation falsified, Reports fol. 40.
having protested most solemnly fol. 40. o^ his Book, that he had cit^d truly
the very words and texts o^ the laws, resolutions, iudgm^nts and acts of
Pa^lament all (...) and in print without any in^erence, argum^nt or
ampli^ica^i^n, quoting particulerly the Books, years, leaves, Chapters and
other such l^ke certain referenc^s, as every man at his (...) may see and read
them etc. The Answerer, I say, hearing this formal protestation, and supposing
besides, that the man would have some respect to ^is credit and honor in this
behalf, granting all as it lay, answered the same as you may see in his Book.
But now upon better search it falls out, that this whole Case was falsely
alleged by M. Attorney in the very point of the principal Co^trouersy in hand
about the Kings spiritual Jurisdiction: for that whatsoever the Char^ter did
ascribe expressly to the Pope and his authority, the Attorney suppressing the
true words, relates it as proc^eding from the King and temporal authority of
his Crown. For proof whereof I shall set down the very words of my learned
friends letter out of England about this point, after view taken of the law
books themselves: and then let any man say, how far M. Attorney is to be
credited in any thing he writes or speaks against Catholics.

60. As concerning (says my friend) the Charter of King Kenulphus for the
Sanctuary of the Monastery of Abindon, The relation sent out of England about
the true charter of K. Kenulphus.
you must know that M. Attorney has egregiously abused his Reader in that and
other points: for the Case stands thus. That in the first year of King
Henry the 7. Humfrey Stafford was attainted by Act of Parliament of high
treason, and took Sanctuary first in Colchester in Essex, and after fled to
Culnam, and took Sanctuary in the Abbey of Abindon: and being taken from
thence brought unto the Tower of London, and from thence brought unto the Kings
Bench he pleaded that he was drawn by force out of the said Sa^ctuary of
Culnam: and prayed his Counsel to plead that point: which by all the Judges
of both Benches was granted unto him. And so they pleaded in this manner.

91. Idem Humphridus per Consilium suum dixit, quod Kenulphus Rex Mercioru^ per
Literas suas pate^tes, consilio and co^sensu Episcoporu^ and Senatoru^ gentis
suae largitus suit Monasterio de Abindon, accuidam Ruchino tunc Abbati
Monasterij illius, quandam ruris sui portionem, id est quindecim Mansias, in
loco qui a Ruricolis ^unc nuncupabatur Culnam, cum omnibus v^ilitatibus ad
eand^m partinentibus, tam in magnis quam in modicis rebus in aeternam
haereditatem. Et quod praedicius Ruchi^us ab omni Regis obstaculo and
^piscopali ^ure in s^mpit^rnum esset quietus, vt inhabitator^seius nullius
Regis aut Mini^^roru^ suorum, Episcopi^e, aut suorum Offi^ialium i^go inde
deprimerentur, sed in cunctis rerum euentibus and dis^tissionibus causarum
Abbatis Monasterij praedicti decreto su^ij^^r^ntur. Ita quod etc. And here
cease M. Attorney leaving out as you see in his recital the words that go
before ab omni Regis obstaculo, that the Monastery should be free from all
obstacle of the King, as also these words: vt inhabitatores eius nullius Regis
aut Ministroru^ suorum iugo deprimantur: that the inahbitants be not oppressed
with any yoke of any King or his Ministers. Whereby is evident that the King in
his Charter did for his part give exemptions from temporal and Royal power
But especially the fraud is seen by cutting of the words that do ensue, which
decide the whole controversy, which are these. Et etiam allegauit vltra, quod
Leo tunc Papa concessit dicto Abbati dictas immunitates and priuilegia. Et quod
Edwinus tunc Britanniae Anglorum Rex and Monarchus co^^^ssit, quod praesatum
Monast^rium omnis terr^nae s^r^^tu^is esset liberum, quae a pr^dec^ssori^us
suis Catholicis, videlicet a dic^o sancto L^^ne Papa, and dic^o Rege K^n^lpho
etc. Et quod virtute literarum and Bullar^m praediciarum and t^mpore
con^ec^ionis earu^d^m, eadem villa de Culnam suit Sanctuarium and l^cus
priuilegiatus etc. Which in English is thus. This decideth the whole
controversy: and therefore was fraudule^t^ly cut of by M. At.
And moreover the said ^umphrey Stafford by his Counsel alleged further for
himself, that Pope Leo had granted unto the said Abbot the said immunities and
pr^uiledges: and that king Edwin the^ King and Monarch over all the English in
Britany had granted that the said Monastery should be free from all earthly
servitude, which by his Catholic predecessors, to wit, the said holy Pope
Leo, and the said King Ken^lphu^ was granted: and that at the time of the
making of the foresaid letters Patents and Bulls, the said village or Town of
Culnam was a Sanctuary and priuileged place by virtue of the said Patents and
Bulls.

62. This is word for word the very plea of Humphrey Stafford for the Sanctuary
of the Monastery of Abindon, as it was pleaded by his learned Counsel in law,
even as it is recorded in the Reports of the years of K. H^nry the seventh, 1.
Henr. 7. printed by Pinson, and Brook tit. Corone, pl. 129.
as they are printed by Pinson the law printer in the time of K. Henry the
eight, before the Protestant religion came up. And the Lord Brook in his
Abridgement of the law, in the title of Corone, placito 129. does accordingly
set down the same Case, with mentioning of the Bulls of Pope Leo for the said
immunities and privileges. But all the Protestant editions in the time of the
late Queen Elizabeth printed by Tottell and Yestwort have committed a notable
trick of falsification, A falsification of Protesta^^ printers.
in leaving out altogether these markable words: That Leo then Pope did grant
the said immunityes and privileges. And also those words of King Edwyn, which
of his Catholic predecessors S. Leo and King Kenulphus were granted. And
again: By ^orce of the Letters and Bulls a^oresaid the said village of Culnam
was a Sanctuary and place privileged.

63. And hereby also is evident, that the King did not by his Charter in
Parliament (for it appears to be made by the Counsel and consent of his
Bishops and Senators and not by Parlam^nt, as M. Attorney does misreport it)
neither was there any Parliament held at that time in the land, or many hundredth
years after (for as it appears by Holinsheads Chronicle page 34. the first
use of Parlaments in England was in the time of King Henry the first: When
Parliamentes began in England.
) it is clear (I say) that the King did not discharge and exempt the said
Abbot from Jurisdiction of the Bishop, nor did grant unto the said Abbot
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within the said Abbey, neither had that abbot any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction derived from the Crown: But as it appears by
the authe^tike report of the Case, the Pope and the King did join both in
making the said Sanctuary, according to their several powers and authorityes.
So that the exemptio^ from Episcopal Jurisdiction proceeded duly from the
grant of Pope Leo: as likewise the exe^ption from all Regal and temporal
Jurisdiction proceeded from the Charter of King Kenulphus. Note also that King
Edwins Grant was only that the said Monastery should be free from all earthly
servitude, and touches not any spiritual immunities or Jurisdiction at all.

The conclusion.
64. Thus far my friend out of England: and by this now you may see, how well M.
Attorney has observed his foresaid protestation: that he had cyted the very
words and textes of the Laws, without any inference, argument or
amplification at all. And this being my friends aduertisment from England with
like observation of many other places cyted by M. Attorney with like fydelity,
I thought good to produce this one amongst many (being the first in order) for
a taste in this place, reserving the rest to a fitter, or at leastwise to a
second edition of the foresaid answer of the Catholic Divine, where every
thing may be referred to his due place: and with this will I end this Chapter.
Thus far wrote I at that time in charg of Sir Edward.

THE DISCHARGE AND Reckoning about the former Charge made to Sir Edward Cook..
V.
YOU have heard now this Charge, how important and substantial yt is: and who
would not have thought, but that either M^ Morton or Sir Edward himself would
have answered somewhat to the same in their Replies made since the publishing
hereof, or at leastwise would have as much as mentioned yt, especially M.
Morton, who in a certain manner and law of vrbanitie was more obliged to take
the patronage of Sir Edwards wrytings then himself: for so much as the Charge
was given in a Book against M Morton, and he had so highly commended the said
work of his Reports, as he calls them The allwaies reportable and memorable
Reports: taking out of them sundry heads of examples, as his words are, that
improve the Popes Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical and ascribe it to the
king: which that you may see how substantial they are, I shall take the
pains to set them down here, as they stand in his Book.

66. I will point at some ^ew heads o^ examples (says he) o^ our ancient
Christian kings which Sir Edward Cook his Majesty's Attorney general in his
allwaies reportable and memorable Reports has lately published. Five cases
taken out of Sir Ed. Cook his Reports.
In the Reign o^ king Edward the first (says he) a Subject brought in a Bull
of excommunication against another Subject o^ this Realm, and published it:
But yt was answered that this was th^n according to the ancient laws o^
England, Full satisf^ct. par. 3. page 41.
Treason against the King, and the Offender had been drawn and hanged, but that
by the mercy of the Prince he was only abiured the Realm etc.

67. At the same time the Pope by his Bull had by way of provision bestowed a
benefice upon one within the Province of ^orke, the King presented another:
Reports fol. 12.
the Archbishop re^useth the Kings presentation, and yielded to the Popes
provision. This Archbishop then by the common law o^ the land was deprived o^
the lands o^ his whole Bishopric during ly^e. Repo^ts fol. 15.
And in the Reign of king Edw^rd ^he third the king presented to a Ben^^ice,
and his Presentee was disturbed by one, who had obtained a Bull from Rome: for
the which cause he was condemned to perpetual imprisonment etc.

68. In the Reign o^ Richard the second, Reports fol. 21.
yt was declared in the Parliament (R. 2. c. 2.) that England had always been
^ree and in subjection to no Realm, but imediatly subject to God and to none
other: and that the same ought not in any thing touching the Regaltie of the
Crown to be submitted to the Bishop of Rome, nor the laws of their Realm by
him frustrated at his pleasure etc. Reports fol 23.


69. In the Reign of King Henry the fourth it was confirmed that
Excommunication made by the Pope is o^ no force in England etc. Repo^ts. fol.
26^
In the Reign of King Edward the fourth, the opinion of the Kings Bench was,
that whatsoever spiritual man should sue another spiritual man in the Court
of Rome for a matter spiritual, where he might have remedy before his Ordinary
within the Realm, did incur the danger of ^remunire, being an heynons offense
against the honor of the King, his Crown and dignity.

70. Thus far M. Morton out of Sir Edward Cook: then he adds: Many other
examples of like nature I pretermit, and remit the Reader desirous to be
further satisfied, unto the book o^ Reports: habet enim ille quod det, and
dat nemo largius. For he has to give, and no man gives more abundantly. This
is his Encomium: But what does he give? truth or falsehood? sincere or wrested
allegatio^s? matter to the purpose or impertinent? That we shall here now
discuss, and show that neither the examples themselves are altogether true as
here they are set down: nor if they were, yet do they not prove the purpose,
for which they are alleged: And first we shall prove the second which most
imports: and it is easily proved.

71. For first Sir Edwards purpose and obligation was to prove, that Q.
Elizabeth by force of her temporal Crown had all manner of Supreme authority
in spiritual affairs, no less then any person ever had, did, or could
exercise in England, as the words of the Statute have, alleged by him: and the
purpose of M. Morton was as appears by the title of his Treatise, to improve
the Popes supreme authority in Causes Ecclesiastical: So as both their ends
and purposes were by different means to prove, that the Pope had no supreme
authority in Ecclesiastical matters for time past in England: the one by
ascribing all to the King: the other by denying it to the Pope. But this
purpose of theirs either in the one or the other point is not proved by any one
of all these examples, nor by them altogether, though they were granted to be
true as here they lie. For that they do not prove, that either our Kings here
mentioned did assume to themselves to have Supreme authority in spiritual
affairs, or to take it from the Pope: nay the Catholic Divine in answering to
Sir Edwards objections herein, does evidently show and prove, yea conuinceth,
that these five English Kings here mentioned, to wit, King Edward the first,
Edward the third, Richard the second, Henry the fourth, and Edward the fourth,
under whom these Cases fell out, did all of them most effectually acknowledge
the Popes supreme authority in Ecclesiastical matters, and were obedient
Children to the same, as he showed by sundry most clear and apparent examples
of their own actions toward the Sea Apostolic: and that these particular
Cases, supposing they were all true, and fell out as here they are set down,
to wit, that the publishing of a Bull of Excommunication in some Causes, and
under some King might be held for Treason: as also that the Archbishops lands
might be seysed upon for refusing to admit the Kings presented Clerk: and that
in Parliament it was said, that the Regality of the Crown of England depended
not of Rome: and that in certain Cases no suites might be made thither,
without recourse first to the Ordinaries of England.

72. Albeit I say that these things were all granted as they lie, False
inferences.
yet do they not infer by any true consequence that which the Knight and
Minister should prove, to wit: that for this either these kings were, or held
themselves for supreme in spiritual authority at that time, or that it was
denied unto the Pope. Whereof this one is a most conuincent argument, that the
like Cases do or may fall out at this day in other Catholic Countries and
Kingdom^s, as in France, Spain, Naples, and Sicily, where ^here be diverse
Concordates, res^rictions and limitations agreed upon for avoiding further
inconuenie^ces between the Pope and Catholic Kings and Princes, concerning
the manner of execution of Ecclesiastical authority, without any derogation to
the Supremacy thereof in the Pope. And so might men be punished by the said
Princes for breaking rashly the said agreements, as they may and are daily in
the said Kingdoms, especially in the last: and yet do not these Kings thereby
either deny the Popes supreme authority, or take it to themselves (as M.
Attorney and M. Morton do falsely ininferre) in these our cases. And thus it is
manifest, that albeit these examples were in all r^spects truly alleged: yet
are they impertinent to prove that which is pretended. And this for the first
point.

False dealing.
73. But neither is it all true, that here is set down, nor as it is set down,
which is the second point to be considered. For which cause though I find these
five Cases sufficiently answered by the Catholic Divine in his late Book
against M. Attorney: yet for that the said Knight in his last Preface to the
sixth part of his Reports, does say that he fyndeth him utterly ignorant in the
laws of the Realm (though as a Divine he made no profession to be skillful in
the same) yet shall I add somewhat to the reuiew of these Cases: whereby it
may appear at leastwise, whether he, to wit, the Divine, or M. Attorney, or M.
Morton have used the skill of their professions with more sincerity in this
matter.

The 1. case again discussed.
74. The first Case th^n is thus set down by M. Morton, out of the Attorneys
book, though not altogether as it lies in his book, but with some advantage,
as the Attorney did out of his Books whereof he took his Case. Full satisf.
par. 3. page 41. Reports part. 1. fol. 12. Mitig. p. 267.
So as here is helping the dye on all hands as you see. In the Reign of King
Edward the first (says M. Morton) a Subject brought in a Bull of
excommunicati^ against another Subject of this Realm and published it: But it
was answered, that this was then according to the ancient laws of England
treason etc. as before is set down.

75. Wherein I must note first, before I come to examine the answer already
made, that M. Morto^ can not choose, as it seems, but to use a trick or two
of his art of iugling, even with M. Attorney himself. For whereas he relates
(to with the Attorney) that this Bull of excommunication was published to the
Treasurer of England, T.M^ clipping of hi^ Author.
M. Morton clyppeth of all mention of the Treasurer, which notwithstanding in
this Case is of great moment: for so much as it seems that if he had published
the same to the Archbishop or Bishops appointed to have the view of such things
and had brought their authentical testimonies for the same, it seems by the
very book it self of Justice Thorpe, who recounteth this Case by occasion of
the Case of Sir Thomas Seaton and Lucy, 30. E. 3. that it had been little or no
peril at all unto the publisher; for that this reason is alleged for the
offense therein committed: 30. Ed. 3. l. Ass. pl. 19.
that for so much as the party (to wit, Lucie against Sir Thomas Seaton) did
not show any writ of excommunication, or any other thing sealed by the
Archbishop of England, nor any other Seal that was authentike proving this:
therefore the Bull was not allowed etc.

76. This then was a fine trick, Brook in his Abridgment, tit. Praemunire pl.
10.
to cut of all mention of the Treasurer: the other also immediately following
has some subtilitie in it, though not so much as the former, to wit, that it
was answered, that this was Treason etc. for that in none of the books cited
either of Thorpe or Brook is any mention of such answer given, as M. Morton
feygneth: nor any such judgment of Treason passed thereon, as M. Attorney would
make his Reader believe, as presently shall be proved: So as these are the
first two tricks of M. Morton, to help his dye: all the rest for the
substance of the matter is like to fall upon M. Attorney.

Answer to the Reports page ^67.
77. First then the Answer of the Divine unto this Case (not having commodity
at that time to see the two books of Thorpe and Brook cyted in the margent)
was, that it could not possibly be imagined, by reason that the Case stood
altogether as M. Attorney did set it down, esp^cially with this note in the
marge^t, that the bringing in of a Bull against a subject was Treason by the
ancient common laws of England, before any Statute law was made thereof: for
that the Divine demands what this Common law was, not made by Statute? How
was it made? By whom? Where? At what time? Upon what occasion? How introduced
and commonly received (for all this a Common law supposes) especially for so
much as the said Divine had showed and abundantly proved now, The Deuines
reso^ against the probability of the Attorneys assertion.
that all precedent Kings of England both before and after the Conquest were
most Catholic in this very point of acknowledging the Popes supreme and
universal authority in spiritual affairs, whereof the power of
excommunication throughout the world upon just causes is a principal member:
so as except they would introduce a law contrary to their own belief, or
suffer a law to grow and be made common in their Realm without their knowledge
or assent, it is absurd to imagine that there could be such a Common law
against the Popes Exco^munications before the days of King Edward the first,
and before any Statute was made against the same, as M. Attorney avouches.

78. Secondly he shows out of the testimony of Matthew. VVestmonast. that this
King Edward being in a great heat of offense against the Clergy of England,
VVestmo^. in hist. anno 1197.
for that they denied to give him the half of their Rents and goods toward
his wars, upon the express prohibition of Pope Bonifacius to the contrary:
which prohibition some Clergy men upon fear transgressing, had compounded
and made their peace with the King in that behalf, he doubting least some of
the other part of the Clergy would bring in an Exco^municatio^ against him, or
against some of those that had compounded with him, made a Decree (says
VVestmonaster.) commanding under pain of imprisonment, that no man should
publish any sentence of Excommunication against the King himself, or those
that had newly sought his protection: he making also a provocation or appeal
as well for himself, as those that stood on his side, to the Court of Rome.
Thus he. A conuincing argument against M. Attorney.
And now let the prudent Reader consider (says the Divine) that if the King
even in his passion of choler did appoint but imprisonment, to be the
punishment for bringing in an Excommunication against himself, and Clergy men
that stood with him, how unlike is it, that by the common law it was treason
against the King, his Realm, Crown and dignity (as M. Attorneys thundering
words are) to bring in an excommunication against a Subject, which is much
less, then against the Kings person himself.

79. Thirdly the said Divine, though he had not perused the law books at that
time; yet did he yield the true Cause, why private men might not bring in
exco^munications and publish them at their pleasure, as now also is prohibited
in other before named Catholic Kingdoms: but they were to be showed first to
a Bishop, and under his Seal were to be certified unto the Kings Courts: which
since that time I have found to be set down expressly in the lawbookes
themselves and craftily concealed by M. Attorney: for thus is it found written
11. Henr. 4^ fol 64. Hancford the chie^e Justice said, 11. Henrici 4. fol. 64^
that he found in his books, that in the time of Will. ^erle (who was Judge
in the beginning of the reign of K. Edward the third) every officer or
co^missary of the Bishop might certify exco^municatio^ in the K. Court, and for
the mischief that ensued thereof, it was advised by the Parlame^t that none
ought to certify excommunication but only the Bishop, and so it is used at
this day. Thus far are Hanckefords words: whereby we may see why the party that
published a Bull to the Treasurer of England without the Bishops approbatio^
incurred so high displeasure.

80. Fourthly, the said Divine does convince M. Attorney out of a Case alleged
by himself afterward in the 31. year of the Reign of King Edward the third,
Reports fol. 15.31. E. 3. tit^ Exco^munic. ^.
where he says, that in an attachment upon a prohibition, the defendant
pleading the Popes Bull of excommunication of the Plain^i^e, the Judges
demanded of ^he defendant, if he had not the Certificate of some Bishop within
the Realm testifying this excommunication etc. Whereby (says he) it is made
evident first, that private men were obliged to show their Bulls unto some
Bishop, before they published the same: and secondly, it appears most clearly
by the answers of the Judges, that they held it not for treason in those days,
nor made any such infere^ce thereof: for that their only resolution was this,
that for lack of this Certificate, the party excommunicated was not thereby
disinabled to follow his plea in that Court: Note the force of this argument.
without saying any one word of danger or punishment against him, that had
pleaded the Popes Bull of excommunication: which they would never have omytted
to do, if 50 years before that, under K. Edward the first it had bin held for
treason by the Co^mon-law, to bring in or publish any Excommunication against a
Subject.

81. This then was the substance of the Deuines answer at that time, which
though it does sufficiently convince M. Attorney to have abused his Reader
egregiously in auouching with such resolution, that in K. Edward the first his
time, yt was by the ancient law of England, adjudged treason against the king,
his Crown and dignytie to publish any Bull of the Popes against any Subject of
the Realm: yet having since that time had better commodity to inform my self
of the lawbooks here mentioned, I will add some more proofs to those which now
you have heard.

82. First then I must let the Reader understand, An addition to the former
answers.
that neither of those two books cited by M. Attorney lib. Ass. pl. 19.30. Ed.
3. and Brook tit. Praemunire pl. 10. neither of them, I say, does affirm, that
it was Treason, or that there was any judgment of Treason given in that Case:
which Case is related by Justice Thorpe 30. Edwardi 3. thus. That whereas Sir
Thomas Seaton sued a Bill in the Exchequer against a woman named Lucie for
calling him Traitor, The case between Sir T. Seaton and Lucy.
fellon, and robber, in the presence of the Treasurer and Bar^ns of the
Exchequer in cont^mpt of the King and slander of the Court. Hereupon the said
Lucy showed forth the Popes Bull, proving the plainti^e to be excommunicate,
and therefore demanded Judgment, whether he should be answered or not: And for
that she did not show any writ of excommunication, nor any other thing sealed
by the Archbishop etc. the Bull was not allowed: whereupon she was forced to
answer, and ^leaded not guilty. And in that plea Thorpe Justice said, that in
the time of the Grandfather of the King, which was K. Edward the first, ^or
that one did notify an excommunication of the Apostle to the Treasurer of the
King, the King would he should have been drawn and hanged, notwithstanding that
the Chancelo^r and Treasurer did kneel before the King ^or him, yet by award
he did abjure the Realm: and said that the woman was in a hard Case ^or
showing forth this excommunication, if the king would. Thus far the said Book.

83. Wherein we see first, that here is no answer made about treason as M.
Morton affirms, nor judgment given as M. Attorney avouches, nor any such
inference made by the Judges: but only a case related, of what K. Edward the
first in his anger would have had to be done to a man, that presented an
excommunication to the Treasurer, to wit, he would have had him hanged and
drawn about the same: which seming to his Judges not to be just, or according
to law, did entreat the King not to put it in execution, but rather by way of
award they made him abjure the Land (though this also was not due unto him by
rigor of law) to pacify thereby the Kings wrath. And it is not unlike to that
Case, that fell out in England Anno Domini 1578. under Q. Elizabeth, when in
her anger she would have had Peter Bourchet to have been put to death by
Martial law, Peter Bourchets case anno 1578.
when he had wounded Sir John Hawkins instead of Sir Christopher Hatto^: but
the Judges would not yeald thereunto, as being against law, and therefore found
out this temperament, that he should be committed to the Tower, and accused of
matters of Religion, as Puritanisme and the like. Where afterward he gave them
a just cause of putting him to death, by killing his keeper. But as the Queens
will and passion made this no law, so neither did that other under K. Edward
the first. So as M. Attorney did much abuse his Reader in auerring it to be
treason by the common law, and adjudged for such out of this Case.

84. And if he will urge that the punishment of ha^ging and drawing implies
treason; it is answered, no: but that this rather makes much for us. For that
the punishment of treason (I mean high treason) is not only hanging and
drawing but quart^ring also (excepting only the Case of counterfeyting of
money, Stat. de 25. Ed^ 3. de proditionibus) as appears by Stanford in his
Book of the Pleas of the Crown fol. 182. but petty treasons, as of killing
the master or Mystresse by the servant, or of any Prelate by his subject etc.
(which in effect are but fellonies) are punished by hanging and drawi^g only:
whe^eof is consequent, that albeit K. Edwards will and commandment had been
according ^o law, as ^t was not, yet had it in^erred no treason at all.

85. And further to satisfy this matter and make it more clear, that the
Reader was abused in this assertion, Four other reasons against Sir Edward.
I will add four several Reasons and arguments more out of the law books
themselves. The first is concerning the abiuring the Realm for pacifying
Tho^ps Case: which proves evidently, that it was not an offense of treason in
the delinquent, for that abiura^ce is no punishment for treason, but only for
felony, as appears by the said Justice Stand^ord in his said Book fol. 116.
where he sets down the beginning of abiurance, The beginning of abiura^ce.
and how it was first ordained by S. Edwa^d before the Conqu^st, and was
grounded upon mercy, when a man had committed fellonie, and fled to a Church or
Churchyard for safety of his life: and did choose rather perpetual banishment
then to stand to the law. So as abiurance by the old laws of England was at
the election of the Offenders, and not at ^he will of the Prince. And
afterward the said Stanford showing for what offenses in particular a m^n might
abjure the Realm, says, that abiuration does not lie ^or him that has
offended in high treason

86. The second Reason is, that the said Stanford in Pleas of the Crown fol.
182. inte^ding to set down all offenc^s of treason, which were either by the
Common Law or Statute Law, does not rela^e any such matter to be treason, as
the bringing into the Realm Bulls of excommunication by one Subject against
an other: which he would never have concealed, if he had found it held for such
in any law book before him.

87. The third Reason is to the same effect, that the Statute of 25. Ed. 3.
being made for declaration of treasons, does ^et down what offenses were
treasons by the Common law. In this Statute, I say, no mention at all is made,
that the bringing in of Bulls of excommunication was treason or any other
offense: which of likelihood cannot be presumed that they would have
pretermitted to touch or mention, if any such thing had bin.

Pleading of Bulls no treason under K. Ed. 3. Hen. 4. Hen. ^.
88. The fourth Reason, and most concludent, is that we read in many Books of
law, as 31. Ed. 3. ^xcommunicat. 6. Fitzh. tit. Excom pl. 6.14. ^en. 4. ^ol.
14.8. Hen. 6. fol. 3 and else where, that diverse Excommunications were pleaded
in the Kings Courts, and no matter of treason or other offense made thereof by
the Judges, which no doubt they would never have passed over so negligently and
carelesely, if it had bin treason by the common law. Neither would any Counsel
have presumed to plead the same so often in the said Courts, if there had been
such peril or offense therein at that time as M. Attorney now pretends.
Brook in his abridgment tit^ Premuni^e. pl. 10.
Neither does the authority of Brook here cyted by M. Attorney patronize him
in his voluntary mistaking and misconstruyng of the law books a foresaid: For
that Brook does not say, that the bringing in of Bulls was judged treason by
law, as M. Attorney does, but on^y makes this note: So see punishment of that
before the Statute of Praemunire: which makes nothing for M. Attorn. purpose:
and if it did, yet were it not to be equalled with so many grave authorities
and evident co^uincing reasons, as before we have alleged to the contrary.

89. Wherefore we must conclude that in this first Case M. Attorney has sundry
ways dealt vnsincerly, and gone about to deceive his Reader, making him
believe: that the bringing in and pleading of the Popes Bulls in ancient time
was treason according to the Common-lawes: which being now proved to be false,
yet does he so often repeat the same upon all occasions against Catholics
both in writing, speaking, pleading: and vbrayding: as if it were a most
certain truth or principle, and not to be controlled. Let us see somewhat of
the other Cases.

TO THE OTHER FOUR CASES objected by M. Morton out of Sir Edward Cook.. VI.
IT were over long to answer so largely unto all the other Cases, as we have
done to this first, especially for so much as the Divine has done it very
sufficiently and fully before, The second case about aduouso^s and collations
of benefices^
the second Case containing only a temporal matter about Advowsons and
authority thereby to present Clearks to benefices, which was an ancient custom
of the Church of England, where te^porall men having founded Churches and
benefices, reserved to themselves the nominatio^ and presentation of the
persons that should enjoy the same: who if they were found fit and nothing to
be proved against the^, that might justly be opposed for their exclusion, then
the Bishop of the diocese was bound to admit them. And if he did not, the
Aduowsoner might have an Action against the said Bishop at the Commonlaw of
Quare non admisit, as in a temporal Case: and if the Bishop could not excuse
his not admitting of the Clerk of the Recouerer by some sufficient cause, then
the Plaintiff should recover domages against the Bishop, or else he might have
upon the not executing the first writ to the Bishop an Alias, or a Pluries
against him. An Alias and Pluries.
And if these were not served or sufficient excuse made upon the return
thereof, why they were not served; then the party grieved might have an
Attachment against the Bishop for his contempt. And if he were attached and
would obstinate^y re^use to obey the Kings commandment in admitting the sai^
Clerk: then might the King for his contempt seyse upon his tempo^alities which
were o^ the Kings endowment. And this was the vttermos^ that the King could by
law do against him: for that he could neither imprison, nor depose, or degrade
him, there being no president to be found (as I suppose) of the first. And for
the second, the law it sel^ seems clear against it, as may appear by
Bracton, fol. 401. Stanford, ^ol. 130. etc. But howsoever it be, this proves
nothing against the Popes spiritual Iurisdic^ion in England, this matter of
Aduowsons being mere tempo^all things and of the kings temporal inheritance,
wherein as in all other temporal affairs, Bishops were bound to observe the
temporal laws.

91. The other point also that happened out under K. Edward the 3. when one was
condemned to perpetual prison for having disturbed the Kings Presentee by
Bulls from Rome, The third case about disturbing the pat^ons Presentee.
is nothing to the purpose at all, for that it apperteined not to the Pope, but
to the Kings temporal inheritance, as has been said, to present Clerks to
such benefices as were of his peculiar patronage: and therefore it was ordained
in the Statute of Carli^le in the 25. of Edw. the first, Statute of Carliele
25. E. 1.
that such as went about to dis^urbe the same unjustly by false informations
and negotiations at Rome, should be punished at the discretion of the Prince,
so it were not with loss of life, member, or of his liuood. And what infers
this? Are not the like laws at this day in Spain and Sicily, and else where
against them that tra^sgres^e ordinations of those Realms about like affairs?
Or does this prove that those Catholic Realms do not acknowledge the Popes
Ecclesiastical Supremacy? Every child may see the weakness of these inferences:
and yet upon these and the like does all M. A^torneys Treatise layne and
consist.

92. As for the other Case under K. Richard 2. where it was propounded by the
Commons in a certain narration that the Crown of England has been at all
times ^ree and in subjection to no Realm, The 4. case about dependa^ce of the
Crown.
nor to the B. of Rome touching the Regality of the Crown etc. it is so fully
answered by the Divine in his Reply to the Reports, as no more needs to be
said. Ans. to Reports p. 211.
For that they speak but of temporal regalities, and have some reference also
(as may be supposed) unto the time when the Sea Apostolic after the
concession of K. John pretended te^porall right also in that Crown. And the
answer o^ the Bishops in that Parliament with distinction that they would ^eld
to that Statute, so far forth as they did not preiudic^ the ancient
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical of the said Sea Apostolic in spiritual
affairs, does evidently show; that this objection makes nothing to the
purpose, to deny thereby any part of the Popes supreme Ecclesiastical
authority; and consequently as it was impertinently alleged by M. Attorney to
that effect in his Reports: so much more fondly was it chosen out by M. Morton,
as a matter of moment to furnish his Book withal.

93. And as for the last Case under K. Edward the fourth where he says, The 5.
case about suites in Rome.
That it was the opinion of the Kings Bench, that whatsoever spiritual man
should sue another spiritual man in the Court of Rome for a ma^ter spiritual,
where he might have remedy before his Ordinary, that is the Bishop of the
diocese within the Realm, he incurreth the danger of Praemunire, being an
heinous of^ence against the honor of the King, his Crown and dignity: though
the former answe^e of the Divine be very sufficient in this case, yet must I
needs add ^n this place, Answer to reports page 232.
that it is rather an heinous offense in such a man as M. Attorney is, or
should be, to misreport and misconster his law-bookes, thereby to make some^
show o^ probability against the ancient power Ecclesiastical of the Sea
Apostolic in England, whereas the said Books being rightly alleged and
understood, do make wholly for it. 9. E. 4. fol. 3.
As for example here in this case alleged out of 9. Ed. the 4. ^ol. 3. the
saying is only of Yeluerton of the kings Bench: Justice Yelue^to^.
and his Report is meant, when a spiritual man shall sue an other that is a
temporal man in the Court of Rome for a thing mere tempora^l he shall incur
the said punishment: For that for one spiritual man to sue another spiritual
man in the Court of Rome in spiritual Causes, was a thing all ways lawful
and usual, both before the time of K. Ed. 4. and after, 14. H. 4 ^. 14.
until it was forbid by King Henry the eight. And that this is true, that it
was lawful by the Co^mon-law in K. Henry 4. time appears expressly by the
Book of 14. H. 4. fol. 14. Neither can (I think) M. Attorney allege any
example, where the same is prohibited either by Common or Statute law, during
the time aforesaid.

Fitzh. abused.
94. And whereas for strengthening this his false assertion he cites in his
Margent, vide Fitzh. in Not. Breu. fol. 45. lit. ^. agreeing herewith. And
further ad^eth a Notandum for the same, as a matter notorious, he does
notoriously abuse his Reader: The true case set down.
For that Fitzh. speaks not at all of a Praemunire, but only, That if one
sueth another out of the Realm for debt or other cause, whereof the kings Court
may have conusance, he shall have a prohibition against him: And so if one
Clearke sue an other upon title of Collation o^ any Prebendary out of the
Realm etc. he shall have also this prohibi^ion. And if a man purchases out of
the Court o^ Rom against any Clerk or others, any Citation directed unto the
Archbishop of Canterbury or any others to cite such a person to appear before
the Pope etc. to answer for the Collation or Presentation unto any benefice or
Prebendary; a prohibition shall lie in this Case. Hitherto Fitzher. in his
writ of prohibition. And this is all that he has in that place of this
matter. So you see, that all that Fitzherbert says, is but that a prohibitio^
shall lie, for suyng in the Court of Rome for debt or title of Patronage, or
such other temporal Causes whereof the Kings Court may have conusance: and he
makes no mention of any Praemunire. And yet every puny Stude^t in the Law can
tell how much difference there is betwixt a Praemunire and a Prohibition: and
that Sir Edward dealt not sincerely, when he brought in the one for the other.

95. So then we so what striving and wresting, and worse usage M. Attorney
offers to his law-bookes, to make them seem to say somewhat against us, and
for Protestant religion, against which most of them were written, as all of
them before our times without exception in favor of the Catholics. We see
also the pitiful choice that M. Morton has made of these five Cases out of
all M. Attorneys Reportable Reports against the Popes supreme Ecclesiastical
authority. Five fond co^parings not worth a paring.
But if we will consider the wise glosses Commentaries, and comparings which
the Minister makes very Ministerially upon every one of those M. Attorney of
falsitie if you remember, for affirming that to be treason by the Common law
which is not) he says thus: Compare And to the second: Compare And to the
third: Compare And to the fourth: Compare this that the excommunication of the
Pope is of no force in England, with those exco^munications, which in

96. And to the fifth: Compare this (o^ the punishment of the^ that drew men
^or suites to Rome) with their acts, who have made no other suite to Rome, but
^or means to d^spossesse English Kings o^ their Crown and dignity. All these
comparings I say, are not worth a paring: and it was great idleness in M. Mort.
to fill up paper and spend time in such co^parings: whereas the matters and
things themselves whereon these ^on co^d parisons are founded, are found to be
falsely applied as now has been showed. Wherefore this has not served any whit
to justify his Clie^t or himself, but rather to confirm and aggrauate the
former Charges given against them both. And it is to be considered, that if in
these five Cases chosen out by M. Morton out of five and fifty cyted by M.
Attorney against the Popes authority before King Henry the 8. his Reign, so
many false tricks are found, what would the number be, if we should discuss
all the rest with like survey? Surely if M. Attorney might be presumed to have
dealt no more sincerely in the rest of his Reports (whereof six several parts
are now published) then he has done in these, concerning R^ligi^, they might
be called reportable reports indeed, in respect of the infinite untruths
reported by them: and few Lawye^s, I think, would be at the cost to buy them.
But I will not suspect this, for that in those other there is no interest, as I
suppose, to wrest them to partiality, as there was in this: both in regard of
hi^ ^erswasion in religion, and favor with the Pr^ce. But now let us pa^se to
peruse and say somewhat of his late new preface which subministreth some new
matter to be handled in this place.

THE EIGHT CHAPTER WHICH BY OCCASION OF TWO NEW PREFACES lately set forth by
the said SIR EDWARD COOK, does handle diverse Controversies, as well about a
Nihil dicit, objected by him to his Adversary: AS also about the Antiquity, and
Excellency of the Municipall Common laws of England, and some other points.
THE PREFACE.
AFTER I was well entered into this work for answering M. Morton his Preamble,
I came to the sight of a new Preface set forth by Sir Edward Cook before the
sixth Part of his Reports, lately published: and for that the name and argument
of Preamble and Preface came so jointly together from two different Authors,
and that the ^inall purpose of the one and the other t^erin (for so much as
concerns our subject of Religion and justifying themselves about that which
they had written thereof, to the slander and injury of Catholic profes^io^)
seemed to me to be one and the very same; which was, to subtract their shoulders
from the weight of the matter in answering the whole that was writt^n against
them, and by a new ^leight and devise o^ Pre^aces and Preambles, Prefaces and
Preambles instead of books.
and promising further ^reatise, to divert the Readers attention from the
principal business, and to intertayne him with other fancies and general
terms, as though they had answered somewhat indeed. For this I thought yt not
amiss to join them also together in this my Reply; and as I had answered the
one largely and particulerly, so to say somewhat also to the other: especially,
for so much as notwithstanding this Preface came forth long after that the
Author thereof Sir Edward had seen my former Charge laid against him, in the
last Chapter of my Treatise of Mitigatio^; yet here does he not only not
answer any thing thereunto, but neither so much as mentions the same, as
before has been said: only in this place he has a certain snatch at the
Deuines answer against his Reports: and I call it a snatch, for that it
contains scarce one page against the others whole Book of above 400. and yet
does he so confidently condemn his adversary both of ignorance, and boldness,
as if he had confuted him indeed by a large conuincement; wherein you shall
hear his own words.

In the preface to the 6. part of his Reports.
2. When I looked into the book (says he) ever expecting some answer to the
matter, in the end I ^ound the Author utterly ignorant (but exceeding bold, as
commonly those qualities concur) in the laws of the Realm, the only subject
of the matter in hand: but could not find in all the book any authority out of
the books of the common laws of the Realm, Acts of Parliament, or any legal,
or judicial records, quoted or cited by him for the maintenance of any of his
opinions or conceits: whereupon (as in justice I ought) I had judgment given
^or me, upon a Nihil dicit, and ther^ore cannot make any replication. ^hus
far Sir Edward, wherein as you see, he answered all that large work of the
Divine in few words, co^demning him of ignorance, boldness, and of saying
nothing at all, in so large a Discourse: but as for the former two points of
ignorance and boldness, and whether he cyted no one authority at all out of any
law books, shall be afterward discussed more particulerly: now only in this
Paragraph shall we consider how true this last assertion is, that the Divine
said nothing at all, and that thereupon Sir Edward had judgment given for him
upon a Nihi^ dicit.

WHETHER the Catholic Divine might be justly condemned of a Nihil dicit, or
no?. I.
FIRST then for trying of this point^ I would demand, what Judge gave this
judgment, ^ith^r Sir Edward himself (for he is now a Judge) or an other, and
upon what due information? If himself did give sentence for himself, it may
easily be excepted against, as suspected of partiality: for that no man, I
think, can be both judge and party, even by Sir Edwards laws (for according
to those of Saint Edward I am sure he could not) in his own cause. But if
another Judge gave the sentence, let us know, who it was and upon what proofs
and grounds (for that such sentences, I suppose, are not yet brought to be
arbitrary in England nor permitted to every Judges will, and liking, without
any proofs or grounds at all:) which being supposed, I am content to stand
heerin, not only to any Judge that sits upon any of his Majesty's Benches at
this day, but even to Sir Edward himself, with condition only that he will be
content with patience to hear my reasons, which are these that ensue.

4. First, a Judgment of Nihil dicit cannot proceed, as I suppose, but upon one
of these two causes, that ^yther the party says nothing at all, Two causes
inferring a Nihil dicit.
as when one standing at the bar to answer for his life, will for saving of
his goods and lands utterly hold his peace: or when he speaks, his speech is
nothing to the purpose. But neither of these causes can be justly alleged in
our case. Not the first, for that the Catholic Deuines printed Answer is
large, and conteyneth, as I have said, above 400. pages in quarto. Not the
second as now shall evidently be declared; ergo, no judgment could pass in
justice upon a Nihil dicit in behalf of Sir Edward against the said Divine.

5. Now then, let us come to demonstrate that the Catholic Divine did speak
to the purpose in deed: for better understanding whereof we must recall to
memory, the true state of the question, and what Sir Edward Cook, then
Attorney, upon his offer and obligation was to prove, to wit, The principal
point, that Sir Edward must prove.
that Queen Elizabeth by the right of her temporal Crown had supreme
spiritual, and Ecclesiastical authority over all her subjects, in
Ecclesiastical affayrs, as largely as ever any person had or could have in
that Realm, and this by the common laws of England before any Statute law was
made in that behalf. For proof whereof the said Attorney pretended to lay
forth a great number of cases, examples, and authorityes out of his law-bookes,
which he said should prove the ancient practice of this authority in Christian
English Kings, both before and since the Conquest: which being his purpose,
whatsoever his adversary the Catholic Divine does allege substantially to
overthrow this his assertion, and to prove that Q. Elizabeth neither had, nor
could have this spiritual Authority, though she had been a man; neither that
any of her ancestors Kings and Queens of England did ever pretend, or
practice the like authority: this (I say) cannot be judged to be from the
purpose, and much less a Nihil dicit. Let us examine then the particulers.

6. The Catholic Divine at his first entrance, for procuring more attention
in this great and weighty controversy between M. Attorney and him about the
Spiritual power and authority over souls in the modern English Church,
Answer to Report^ in the Preface.
does auerre the question to be of such moment, as that the determination of
all other controversies depends thereof. The high importance of this
controversy.
For that whersoeuer true ^pirituall authority and jurisdiction is found, there
must needs be the true Church, to whom it appertains to determine of the
truth of the doctrine taught therein, or in any other false Church or
congregation, for approving the one, and condemning the other. Whereof
consequently also depends everlasting salvation, or conde^natio^ of all those
that believe, or not believe those doctrines.

7. He shows further, that the life, and spirit, and essence of the true
Church in this world, consists in this true jurisdiction of governing and
directing souls by preaching, teaching, bynding, and absoluing from sin,
administering true Sacraments, and the like. And that where this true power and
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is not lawfully found, but either none at all, or
violently assumed, there wants this vital spirit. Neither is it any Church
at all, but a Synagogue rather of Satan: and therefore that the first and
chief care of every Christian ought to be for saving of his soul, (e^pecially
in times of strife, contentions, and heresies, as are these of ours) to study
well this point, and to inform himself diligently therein: for if he find
this, he fyndeth all: and i^ he miss in this, he misseth in all. Nor is it
possible for him to be saved.

8. Moreover he declares, that as in England at this day there be three
different professio^s of religion, Th^ee different professions of Religion in
Engla^^, with their grounds or spiritual jurisdiction.
the Protes^ant, the Puritan, and the Catholic, all three clayming this true
and vital power o^ Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to be in their Congregations:
so do they derive the same from three different heads and fountaynes
immediately, though all pretend that mediatly at leastwise it comes from God.
The Prot^stants taking it from the Temporal Princes authority, given him from
God by right of his Crown, as here is taught by M. Attorney: The Puritans from
the people gathered together in their congregation. The Catholics from their
Bishops, and Prelates descending by continual succession from the Apostles, to
whom they believe that Christ first gave heavenly power and jurisdiction for
governing of souls, and especially to the chief Bishop Successor to S. Peter,
and not unto temporal Princes, or to lay people or popular Congregations made
by themselves, who cannot properly be called Successors of the Apostles: and
this difference, as it is mani^est, and evident; so is it of such weight, as it
makes these three sorts of men, and their Congregations, or Churches
irreconciliable: for that which soever of these three parts has this true
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, has thereby the tru^ Church, as has been said,
and makes the other two to be no Churches at all, but rather profane, and
Diabolical S^nagogues, and such as have neither true Prelates, nor Prelacy, nor
true preaching, nor teaching, nor Sacraments, nor absolutio^ of sins, nor any
one act, or thing o^ a Christian Church in them. And that the trial of all
this depends of the discussion of this controversy between M. Attorney and
him. All this has the Divine in his first entrance. And did he not herin
speak to the purpose? or can this be condemned for a Nihil di^it?

9. After this for better understanding of the whole controversy, the Divine
lays down at large the ground, beginning and origin of all lawful power and
jurisdiction of men, over men, The origin and ordinance of both powers
spiritual and temporal.
both spiritual and temporal, in this world: showing how both of them are
from God, though differently: the spiritual being instituted immediately by
him, and delivered to the Apo^^les, and their Successors; but the temporal
mediatly, that is to say, given first to the Common wealth to choose what form
of government they list, and by mediation of that election giving to temporal
Princes supreme Authority in all temporal affairs.

10. Then he ^heweth the different ends, and objects of these powers: the end
of spiritual power being to direct us to everlasting salvation, both by
instruction, discipline, direction, and correction: and of the temporal or
civil power by like means, and helps to govern well the Common weal^h in
peace, abundance, order, justice, and prosperity. And according to th^se ends
are also their objects, matter and means. As for example, the former has for
her object, spiritual things, belonging to the soul, as matters of says,
doctrine, Sacraments, and such other: and the later handles the Civil
affairs of the Realm, and Common wealth, as they appertain to the temporal
good, and prosperity thereof.

The di^ferent excellency of these 2. powers.
11. Next after the declaration of these three points, to wit, of the origens,
ends, and objects of these two powers, spiritual and ^e^porall, the said
Catholic Divine deduceth out of the same the different dignity, excellency,
and eminency, of the one, and the other power, the one being called Divine, the
other Humane, for that the ends, and objects of the one are immediately
concerning the soul, as now we have declared: and the other concerning humane
affairs immediately, though mediatly in a Christian Common wealth referred also
to God. And this di^ference of these two powers he declares by the similitude
and likeness of flesh and spirit out of S. Gregory Nazianzen, Nazianz. orat.
ad Ciues timore perculsos
who in a certain narration of his, does most excellently express the same by
the comparison of spirit and flesh, soul and sense: which thing (says he) may
be considered as two distinct Common wealths separated the one from the other,
or conjoined together in one Common wealth only. Answer to Reports page 24.
An example of the former wherein they are separated may be in beasts and
Angels, the one having their common wealth of sense only, without soul or
spirit: and the other Common wealth of Angels, being of spirit only without
flesh or body; but in man are conjoined both the one, and the other. And even
so (says he) in the Common wealth of Gentiles was the Civil and Poli^icall,
Earthly and Humane power, given by God to govern worldly and humane things,
but not spiritual for the soul: whereas co^trarywise, in the primitive
Chri^tian Church for almost three hundred years together none or few Kings,
Princes, or Potentates being converted, the Common wealth of Christians was
governed only or principally by spiritual authority under the Apostles and
Bishops that succeeded them.

12. Out of which consideration confirmed, and strengthened by sundry places of
holy scripture, and ancient Fathers alleged by him, he shows the great
eminency of spiritual Authority above temporal, being considered severally in
themselves, though they may stand jointly, and both together in a Christian
Common wealth, where the temporal Princes be Christians, though with this
necessary subordination, that in spiritual and Ecclesiastical affairs
belonging to the soul, the spiritual governors be chiefly to be respected,
as in Civil affairs the temporal magistrate is to be obeyed, and this he
shows by diverse examples, and occasions out of S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S.
Gregory Nazianzen, and other Bishops and Prelates, that in Ecclesiastical
affairs prefered themselves, and their authorities before that of Christian
Emperors, with whom they lived, expressly affirming, that in those respects
they were their Superiors and Pastors, and the said Emperors their sheep and
subjects, though in temporal affairs they acknowledged them to be their
Superiors.

13. All this is set down by the Catholic Divine with great variety of
proofs, many examples, Nazian. orat. ad ciues timore perculsos, Chrysostom. l.
3. de Sacerdotio and to. 4. in c. 6. Esaiae. Ambr. lib. 2. ep. 33. and conc. de
basilicis non tradendi^^
facts and speeches of ancient Fathers. And will Sir Edward Cook say, that
this was from the purpose, and a Nihil dicit? does not this quite overthrow his
assertion that all te^porall Kings by virtue and power of their temporal
Crowns, have supreme authority also in spiritual affairs? If the forsaid
three Fathers (to pretermit all others) S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Chrysostom,
and S. Ambrose, that had to do with Christian Emperors, which had te^porall
authority over all, or the most part of the Christian world, did yet
notwithstanding affirm unto their faces, that they had no authority at all in
spiritual matters belonging to souls, but were and ought to be subject to
them, their Pastors in that Ecclesiastical government: how much less could a
woman-Prince have the same by right of her temporal Crown, as most absurdly
M. Attorney auerreth? Answer to Repo^ts p. 74 75.76.77. and dein^eps.
Which absurdity the Catholic Divine does convince so largely by all sorts
of proofs, both divine and humane, as well under the law o^ Nature, as
Mosay^all and Christian, that a person of the feminine s^xe is not capable of
supreme Spiritual jurisdiction over man, as nothing seems can be answered
theru^to. And was this also from the purpose, to prove that Queen Elizabeth
could not have it? What will Sir Edward answer here for his Nihil dicit?

14. After all this, and much more alleged by the Catholic Divine, which I
pretermit for breuities sake, he comes to reduce the whole controversy
between M. Attorney and him, unto two general heads of proof, the one de
Iure, the other de facto, that is of right, and fact, showing, that in the
first of these two proofs de Iure, which is the principal, M. Attorney did
not so much as attempt to say any thing ^or proof, Two sorts of proofs de
iure and de facto.
that by right, Queen Elizabeth, or any of her Ancestors had supreme
jurisdiction in causes Ecclesiastical, but only that de ^acto some of them had
sometimes taken, and exercised such an authority. Which if it were without
right, was as you know nothing at all: and therefore the said Divine having
proved more at large, that by no right of any law whatsoever, divine, or
humane, Queen Elizabeth, or her predecessors had or could have supreme
authority Spiritual, he comes to join with M. Attorney also in the second,
proving that neither in fact any such thing was ever pretended or practiced by
any of her Predecessors, before the time of her Father K. Henry the viij
either before or after the Conquest.

15. And as for before the Conquest, there have been more then an hundred
Kings of different Kingdoms within the land, he proves by ten large
demonstrations, Ten Demonstrations against M. Attorneys assertion de facto
before the Conquest.
that none of them did ever take upon him such supreme spiritual authority,
but acknowledged it expressly to be in the Bishop of Rome; of which
demo^strations, the first is of laws made by them generally in favor, and
confirmation of the liberties of the English Church, according to the
directions and Canons derived from the authority of the Sea Apostolic. The
second, England made before the Rome, and not by temporal Rome, and the Sea
Apostolic. Rome for remedy. The sixth, the succession of England during that
time all acknowledging the supremacy of the Pope, were notwithstanding in high
favor, and reverence with the English Kings, with whom they lived: whereof is
in^erred, that these Kings also must needs be of the same judgment and belief,
and consequently make laws conform to that their faith and belief: as
contrariwise since the schism began by K. Henry the 8. other Princes, being of
contrary belief, have also made the contrary laws.

16. These heads of demonstration together with four more not unlike to
these, which for breuity I do pretermit, being laid forth at large by the
Divine with the manifest proofs, and declarations out of the ancient, and
irrefragable histories of our Nation to make this evident inference that our
Christian Kings before the Conquest did all of the^ acknowledge the Popes
supreme Jurisdiction in spiritual affairs, and consequently they acknowledged
also that it appertayned not to themselves. And whereas the Attorney to prove
his assertion alleges two examples before the Conquest, Two instances of M.
Attorney before the Conquest, helping him nothing.
the one of K. Kenulphus about a Privilege he gave to the Abbey of Abingdon,
the other of K. Edward the Con^essour, that says, That a King as Vicar of the
highest, must defend the Church: it is answered by the Divine, that both of
these examples do make against M. Attorney. The first, for that there is
express mention, that this Privilege was given by Authority from the Pope:
and the second, that it is nothing to the purpose, K Edward speaking of
temporal Authority, when he says, That the King is Vicar of the highest, and
in the very same place insinuating most manifestly that in spiritual affairs
the Pope is supreme, and consequently that both these authorities were
frandulently brought in by M. Attorney: yea the former most will^ully
corrupted, as I do show more largely, and particulerly in the end of my twelfth
Chapter of my book of Mi^igation. And was not all this to the purpose? Or will
M. Attorney call this a Nihil dicit, when the cause shall come before him in
seat of Judgment?

17. Lastly, the Divine coming down from the time of the Conquest unto our
days, to wit, to the reign of K. Henry the viij. shows largely in the
several lives of every one of those Kings, that in this point of the Popes
supreme Ecclesia^ticall Authority they were all uniform in one and the self
same belief, and acknowledgment: which he proves out of their own words,
factes, laws, histories, and other authentical proofs. And if at any time
there fell out any disagreement, or disgust between any King, Concerning the
English Kings after the Conquest
and the Pope that lived in his time, it was only upon particular interests,
complaints of abuses by officers, evil informers or the like: for remedy
whereof some restrictions, agreements, or concordates were made, as now they be
also in other Catholic Countries: and not for that any English King from the
very first Christened, unto K. Henry the 8. (nor he neither for the first 20.
years of his reign) did ever absolutely deny the Popes supreme Jurisdiction in
Ecclesiastical causes.

18. And secondly the said Divine answers fully to all those pieces and
parcels of laws, that M. Attorney produces, which are showed either
fraudulently to be alleged, or wholly misconstred, or utterly to be
impertinent to the conclusion which they should infer. And shall this in like
manner be judged from the purpose, and a Nihil dicit? where now is that Judge
that gave sentence ^or him in this behalf, will he come forth and stand to his
sentence? Or will Sir Edward Cook be so unreasonable in this behalf, Sir
Edward precipitant in au^rring things against Catholics.
as to request any man to believe him that such a Judgment was given for him?
Or that he found so unjust a Judge as would give such a sentence so contrary to
all conscience, sense, and reason? But you must note that many men have noted
this to be somewhat singular in Sir Edward Cook (as many other points be) that
when he talks of Catholics or their a^fayres, he is so confident, resolute,
and precipitant in his asseuerations against them (especially when he preaches
on the Bench, or gives his Charge) that except we believe him at his bare
word, contrary to all liklihood of truth, the most part of that he speaks
will seem to be wilful untruths spoken against his own conscience: so little
he remembers the saying of the prophet, Pone ostium circumstantiae labijs
meis. Psalm. 140
I do not say they are lies, for that were inurbanity, considering his present
dignity, but that they may seem such to the wyser sort, for that they lack
this door of true circumstances to make them probable, whereof we shall have
occasion to touch some more examples afterward. Now we shall pass on to
examine whether this Nihil dicit, objected to his Adversary, do not fall more
justly upon himself, and therewith also an opposite charge called a Nimium
dicit, which is to speak more then is true.

THAT THE Imputation of Nihil dicit, does fall more rightly upon M. Attorney:
as does also the Nimium dicit, or euerlashing in his assertions.. II.
HAVING showed now that the Nihil dicit cannot be ascribed to the Catholic
Divine, for that he left written so much and so effectual to the purpose he
had in hand, it would be an easy m^tter to show in regard of the contrary
effects that the sa^e remains with M. Attorney: both for that he answered
little or nothing, and that wholly from the purpose. The first is manifest by
this new Preface of his, wherein he answers scarce half a page to more then
400. pages of my book written against him. The second also is not obscure by
that I have written in the precedent Paragraph of the impertinencie of proofs
produced against us, which afterward perhaps may be better examined, and
consequently for both these respects, the Nihil dicit lights upon himself.

20. Now then l^tting pass this Nihil dicit, we shall contemplate a while the
Nimium dicit, when more is uttered then the truth, with shall be the proper
argument and subject of this present section or Paragraph, and this only about
such matters as he has now freshly and las^ly uttered in this Preface, that in
all conteyneth but one only printed sheet: whereby appears how great a volume
it would arise unto on our behalf, if we should examine the vnt^uthes of all
his other writings against us.

21. To begin then with that which before we touched, he avouches in this his
Preamble; A manifest untruth uttered by Sir Edw.
That he could not find in all the book any aut^ority out of the books of
Common laws o^ this Realm, Acts of Parlaments, or any legal, and Iudi^iall
records, quoted or cyted by the Catholi^ke Divine for the mantenance o^ any of
his opinions or conceits: whereupon (as in Justice, says he, I ought) I had
judgment given for me upon a Nihil dicit. Thus far the Knight: whereby you
perceive, that the immediate cause of this judgment given in his favor was
grounded upon this presumption, that the Divine neither quoted nor cyted any
one such witness throughout all his book: which if it be evidently false (as
now I shall prove it) then must the Judge confess, if he will not be Iudex
iniquus, that the sentence of Nihil dicit is to be revoked as unjust.

22. Let us see then how true or false this assertion is, or rather how many
several falsehoods there are contained in one. First then page 163. The Deuin^
does cite the several laws of William Conqueror out of Roger Houeden part
2. Annalium in vita Henrici 2. ^ol. 381. and by them does prove, that the
Conqueror acknowledged the Popes supreme Authority in causes Ecclesiastical.
And is not this a legal record? And in the next two leaves following, he does
cite above twenty di^ferent places out of the Canon law and Canonists, which
though perhaps M. Attorney will not call legal in respect of his Municipall
laws, yet judicial records they cannot be d^nyed to be. Moreover page 245.
and 246. he does allege the testimony of Magna Charta cap. 1. made by king
Henry the third, as also Charta de ^oresta made upon the ninth year of his
reign, and Charta de Merto^ made in the 18. of the same Kings reign, as other
laws also of his, made upon the 51. year o^ his Government, all in proof of
the Popes jurisdiction, and are all legal authorityes. And furthermore he does
cite page 248. statut. anno 9. Henrici 6. cap. 11. and page 262. he cites
again the said Great Charter, and Charter of the Forest made by K. Henry the
3. and confirmed by his son King Edward the first diverse times. And page 271.
he cites two laws anno 1. Edward. 3. stat. 2. cap. 2. and 14. eiusdem statut.
3. pro Clero, Variety of legal authorities out of law books
and does argue out of them for proof of his principal purpose against Sir
Edward. And how then, or with what face does, or can the Knight avouch here
that the said Divine alleges no one Act or law of Parliament or other
judicial record throughout his whole book? does he remember his own saying
in this his Preface: That every man that writes ought to be so careful of
setting down truth, as if the credit of his whole work co^sisted upon the
certainty of every particular period? Does he observe this? How many periods be
there here false of his? But let us see further. Page 277. in the life of king
Edward the first the said Divine does cite an expre^se law of King Edward 3.
Anno regni 25. as also page 283. he does allege statut. de consult. editum
anno 24. Edwardi 1. and another Anno 16. Edwardi 3. cap. 5. and all these
things are cited by the Divine before he comes to treat peculierly of the
life of King Edward the third: Manifest and wilful untruths uttered by Sir
Edward.
but under him, and after him he does not allege as few as 20. legal
authorities, and statutes of Acts of Parlaments: so as for M. Attorney to
avouch here so boldly and peremptorily as he does, that the Divine in all his
book did not allege so much as any one authority either out of the common
laws or Acts of Parliament, or other legal or judicial record, is a strange
boldene^se indeed: And yet he says, that he found the Author utterly ignorant
and exceeding bold. But if he could convince him of such boldness, as I have now
convinced himself, for affirming a thing so manifestly false, I should think
him bold indeed, or rather shameless: for that here are as many untruths, as
there are negative assertions, which is a Nimium dicit, with store of witnesses.

23. It is another Nimium dicit also, if you consider it well, that which he
writes in the same place, that, when he looked into the book, ever expecting
some answer to the matter, he found none at all. Whereas he found all that is
touched in the former Paragraph and much more, which was so much in effect, as
he saw not what reply he could make thereunto: which himself confesses a little
before in these words, saying: Expect not from me, good Reader, any reply at
all: for I will not answer unto his Inuectiues, and I cannot make any reply at
all unto any part of his discourse: and yet does he endeavor to mitigate this
also, saying: That the Divine answers nothing out of the laws of the Realm,
the only subject (says he) of the matter in hand. And a little after again: I
will not (says he) depart from the State of the question whose only subject is
the Municipall laws of this Realm. But this re^uge will not serve, both for
that I have now showed that the Divine has alleag^d many testimonies out of
the Municipall laws, as also for that this is not true, that the question is
only about these laws: for that as before has been showed the true state of
the question between us, is, The true state of the question.
Whether supreme Ecclesiastical authority in spiritual af^a^res did remain
in Queen Elizabeth and her Ancestors by right of their temporal Crowns, or
in the Bishop of Rome, by reason of his primacy in the Chair of S. Peter:
which great matter is not to be tried only (as in reason you will see) by the
Municipall laws of England, or by some few particular cases deduced from them,
but by the whole latitude of divine and humane proofs, as Scriptures, Fathers,
Doctors, histories, practices of the primitive Church, laws both Canon and
Civil, and the like, as the Divine does teach in different occasions of his
book, adding further: That albeit it should be granted to Sir Edward that
this matter should be discussed by the common Municipall, and Statute laws of
England only, yet would he remain wholly vanquished, as largely does appear by
the deduction of the said Divine throughout all the succession of English Kings
from Ethelbert the first Christened, to King Henry the 8. that first fell into
schism against the Church of Rome. This then was a notorious Nimium dicit.

24. Another is when he says in reproof of the Deuines answer to his Reports,
that the book is exceeding all bounds of truth and charity, full of
maledictions and calumniations, nothing pertinent to the state of the question:
and that it becomes not Deuines to be of a fiery and Salamandrine spirit,
soming out of a hot mouth etc. which indeed will seem to any indifferent man
a stange passionate exaggeration of Sir Edward, The temperate proceeding of the
Divine in his wrytings.
exceeding all terms of simple truth, for that there is nothing found in that
book, but temperatly spoken, and with respect as it seems both to his Office
and Person: but yet when he saw the exobitant intemperance of the Attorneyes
hatred against Catholics to draw him to such acerbity of bloody calumniations,
that he would needs inuolue them all in the heynons crime of treason by mere
sycophancy, and malicious collections upon false supposed grounds, and
fictions of Pius quintus his Bull, and such like impertinent imputations; no
marvel though he were more earnest in the repulsion of such open wrongs; but
yet with that moderation, as I persuade my self no injurious, or contumelious
speech can be alleged to have passed from him in all that book, and much
less such inu^ctiues as here M. Attorney charge him withal: as also with
that fiery Salamandrine spirit, foming out of a hot mouth, wherein, besides
the contumely, which he will easily pardon, Sir Edward speaks more then I
suppose his skill in Philosophy, or history will be able to auerre or bear
him out. For that ancient Pliny in his natural history treating of the nature
of the Salamander which lives in fire, says not that he is hot and fiery,
Plinius lib. 10. histor. natural. cap. 67.
but contrary wise so extreme cold of nature, as he resists the very force of
the fire if self. So as whiles M. Attorney goes about to accuse his adversary
of too much heat, his example infers that he is over could, and that he
mistook quid pro quo. And was not this a Nimium dicit in like manner?

25. Another excess though of meaner mark including also a Nimiu^ dicit, is
co^mouly noted in Sir Edward, The Pedanteria of Sir Edward.
and all his speeches and writings, and not wanting also in this little preface,
which is, a heaping together of many latin sentences without Englishing, or
rightly applying them, thereby to seem more admirable to the ignorant, when
they hear so frequent phrases and sentences which they understand not: and in
other Countries it is accounted Pedanteria, or playing the petty
Schoolemaister, nothing fit for grave men to use, whereof notwithstanding you
have some store also in this little Preface, though but of one print^d sheet of
paper, as has been said: for both in the first and last page, he begins
and ends with that: and few other pages pas^e without some respe^sion thereof,
as ille didicit maledicere, and ego maledicta contenmere, which sentence is
evidently false in the eye and ears of all men, that either have read our
books, or heard him speak. For as he cannot produce any maledictons of ours
against him, so have we as many witnesses of his most bitter railing against
Catholics and Catholic Religion, Sir Edw. his ordinary and continual railing
against Catholics.
whose cause every good man ought to esteem a thousand times more the^ his
own, as he has written books, scroles, or libels against us, or has given
co^tumelious Charges on the Bench, which are continual, but especially, and by
name I remit my self to the most insolent inuectiue which he made against us
in his own Country at Norwich on the 4. of August anno Domini 1606. set forth
afterward in print; and again in the same place at sundry times in the ensuing
years; in all which injurious speeches besides his other poetical inventions
to make us odious or ridiculous, he triumphed also in this kind of Grammatical
Pedanteria, of alleging sundry la^in sentences against us, whereof I may chance
to have occasion to treat more afterward.

26. But I am departed unawares from the examples of his present Preface, and
therefore shall return thither again. When he saw himself ouerloaden with
the multitude and variety of testimonies for proving the principal question of
the Popes supreme authority spiritual, he answered thus: Impertinent
Gra^maticall phrases.
For his Deuinitie and histories cyted by him, only published in the said
Book, ad faciendum populum, I will not answer: for then I should ^ollow him
in his error. And is not this a goodly answer? Was yt error in the Divine,
or vanity ad ^aciendum populum, to prove by grounds of Deuinity, Scriptures,
Fathers, practice of the Primitive Church and other like Theological proofs,
that Q. Elizabeth in right could not have supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction:
and out of all sorts of histories belonging to England to convince, that none
of her Ancestors did ever in fact pretend the same? Was this only ad ^aciendum
populum, to hunt after popular applause? How impertmently is this Grammatical
phrase applied by Sir Edward?

27. But let us see the next. In reading these and other of my Reports (says
he) I desire the Reader, that he would not read (and as it were swallow) too
much at once: for greedy appetites are not of the best digestion: the whole is
to be attained by parts, and nature (which is the best guide) makes no leap:
Natura non facit saltum. In which words as I acknowledge the aduertisment to be
good, that a man ought not to read too much together, least he confound his
memory: So why this phrase of Natura non facit saltum is brought in, but only
for the forsaid Grammatical oftentatio^ I see not. Nature makes no leap, but
she proceeds orderly, digesting one thing after an other, it is true: but what
is this to prove that a man may not read to much at one time? Surely this
leap of M. Attorney was somewhat wide from the purpose: and if his wrytings in
law-matters be no more gracious and attractiue, then are his discourses in
Deuinity, and Controversies, I presume the Reader, that esteems his time
worth the bestowing, will not have need of this aduertisment, that he read not
over much at once in his Reports, for that wearines will soon bring him to
that moderation.

28. And thus much have I thought good to say briefly to such points of this
Pre^ace as concern his Reply to the Catholic Divine: for in effect Sir
Edward answers no more to all his large Book the^ now you have heard: albeit
in the ^ormer part of this his Preface he takes another matter in hand, which
is first to auerre, that the antiquity and excellency of our Municipall laws
in England, About the antiquity and excellency of our English laws.
which he calls the Common, do exceed all other humane laws whatsoever in
the world. Then for proof of this he brings in a Student of the said Common
law to propose unto him four particular Cases, whereof the la^t (for which all
the other were brought in) is: whether the ancien^ laws o^ ^ngland did admit
any Appeals to Rome in Causes spiritual or Ecclesiastical: and then vaunteth
presently thus: I had no so^uer seen these questions (says he) but instantly
I found direct and demonstra^iue answer unto the same. But by his leave Sir
Edward must have patience to let me tell him, that his Answers are so far of
from being demonstratiue, that is to say, evident, certain and irrepugnable,
as that they are not so much as Logical, that is to say, probable; nor have
any true form or force of a lawful argument in them: for that they go about
to prove vniuersalls by particulers, and yet do not so much in effect as prove
those seely particulers which they pretend. These two points then are to be
examined, first about the supposed antiquity and excellency of his Municipall
laws: and secondly his proof and confirmation thereof by his Answers to the
Students four questions devised by himself. For that no Student I suppose, of
any mean tallent of wit or learning would hau^ proposed such questions, for
confirmation of so great a matter as is pretended: or would have been content
with so simple Answers, as here are set down.

WHETHER THE Common Municipall Laws of England be more ancient and excellent,
than any other humane Laws of the world.. III.
FOR better understanding of this point I shall first set down some lines of
Sir Edwa^ds narration, which beginn^th thus. Since the publishing of the fifth
part of my Reports, In the Preface to the 6. part of Reports.
a good Student of the Common Laws desired to be satisfied in one special
point of my Epistle to the second part of my Reports, where I affirmed that if
the ancient Laws of this noble ^and had not excelled all others (speaking of
humane) it could not be but some of the several Conquerours and ^ouernours
thereof, that is to say, the Romans, Saxons, Danes or Normans, and especially
the Romans, who (as they justly may) do boast of their Civil Laws, would (as
every of them might) have altered or chang^d the same. And (says he) some of
another pro^^ssion are not persuaded, that the Common Laws of England are of
so great antiquity, as there superla^iu^ly is spoken. So he. And in these last
words I presume he understood the Divine, that impug^ed this excessive
imaginary antiquity of our Municipall ^awes in his Answer to the Reports,
Answer to R^ports page 14.15. etc.
and Sir Edward having seen the same, should in reason have answered somewhat
thereunto, if he had been prepared for it.

30. But he thought that course not best, but rather to help himself with the
pretend^d authority of Sir John Fortescue Sir John Fortescue.
chief Justice of England in the Reign of King Henry the 6. saying, that he
was a great Antiquary: and he was a notable man indeed, though more as it
seems, in the skill of our Common Laws, then in matters of Antiquity, A
great exaggeration o^ an^^^uity.
out of whom Sir Edward, to help his cause and assertion, cites the words
following. As touching the antiquity of our Common Laws (says he) neither are
the Roman Civil Laws, by so long continuance o^ ancient times confirmed: nor
yet the La^es o^ the Venetians, which above all other are repor^ed to be of
most antiquity, ^or so much as their Island in the beginning of the Britans was
not then inhabited, as Rome also then vnbuilded: neither the Laws of any
Nation of the world which worshipped God, are of so old and ancient years:
wher^ore the contrary is no^ to be said, nor thought, but that the English
customs are very good, yea o^ all other the very best. Thus he: if he be
rightly cited, for I have not his book by m^.

31. And though I do respect and reverence both these men's professions, and
much more their state and place of Judges: yet does force of truth oblige me to
contradict their error, which seems to me very gross and palpable, or
rather their errors and mistakinges in sundry points here down. As first in
that yt is auerred, that the Civil law and Roman laws are not of so long
continuance of ancient times, as the ancient Municipall Laws of England are,
which he goes about to prove by two several means, whereof both do contain
as well falsyties as absurdities, if I be not greatly deceived therein.

32. His first means of proof is, His first means of proof by an^iquit^ ^f
Nati^ns.
^or that in the beginning o^ the Britans, Rome was then vnbuylded, and
conquently that the British Laws are more ancient, then those of the Romans.
And then supposing further, that those British Laws which were in the
beginning of the Britans, were never changed, but rec^iued in England f^o^ time
to time, have endured to our days, and are the Common Laws of our Realm at
this day: Wherein there are many suppositions, as you see, strange to hear, but
harder in my opinion to be proved. As first, that the Britans in their
beginning even before Rome was buylt, had such good Laws as the Romans in
England seven hundred years after the said building of Rome, were content to
accept for their Laws in that land. And the like after them the Saxons, and
other Co^querous people that ensued: which is such a paradox unto men of reason
and learning, as the very naming thereof cannot but cause laughter. For albeit
the British nation be more ancient then the Roman, according to the Story of
Geffrey Monmouth, Galfridus Monumetensis lib. 1. historiae.
that affirms the^ to descend from Brutus a Nephew of Aeneas, from whom
Romulus the founder of Rome some ages after descended: and that they were a
valiant warlike nation from the beginning: yet that they had such good
politic and civil Laws (themselves being uncivil in those days) is a
matter incredible, which I prove thus: That whereas the Roman Laws began from
Romulus himself and from Numa Pompilius and other ancient Lawmakers among
them, and this soon after the building of Rome (I mean the more older Laws
of the twelve Tables,) and the like continued from time to time afterward,
until the coming of Julius Caesar into Britany, which was above 600. years
after Rome was built, and above a thousand after Brutus had been in England: in
which time yt is probable, that the British Laws, would have grown to greater
perfection the^ they were in the beginning: yet I say that the said Laws and
customs of the Britans are recorded to be such in Julius Caesar his days, and
set down by his own pen, as also by the writings of diverse other Roman and
Greek Authors that succeeded for two or three hundred years after him, as must
needs be incredible that they should be continued by the Romans, Saxons, and
other people that followed them. And then if they were such, and so rude so
many ages after their beginning, what may we imagine they were at their very
beginning it self, which was a thousand years before, from which time our two
Knights here do infer their antiquity and eminency above the Roman Laws?

33^ Let us see then what ancient Histories do report of the British Laws and
Customs in Julius Caesar his time and afterward. The state of Britany for
laws and customs in Julius Caesar his time.
Caesar the Roman-Captaine having made two iourneys into England, and informed
himself diligently about the Laws and Customs of the Brytans in those days,
which was about 60. years before the Nativity of our Savior, sets down
many things of their small policy in that time. As first the description of
their manner of consultations in their war, wherein he says, that in commune
non co^sulunt, they have no common Counsels: and then describing the chief
City of the Realm where their K. Cassiuela^ that was head of all the rest,
C^sar lib. 5. de bello Gallico.
had his Court and Counsel somewhat about the Thames (though not where London
was afterward built) he shows that it was in a wood, and that the walls were
trees cut down round about, instead of fortresses, within which they enclosed
both themselves and their Cattle: and this was the symplicity of that time.

34. After this he sets down many Laws and customs of theirs, far unfit
to be received by the Romans, and other people after them, as Nummo aereo aut
annulis ferreis ad certu^ pondus examinatis pro num^o vtebantur, Their money
was of brass, and rings of iron given out by weight. And then again that they
had a law and custom luto se inficere, quod caeruleum efficit color^m, to
paint themselves with a certain earth, Solinus c 35^ in fi^e.
that made a blew color. And Solinus writing more then an hundred years after
Caesar again, shows this law and custom to have been so inviolable among
them in his days, that the very Children had the figures and shapes of beasts
imprinted in their flesh, by launcing and cutting the same first, to the end
that the said painting with terrible colors might the better sink in: and
Pliny does add that the very women also did observe the same custom, Plin.
22. histori^ naturalis cap. 1.
which seems also to have continued somes ages after, for that the Poet
Claudianus under the Emperors Arcadius and Theodosius about four hundred
years after Christ speaking of the Britans of his time, says of them:
Claudian. in Lauds Stilico^. paneg. 2. page 258.
Inde Caledonio velata Britannia monstro,
Ferro picta genas: cuius vestigia verrit
Caerulus, oceanique ^stum mentitur, amictus.
In which verses the words ferro picta genas, and caerulus amictus signifying
that their faces were painted with the dint of iron, and their habit blew, do
importe that this law and custom was long continued among them: and yet never
received by the Romans, Saxons, nor Danes. And Caesar yet goes further showing
their Laws and Customs about their wives and Children. Vxores habent deni
inter se communes etc. Ten men agreeing among themselves have their wives and
Children in common.

35. The same Caesar also, and Diodorus Siculus and Strabo, Diodorus lib. 6.
rer^ antiquaru^. Strabo lib. 4. Geographiae.
which two lived soon after him under Augustus Caesar, do recount other Laws
and Customs of the Britans of their days, whereof we see no sign in ours: as
their order of fight in Chariots and Coaches, with other things belonging to
Chiualry. And Pomponius Mela living under the Emperor Claudius, that went with
an imperial army into England some fyftie years after Christ, says of the
Britans in those days: Inculti omnes, tantum pecore and ^inibus dites: Mela l.
3. Geograph.
that they were all witho^t po^icie, and only rych by their cattle and
pastures: which imports tha^ they had no good Laws to lend the Romans in
those days, and much less to deliver them over to posterity.

36. And yet further an hundred and fyfty years after that again, Tacitus in
vita ^ulij Agricol^e.
wrote Cornelius Tacitus under the Emperor Domitian, as also Solinus before
mentioned, who do both concur in this: that in their days the Britans were a
people as on the one side stout and valiant, so on the other very rude and
uncivil for policy, without discipline and order, as also Counsel or good
direction, especially in their wars. Whereupon Tacitus says: Dum singuli
pugnant, vniuersi vincuntur. whiles every one fights a part after his own
fancy they are all overcome. And I might hereunto add diverse Greek
Historians, as well as Latin, specially Herodian, Dio Nicetus, Xephilinus, and
others, Herod. l. 3. hist. Dio in epit. hist. Xephil. in hist. Omnes in vita
Alexandr^ Seu^^i.
writing o^ the Brytans, their manners and customs under the Reign of Seuerus
the Emperor, who went thither in person, and dyed in York two hundred yeare^
after Christ, and almost 300. after the Brytans had been under the Roman
government: and yet do the said Historiographers recount such extreme want of
policy and Laws among the Britans at that time (which I take to be meant
principally of the Northern) as scarce of any Country the like: The rudenes
of the Brita^s 200. years after Christ.
Nec moenia habent (say they) nec Vrbes, nudi, sine calceis, vestis vsum
ignorantes etc. they had neither walls nor towns, b^t went naked without
shoes, not being acquainted with the use of apparel. And to the end we may not
think that the Southern p^rtes were in much better state for policy, Dio in
Nerone. The speech of the Qu. Br^nde^i^ke.
Dio Nicetu^ recou^teth the speech of the Qu. Brundeuica under the Reign of
Nero: which Queen dwelt in the most civil and wealthy parts of Britany, and
yet objected to the Romans, that they were delicate and could not live without
corn, meal, wine, oil, shelter of house, and other like commodities: Nobis
autem (says she) quaeuis herba and radix ^ibus est, quili^et succus oleum,
omnis aqua vinum, omnis arbor domus. But unto us (and let us mark that she
puts her se^fe among the ^est being a woman, Captain, and Queen) every
herb and root is meat, every joyce is oil, every water is wine, and every
tree is a house. Thus she.

37. And now here Sir Edward perhaps will say, a^ before he did of Theological
authorities, that I do allege all these Histories ad faciendum populum: which
I do not, but rather to show that he has no cause to vaunt, that either
himself, or his fellow-Iustice are such Antiquaries as here he mentions, not
having seen, as it seems, nor considered this variety of ancient Histories,
whereby is proved that the laws and customs of the Brytans were not such from
the beginning, and before Rome was builded, as they may be preferred for their
antiquity, and excellency before the Roman Laws, whereas almost a thousand
years after that the Roman Laws had been received in the world, the Brytans
had scarce any use of policy or common Ciuility: though afterward when by the
benefit of Christian Religion especially they received the same, they exceeded
perhaps many other Countries in piety and religious polycie.

38. Thus then is the first medium of Sir Edwards probation overthrown about
the antiquity of the Brytan Laws before the Romans: which is neither true; nor
if it were, yet makes it nothing to his purpose, to p^oue that the Common
Mu^^cipall Laws of England were of that antiquity, as pr^sently shall be showed.
A ridiculous imagination of the great antiquity of the venetia^ Laws.
And as for the other two instances, that the said British Laws are more
an^ient then the Laws of the Venetians, which are most ancient of any other
Nation of the world that worshipped God: this (I say) is little less th^n
ridiculous. For that first the Venetians (as Blondus their own Country man
and Historiographer testifies, Blondus l. 1. ^ist. Ital. and lib. spe^ia^i de
^ebus Venetorum.
writing of their antiquity) began first to build their City and Common wealth
upon the year o^ Christ four hundred fi^ty and six, which was upon the point
of twelve hundred years after the building of Rome, and consequently the
Venetian Laws cannot be imagined to be o^ more antiquity then the Roman, and
much less then of other Nations more ancient then the Romans, as the
Carthaginians, Grecians, Aegiptians, Medians, Persians, Syrians, and the like.

39. And secondly wher^as to temper the matter somewhat, he adds, that the
British Laws are more anci^nt then of any na^ion of the world, that worshipped
God: this addition ( of worshipping God) is both from the purpose and untrue.
From the purpose, for that Sir Edward exprely here prete^deth to speak only
of humane Laws: An impertinent exception.
so as whether the people whose Laws they are, do worship God or not, is from
the question. Besides that M. Cook I think will not deny, but that the Romans
worshipped God, and were Christians, at least many of them, before the Britans
(if this made any thing to the purpose:) and yet will he have the Britans Laws
to be more ancient then those of the Romans: so as this circumstance of
worshipping God is neither true, or to the purpose.

40. Secondly it is untrue, that the British Laws were before the Laws of any
Nation that worshipped God, for that the Jews worshipped God, and may be
presumed also to have had some political Laws for their Civil government
among themselves, long before the Britans; yea before Moses gave them his
written Laws For that being a Nation so popul^us as they were, cannot well be
imagined to hau^ l^ued four hundred years in Aegipt without some humane and
Civil laws among themselves also, be^^des those of the Aegiptians, albeit
they were forced al^o to k^epe, perhaps, the Aegiptians laws, which in that
case may be accounted their laws, and so more ancient th^n the Britans. So as
all these things were weakly considered by Sir Edward, and he shows himself
no good Antiquary, though he would seem to covet much the opinion thereof.

41. But more then in any other point, this def^ct of his is seen in setting
down his second Medium for proof of the antiquity and excellency of his
Municipall laws in these words, before recy^ed: His second medium for proouing
the antiquity and excellency of our English Laws.
That if the ancient laws of this noble Island had not excelled all the
others, speaking of humane, it could not be but some of the several
Conquerours and Governors thereof, that is to say, the Romans, Saxons, Danes or
Normans, and especially the Romans, would have altered or changed the same.
Where you see, he holds it for a supposed known, and received principle,
that none of all these Conquerous people, entering into Britany, did alter or
change the old British laws: and consequently that those which now we call the
Common laws of England, were also the laws of the ancient Brytans, and theirs
ours: which is one of the most solemn absurdities in my opinion, that ever
proceeded from the mouth of a man, pretending to be learned in his own Country
affairs.

42. For first besides the demonstration before made to the contrary, out of
reason and evident probability, that the Britans generally having received very
little use of Civil policy until two hundred years after Christ under the
Emperor Alexander Scuerus, Whether the ancient British Laws were ever changed
or altered.
and almost three hundred after they had been under the Romans, it was not
likely that the said Romans, their Conquerours, would admit their laws and
customs so much condemned by them of barbarism^ and inciuility, as by the
former related Authors both Greek and Latin has been declared. Besides this (I
say) there is express mention found in antiquity, though M. Attorney seems
not to know it, of the change of those Laws and customs by the Roman
Emperors.

Plin. lib. 30 hist. cap. 1.
43. For first Pliny that lived presently after the Apostles, recounteth that
the Emperor Tiberius Caesar, under whom our Savior suffered, did take away
diverse of their Laws and customs, especially about sacrificing of men, women
and Children, in lu^o Andates, in a certain grove dedicated to that Pagan
Goddess, which signified Victory. He removed also Druid^s, and cancelled their
Laws which were the instruments, and ministers of those Cruelties. ^hereupon
the said Pliny makes this consideration: Non satis aestimari potest, quantum
Romany debeatur, qui sustulere Monstra, in quibus hominem occidere
religiosissimum erat, mandi v^ro etiam saluberrimum. It cannot be sufficiently
esteemed how much the Britans do owe to the Romans that took away these
monstrous customs and laws, whereby it was held a most religious thing, to
kill men: and a most wholesome to eat them. Whereby appears that diverse laws
of the Britans were changed by the Romans, and namely those of their Pagan
sacrifices (which were their principal) albeit the Romans were yet heathens
and Pagans themselves: so as this overthrows quite Sir Edwards false
principle, that British laws were never changed nor altered by the Romans.

44. But yet further, when very shortly after the forsaid speech of Queen
Brundeuica (that was under Nero) Vespasian came to govern Britanny, and had
that famous victory, wherein he took King Aruiragus and his some Guiderius,
and diverse other principal persons of the Brytish Nobility, Hector Boethius in
his History of Scotland, Hector Bo^th. hist. S^ot. lib. 3. page 45.
does show, that upon mature deliberation, I^ra and paternas leges postea
Britonibus ademit Vespasianus, and Romanas introduxit; V^spasian took away and
changed their old British laws and customs, and introduced those of the
Romans in place thereof. The British laws changed by the Romans
Behold here a whole change of laws denied so resolutly by our two Justices
as you have heard before: were they good Antiquaries in this think you? If you
say, yea: I will oppose against them our other English Antiquary, and King of
Arms William Ca^bd^n, who in his Description of Britany speaking of the said
Emperor Vespasian, Cambde^. in descrip. Brit. page 42.
and of his son Domitian in their government of England, says: Britannis
iugum impositum etc. At this time the Britans received the Roman yoke: four
Legions of soldiers being appointed to lie there, that with terror should
hold them down etc. Neque legibus suis patrijs vti permissi sunt, sed
magistratus a populo Romano cum Imperio and securibus missi, qui ius dicerent.
Neither were they permitted to use any more their own Country laws, but
Magistrates and Officers were sent to them from the people of Rome with supreme
authority and ^nsignes of Justice, to administer law unto them. So he.

45. What will Sir Edward say to this? Was this a change of laws or no? And
will he still stand to his former assertion, that the Brytish laws were never
altered by the Romans? But let us add yet one witness more and that of great
credit, to wit, Gul. Malmesburiensis, Guliel. Malmes^. in fastis Anno Domini 86.
who as well in his story of England, as in his Fasti signifi^th the same
alteration, saying in the later: That upon the fourth year of Domitian, which
was the 86. of Christ, Britannia nunc penitus primum subiugata, ductu
Agricolae, auspicijs Domitiani: Britany was now first of all utterly subdued by
the army of Agricola^ and authority of Domitian the Emperor, etc. which full
and complete subiugation includes also the necessity to accept of the
vanquishers laws, and not to give laws to them. And what will Sir Edward now
say to this also? Will he recall his temerarious assertion? Will he remember
now his former saying, that Ignorance and bouldnes do commonly concur?

46. But let us go yet forward: for as we have demonstrated of the Romans in
this affair, so might we show no less also of the other three nations by him
mentioned, ^o wit, the Saxons, Danes and Normans. Why it is not lik^ly that the
Saxons or Danes would admit the ^ritish laws.
For that the Saxons coming in after the departure of the Romans, about 450.
years after Christ, and falling into such extreme emnity and breach with the
Brytans, as our histories do testify, both in regard of their quarrel about
the Country and possession thereof: as also for that the Britans were
Christians and the Saxons pagans: so as one did not so much as communicate with
the other, but as enemies in the field: This being so, I say, yt is not like
nor any way in reason probable, that they (the said Saxons^ being Conquerours,
and such professed enemies, would admit the Britans laws, or govern
themselves th^rby, both for that they brought their own laws with them, nor
understood nor regarded those of their adversaries conquered by them.

47. And the like may be said of the Danes afterward when they came in upon the
Saxons, who had their own laws among themselves, and others they made in
England, Ingulphus in historia de Croyla^d. Malmes^. in Guli^l. p^rimo, i^i^ue
P^lidorus.
calling them the Danish Laws, and some of them were admitted generally
throughout the Realm in those few years wherein they had the peaceable
government thereof, which in great part were afterward excluded again or altered
by S. ^dward the Confessor, when by him the Saxon ^nglish blood came to
recover the dominion: as those again of S. Edward were for the most part
changed and altered by William the Conqueror, as all our ancient Histories do
testify, namely Ingulfus, Malmesbury, Polidore and the rest.

48. And albeit it were ouerlong to recount all the forsaid variety of Laws in
particular brought in by Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normans, which import great
cha^ges and alterations, John Fox in his Acts and Monumen^s.
and thereby do confute Sir Edwards ^ssertion: yet have some of our Nation not
wanted to gather out of more ancient writers, Doctor Ha^pesfi^ld in ^istor.
sundry laws that have been made by several Kings of different Nations, as
namely those of King S^culo 8. cap. 10.
Inas, Saeculo 9. cap. 5.
Alured, Saec 10. cap. 2.
Edward the first, Ibib. c. ^.
Edgar, Aethelstan, Saec. 11. cap. 2.
Agilred all Saxons: and of King Canutus the Dane, and of S. Ibid. c. ^.
Edward the Confessor restorer of the English blood reigning all before the
Conquest. And after the Conquest of King William that was the Conqueror, who
like a Conqueror indeed took that liberty to himself, as to change and alter
at his pleasure all laws of what nation or people soever he found in use
before him in our Island, which Polidore testifyeth out of ancient authorities
in these words: Leges pene omnes a superioribus sanctiss. Regibus olim ad been
beateque viuendum sustulit, nouasque dedit minus aequas, quas posteri non sine
suo damno seruauerunt. He took away almost all the laws, that had been made
before the Conquest by most holy Kings for their happy life and government of
the people, and gave new laws more unequal, which they that ensued retained
to their own loss: as though it had been a great crime to break those laws,
which a Conqueror that was no friend of the English nation brought in, instead
of good laws.

49. So Polidore, that had examined all our antiquities about this matter of
English laws: for so he says of himself, Diligenter omnia veterum monumenta
pers^ruta^us sum, I have diligently sought all monuments of ancient writers in
this behalf: and by this assertion of his, does overthrow directly three
positions of our two Justices here. Three positions of the two Justices
overthrown.

Polidor. l. 9 p. 391. edit. Gandau.


First of the eminent antiquity of ou^ present laws in England. Secondly that
they were never changed or altered. The third, that they were the best
absolutely of all other Laws: which last point about the goodness, Polidore
does impugn expressly as you see, adding also further for some example, of the
iniquity and asperity of our said laws, left by William the Conqueror as
follows: Non possum hoc loco (says he) non memorari rem, tametsi omnibus
notam, admirat^one tamen dignissimam, atque dictu incredibilem etc. I cannot
choose but recount in this place one thing, albeit known to all, yet most
worthy of admiration and incredible to be spoken, which is, That these Laws
which ought to be understood by all, were written at that time, and now also
are in the Norman tongue, which neither English nor French did rightly
understand. Whereupon you should have seen even from the very beginning
thereof, The iniquity of the Conquerours laws that now are English.
partly by the iniquity or injustice of the Laws themselves, and partly by the
ignorance or vnskil^ulnes of those that did interpret amiss these l^wes, this
man to be deprived of his ancient inheritance: another to be condemned in
criminal Causes by the judgment of most unskillful men; and yet upon that
judgment put to death: another to be entangled with inextricable suites of law:
and finally both divine and humane a^^aires to be turned vpside down by these
new Laws.

50. Thus you see what Polydors judgment was thereof: and he that will see more
inconvenience and mischiefs that ensued thereof, let him read Ingulfus,
Ingulf. in ^isto. de Croyl^nd. page 513. etc.
that lived and wrote in the same time, and was an eye witness of the said
miseries. And finally I will end this matter with the testimony of John Fox in
his Acts and Monuments, a witness I suppose which Sir Edward will not refuse:
who treating of things that passed in the life of William the Conqueror has
these words: Fox acts and mon. p. 154. col. 1. ^um. 83.
For so much (says he) as he obtained the Kingdom by force and dint o^ sword^
he changed the whole state of the gouerm^nt of this common weal, and ordained
new laws at his own pleasure, pro^itable to himself, but grievous and
hurt^ull to the poople^ abolishing the laws of King Edward: whereunto
notwithstanding he was sworn before to observe and maintain; for the which
great commotions and rebellions remained long after among the people, as
Histories record, to have the laws of King Edward received again. So he. And
by this may appear how true it is, that Sir Edward does affirm, that neither
Romans, Saxons, Danes, or Normans ever altered or changed the ancient British
laws of our Island, but that they be now the self same that they were then:
And of all other Nations the best: An assertion worthy of such an Antiquary, as
Sir Edward would be thought to be.

51. And albeit this may be sufficient and superabounda^t also for overthrow of
Sir Edwards imagination, that our common laws were never changed, but
continued still for their excellency in goodness in all times, even from Julius
Caesar's days downward, for that he fyndeth, or at leastwise surmiseth some
things or customs like the one to the other in different times, and under
different Princes, as now you have heard: yet will I adioyne one consideration
more to the contrary of his, concerning particular laws, which are found to
have been both under the Saxons, Danes, and old English, that are not now in
use, Anno Christi 687
and consequently the Judge must confess, that in those at least there has
been a change. As for example, it is read that it was a law in King Inas his
days the 12. King of the West Saxo^^ almost a thousand years gone, See the
Saxon laws imprinted at London cap. 3. and 4 These also were printed anno 1568.
That if a bondsman by commandment o^ his Master did work, or do any servile
thing upon a Sunday^ his Master should leese his dominion over him, and pay
thirty shillings besides. Under the famous King Alfred, and his son Edward
the elder, and King Guthrun the Dane, with whom they made peace, it was a law,
That a man condemned to death, might not be hindered to confess his sins to
what Pri^st he would, nor that he could be executed upon a Sunday. Alred.
Rieual. de Regibus, in Edgarum.
Under renowned King Edgar it was a law, which is yet extant in the Saxon
language, That whosoever did slander an other in a grievous crime, should
either leese his tongue, or redeem it deerly by other means.

52. Under King Canutus the Dane that changed King Edgars l^wes (as Fox
testifyeth) it was made a law, See Fox Acts and monu^^ts page 148.
That public ^ayres and markets should not be holden upon Sundays. Item, That
every wife that shall, during her husbands li^e, commit adultery, shall have
her nose and ears cut of. Item, That if a wyddow marry within a year after
her husbands death, she shall leese her ioynture. Item, That whosoever, having
touched the holy Bible, have for sworn himself, should leese his hand, except
he had redeemed the same at the Judgment of the Bishop. And the like severity
was to be used upon unjust Judges, that by corruption gave wrong sentences. And
this by the Danish laws. But under King Edward the Confessor that reuiewed
over all the former laws again, both of Saxons and Danes, retayning such as
liked him, and excluding the rest, diverse others of his own were made, which
Polidore says, were called Leges communes, Polydor. l. 8. hist. in Edwardo
Conf^ssore.
the Common Laws (which imports far less antiquity then M. Attorney
avouches) among which this was one, That Usurers should leese all their
goods, and besides be cast into banishment, as being plagues of the people:
which rigor is not now used, and perhaps may not be by our modern Common
laws: as neither the other before mentioned of cutting of the wives nose and
ears that is an adulteress, which perhaps would make many a pitiful and
foul sight in our Country. So then these and many other such laws which were
generally received in our Island before the Conquest, are not at all now in use,
as all men will confess, and thereby it evidently follows, that there has
been change and alteration of laws in our Realm, and that our Common Laws at
this day are not so excessiuely ancient, entire, and excellent, as Sir Edward
Cook would have us think, and believe that they are.

53. Concerning which excellency next after antiquity and integrity, we must
now add a word or two more, for that notwithstanding all that Polidore,
Ingul^us, Defectuous laws.
and John Fox have said before of the iniquity of such laws, as were
promulgated by the Conqueror against rath^r, then for the English, Sir Edward
here with his fellow Justice, as you have heard, says, Answer to R^po^tes
page 13.14^ 15. etc.
that without all doubt they are absolutely the best of all other nations.
Whereunto the Catholic Divine answered before, that as he would not discommend
his Country laws, nor diminish any part of that praise which is due unto
them, if they be well and rightly executed: so on the other side the malice and
infirmity of men considered, they seem to learned strangers, and to diverse
also of our own Country not to have such excellency in them, but in diverse
points to be defectuous, and to leave the subject open to many injuries,
oppressions, ruins, and other inconveniences in sundry cases, which are
piously provided for by other laws.

54. As for example, among the rest is noted and censured for most strange, the
manner of judgment Judgment of life and death.
where no Advocate, nor learned Counsel is allowed the defendant, for defense,
either of his honor, living, or life, but himself only must speak and
answer for all, against the impugnations of many and potent adversaries, that
with their authority, and coun^enance, bitter words, threats, taunts, terror
of speech, and other like mean^s, may so oppress him, and put him out of
himself, as that when it imports him to say most, he can say least, and so
perish for lack of just defense, as more largely the Divine does prosecute:
alleging also many reasons for the same, against all which hu^ts, and
inconveniences other country laws, both ciu^ll, and Municipall, do make ample
and car^full provision.

Jury of 12. men.
may have such passion against him, as he would over weary all the rest, except
they will yeald to his condemnation. Whereunto this also being added, that if
the said Jurors do condemn any never so wrongfully, there is no punishment
for it in this life, but only before God: but if they deliver him against the
inclination of Prince or Court^ (which is easily to be known or coniectured)
great peril hangs over their heads to be troubled, vexed, and forced to
wear papers for perjury. This I say considered by learned men, that are
indifferent in the cause, does make them wonder and think, that no Nation
living has more harder laws in this point, nor more unequal for the subject,
then ours.

Dowry of marriage.
which if it be in money, goods, or Chattels, may be spent and consumed by the
evil husband; against whom she has no remedy, nor security at all, which by
the Roman Civil laws is most carefully provided for. So as whatsoever
disorders the evil husband does commit, either in spe^ding, or offending: yet
is his wives dowry secure, nor can he spend or dilapidate any thing thereof, but
only the rent, or annual Income for what occasions soever.

Provision for younger Brothers.
who being brought up, during their Fathers life in equal condition with the
elder brother, are afterward enforced to great inequality; yea oftentimes to
great misery, our common laws not providing for them in the diuident of their
Fathers goods, nor yet obliging their said elder brother to allow them
competent maintenance, conform to their state and birth, which other Countries
do.

58. The Case also of Pupils seems strange to foreign nations, Pupills and
Pupilage.
that the wardship of them both for Liberty and avarice of some Lawyers.
which being joined with their authority, and power to oppress whom they will,
they become a terror (every one in his Country) to the best of the Kings
subjects: so as no man dare to speak or look against them. And truly the
particulers that are recounted of exorbitant Fees taken by diverse, to purchase,
as it were, their look, without saying any one word for the^ at the bar are
stra^g, and yet not so much to be wo^dred at, as lamented: for that there is no
hope of redress. And whether Sir Edward himself have been one of these
lawyers, and had his share among them proportionable to the ^est, or above the
rest, let his neighbors speak, and his abundant wealth, lands, and lyuings
bear witness: I do not mean to be his accuser, but his answerer.

59. Only I must say one thing more which I would not have spoken at this time
if Sir Edwards last contumelious speech at his departure from Nor^ich in his
public Charge had not moved me thereunto, and it is this: A merry tale devised
by Sir Edward against Monks.
That whereas in that speech to make his auditors merry, he brought in an
example framed by himself, as may be supposed, of a Prior or Monk that
craftily induced a Gentleman to give part of his lands from his son and heir
to a Monastery; for which act his said son coming into his sick Fathers
chamber whiles the matter was in doing, did by his Fathers leave beat the monk
out of the Chamber with good ^udgells, which he carried away with him insted of
inheriting the lands: whereat the Auditory did laugh merrily. But I must needs
te^l Sir Edward not in jest but in very good earnest, that ^f either Monk or
Priest that is learned in Deuinity, and of a good conscience should come to him
on his death bed to help to make his testament (according to the old custom)
for better discharge of his soul in the world to come, and should hear but
the common speech of people that runs concerning his great wealth and hasty
getting thereof, should be bound (according to Catholic religion) to seek
further into matters, and to tell him another manner of tale in his ear, then
ever yet he heard about restitutions and satisfactions necessarily, and under
pain of everlasting damnation to be made before his departure out of this
life: which doctrine if Sir Edward did believe (as all his ancestors did, and
adventured their souls therein:) it may be that among other good works, he would
resolve himself perhaps to give some lands also to Monasteries, Hospitals,
Churches, and other places of piety ^or satisfaction of things not so well
gotten, though he left the less to his Son and heir.

60. I have recyted I think in some other place and occasion, a true story,
that fell out not many years agone in the Indies, where a great rich man being
very sick, and having had great traffic of affairs in his life, A true
serious story answering to Sir Edwards tale
sent for a Divine to direct his conscience at his last vpshot, who examining
his estate found him obnoxious to great restitutions, as of some hundredth
thousand crowns, perhaps, which he had gained unjustly, and bestowed in rents
and lyuings for his son and heir. Wherefore the learned man telling him that
either he must make restitution, or be damned, quia non dimittitur peccatum,
nisi restituatur ablatum, he answered him, that it was impossible: for that his
son and whole house would be utterly decayed thereby. Wheru^to the other
answered that the^ it was impossible for him to be saved, and that heerof he
did assure him upon his conscience and skill in Deuinity that there was no
other remedy to be taken, or help to be had in that case, for that no
absolution can save between the Priest, and his Penitent, where is included
the interest or hurt of a third. Whereat the sick Father being somewhat
astonished^ and terrified desired him to deal with his son: but his son
would not so much as hear any mention thereof, but rather was as ready to have
beaten out the said Divine, as Sir Edwards young Gentleman was to beat out the
Monk. Whereupon the Divine took this resolution to bring him before his
Father, and told him that upon his conscience and soul his Father was to go to
eternal flames of hell, if due restitutio^ were not made: but yet that he had
thought upon a certain mean, how some satisfaction might be made, whereby God
perhaps might be moved to pardon his Father so great extremity of punishment:
The Fathers prudent and pious resolution.
which was that his said son should hold his finger but one half quarter of
an hour in the fire, or over a Candle, thereby to deliver his Father from
eternal fire. But he answered, that he would not do it for ten times so much
land as his Father was to leave him. Whereupon the Divine inferred, saying: And
will you have your Father to lie body and soul in eternal fire for these
lands, and yet will not your self suffer half a quarter of an hours burning
of your finger, for ten times as much? Whereupon his Father resolved absolutely
to make restitutio^ though with no small abatement of his sons estate.

61. And now of this example I shall not need to make any application, for it
is clear enough of it self. I do not wish ^uill unto the temporal state of
Sir Edwards son and heir, whom I know not, but rather do hear him
commended: yet do I wish better unto the Fathers eternal state of his soul,
no less the^ to mine own. And so much of this matter by his own prouocatio^,
concerning the beating of the Monk by the son and heir for giving that
counsel to his Father, which the prophet Daniel did to one that was heavily
loade^ with sins, Daniel. 4.
peccata tua cleemosynis redime, and iniquitates tuas misericordijs pauperu^:
sorsitan ignoscet deli^tis tuis Deus, Redeem by alms thy sins, and by mercy
toward the poor thy iniquities: percha^ce God will pardon thereby thy
offenses. But this seems but a matter of jest to Sir Edward, and so we shall
leave to treat any further thereof, and pass to peruse the second part of his
present Preface, wherein he pretends by four cases, or questions propounded
by the student, and answered by himself, to confirm, and establish his
precedent assertion of the supereminent antiquity, and excellency of our
English Municipall laws above all others; but especially their antiquity;
which he does perform in as strange a manner, as ever commonly I have heard
man dispute.

ABOUT FOUR several questions said to be propounded by the Student in law,
and solued by the Judge for confirmation of the Antiquity, and Eminency of our
modern English Laws.. IIII.
SIR Edward having set down before the demand of his student about the
supereminent antiquity of the English Laws makes him to say thus: That some
of another profession are not persuaded, that the common laws of England are
of so great antiquity as there (in my Preface) superlatiuely is spoken. In
which words no doubt but he means the Catholic Divine, and then as glad to
see some doubt or co^tradiction made thereof for him to show his skill, and
readiness in answering, he writes thus: Preface to the 6. part of Reports.
I was right glad to hear of any exception (says he) to the end that such as
were not persuaded might either be rightly instructed, and the truth confirmed,
or that I might upon true grounds be converted. Do you see how confidently he
writes? And do you think, that he will be a true Conuertite in deed? If he
means sincerly, we have alleged him now many and sufficient grounds, which
either he must acknowledge, or take upon him to answer them. Let us hear how
he goes forward.

63. I desired (quoth he) to know some particulers, Ibidem. ^ower questions
proposed and solued.
as many as they would, at length their great desire was to see some proofs,
that the common law in these 4. cases, was before the Conquest, as now it is.
First, that the Queen, being wise to a King regnant was a person sole by the
common law to sue and be sued, to Secondly, that Thirdly, that a woman being
attaynted o^ petite treason (for killing her husband) should be Fourthly,
whether the ancient laws of England did permit any appeal to Rome in causes
spiritual or Ecclesiastical.

64. Thus far the questions framed by Sir Edward instead of his student, for
that he persuaded himself to have somewhat to say for their proof, though in
deed it be nothing, as presently you will see: for that no student of any
capacity would have proposed these particular cases to prove a general
assertion that the laws of England, were the most ancient of all other laws.
For though we suppose all these 4. points were true, and to be proved, as he
sets them down, that they were in use before the Conquest: yet do they not
infer, that the modern English laws are the same without change or
alteration that were of the Britans, Saxons, and Danes. For that diverse
particular cases may be common to different laws, as there were in the laws
of the Lacedimonia^s, Carthaginians, Athenians, Romans: and yet we may not for
that cause conclude, that they were the self same laws delivered from the one
people to the other, without alteration; which is here the badde inference of
Sir Edward. But now let us see whether these particulers can be proved, as
here they are promised, and first let us hear him vaunt yet once again.

65. I had no sooner (says he) seen these questions, but instantly I found
direct and demonstratiue answers to the same. Behold the fertility, and
felicity of his wit, that fyndeth instantly so direct, and demonstratiue
proofs: that is to say, such as are evident, clear, universal, and
irrefragable (for such only may be called demonstratiue according to the rules
of Logic: Arist. lib. ^ poster. c. 2.
) and yet shall you now presently perceive that no one of them is
demonstratiue: Answer to the first
For the first (says he) behold an ancient Charter made long before the
Conquest, which follows in these words. Our lord Jesus Christ reigning for
ever, I Ethelswith Queen of the Mercians by Gods grant, The charter of Q.
Ethelswith.
with consent of my Eldermen, will give by grant to Cuthwolfe my most
faithful seruitour a certain piece of land, being part of my peculiar power
(that is to say) a piece of land of 15. Manses, in a place which is called
Laking, for his obedience, and payable money in this manner: that is to say, a
thousand five hundred shillings of silver and gold, or fifteen hundred si^les,
that he may have, possess and enjoy at his pleasure, as long as he lives, and
after his end, and limit of his days, he may leave it to whom soever he will
for everlasting power, and perpetual inheritance. Anno 868.
And this my donation is couenanted in the year of our Lords Incarnation 868.
the first Indiction. And we do charge all secular powers in the name of God the
Father, the son and the holy ghost to observe the forsaid inuiolate. These
witnesses subscribing, and consenting thereunto, whose names here recited are
vnd^r^r^tte^. I Ethelred King of the Westsaxons have consented and subscribed.
I ^urghred K. of the Mercians have consented and subscribed. I Ethelswith
Queen have consented and subscribed etc.

66. Thus far this Charter, but now I would demand what Sir Edward means
to prove heerby? He pretends to prove that the common law was the same before
the Conquest, as it is now, about the priui^edge of Queens to be able to buy
and sell, give and take of themselves solely without license of their
husbands. But first if he could show this, or somewhat like to this out of
some particular fact of some particular English Queen before the Conquest: yet
what were this to prove either the antiquity of the common law before the
Danes, Saxons, and Romans, as here he promises? or that this particular fact
of Qu. Ethelswith was a law, or according to the common law in those days?
does one particular instance or action make a law, or prove a law with Sir
Edward? Might not Queen Ethelswith make that sale and gift which here she
does to her servant, out of her own dowry, portion, or inheritance, which she
brought with her from her Father, and brother Kings of the West Saxons? And if
she did, the case proves nothing. For so may not only married Queens, but all
other wives also give of their own.

67. And supposing she had received that land in gift from the King her
husband, and had had his leave, and consent also to alienate, sell, or give the
same, it had been no proof of a common law but a particular fact by license of
her husband, as every one will confess. Now then, that not only one but both
these conditions were in this fact of Queen Ethelswith (to wit, that she
disposed of her own, and this also with the special consent of her husband)
appears clearly by the very words of the Charter it self, where first it is
said: Donabo aliquam telluris partem meae propriae potestatis, I will give a
certain part of land, which is of my own proper power: that is to say of my
own right and possession. And secondly, both her brother King Ethelred of the
West Saxons (in whose dominions it may be that the said p^ece of land, Sir
Edwardes bad argumentatio^.
or part of it did lie,) and her husband King Burghred of the Mercians did
expressly consent, subscribe, and bear witness thereunto. And was this a good
example to prove that it was a law at that time, that every Queen might take,
and give solely without the King her husband? did Sir Edward when he was
Attorney make such good consequences, and frame such demonstratiue arguments in
his pleadings at the barre^ Surely among us here he would never have gotten
ha^fe his wealth, by such like disputing.

68. But to understand better this Charter, it is to be considered, that, as
all our ancient writers do testify, The true story of Q. Ethelswith.
this King Burghred of the Mercians being in great distress by the ^anes of
one side, and the northern Britans of the other, ^^at jointly invaded his
Kingdom, knowing not what to do for defending the same (which after also was
lost to the Danes) he made recourse to Athul^hus, called also otherwise
Adelnulphus K. of the West Saxons, who did not only help and assist him, but
gave him also this his daughter Ethelswith in marriage, with such wealth and
riches, as it seems that it eased both vectigalium pen^^u^^, ^ ^ostiu^
dep^^datione^, (to use Malmesb. his words) that is, Gul. Malmesb. l. 1. de
gestis regu^ Angl. c. 5.
both the paying of his pension or tribute to the Danes, as also the spoil of
his enemies. And again in another place he says of him: Burghredum regem
Merciorum and additamento exercitus contra Britones iuuit, and filiae nuptijs
^on par^m exaltauit. King Ethelwolfe of the West Saxons did both help King
Burghred of the Mercians against the Britans by increasing his army, as also
did not a little exalt him, Malmes. l. ^. c^p. 2.
with the marriage of his daughter Ethelswith. And the like has Huntington,
and Ethelwerd in their histories, whereby it is evident that Queen Ethelswith
came rich, See Ethelwerd lib. 3. chron. cap. 3. Huntingt. lib. 5. histor. prope
initium.
and powerable to her husband King Burghred, and was a great stay unto him in
his great distress, and therefore she might well presume to dispose of such
things as were her own ( propriae potestatis) especially her said husband, and
Brother King Ethelred then reigning after his Father, consenting and
subscribing to the same, as now you have seen. And so this first demonstratiue
answer of Sir Edward does demonstrate nothing else but that he answers nothing
at all to the purpose. Let us see the second ^hether it will be any better.
Answer to the second question.


69. The second question was, as you well remember, whether it was a law before
the Conquest, that a man seysed in ^ee simple shall forseyte both lands and
goods by attaynder of ^ellonie, or by out-lawry, and that ther^y his heirs
shall be disi^herited. Unto which question, says Sir Edward, I have here s^t
down anot^er Charter of Record, K. ^thelred.
made long before the Conque^t, ^or direct answer. And then he relates a
donation made by King Eth^ldred Father of K. Edward the Confesso^^, Anno 995.
upon the years 995. Which was but 71. years before the Conquest (though Sir
Edward said it was long:) and the donation was of a certain piece of land,
that was forfeyted to the King by one Ethelsig, that having committed theft,
and flying to the woods was outlawed thereupon: whereby the King came to have
his goods and lands and made donation thereof to another, to wit Vls^icke, And
this is all the proof, direct or indirect which Sir Edward alleges. But
here again I would ask him, how does this prove the principal question, of
the great antiquity of the modern English Common laws before the Danes,
Saxons, and Romans, seeing the case fell out so near before the Conquest.
Secondly ^ would demand of him, how he can prove that it is proper alone to
our English Common laws to punish theft, murder, out-lawry, and other such
crimes, by loss of lands and goods: for that I do see it practiced commonly in
all other countries besides, except only in the Kingdom of Naples: where by
peculiar grant and Concession of the Kings of Spain, since it came to their
dominion, the goods and lands of such delinquents are reserved to their
children, except only in crimes of high treason. But in other Kingdoms to my
knowledge there is no such reservation. And I have understood, that diverse
Great men have forfeyted their lands from their heirs, not only for being
outlawes themselves, upon murders and such other fellonies, but also ^or
favoring and ayding such men: whereof I could give diverse examples fresh yet in
memory, but that it is not expedient for us to meddle in matters of other
Common wealths: so as this is no proper law of England, as here it seems to
be presumed by Sir Edward, but common to all or most Nations: and therefore no
maruayle though it were in use also among the English before the Conquest.

70. His third case proposed is this, Answer to the third question.
that a wise being attaynted of petty treason, for killing her husband, should
be burnt, as now is used in England: and to prove that this is an ancient law
of the Brittans, and from them come down to our time without change or
alteration, he cites a place out of Caesar in his Commentaries lib. 6.
affirming, that i^ the wise be suspected o^ the death of her husband, and si
compertum est, igne etc. interficiunt: that is (says he) if she be sound
guilty of the death of her husband (which is petty treason) she is burnt to
death, as she is in that case at t^is day in England. So the Judge. For now he
speaks as a Judge, though not like a Judge, that is truly and sincerely, as
presently you will see. For first though the matter were so in Julius Caesar
his Co^mentari^s, as here is related: yet what does this make to the maine
question to prove, that the English municipall laws are the same now that
they were under the Brittans in Caesar's time without alteration? About burning
of women for petty treason in Cesars time.
Is one example of similitude sufficient to prove this? May not the different
laws of diverse countries agree in some one case or other, without this
inference, that therefore they are the same laws? Was not hanging for theft in
use also among the Brittans, Romans, and Grecians? and yet were not the laws
one and the self same. And supposing that the Brittans had had this punishment
of wives for killing their husbands in Cesars time, how will Sir ^dward prove,
that this endured always afterward, and was never changed by the Romans,
Saxons, Danes, or Normans? why had he not alleged some examples of the
continued use and practice of the same throughout the reigns of the subsequent
Kings, and Nations? Was his store house so barren, that he had but one only
example to bring forth, and that so far fecht as from Caesar by a leap to our
time? here Natura ^acit sal^um indeed: or rather my Lord leapeth from nature
and against nature, in making such a skippe ab extremo, ad extrem^^n, sine
medic, which nature never does, or can do.

71. But now I must show that nothing is here sincerely related, but all
corrupted and perverted. For first Caesar in the place of his Commentaries
here alleged, does not talk of Britans, but expressly of Frenchmen, when he
sets down their laws and customs concerning the power and use they have
in punishing their wives, beginning his narration thus: Galli se omnes (says
Caesar) ab Dite patre prognatos praedicant, Caesar lib. 6 comment. de bello
G^lli^o p. 157. edit. Manucianae.
all Frenchmen do affirm themselves to descend from Pluto the God of riches
etc. And then a little after adds further: Viri in vxores, sicuti in liberos,
vitae necisque habent potestatem: and cum paterfamilias illustriore loco natus
decessit, cius propinqui conueniunt, and de morte si res in suspicionem venit,
in seruilem modum quaestionem habent: and si compertum est, igne atque omnibus
tormentis excruciatas int^rficiunt. The custom of Frenchmen about authority
over their wives in Julius Caesar's time.
Men ( in France) have power of life and death upon their wives, as also upon
their children: and when the head of any honorable family dies, all his
kindred do gather themselves together to make inquiry of his death, if there be
any suspicion that he was made away, then they do use torments upon the wives,
as if they were slaves: and if it be found that they were guilty of the said
death, then after they have been tormented by fire and all other torments, they
put them to death.

72. In which narration first you see no mention of Britans, but only of
Frenchmen, as has been noted: the nobility whereof are divided by Caesar into
two sorts; the one Druides, that had care of their sacrifices, and matters of
Religion, the other Equites, Knights that made as it were the lay nobility, and
of whom he recounteth this that we have here related. You will ask then
perchance with what truth or syncerity Sir Edward can recite this as the Law of
the Britans which is related by Caesar as the Law of the Frenchmen? He has no
other shift for excuse of this, but to make this note in his margent: See in
the Preface to the third part of my Reports out of Caesar's Comment. Disciplina
Druidum in Britannia reperta, atque inde in Galliam translata esse existimatur.
It is t^ought that the discipline o^ the Druides was first found in Britanny,
and from thence translated into France. And is not this a good reason, that
whatsoever is recounted by Caesar of Frenchmen should be ascribed to Brittans,
^or that in times past the discipline of the Druides is thought by some to have
come from Britanny? What coherence has this together? May not all laws of
the Frenchmen be ascribed by this means unto the Brittans? Is not this a
strange direct and demonstratiue proof, to prove one thing by another? This
indeed is an argument a disparatis as Logitians do call it. But let us see more
tricks besides this.

73. Why had not he alleged the whole place out of Caesar as I have done? and
why does he cite the words so cuttedly, and si compertum est, igne etc.
interficiunt: and yet in the English leaves out ( etc.) saying And if she be
found guilty of the death of her husband (which is petty treason) the wife is
burnt to death, as she is in that case at this day. Why had not he set down (
etc.) also in the English, thereby to let his Reader understand, that there were
some words left out, to wit, atque omnibus tormentis excruciatas, interficiunt:
they do kill such wives as are found culpable after they have been tormented
with fire and all other torments. What needed the word ( etc.) for excluding so
few syllables but that yt stood not well with Sir Edwards purpose to have them
seen and read, for that they show plainly, that neither Brittans nor Frenchmen
had any such Law or custom to put such wives to death by burning, though they
used the same for a torment, before their death. Wilful fraud by embezeling of
words.
No more then it may be truly said, that Englishmen at this day have a law or
Custom, to put Priests or other men to death by the Rack, though diverse of
them have been racked, and aft^rward put to death. And this could not my Lord
but see in reading Caesar: whereby is evident that his Lordship also comes
into the Classes of them that avouch wilful and formal untruths against
their own conscience and knowledge, when they make for their purpose: and yet
is this far from the office and manner of proceeding of a Judge, that ought to
be exact and punctual in his truth.

74. But now further to his inference, suppose that he had related his Author
truly, and that Caesar had said as he says: That the ancient Brittans had this
law and custom to burn wives that should be ^ound guilty of their husbands
deaths, which Sir Edward says has continued to our time: why if it were so
(to answer conjecture with conjecture) should not the other part of the same
law have remained also, that husbands should have power of life and death over
their wives, as the Brittans according to Sir Edward had: or how, where, or
when can he prove, that, that part of the Law was abrog^ted, and the other of
burning them left to remain? or if he cannot, or that he will say that the
other part in like manner does in rigor remain, Why one part of the British
law descended to our times and not the other.
then would it go hard no dout with many wives at this day, that are scarce
patient of far less power and dominion in their husbands over them, then is
that of life and death: which Case, as it apperteineth not to me to discuss,
nor to Sir Edward, I think, to determine, so is it sufficient for our purpose
to have demonstrated, that his answer to this third question has neither been
Direct nor Demonstratiue, nor sincerly handled, nor grounded upon true
relation. Now then to the fourth and last.

75. If in all the former three questions, the Judges answer have been found to
have been defectuous, Answer to the 4. question.
much more in this then in all the rest. For whereas before you have heard them
say, that the Students desire was, to see some proofs, that the Common law in
these four particular Cases, was before the Conqu^st as now it is, and that
Sir Edward had no sooner seen them, but that instantly he found dire^t and
demonstratiue answer to the same: now coming to answer indeed, he alleges
an act of Parliament holden in the 10. year of King Henry the second, which
was Anno Do. 1164. Henricu^ secundus Anno Domini 1164.
wherein it was enacted, That i^ any Appeal came from any Archdeacon or Bishop
unto the Archbishop, and he should fail to do justice, it must lastly come to
the King, nor proceed any further without the assent of the King: Sir Edward
flies from the point in controversy.
which is a strange falling from the purpose, if you mark it well. For that
the question was, whether this Common law of England, that is now in use, was
in use also before the Conquest, and that as now it is used, which the judge
affirms, and for proof thereof alleges a Statute made an hundred years
after the Conquest. What will you say to this? Why had he not alleged some one
example or proof before the Conquest as the Case and question required? Or why
had he not gone about to satisfy some of those examples to the contrary,
alleged by me in the 6. Chapter of my former Answer to his Reports and fi^th
demonstration, Answer to Reports Chap. 6 demonst. 5. page 1, 3.
to wit, of Appeals to Rome of the two Archbishops of Canterbury, Lambert, and
Athelard, under the two Mercian Kings Offa and Kenulphus: as also the two
other famous Appeals of S. Wilfrid Archbishop of York against the two Kings
successively of the Northumbers, Egfrid and Alfrid? All which are recounted by
S. Bid and others long before the Conquest, which in my said Book are set
down, and Sir Edward could not but have read them, and are full to the purpose
to prove the lawfulnes of Appeals in our primitive Church of England: yet now
he says no one word of the^, but comes in with an impertinent instance, that
there was a prohibition of Appeals made under King Henry the second by Act of
Parliament in the tenth year of his Reign, whereas yet there was no
Parliament in use, nor Statute law was begone, until the 9. year of King
Henry the third, which was above 60. years after, as appears both by the
Collection of Justice Rastall, and other Law-bookes.

76. I do not deny but that King Henry the second entering into passion against
S. Thomas Archb. of Canterbury made a decree at a certain meeting of the
Nobility at Claringdon, Justice Rastall in his Abridgment of Statutes.

The Counsel of Claringdon. An. 1164.


rather moderating, as himself pretended, then taking away Appeals to Rome,
not denying that they ought to be made in respect of the Popes supreme
authority Ecclesiastical: but for restrayning of abuses in appealing thither
without just cause or necessity, especially in temporal affairs, he ordained
that matters should first orderly be handled in England, in the Bishops and
Archbishops Courts: and if that way they could not be ended, Houed. in vita
Hen. 2. fol. 287.
they should not be carried to Rome without the Kings assent: which declaration
of the kings intention is set down by Roger Houeden out of the Epistle of
Gilbert Bishop of London to Pope Alexander the third, written by the kings own
Commission: which not being admitted afterward by the said Pope, the king
recalled the same with an Oath under his own hand, whereof the said Houeden
writes thus: Houeden ibidem.
Iurauit etiam, quod neque Appellationes impediret, neque impediri permitteret,
quin libere fierent in Regno suo ad Romanu^ Pontificem in Ecclesiasticis
causis. He swore also that he would neither let Appellatio^s nor suffer them to
be let, but that they might be made in his kingdom to the Bishop of Rome in
causes Ecclesiastical etc.

77. All which things could not but be known to Sir Edward before he wrote
this his Preface: and that the Catholic Divine in his answer to the fifth
part of his Reports, had produced so many evident arguments and probations,
that King Henry the 2. K. Henry the second very Catholic in the point of the
Pope^ supremacy.
was most Catholic in this point in acknowledging the Popes supreme
Ecclesiastical authority (notwithstanding the contention he had with S.
Thomas, about the manner of proceeding therein for the execution) as none of his
Ancestors were more: which in like manner is evidently seen and confessed in
effect by Sir Edward himself, in that in his whole discourse of Reports, for
improuing the said Popes Supremacy he alleges not so much as one example or
insta^ce out of the reign of this King: which in reason he would not have
pretermitted, if he could have found any thing to the purpose therein.

78. But yet now finding himself in straytes how to answer the Students
demand about the a^tiquitie of prohibiting Appeals to the Sea of Rome, he was
forced to lay hands on this poor example, which was neither to his purpose, in
regard of the time, being after the conquest, as now you have heard; nor of the
thing it self, for that it was against him, as being only a moderation of
abuses, yea and that in temporal things as Bishop Gilbert of London expressly
a^oucheth, and recalled by the same King afterward^ and finally is wholly from
the purpose and chief question about the Popes supreme authority, whereof
this of Appeals is but one little member only. And thus we see both how well
and sub^tantially Sir Edward has mainteyned his assertion of the supereminent
antiquity and excellency of his Municipall laws, and how direct and
demonstratiue answers he has made to the four Questions or Cases devised by
himself, for confirmation of the ^ame.

79. And whereas he inserteth a note of Record of the decree of Claringdone, A
shift of euasio^ taken from Sir Edw.
that this recognition was made by the Bishops, Abbots, Priors etc. of a
certain part of the Customs and liberties of the Predecessors of the king,
to wit, o^ King Henry the first his Grandfather, and of other Kings, which
ought to be observed in the kingdom: whereby it seems the Knight would have us
imagine (though he utter it not) that the same prohibition of Appeals might
have been made and practiced by other former Kings living before the Conquest:
it is found to be but a mere Cavil, both by the Catholic Divine, that
showed out of authentical histories the contrary practice under all our
Catholic Kings, both before and after the Conquest; as here likewise it is
convinced by the words and confession of this King H^^ry the second himself,
that these pretended liberties of his Ancestors, were brought in by himself
only, and in his time, as is testified by Houeden in two several Charters,
Houede^ in He^. 2.302. and 303. Baron. Tom. 12. in An. 1172. non long ab
initio.
one of the Pope, and the other of the King: as also by an authentical Record
of the Vatican, set down by Baronius in his tweluth Tome. So as here the Judge
has nothing to lay hands on, but to give sentence against himself, both of the
Nimium, and Nihil dicit, as now you have seen. And so much for this matter.

HOW THAT THE foresaid Nimium dicit, as it imports falsum dicit, is
notoriously incurred by Sir Edward Cook, in sundry other assertions also
apperteyning to his own faculty of the law, which were pretermitted by the
Catholic Divine in his Answer to the 5. Part of Reports.. V.
FOR so much as the most part of this seventh Chapter has been of omissions,
and pretermissions as you have seen, and these partly o^ M. Morton, in
concealing such charges of untruths as had been laid both against him, as also
against his Client Sir Edward, and partly of Sir Ed. himself, in not answering
for himself when he ought to have done; I thought it not amiss in this place
to adioyne some other omissions in like manner on the behalf of the Catholic
Divine, who passed over in silence sundry notable escapes of his adversary M.
Attorney, which he committed in cyting law books, and lawyers authorities
against the Popes ancient jurisdiction in spiritual cases in England, and this
partly, for that he had not as then all the Books by him, which were quoted,
and partly upon a general presumption, that in this point M At^orney would be
exact, for that he had so solemnly protested the same in his book of Reports,
Reports part. 5. fol. 40.
as before has been touched, to wit, that he had cy^ed truly the ver^ words and
textes of the laws, resolutions, judgments, and Acts of Parliament all public
and in print, without any inference argument, or amplification quoting
particulerly the books, years, leaves, chapters, and other such like certain
references, as every man at his pleasure may see and read them.

81. This is his protestation: and who would not believe a man (especially such
a man, and in such a matter) at his word, or rather upon so many words so
earnestly pronounced, especially if he had heard his new and fresh confirmation
thereof which he sets ^orth in this other Preface to his sixth part, wherein he
says, Pref. to the 6 part of Reports f. 6.
that every man that writes ought to be so care^ull of setting down truths,
as if the credit of his whole work consisted upon the certainty of every
particular period: which if it be true, then must it needs infer a great
prejudice to the credit first of the said 6. Part of Sir Edwards Reports, for
so much as so many periods have been now found false in this very Preface. And
secondly it cannot but import the like discredit unto his said fifth part, for
which he framed his former protestation, for that upon better view of the
books, Statutes and laws by him cyted, it is found, that he does not only
misalledge many both words and texts, resolutions, and judgments, but
peruerteth many other by wrong inferences, arguments, detorsions, and
amplifications of his own, quite contrary to his former protestation, which
now briefly shall be declared more in particular.

82. First then not to iterate again the number of those many and manifold
falsehoods used by Sir Edward in the cyting of the Charter of King Kenulphus
before the Conquest, See before. 4. and 5.
for giving privilege of Sanctuary to the Church of Cul^am belonging to the
Abbey of Abindon, both by concealing the words that most imported, That all
was done by the consent, and authority of Pope Leo: as also the like insincere
dealing in Justice Thorps case concerning the question, The first two falsehoods.
whether it were treason in the ^aigne of K. Edward the first for one subject
to b^ing in a Bull of excommunication against another subject, whereof we have
treated in two several precedent Paragraphes of this Chapter, and convinced
that there was much false, and fraudulent dealing in them both: this, I say,
pretermitted, we shall note some more examples out of his other instances under
English kings since the Conquest.

83. First he alleges this instance under the Conqueror himself, not out of
any law of his, Reports fol. 10. b.
but out of a fact. K. William (says he) the first did of himself as K. o^
England make appropriation of Churches with Cure to Ecclesiastical persons:
whereof he infers, The third fraud about the Conquerors case.
that he had Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and cyteth for the proof of his
assertion 7. Ed. 3. tit. Quare impedit 19. which objection though it be fully
and substantially answered by the Divine, showing sundry and diverse ways, and
namely four, whereby a lay man may come to have the collation or appropriation
of bene^ices: yet the book by him cyted being since that time examined, it is
found that Sir Edward dealt very vnsincerly in alleging this case to his
purpose which makes wholly against him. For this is the case set down briefly
by Brook in his Abridgement, but much more larger, by the law-booke it self
of 7. Ed. 3. fol. 4.

84. In the 7. year of King Edward the third by reason of an action of Quare
impedit brought against the Deane, Chapter, 7. Ed. 3. fol. 4. Fi^zh. tit. Quare
impedit 19.
and two Prebends of the Church of S. Peter of York by the Abbot of Newenham,
for that they had refused to admit his Clerk presented by him to the Church of
T. whereunto he pretended to have right to present: the case was handled in the
Kings Bench, and the defendants pleading Plenarty for their defense, that is to
say, that the place was full and not void, for that there was an appropriation,
or union made of the said Church of T. with soke and sake, that is, with the
appurtenances unto the foresaid Church of S. Peter of York, and unto two
Prebends of the same, by a Charter of King William the Conqueror, and
afterward by another of K. Ed. 1. The chief Justice at that time named Herle
did four or five times at least, during the discussion of that case, Herle
chief Justice.
give his judgment, that by law the Conqueror, nor K. Edward could not make
any such appropriation. And of the like opinion were the rest of the Judges (or
at least contradicted not the same) to wit, Sir John Stoner, Sir Io^n
Cantabridge, Sir John Judge, Sir John Shardelow, and the rest, though two of
them spoke in the case, as may be seen, and gathered by reading the book it
self, and Stouffe and True that were of Counsel of the Plaintiff affirmed
flatly, that no such appropriation could be made by the Co^querour. All which
the Attorney craftily concealed in his narration of the case, to the end that
it might be deemed that the judgment of the Court had been in K. Edward the
thirds time (under whom this case was handled) that the Conqueror might
according to the co^mon-law, make an appropriation by his letters patent. And
is this good dealing even in the very first case which he proposes after the
Conquest?

85. After this he passes over all the Conquerours life, and six other kings
ensuing, as William Rufus, Henry the first, Henry the first founder of the
Abbey of Reading.
K. Stephen, Henry the second, Richard the first, and K. John, fynding no one
example among all those Kings actions, laws or orders, that might seem to
have any show of spiritual Jurisdiction, but only that in the life of K. H. 1.
he alleges a Charter of the said King, wherein he, as founder of the Abbey of
Reading, Anno 26. Him. 1. qui f^^t anno Domini 1125.
does appoint out certain orders and laws, about the temporalityes of that
Abbey, a thing very just and lawful for all founders to do by their own
right, and consequently makes nothing to the purpose of our question of
Ecclesiastical power; and moreover the Divine proves by diverse examples, that
sundry Popes were wont to give faculty to Princes, and other founders to
prescribe spiritual privileges for diverse pious works erected by them: In
the Answer to the 5. part of Reports c. 8. p. 18^.
which the Popes themselves would afterward confirm, and ratify: so as this
also was a fraud in M. Attorney to allege so impertinent an example; but it
shows his poverty and barennesse in examples of those years, which being
above 150. under 7. kings, as has been said, he could find but these two
poor examples (nothing proving the purpose) to bring forth in all this time,
whereas if he would look over the time since K. Henry the 8. took upon him
indeed Ecclesiastical authority by virtue of his temporal Crown, and the
other three Princes who in that have followed him, Straining and squeesing of
ancient Princes actions, for some show of supremacy Ecclesiastical.
whole volumes might be written of examples and presidents given therein of
practicing spiritual power: whereby it is evident: that those former Princes
from the Conquest downward, were not of the opinion and judgment of these
later Princes, and that Sir Edward does but squeese and strain them, to make
them say or signify somewhat, which they never meant indeed: and this iniquity
is not the least in the Attorneys proceeding in this matter, and yet does M.
Morton say of him, as you have heard, exhorting every man to resort unto Sir
Edwards storehouse for abundance of good proofs, saying, habet ille quod det,
and dat nemo largius, he has store to give, and no man gives more liberally.
Now then we shall peruse some of his store.

86. Under K. Edward 1. he alleges this instance for proof of his supposed
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, 4. E. 1. Reports fol. 13. a.
that when Pope Gregory the tenth had determined in a Council at Lions,
Bigamos omni priuilegio Cl^ricali esse nudatos, and correctioni fori saecularis
addictos, In 6. Decretal. l. 7. tit. de B^ga^is.
that all such as had been twice married are deprived of all privilege of
Clergy men, and are subject to the jurisdiction of the secular Court; There
arose a question in England in time of Parliament how this decree of the Pope
should be executed, and observed, some of the Prelates inclining, that it
should be understood only of such Bigamies, as should fall out after the
Counsel: and therefore demanded to have delivered into their hands, and freed
from the temporal jail, such as presently were in prison, and had been
bigamies before the Council. But the K. and his Counsel were rather bent to
have all bigamies excluded from that privilege, both present and to come, for
that the Popes Constitution now alleged seemed rather to sound that way: for
that it is general and without exception. Upon which determination produced,
the Attorney has this note, instead of an inference: Observe (says he) how
the King by advise of his Counsel (that is by authority of Parliament)
expounded how this Council of Lions should be understood, Reports p. 5. page
13.
and in what sense it should be received and allowed. And thereof would infer,
that the king and his Counsel held themselves to be above the Pope, for that
they took upon them to determine in what sense the Popes decree should be
understood. And yet M. Attorney protests as before you have heard, that he
makes no inferences, but only alleges the bare law books as they lie, but
yet here every man will see that it is untrue: for that here he makes an
inference, and that very false and impertinent. For he should rather have made
the quite contrary inference, to wit, that for so much as the King and his
Counsel did subject themselves to the acknowledgment and observation of the
Popes decree, and did accommodate the law of England thereunto (which before was
otherwise) they did thereby acknowledge that the Popes power in making laws for
Ecclesiastical matters, was Superior to that of the King: and can Sir Edward
or any man else deny this consequence? And this shall suffice for this case;
but only I may not let pass this one note by the way, Arraigned.
that whereas M. Attorneys words are, that certain Prelates when such persons as
have been attaynted for fellons, Attainted.
have prayed to have them delivered as Clerks, he forgot himself, for that
the words in the book are: quando de felonia rectati ^uer^nt, when they had
been arraigned of ^elony, and not when they had been attainted of felony: for
that Clerks before attainder were wont to be delivered to their Ordinaries:
Stanford l. 2. cap. 49.
but being once convicted, and attainted they cannot make their purgation
afterward, as appears by Stanford l 2. c. 49.

87. Under K. Edward 2. the Attorney writes thus: 18. E. 1.
Albeit by the ordinance of Circumspecte agatis made in the 21. year of K.
Edward 1. and by general allowance and usage, the Ecclesiastical Courts h^ld
plea of Tithes, obuentions, oblatio^s mortuaryes etc. yet did not the Clergy
think themselves assured nor quiet from prohi^itions purchased by subjects,
until that K. Ed. 2. by his letters patents under the great seal, The statut
of 9. E. 2. Articuli Cleri. c. 16.
and by consent of Parliament etc. had granted unto them to have jurisdiction
in those cases etc. So M. Attorney. And what does he infer heerof think you?
the question in hand teaches us, to wit, that K. Edward 2. is proved by this
to have had supreeme spiritual jurisdiction. An inference you will say, very
far fecht: but this is the manner of Sir Edwards disputing, and yet he says,
that he makes no inference, nor argumentatio^ at all: mark then his
guilfulnes.

88. He co^^esseth that before king Edward the 2. there was general allowance
and use of Ecclesiastical Courts in England for Ecclesiastical matters, 18.
E. 1.
as appears by the ordinance of Circumspecte agatis, under K. Edward 1. and
of magna Charta before him again under K. H. 3. and many other proofs: he
confesses also that this use and allowance was confirmed according to the
Custom of his Ancestors by the same K. Edward 2. by a new statute made in the
ninth year of his reign, called Articuli Cleri. But what of this? hence he
infers, that the king was supreme in spiritual authority, for that he
granted (^aith he) to them to have jurisdiction: and do you see the good
consequence? I will reason with him in the like. The parlame^t de prerogatiuis
Regis held in the 17. year of the same K. reign did number and explain and
confirm all the kings prerogatives which were allowable at the common law:
ergo, this statute did give unto the king his prerogatives, and that he had
them not before: which consequence I doubt not but M. Attorney himself will
deny to be good, and yet is it as good as the other: for K. Edward 2. in his
statute of Articuli Cleri, did but concur with his Ancestors in confirming
those privileges which had been used before, time out of mind, and in
subiecting his temporal laws to the laws of the Church in the cases there
specified: so far of was he from taking supreme jurisdiction upon himself,
as falsely and fondly M. Attorney would make his reader believe. But let us
pass from K. Edward 2. to his son K. Edward the third, out of whose reign
M. Attorney alleges more examples and instances, then almost out of all the
rest, whereof we shall touch some few, for all would be over long, and perhaps
we shall desce^d no lower then the time of his reign, reserving the more ^ull
discussion of these, and other examples, until the Catholic Divine or some
body for him shall prepare a second edition of his forsaid answer to Sir Ed.
Reports.

89. First then fol. 14. b. of this his fifth part of Reports; he recites out
of the reign of this K. Edward 3. (but quoting no particular place) that it is
often resolved, that all the Bishoprics within England were ^ounded by the
kings progenitors, and therefore the aduowson of them all belonged to the king
etc. And that when a Church with cure is void, if the particul^r Patron or
Bishop of that Diocese do not present another within the space of 6. months,
then may the Metropolitan confer the same: Fraudule^^ dealing.
and if he also do it not within six other months, then the common law gives
to the king, as to the supreme within his own kingdom, and not to the Bishop
of Rome, power to provide a competent pastor for that Church. This is Sir
Ewdards narration, full of deceit as now you shall see. For albeit the common
law does give to the king as to the supreme within his own Kingdom to present
by lapse, as has been said: yet not as supreme in spiritual authority, as he
would have his reader mistake and believe; but as supreme in the temporal
patronage, or as supreme temporal Patron of that Benefice to who^ in such
cases the aduowson of presenting belongs, as appears evidently by Cirendon,
and the Bishop of Lincolnes case in Plowdens Commentaries, fol. 498. Plowd.
Co^. fol. 498.
where it is said, that because all aduowsons and lands within the realm are
held either immediately or mediatly of the King, and the land where the Church
is situate before the Church was builded, was held of the king, so in respect
of the tenure of the king, the presentment by lapse accrueth unto him, as
supreme Patron, and not in respect of the supreme jurisdiction Ecclesiastical,
which the Statute of 25. H. 8. 25. H. 8.
did first of all ascribe unto his temporal Crown.

90. Under the same king 17. E. 3.23. he cites another law-booke thus: Reports
f. 14. b. 17. E. 3.23.
The king may not only exempt any Ecclesiastical person from the jurisdiction
of the Ordinary, but may grant unto him Episcopal jurisdiction, as thus it
appears there, the king had done in ancient time to the Archdeacon of
Richmond. So he. But if you read the book it self here cited of 17. E. 3 23.
you shall find that no such assertion can be founded there. For thus the case
stands in that book: Stouff a Sergeant at law said, that the Archdeacon of
Richmond had the office of the Ordinary, The Archdeacon of Richmond.
and I think, quoth he, by l^aue of the king. This is all the case there
related: where you see that Sergeant S^ou^^ affirms not that he knew it to be
so, Sergeant Stouf.
but did think so, that the said A^chdeacon of Ric^mond had the office of the
Ordinary by leave of the king, and much less did he avouch as Sir Edward does
for him, that the king gave or granted unto him that ^piscopall jurisdiction,
which is not warranted, but rather overthrown by that book, as you see, for
that the Archdeacon might have his Episcopal Authority, if he had any, by
gr^unt from the Pope, and license only of the king: and so this a^^^uera^ion
^tanding but upon a collection of M. Attorney, falls to the ground.

91. It ^olloweth in M. Attorney his Reports under the same K. Ed. 3. All
religious, 20. E. 3. Exco^m. 9. etc.
or Ecclesiastical houses (says he) whereof the king was founder, are by the
king exempt fr^ ordinary Jurisdiction, and only visitable, and corrigible by
the K. Ecclesiastic^ll commission: and for this he cites t^ese books 20. E. 3.
Exco^. 9.16. E. 3. tit^ Br^. 660.21. E. 3.60.6. H. 7.14. Fitz. Not. Breu^ But
in none of these books shall you find these words, that they are only
visitable or corrigible by the K. Ecclesiastical commission. This is Sir
Edwards own invention. The books quoted do speak of hospitals, and free
Chapels of the Kings foundation, which are not visited by the Ordinary, for
that they are things temporal, and without cure of souls, and therefore not
spiritual or Ecclesiastical, ^itzh. Not. Br. f. 42. A.
nor to be visited in those days according to the common law, by the Bishop,
but by the kings Chancellor, as a temporal officer, as testifyeth Fitzherb.
in his Not. Br. ^ol. 42. A. though afterward in K. H. 5. time for remedying of
disco^ders it was decreed in the 2. year of his reign, 2. H. 5. c. 1. Rastals
Abridgment ti^. Hospitals.
that the visitation, and correction of such Hospitals and free Chaphels of the
Kings foundation, or of his subjects, should be done by the Ordinaries,
according to the Ecclesiasticll laws 2. H. 5. cap. 1. in Rastals Abridgment
tit. Hospitals. So as here, the principal words of controversy, to wi^, by
the kings Ecclesiastical ^ommission, are feigned, and put in by M. Attorney;
and this is his ordinary art, to seem to have somewhat in favor of his
purpose, when it is nothing at all, but against him.

92. It follows in Sir Edw. instances ^ol. 15. The king shall present in his
free Chapels (in default of the Deane) by lapse in ^^spect of his supreme
Ecclesiasti^all jurisdiction, 27. E. 3. fol. 84.
citing for i^, 27. Ed. 3. fol. 84. But here again I find a ^oule fitten, for
his book has not these words, in respect of the kings supreme Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction (which is here made the principal verb of this part of speech,
and often thrust in by M. Attorney of his own invention,) but the meaning of
his book is, as he cannot but know, that the king in such cases shall present,
not in respect of supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, but as supreme Patron
temporal; for that aduowsons, or patronage of such benefices are mere
temporal inheritances, according to our co^mon-lawes, as often has been
declared, and therefore the King being founder, may by lapse present.

93. An other like fitten or rather more foul is committed by him in the same
place, alleging out of 22. Edward. 3. lib. Assis. pl. 75. that tithes arising
in places out of any parish, 22. E. 3. lib. Ass^ pl. 75.
the king shall have them: ^or that he having the supreme Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, he is bound to provide a sufficient Pastor that shall have the
cure of souls of that place, Notable abuses about the case of Tithes.
which is not within any parish. And by the common laws of Engl^nd (says he)
it is evident, that no man, unless he be Ecclesiastical, or have
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction can have inheritance of tithes. Thus much M.
Attorney to prove that K. Ed. 3. had supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and
not the Pope in his days. But here be so many scapes, frauds and errors, as
is a shame to see. For first in his book quoted there is not found those words
(that principally import the controversy) that he, as having supreme
Ecclesasticall iurisdiction^ is bound to provide a sufficient Pastor, but all
this is thrust in by M. Attorney to make up his market. Secondly much less is
this yielded for a reason, by his book, why the king should have such tithes,
as lay out of all parishes: but another reason more substantial is to be
alleged (of being temporal Lord of the Lands) which presently we shall touch.

94. Thirdly it is not true, that the king, as having supreme Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction is bound to provide a sufficient Pastor to have cure of souls,
of that place which is not within any parish, both for that it may appertain
to a particular subject to dispose of those tithes, Pour vn^ruthes uttered in
one case.
if he be temporal Lord of the place, without having supreme Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and the emolument may be so small, or the place it self so vast
and remote, as either there be few souls to have cure of, or the maintenance
not sufficient for a Pastor. Fourthly it is false, that by the common-laws of
England no man unless he be Ecclesiastical, or have Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, can have the disposing of tithes, for that every man before the
division of particular parishes was made, though he was bound by divine and
Canonicall-law to pay his tithes of his lands: yet might he according to the
co^mon-lawes of England have assigned them to what Parish he would. Now let us
see the case it self, as it is proposed in 22. Ed. 3. lib. As^. pl. 75.

22. E. 3. l. Ass. pl. 75.
95. The king granted certain tithes unto the Provost of C. out of certain
lands newly asserted in the forest of Rockinga^; and the said Provost thereupon
brought a writ of Scire facias out of the Chancery against some that took away
the said tithes etc. and then (after some altercation to what Court the said
suit belonged) the plainti^e, The state of the question.
that is the Provost, prayed execution, but Thorp the chief Justice said;
Thorp chief Justice.
that it was wont to be law, when there is a certain place that is not of any
parish, as in Engelstwood and such like, that the king should have the tithes
(and not the Bishop o^ the place) to grant them to whom he should think good,
as he has granted them unto you: notwithstanding (says he) the Archbishop of
Canterbury having sued unto the kings Counsel to have those tithes, for that
the matter is not yet tried: until it by tried you shall not have execution. So
he. And this is all the Case: wherein you see that albeit Justice Thorp said,
that it was wont to be law, that the king should dispose of the tithes of such
places, as were newly assert^d, and cultiuated that were of his inheritance:
yet does he not so resolutly affirm it, that he would give sentence of
execution against the defendants, albeit they had made default after they had
pleaded to the issue, as there is manifest, but would have the Archbishop of
Ca^terburies suit to the contrary to be heard also. And indeed he could not but
know, but that in the book of 7. Ed. 3. fol. 5. (which was 16. years before
this case was treated) the opinon of Herle chief Justice was, 7. E. 3. f. 5.
that the Bishop should have such tithes: and much less does Justice Thorp
assign the cause of right of those tithes unto the king, for that he has
supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as our Judge does now: but for that
commonly such new wast asserted lands, appertained unto the king, albeit as
now has been said, they might have appertayned also to a particular subject,
if he had been Lord of the place, as is most perspicuously declared, and set
forth in an ancient Treatise entitled: O^ the power of the Parliament, annexed
to the Old Doctor and Student, or book so entitled: where it is said as
follows.

96. If wast ground ( says the Book) whereof was never any profit taken, The
Book of Doct. and stude^t f. 25. printed by the dutch print in the time of K.
Henry the 8.
and that lay in no parish, but in some forest, or that which is newly won
from the sea, were brought into arable land, if the freehold thereof were to the
king, he might assign the tithes to whom he would: and if the freehold were to
a common person, he might do the like. For though tithes be spiritual: yet the
assignement of tithes to other, is a temporal act. For before parishes were
divided, and before it was ordained by the laws of the Church that every man
should pay tithes to his own Church, every man might have paid his tithes to
what Church he would, and might one year have given his tithes to one Church,
and another year to another, or have granted them to one Church for ever if
he would. And like as every man before the seuering of the parishes might have
given the tithes to what Church he would, because he was bound to no Church in
certain: so may they do now that have lands that lie in no parish: for they
be at liberty to assign the^ to what Church they will as all men were before
the said law was made, that tithes should be paid to their proper Churches.

97. So far this Law-booke: which does not ascribe anything to the kings
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as here you see, as neither does Justice Brook,
who in his Abridgement abridgeth the foresaid ca^e of 22. E. 3. lib. assis.
under the title of the Kings Prerogatives, signifying thereby, that the said
tithes are due to the king (if they be due) in regard of his prerogative
Royal, and not of his spiritual supreme power and jurisdiction, See Book 22.
Ed. 3. tit. Prerogative pl. 47. Brook 22. E. 3. tit. Preroga^iue pl. 47.


98. And as for the law mentioned in the foresaid Treatise, whereby men were
appointed to pay their Tithes to their peculiar parishes, whereas before they
were free to pay them where they would; it is meat of a Canon of the great
General Council of Lat^ran held at Rome under Pope Innocentius 3. Council.
Lateran. can. 53. and 56.
in the days of K. John of England upon the year 1216 which was above a
hundred year before this other case fell out in 22. E. 3. in which Council it
was ordained, That eu^ry man should pay his Tithes to his proper Church and
parish. To which Ordination of the Pope and Council the kingdom of England
submitted it self, and the temporal laws thereof: The law of paying tithes to
particular parishes.
and so the matter endured until the breach of K. H. 8. So as in all this time
the Popes supreme Authority, and spiritual jurisdiction was acknowledged and
obeyed, about this matter of Tithes in England, as is evident also ^y these
books ensuing, to wit, 7. E. 3. fol. 5.44. Ed. 3. f. 5.10. H. 7. fol. 16. but
yet for that the said Canon of Lateran did not comprehend expressly all such
lands as were then wast and should after be asserted, 7. E. 3. f. 5.44. E. 3.
f. 5.10. H. 7. fol. 1^.
K. Edward 3^ in the case proposed might according to the former ancient law
that was used before the said Canon, give and appoint the tithes of these newly
asserted lands of Rockingham, to whom he would, as he did, though not under the
title of his supreme spiritual jurisdiction, as the Attorney very falsely does
pretend, but as temporal patron of that land, for the causes before specified.
And so much of this Case.

99. Another he cyted out of 38. E. 3. lib. Ass. pl. 22. in these words: 38.
E. 3. lib. Ass. pl. 22. Repo^ts. fol. 16. b.
The king d^d by his Charter translate Cha^ons secular^ into Regular and
religious persons: which he did by his Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: and could
not do it, unless he had had jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. So he: And here is
false dealing again, for all that is said in that book, is this, that it was
pleaded for the king, that by his Charter he did grant that the Prior and
Coue^t of Plymouth might transfer Secular into Regular Chano^s, which was but
a grant or license, as you see. Nor did the king translate Chanons Secular into
Regular, which belonged unto the Pope, but granted only and gave license, that
they might be so transferred; nor has the law-booke any one word of the kings
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, but all this is feigned by M. Attorney himself.

100. Again he cyteth out of 49. Ed. 3. lib. Ass. pl. 8. where, 49. E. 3. lib.
A^s. pl. ^. Reports f. 17.
the Abbot of Westminster, says he, had a Prior and Covent, who were Regular
and mort in law: yet the king by his Charter did divide that corporation, and
made the Prior and Covent a distinct and capable body to sue, and to be sued by
themselves: whereof M. Attorney would infer the kings supreme spiritual
authority, and jurisdiction. But his book favors him not at all heerin, for
albeit Candish said that the possessions of the Abbot and Prior of Westminster
were severed the one from the other, Candish.
and that this began with the Charter of the king, yet is it plain by the law
11. H. 4. fol. 10. 11. H. 4. fol. 10.
that the Abbot and Prior of Westminster had their possessions in seueralty
from time to time out of mind etc. Nor is there any thing spoken there of the
kings grant at all: and if there were, yet must it be understood according to
that which is declared by the Catholic Divine of the concession and
confirmation of privileges granted by Pope Leo the 9. and Nicolas the 2. to K.
Edward the Confessor concerning the said Monastery of Westminster, Answer to
Reports c. 6. p. 30. et 31.
to wit, that they gave him authority to grant privileges, which they
themselves did ratify after they were granted, and so in this case, the
separation and seueraltie of the said Abbot and Prior of Westminster having
been time out of mind, must necessarily be presumed to have proceeded
originally from the Pope, as the book 11. H. 4. says, 11. H. 4.
and that the Grant of the K. was but his allowance and good leave to the same.

101. I might produce here many other particulers both under this K. Edward
the 3. and much more if I would desce^d any lower to the reigns of other
ensuing kings, but I think best to stay my self here, leaving the rest to
some other more fit opportunity which before I have insinuated^ and this which
already has been spoken may be sufficient to declare and make manifest that
Sir Edward is neither so exact and punctual in his truth, as he would seem
when he says; That the credit of every writers whole work must depend of the
verity of every period thereof: nor yet so sincere in the simplicity of his
allegations, as that he uses not either inference, argument, or exaggeration,
as of him self you have heard him protest before; for so much as now more or
less you have seen and beheld both these two as^euerations of his contradicted
by himself in deeds: the first by many untruths uttered in his behalf; the
second by a perpetual course of crafty dealing to infer and enforce such
things to his Readers apprehension as his Authors never meant, nor the books by
him cyted do affoard or bear, whereof I do understand that he is like to hear
more ere it be long, from a Catholic lawyer that means to join with the
Catholic Divine in defense of their common and Catholic says about these
points: and to deal with Sir Edward in proprijs, A Catholic lawyer like to
join with the Cath. Divine against Sir Edward.
upon his own grounds, as I doubt not, but that he may with great advantage,
in respect of the notorious difference of their cause; the one having with him
the authority and prescription of almost a thousand years in our Country,
wherein all Lawyers, Judges, and Learned men of that profession were truly
Catholic and of one faith judgment, and Religion: and the other has not yet
full the prescription of one age to stand with him in his novelties: and
consequently no marvel though he mean to stand to his own wit only.

OF ANOTHER Preface ins^antly come unto my hands, prefixed before the L. Cooks
seventh Part of Reports, containing new injuries offered to Catholics by
him.. VI.
BEING come to this place of my answer I received a new half sheet of paper
printed in latin without the English, containing another Preface of the Justice
before his 7. Part of Reports: and albeit I expect the rest of the book both
in English and Latin, yet perusing over this in the mean space which already
is come, I perceive Sir Edward Cook^ to persist still in his old animosity of
pursuing Catholics upon every occasion offered or sought for by him; so as
nothing can come from him, either in speech or writing, but some part must
concern the^ and their imputation. See before. 4. and ^^
And as for his speeches (especially his Charges given upon the Bench) I have
said somewhat before: and how bitter, false and injurious they are, alleging
in particular some passages of his Charge given at the Assizes of Norwich upon
the 4. of August 1606. published in print by R. P. and dedicated to the Right
honorable Earl of Excester: which two leters of R. P. I knew not at that time
whom they meant, until now in this Latin Preface Sir Edward calls him
inuidum and maledicum Pricket, R Prick. accused by Sir Edw.
an envious and slanderous Pricket, for that belike he had pricked somewhat his
Lordshipps patience by the edition of his said Charge without his license: he
adding moreover, That the said Pricket had not set down any one least sentence
of his speech truly and sincerely in that sense and signification wherein
himself had uttered the same, which no doubt was a great fault in Pricket, if
it were true.

103. But on the other side is first the protestation of Pricket himself,
Pricket in the Epist. dedicatory to the Charge.
who says to the foresaid Earl, showing both his sincerity and affection
toward the Justice. If therefore in this following work (says he) my memory
has given a true instruction to my pen, I hope my labors shall be accounted
profitable, when it administreth a public benefyt. And again: I humbly crave
your Honor will vouchsafe to patronize this little book by me collected, not
out of mine own, but from the words of that Reverend, and learned Judge the L.
Cook; who at his coming unto Norwich, did upon the Bench deliver a Charge so
excellent, as that it worthily deserves to be continued in perpetual memory.
These are Prickets words, which seem to free him much from the passion of envy
and malediction objected by Sir Edward, whom he pretends greatly to honor by
this edition of his speech. And that no affection toward Catholics did biaz
him in this relation, may appear by his other words that presently did ensue
after the former, saying: I hope that this speech being produced to a public
view, shall remain unto our public weal a worthy president, wherein Romes
Champions may with shame discern their long continued shameful practices;
Puritans and Schismatiks learn to know with what injustice they disturb the
happiness of our most happy Peer. So Pricket, who shows himself as you see a
perfect Protestant in profession, and thereby it is made very probable that the
envy objected unto him by Sir Edward did not arise upon any di^parity or
partiality of religion (notwithstanding it may be that the difference of their
two particular states in purse and wealth considered, Pricket being a poor
soldier, might envy somewhat the rich lawiers great wealth and abundant
flowing fortunes.) For thus he begins his Epistle to the said Earl,
lamenting his own penury.

104. May it please your Honor, the observation, which this world begets, may
teach experience truly to report, that love and charity are for the most part
grown so cold, Pore Pricket a cold in the heat of his gospelling sunshine.
even in the hoatest sunshine of our profession, as that despised poverty,
though addicted to the religious exercise of endeauours commendable, is in the
best employment (which seems with greatest favor to smile upon our hope) so
coldly recompensed, as that poor, vnpittied, dejected, and miserable poverty
knows neither means nor place, how or where to warm herself. Unhappy I in
this best time of greatest happiness, who being, as I am, a poor despised,
hated, scorned, and unrespected soldier, so unfortunate, as no commended
means (though many used with confirmation both of love and loyalty) can be of
power to raise a spirit drowned in the worst of misery from despayres gulf
etc. Whereby it may appear that Prickets chief endeavor was rather indirectly
by laying forth his own temporal needs to draw somewhat from Sir Edwards
purse, and by writing the story of his glorious speech at Norwich, to gain
unto himself his good will and affection for his relief, then any way to show
malignity against him: whereof I find no cause or probability, but rather his
pricking stomach against us, whom Sir Edward also impugned, and consequently,
if any thing be found in his narration, that at this present displeased Sir
Edward, it must be thought to proceed either from the error of the others
memory that directed not well his pen, or from some change of mind in Sir
Edward himself who now perhaps reprehendeth that which before he misliked not,
but was well content to have it published. And to this later conjecture I am
the rather induced to incline for that there are now two years past and more,
since Pricket set forth in print this speech, and I never heard that Sir Edward
did mislike it, until at this present I see it so greiuously reprehended by
him in this last Preface: for in the former that was prefixed before his sixth
part of Reports (which seems to have come forth after Prickets relation) no
complaynt or mention is made thereof.

105. But you will ask me (perhaps) why so great a charge should be found in
Sir Edward, Why Sir Edw. misliketh now Prickets narration.
that he should so sharply and vehemently inueigh against that which before he
liked, or at leastwise tolerated for so long time; whereunto truly I know not
what other thing to answer, but that it may be, that the exceptions I took in
my answer to M. Morton against diverse things in that narration, as notorious
untruths might displease or stinge somewhat Sir Edward, who having no list to
answer the matters themselves, thought best to fall aboard the relator, and to
lay the fault on him, saying, that he has not related matters aright: wherein
as I mean not to excuse him, so on the other side it seems very hard unto
me, that the substance of those points, wherein I touched Sir Edwards untrue
dealing, and many other, wherein I might have said much more, should be feigned,
or devised by Pricket, or related by him more maliciously against us, then they
were meant or uttered by the Justice himself, which is evident, partly by that
which I have heard to be continued still by him both there, and in other
places, where since that time he has given Charges to the Jury: wherein the
greatest part and most bitter of his speech is always commonly against the
Catholics, as though they were the greatest malefactors of the realm, to be
inquired of. And in this very Charge and speech related by Pricket, his
malicious in^ectiue against them conteyneth above a dozen leaves printed, the
whole thing it self scarce being as much again.

106. And if you will behold the impertinency and vanity thereof, considering
the auditory of Norwich his Country, where he would needs triumph gloriously
in that first Charge (if I be not deceived) after he was Judge, you shall find
it not only like to be Sir Edwards, Sir Edw. parable about a young Roman Judge
applied to himself.
but worthy also of his vein in that vanity: for that having first by a
several Exordium set down a tale of a Noble young Roman that was by the Senate
made a Judge in his tender years, and for diverse reasons and considerations of
the dignity thereof made some delay, and difficulty in admitting the same, he
did notwithstanding upon some friends persuasion yeald at length to accept
thereof: all which Parable the Justice applying to himself, begins his
Charge with such plausible Oratoricall wisdoms eloquence (to use the words of
his Relatour M. Pricket) as first he expounded unto them upon his fingers the
Grammatical verse: Quis, quibus, quid, quomodo, and, de quibus, that is: who
sent this Commission? to wit, his Majesty. To whom? to Sir Edward, and others
under him. What did it co^teyne? Great and high authority. How must it be
executed? By doing justice. Of whom and what causes must inquiry be made?
Principally, and in the first place against Catholics that do profess the
Roman religion and obedience of the Pope.

107. And is not this a goodly deduction? Was there ever any English Judge
before the Apostasy of Martyn Luther, that gave a Charge from the bench against
such men, for being such? If all the Judges and lawiers of our Nation that ever
gave Charges to inquire of malefactors for nine hundred years together, and
more in our Island after Christian religion received, did give such a Charge,
and for such a crime then has Sir Edward somewhat to excuse his insolency
heerin. But if there be none, as most certainly there is not: how then does he
perform his promise made here in this new Latin Preface of avoiding five
things in setting down his Reports? Pr^fat. ad part. 7. Re^lat.
Whereof the fourth he terms Nouitatem, Nouelty, which he defyneth to be then,
when, Sir Edw. protests against Nouelity when he practizeth the same.
si ad amussim nostrorum librorum, and antiquorum exempla applicentur,
nequaquam quadrant. If the things which he speaks being applied to the exact
rule of their law-bookes, and examples of their ancients, do not agree
thereunto: Which he holds for a thing most unworthy of their profession,
indignissimam studiis nostris. Wherefore either he must bring forth such
ancient books, laws, and examples for himself and his cause (that precedent
Judges have given such Charges) or else he conuinceth himself to be most
unworthy of that place and dignity of law which he holds.

108. But to return to the Charge given at Norwich: Charge p. 10.
after he had expounded the verse of Quis, Quibus etc. according to his manner
of ostentation, he begins his narratio^ thus: Page 18.
Our worlds admired Queen renowned Elizabeth, did, as you do know, in the
beginning of her Reign, change the State of religion in this kingdom, in her
first Parliament, by the consent of her Lords Spiritual and Temporal etc.
and then he goes forward to show the continual reclayme, and resistance made
by Catholic men from time to time for their religion: whereby thinking to
disgrace them as rebellious, for their reluctation, does in deed give them the
highest commendation that can be given to Christian men, which is to stand
firm and constant to the worlds end in their Religion once received, and
continued to their time. And for himsel^e does insinuate thereby, that for the
gayning of advancement, and pleasing a worlds admired Queen, or any other
worldly Prince, it were no hard matter to make him admit any change of Religion
whatsoever, for so much as he allows so easily of this, which this
VVoman-Queene made with admiration and wonder o^ the world: and yet does he
utter a notorious untruth in that he says, she did it by the consent o^ her
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, for that all her Lords Spiritual (which make
the chie^e part of the Parliament) resisted the matter, as appears by their
deprivations, depositions, restraints or imprisonments that thereon ensued. So
as this is as true, as that other which follows in the very next page, and
has been handled by me in other places, to wit, that as well these that were
restrained or imprisoned, as generally all the Papists of this Kingdom, did
come to the Protestants Church, nor any of them did resuse during the first ten
years of the said Queens government, which I have co^uinced Supra. 4.
before by hundreds of witnesses, to be most shamefully false, as also the
other devised fable, that Pius Quimus did offer to approve the Communion Book
of English service by his own letters to Q. Elizabeth, if she would do him the
honor as to accept it from him.

Indecent ^coffing for a Judge.
109. I do pretermit willingly as unworthy of my pen, those scoffs and
contemptible derisions, which it has pleased his L. to use against that holy
man, and high priest of our souls Pope Pius Quintus, Charge p. 19.
calling him Pope Impius V. his hellishnesse, his horriblenesse, and the like:
which seems much to s^uour of the spirit of those that in Judge Pilates house
did scoff at our Savior, Mat 27.
bowing their knees, and crying: Marc. 15.
Aue Rex Iudaeorum: but yet there the master Judge did not descend to such
scurrility. But surely I am sorry to see a Lord Judge use the same in public
auditory, which were fitter for one of his Kitchen amongst his Companions: and
when such things as these are related unto strangers, they seem incredible to
men of e^timation and honor.

110. But Sir Edward passing on in this manner throughout his whole speech,
brings in all the accidents fallen out from the beginning of that Reign unto
the end of the Irish wars, Doctor Sanders his being there, Steukley his going
to Rome, and afterward to Portugal: the Duke of Guise his actions, and of
Me^doza, called by him Jesuit, though he were a Noble man, and Ambassador of
the K. of Spain in England, Campian, Persons, Heywood, Shirwyn, and other
Priests coming into England upon the year 1580. and many other such like
things little appertayning to them of Norwich, but that my L. would needs
speak like a great Counselor that day, and be Propheta in Patria, and fill
men's ears with tales, and terrors: and yet in the end after all said, and
much thereof known to be false to the greatest part of discret men in his
auditory, he comes at length to be somewhat more mild and placable, saying:
page 36.
by this then our English Papists, either Jesuits or Seminaries may learn to
know that it is not Religion that they strive for; but only to mayntaine the
Antichristian head of Romes usurped Supremacy. Sir Edw. strange exhortation.
And if there be in this presence any Roman Catholics, or so many o^ them as
shall hear of that which now has been spoken, I entreat the^, as my dear
and loving Countrymen, that they will not any longer be seduced by any lying
spirit sent from Rome, seeing that the Pope (whom they believe) has himself
allowed (as before we have showed) that in our Church we have a doctrine of
faith and religion, su^ficiently necessary to salvation. Dear Countrymen we
have then enough and need not the help of any Pope, sithence all the Papists
generally came unto our Churches before our late Q. Elizabeth was
excommunicated etc. Thus he.

111. And do you see this Conclusion, all grounded upon suppositions, that are
manifestly false, or The Article of supremacy in Spiritual matters, of how
great importance.
which is a great absurdity to imagine. For does not the Catholic Divine in
the Preface of his Answer unto him (and we before have also repeated the same)
show and demonstrate that this point of supreme spiritual authority, is so
principal an article of Religion, as all other controversies may be determined
thereby? How then does the Justice trifle so in this matter? Is he not ashamed
to say in the face and ears of such an Auditory, that Catholi^kes strive not
for religion, when they strive for their supreme Pastors spiritual Authority?
It is as good an argument, as if a man should say, that Sir Edward when he was
a Counselor pleaded not for money, but for gold: as if gold were no money.

Pius Quintus to have allowed the Protestant Communion Book, for that Sir
Edward says, and swears it upon his credit, saying: and this upon my credit,
and as I am an honest man is most true: which I have else where showed to be
most untrue, and that no Catholic that all Catholics generally did come to
the Protestants Church for the first ten years of Q. Elizabeth's reign, which
they do not only think, but know to be most false.

113. Fourthly he supposes it to be a good consequence, their salvation: and
need not the help of any Popes authority, for absolution of their sins, or
other spiritual power: For such is his inference, when he s^ith: Dear
Countrymen, we have then enough, and need not any help of any Pope, sithence
all the Papists generally came to our ^hurches, before the late Queen was
excommunicated: which inference and consequence is both false and absurd. For
albeit some Catholics came to the Church for fear or otherwise; yet thereby
have not Sir Edward and his partners enough for their salvation, for that the
other came to their Churches; for they might come with a repugnant mind,
condemning and detesting inwardly their Religion, no less, or perhaps more,
then they that were Recusants, and openly refused to come, as no doubt, but at
this day also many do, who are forced to Church against their consciences.

114. And it is to be noted that Sir Edward says: We have a doctrine of ^aith
and Religion s^fficiently necessary to salvation: So as he ascribes no
perfection to his Religion, nor any abundant sanctity, latitude, or degrees
of holiness, one above the other; but if it be sufficiently necessary, it is
enough for him. And yet does our Savior say: Joan. 14.^. Mat. 5. and 19.
that there be many mansions in the house o^ my Father; and exhorts men to
perfection, Perfecti estote, which imports somewhat more, then sufficiently
necessary. But if seems that Sir Edward would be content with a little, and
go no further then necessarily he must. God grant he go so far, and keep him
in charity, Charge p. 40.
in which here he seems in part to be by his offer of union and agreement,
though in the very next leaf he falls into extremities again, saying: That
the most sacred person of Gods anointed, king James, whom Pope Clement the
ninth could proudly dare to term the Scottish Her^ticke, shall underneath his
Princely foot, tread down Romes faithless, Papal, proud, and Antichristian
heresy etc.

115. Do you see where the man is again? Even now you have heard him ascribe
so much to Pope Pius Quintus, as for that he was presumed (though falsely) to
offer the allowance of the English Communion book to Q. Elizabeth, Sir Edw.
intemperate railing
if she would take it of him, that therefore they had a doctrine of faith and
religion sufficiently necessary to salvation, for that the Pope had allowed it:
and yet now he turns to his old railing, calling the Roman faith, Romes
faithless, Papal, proud, Antichristian heresy: And thereby makes all
Christian kings that acknowledge the Popes spiritual authority to be faithless
and Antichristian heretics. How will this sound in the ears of all foreign
Monarchs, and greatest Potentates that are touched thereby? Is this intemperate
speech befitting a Judges person? yea a Chief Judge? But there is nothing more
intolerable in this speech, then the base and odious flattering of his Majesty,
which vice it is read that diverse magnanimous Princes have more hated and
punished, then any crime besides; yea next unto treason it self, especially
when it is conjoined with notorious falsity as this is, when he says, That
Pope Clement the ninth (he should have said the eight) could proudly dare to
term the Scottish heretic, which is indeed a famous English calumniation
devised by himself, or others, and can never be proved to be true: for that
Pope Clement spoke ever very respectively of his Majesty in all occasions, both
when he was in Scotland, and after: Neither will the contrary be found in any
of his writings. Wherefore it is both shameful and shameless, that such open
untruths should be spoken in public audience without controlment. But let us
go forward to a point or two more.

116. After his former exhortation and inuitation to draw Catholics to his
doctrine of faith and religion sufficiently necessary to salvation, he pas^eth
to another point of threatening: first, that his Majesty will never give any
toleration to Catholics: and the second, that in the mean space, Charge p.
36.37.
while they hope in vain, they shall abide the smart of punishments. The first
he proposes in these words: If there be any Papist so ^oolish, and altogether
reasonlesse, as to expect, that his Majesty may be drawn to such alteration or
toleration, as they desire, I will them assuredly to know, they hope in vain.
The second he sets down thus: Such Papists as notwithstanding the
impossibility of their hope, will still remain perverse, let them know for
certainty, that the laws concerning them shall receive a most strict and
severe execution against them.

117. This is the dreadful denunciation of our new Judge, whereby you see, that
in the one he forestalleth absolutely his Majesty's will, The forestaling of his
Majesty's will.
not only for the present, but for all time to come, further, perhaps, then he
has commission to take upon him. For what knows he what God may inspire his
Majesty in succeeding years? Or what other reasons and circumstances of time,
place, and state of things may induce his Royal Wisdom prudently and piously
for benefit of his subjects to alter somewhat his present resolution? Is not the
heart of kings in the hands of God? Proverb. 21.
Will my L. Justice so make himself Pedagogue and Master of his Majesty's
will, as he will define or predetermine before hand, what he shall do, or what
he shall not do for the time to come? This is very predominant indeed, and
were more then enough for a whole Counsel to do: but much more and far
overmuch for him, that hitherto, so far as I know, has noe place among them.
We cannot but hope better of his Majesty's pious disposition, and trust, that
in time we shall say also, Romans 5.
Spes non confundit: notwithstanding the desperate resolution of Sir Edward to
the contrary.

118. And as for the second point of his threatening punishment and vexation to
Catholics, it is little to be wondered at, and less to be esteemed in such a
Cause as they suffer for. Less to be wondered at; for that such animosity of
spirit is wont often to accompany them, that rise in have to excessive wealth
and authority over others: less to be esteemed by Catholics, who both take it
for a glory to suffer for their Religion, and have learned by experience of
former times, that God is wont to extend his hand, and make an arrest, even
then, when those that persecute his servants are most in their heat of
pursuit against them. And I could wish that Sir Edward did but look over the
two ancient written Books, the one of Tertullian to Scapula; the other of S.
Cyprian, in imitation of the former to Demetrianus, both of them persecuting
Judges: Example of two persecuting Judges.
whom the said Authors do earnestly exhort to look upon the ends of such, as
had been their persecutours in that their office before. Tertull. l. ad
Scapul. cap. 3.
Possumus (says Tertullian to Scapula) and exitus quorumdam Praesidum tibi
proponere etc. Cyprian. l. ad Deme^rianum.
We might lay before your face the ends also of certain Presidents or Judges,
that after afflicting us, felt the hand of God themselves: and then he names
Vigelius Saturninus in Africa, that was suddenly stricken blind, Claudius
Herminianus in Cappadocia, that was eaten with life, Ceciliu^ Capella of
Byzantium, that after much cruelty perished miserably, when he least expected.
And I think also, that I may truly add, that whosoever shall look upon the
ends of such as have been the greatest persecutours of Catholics in England,
since persecution began (and among those also some Judges of Sir Edwards rank,
if I be not deceived) will find little cause to brag or to vaunt, that they
were happy therein. But howsoever this be, I say to our Judge, as Tertullian
said to his, when he laid before him the said examples: Non te terremus, quia
nec time^^^, we do not go about to terrify you, for that neither do we fear
you in this cause, though I know you may vex us, as you have done, and do:
but when all is done, our hope is where it was, in the Highest; Math. 10.
and our assurance and protection is the warrant of our Master: Nolite timere
eos, qui corpus occidunt etc. Do not fear those that can vex or kill the
body, and afterward can do noe more: but fear him that after this life can
cast into hell, and everlasting torments: and this Judge must our Judge fear
also. For he is Judge of Judges, and can both reuerse judgments, and revoke
sentences at his pleasure.

119. And thus much have we been induced to speak and repeat again in this
matter of this Norwich-Charge, by occasion of Sir Edwards accusation of Pricket
in setting down the same: wherein if he had gone about to recall or mislike any
part thereof, as over injurious to Catholics, we should have accepted thereof
most gratefully, and adjoined with him in the just reprehension of Pricket, as
having related that speech more maliciously, then it was meant against us, but
I can discover no such meaning or moderation in Sir Edward by that he has
written since that time, or spoken again in that place: whereof I have heard
by some that were present, that he has borne himself no less insolently,
then in the former speech, especially bringing in tales against Monks, to get
applause thereby of the vulgar people against that order of Religious men in the
Catholic Church: whereof you have heard one example before of the Prior, that
was feigned to have gotten by fraud a Gentleman's land in helping him to make
his Testament: another was of an Abbot that made an enclosure, and took in a
high way within his enclosure, and for that there was a rough and rude
Countryman, that brake down his enclosure, Sir Edw. tale of the fighting
Abbot.
saying that he would pass where his father and grandfather had passed, the
Abbot being a lusty, tall, fat, and strong knave, says Sir Edward, desiring
to fight hand to hand with this clown or countryman, when he was to repasse
that way, took on a serving man's apparel (if you will believe the story) went
to the place, watched his return, joined with him in combat, and was well
beaten by him. And then did Sir Edward both laugh heartily, and give God
thanks, that he had found out such a History to tell them in that place: and
further he said that he was heartily glad, that it fell upon an Abbot. And was
not this grave matter, think you, for a Judge to treat in that place and
auditory? What would the Roman Senate have thought of their young Roman Judge,
(whose imitation it seems that Sir Edward, in the beginning of his Speech had
prefixed unto himself) if they had understood that from the Bench and Seat of
Justice, even pro rostris, he had used such leuity of speech and action, as
this is?

120. But here now it may be, that my L. will be somewhat displeased to have
his things published abroad, Sir Edw. loud tongue in speaking ill of
Catholics.
which he did but speak for his private pleasure, mirth, and triumph in his
Country of Norwich. But the fault is his own in speaking it so lowdely, and
not observing the counsel of his Honorable friend; who hearing him one day
o^erlash very much, as here is reported, against Catholics, said merrily, but
wisely, unto him: speak softer my Lord for that otherwise you will be
ouerheard beyond the seas. But for remedy of this also it seems, that his
Lordship has thought now upon a more effectual way to be free from these
admonishments from beyond the seas. For in this new last Preface of his, after
a great reprehension of those, that write in these our times saying, Quotidie
plures, quotidie peius s^ribunt: that every day more do write, and do write
worse (wherein I doubt not but his own writings are excepted by his Lordship,
being also a modern writer himself) he comes to pronounce this terrible
sentence upon all Catholic books and writings, that come from abroad: Si
quisquam hominum etc. If any man shall bring into England any of those Books,
Prafat. ad part. 7. Relat.
which I have seen lately written from Rome or Romanists, or shall by reading,
seem to patronize them with his suffrage, or with approving them shall deliver
them to others to be read, he must o^ necessity ^or the first fault be
condemned in a Praemunire with loss of goods and lands, and to be imprisoned
during life, at the Princes pleasure: and for the second he must suffer death,
as in case of treason. This is his denunciation and determination, A dreadful
new co^minatio^ of Sir Edw. against all Catholic books.
which he proves not otherwise in this Preface, but only by his own
asseueration. It may be that he will go about to prove it afterward out of
some laws, that he is to relate in this his seventh Part of Reports: and
that he will do it as substantially, as he proves before in his fifth part,
that Q Elizabeth and her predecessors according to the ancient common-lawes of
England had supreme Ecclesiastical authority. If he do, somewhat may chance
to be said to the book, when it shall be seen, for hitherto I have had no
view thereof at all: only I must needs say here; that in wise and indifferent
men's judgment Sir Edward being a writer himself against Catholics, and
having thereby provoked them to answer him (as before you have heard how
joyful he was when any objections were made by the Student against his
writings, and the more, says he, the better:) he has not provided well for
his credit and honor, to go about now to bar all writing on our side, by
terror of penalties, yea and of death it self. For this is plainly to provoke
to the field: and then to get a proclamation, that if his enemy do overcome
him, his victory shall be death.

121. But I cannot persuade my self that Sir Edward will easily get any such,
unjust, and dishonorable refuge for his defense. For either he must procure it
to be decreed of new by some modern law; which being so unreasonable I cannot
expect from the wisedoms of so many grave men that must have voyc^ therein: or
he will deduce it out of some ancient laws of England: and therein I dare join
with him, that he is not able to do it.

122. Wherefore my counsel should rather be to Sir Edward, A charitable and
equal offer to Sir Ed.
that either he would cease to provoke us by writing, or intemperate speaking
against Catholics, or take in good part our temperate answers, or cause them
with like temperance to be confuted by himself, or by some on his part, or so
finally change his course toward us, as we may have no special cause to
complain of him more then of others: which were a far better way in my
opinion, to peace and profit of both parts, then by terror of punishments to
seek to oppress all Catholic writings, which will be very hard for him to
do. And when it should succeed, he were like to gain least of all thereby: For
that most probable it is, that in such a case they would all turn their pens
against himself, instead of other argument by his means prohibited.

123. And this is as much as I have to say about this last Preface, which
comes entitled thus: Deo, Patriae, Tibi, signifying thereby, as I comprehend
the matter, About the intituling of his 7. part of Reports.
that this seventh Part of his Reports now come forth, is dedicated as
serviceable to all those three; to God, our Country, and the Reader: which if
it be no otherwise written then the fifth Part, that I have read, it may very
well be returned again by the Reader saying: N^c Deo, nec Patriae, nec Mihi:
It is neither profitable, nor seruiciable to Gods honor, nor to our Country,
nor to Me. Not to God; for that it impugneth his only true and Catholic
Religion, and that by false and indirect means, whereof God is an enemy. Not
to our Country; for that these Reports of law being contrary to all ancient
laws, and written with a contrary spirit to all our ancient lawiers, Judges,
and lawmakers, before this our present age, can profit nothing our Country;
but set greater breaches and divisions therein. To Me also, that am the Reader
or Student, it can neither profit, nor import any thing, but loss of time, and
breaking my head with con^radictions: For so much as all this must once again
be cast of and forgotten, as novelties. when our old course of Commonlaw must
return to follow her ancient stream again.

124. Wherefore a much more honorable and profitable course had it been for so
great a wit, and learned a man in our laws, as my L. is said and held to be,
that to the end his labors in writing might have remained grateful and
commodious to posterity, he had conformed himself, his spirit, knowledge and
pen, to that of ancient precedent lawyers of our land, as Plowden did, and
some others, whose wrytings for that cause will be immortal. But Sir Edward,
taking to himself a contrary new course by wrenching and wresting laws to a
contrary meaning from the common sense, both of the laws themselves, and
lawmakers, as also of the times wherein they were made, and torrent of
authority, that governed the the same, his labors must needs in the end prove
to b^ both unprofitable, and contemptible.

125. For I would demand him, what sound common lawier will join with him in
this point, which he so re^olutly auerreth in his last Preface, that all books
coming a Roma, vel a Romanistis, from Rome or Romanists, that is from any sort
of Catholics, have punishment according to our ancient laws (for of those I
suppose he speaks) of loss of goods, liberty and life? Will any man believe
him, that this is conform to any ancient law of England? Sir E^w. his
novelties like to prejudice all his writings, as not conform to our ancient
lawiers.
Does he not know (as I doubt not but he does much better then I) the old
ancient honor, that was wont to be borne to Rome and Romanists, by our English
Common laws? Can he deny but that the Bishop of Rome is termed Apostolus and
Apostolicus almost eu^ry where in the same ancient laws? yea Prince of the
Church? and that our Archbishop of Canterbury the greatest Peer and Prelate of
England, is called in our law Apostoli Legatus, Legate of the Apostle and Roman
Bishop? And that his spiritual Court is but a member of the Court of Rome,
which Court in England is called Curia Christianitatis, the Court Christian, or
Court of Christianity, throughout our Common law-bookes, as I might show by
multiplicity of authorities, if it were not a matter so notoriously known, as
no meanest lawier will, or can deny it. And is it likely then that according
to those laws it may be proved, that it is Praemunire and treason, to bring
in a Book from Rome or Romanists, to read it, to praise it, or to lend it to
another, as here our new Justice does tell men with terror against justice,
especially when he adds, Hi sunt illi libri qui splendidos etc. These are
those books, which do carry goodly and religious titles, which do profess to
help and comfort the infirm consciences of men, that are in trouble: These are
they that take upon them to bring miserable and sinful souls unto the desired
port of tranquillity and salvation. By which words it seems that Sir Edward
has a chi^^e mislike of spiritual Catholic books, Spiritual books
mislyked by Sir Edward.
which treat the argument of quieting of souls. Which if it be so, then I hope
that our books of Controversies may pass with some less danger; though
indeed I do suspect, that he means these, when he speaks of the other; for
that they do most concern him. For what do spiritual books trouble Sir
Edward, which I suppose that either he never reads, or little esteems the
argument they handle, his cogitations being employed about far other objects
of this world for the present? Albeit I do not doubt, but if in some other
circumstance of time, state and condition of things he should read them, or
they should be read unto him, as namely on his deathbed, when flesh and blood
and worldly preferments do draw to an end, and himself near to the
accompting day, they would make other impression in him. Which being so, true
wisdom would, that what we must do in time perforce and perhaps to late, or
with out profit, we should out of good will and free choice prevent by
Christian industry. Which almighty God grant us his holy grace to do. And
this is all the hurt I wish to Sir Edward for all his asperity against us.

126. Now let us return to M. Morton again, whom we have left for a long
time to give place to this piece of Reckoning with Sir Edward. It follows
then in consequence after the precede^t Chapter of his omissions and
concealments in diverse and different charges laid against him for untruths,
wherewith he was charged in the Treatise of Mitigation; that we see what new
untruths he has super-added in his defense thereof, for increasing the burden.

THE NINTH CHAPTER WHICH LAYS TOGETHER ANOTHER CHOICE NVMBER of new lies,
made wilfully BY Mr. MORTON over and above the old, in this his Preamble,
whilst he pretends to defend, or excuse the said old, being above fifty in
number.
WE have made a large intermissio^, as you see, of M. Morto^s affairs by
interlacing some of Sir Edwards: now must we return to our principal scope,
which is to show more new and fresh untruths of later date in this last Reply
of M. Morton. And albeit those that are to be touched in this Chapter have
been for the most part handled, and discussed before: yet to the end, that
they may more effectually be represented to the eye, and memory of the Reader,
by putting the principal of them together in rank, under one mu^^er, I have
thought it expedient to take this pains also, New lies added to old.
whereby may appear how ruinous, and miserable a cause M. Morton has in hand,
that cannot be defended but by addition of so many new lies unto his old, and
even then when he stands upon his trial for the said old, and se^keth by all
means possible to hide and cover the same in such manner, as before you have
heard^ And no marvel, for that, both truth, reason, and experience do teach
us, that an old lie can never be well clothed, or covered but by a new. Let us
pass then to the survey of this Chapter, noting by the way, that we are rather
to touch certain heads, or principal branches that contain commonly sundry
and several lies under them, then simple and single untruths if they be well
examined: nor is it our purpose to name all, for that would imply too large a
prolixity for this place, especially for so much as I am to remit the Read^r
commonly to other places of my book, wherein the points themselves are more
largly handled before. Now then shall I lay forth some 20. of the said heads,
containing in them a greater number of particulers, as now you will see.

2. The first wilful lie then, that I will note here, is that which perhaps
has not been laid open before, for that I discovered the same since the writing
of the rest, About the Equivocation of Saphyra.
in perusing his Epistle to the Mitigator more diligently, where he pretending
to have obtained the victory in his cause about the question of Equivocation,
by the Confession it self of his adversary, he writes thus: In the
Preamblatory ^pistle to P.R.
I do appeal from your position to your Confession^ granting that there is a
mental Equivocation, which no clause of reservation can save from a lie: which
one Confession of yours is sufficient to convince all your mental
^quiuocatours^ ^o be apparently liars: and thus have I obtained my cause etc.
So he. And in diverse other places of this his Preamble he insulteth greatly
upon this Conf^ssion of mine: but let M. Morton show that in all my book I do
confess, that there is a mental Equivocation, which no clause of reservation
can save from a lie, and then I will grant that he obtained somewhat indeed
wherabout to wra^gle: but if I do never say so, nor he is able to prove it, but
rather in other places of his book does deliver me from that Confession,
Pream. page 47. and 48.
granting that the words, mental Equivocation are not mine, but his own (my
words being only these; that there is some speech which cannot be saved from a
lie, by any reservation, and not, that there is a Mental Equiuocatio^ which no
reservation can save from a lie) if this (I say) be so; False purchase by lying.
then whatsoever he has obtained heerby for his cause he has obtained the
same by false purchase of untruth and deceit as you will easily see: Let us
examine then the matter a little further.

3. First then (as now I have said) it was never my mind to affirm, that there
is a mental Equivocation which no clause o^ reservation can save from a lie,
but rather thus, that there is an outward speech which no clause of reservation
can save from a lie, Act. 5^
such as was the speech of Saphyra, for example (for of this was the treaty)
when she answered falsely unto S. Peter her lawful judge about the price of
her field that was sold; this speech of hers I said in the Treatise of
Mitigation, Mitig. page 344.346. and 348.
though she might have a mental reservation therein (as M. Morton supposes her
to have had,) yet could not that reservation excuse the same from a lie, in
respect of the obligation she had absolutely to utter the truth, which
obligation he has not, who speaks to one that has no jurisdiction over him,
and consequently may equivocate.

4. Now then M. Morton to obtain ^his cause by a lie, falsely affirms me to
say, that there is a mental Equivocation, which no clause o^ reservation can
save from a lie, which is in effect to make me speak contraries. For if it be
a lie, then can it be no Equivocation, as out of their proper definitions I
have largely proved in my treatise of that subject: And if it be a mental
Equivocation, then must it needs be saved from a lie by mental reservation.
And finally that my words, that there was an outward speech (as namely that of
Saphyra) which no mental reservation could excuse from a lie, and consequently
that it could be no Equivocation, do prove not only my own words, speaking
thereof, but also the words of M. Morton himself afterward in the 12.
Paragraph of this his Prea^ble, Pream. page 47. and 48.
where he says and insulteth thus: P^ R. is driven to such a vertigo, and
giddines, that even when he would de^end his art of Equiuocating from a lie, he
is by consequence from Gods word (in the example of Saphyra) ^orced to confess
an outward speech, which no clause of reservation could save from a lie. Thus
he.

5. And mark where the Vertigo is, A lying vertigo.
for before in his Epistle he avouched me to say, That there was a mental
Equiuocatio^ which no reseruatio^ could save from a lie, and here he affirms
my words to be, that I confess an outward speech, which no clause of
reseruatio^ can save from a lie: which last I grant, and do deny the former,
and do prove my denial both by mine own and his words now recited: what then
can save him from a lie, and lying Vertigo in his former assertion, wherein he
braggeth so extrauagantly, as you have heard, that thereby he has gained his
whole cause in the controversy between us. Is there any excuse for this
Vertigo? Or reason why this so ^otoriou^ a ly of M. Morton may not be condemned
for wilful? But let us see a greater.

6. Card. Bellarmine speaking of an old ancient heresy sprung up in the
Apostles time against the Real Presence, as is recorded by the Greek
historiographer Theodoret, as taken out of the Epis^le of S. Ignatius ad
Smyrnenses writes thus: About Theodoret corrupted.
Qu^ sententia citatur a Theodoreto, in 3. Dialogo ex Epist. Ignatij ad
Smy^nenses, vbi tamen nunc non habetur^ which sentence is cited by Theodoret in
his third Dialogue out of S. Ignatius his Epistle to the Christians of Smyrna,
where notwithstanding it is not now found, that is to say in Ignatius: Bellar.
l. 1. de Euchar. cap. 1. mitio. see supra cap. 3. number. 99. Pream. page 65.
but how does M. Morton cite it? Thus: Quae sententia citatur a Theodoreto in
Dialogo, vbi tamen nunc non hab^tur, and then translateth it, which sentence is
cited by Theodoret in his Dialogue, but is not now to be found in Theodoret,
which is so notorious and wilful a falsification, as he that will but take the
payns to look upon Theodoret, shall find it to be there both in Greek and
Latin: Three falsehoods in one allegation.
How then may be excused this foul escape? Is it not wilful? did he not see
and know that he fa^sifyed manifestly the text of Bellarmine? And told also a
manifest lie of Thodoret? and thirdly went about to deceive his Reader by his
false English translation? How then may be excused this trip^e ^alshood in one
and the self same matter, wherein Bellarmine is abused, Theodoret corrupted,
and his Reader by ^alse translation deceived? Is not one only of these tricks
sufficient to des^rie, and discredit his bad conscience in writing? But let us
go forward.

7. In his former book of Full satis^action part 3. page 28. he, to disgrace
Pope Hildebrand, brought forth a testimony of Claudius Espencaeus, About Claud.
Espencaeus falsified.
as af^irming the said Pope to have been the first that made schism between
Emp^rors and Popes, and now in this new reply of his he repeateth the same
again, Prea^b. page 28.
saying, I produced Claudius Espencaeus their own Romish Bishop, which does
plainly aver, that Hildebrand was the first Pope, who without any example of
antiquity, made a schism between Emperors and Popes. But now the matter being
better examined for that P. R. could not get that work of Espencaeus when he
wrote his former Treatise, it is found that Espencaeus is so far of from
plain auerring the same, as he does not so much as once affirm it of
himself, but only relates it, as passionate words of cer^^ine Schismatic
Priests of Liege that were censured, and appointed to be punished by Pope
Paschalis the second, See supra c. 1. number. 100
as more largely we have showed before out of the second tome of Counsels,
where their whole speech is set down under this title, Cleri Leodiensis ad
Paschalem secundum Querimonia. And is this simplicity in writing? Is this
sincerity? Is this tolerable in a Minister of simple truth, who vaunteth to
his Majesty of the constant assurance of his upright conscience?

8. Whereas Franciscus Costerus in his Enchiridion of Controversies handling
this argument for the authority of the B. of Rome, The false allegation of T.
M. about Costerus.
that for so much as the old Popes before Constantines time and after, did take
upon them as heads of the Universal Christian world to decide Cases of all
Countries concerning Religion, and affirmed the same to pertayne unto them,
Cap. 3. quod est de summo Pontif.. constat.
it is very like (says he) or rather certain, that if that had been by
usurpation, or false means, some Catholic Prince, Prelate, or writer, would
have reproved the some. And then he adds, Atqui vero nemo hactenus fuit
Catholicus, v^l Princeps, vel Presul, vel Scriptor, qui mendacij, vel malae
fidei Romanos arguerit. And yet nevertheless hitherto there has been no
Catholic, either Prince, Prelate, or Writer, that ever argued these Roman
Bishops of lying or false dealing therein: Which words M. Morton peruerteth
egregiously, Pream. page 51.
as though Costerus had affirmed, that no writers, Prince, or Prelate, had ever
accused Romanistes, or Roman writers of any falsehood in writing: which is so
notable a cosenage as a man of any good conscience would never devise. For that
Costerus was not so simple or ignorant to affirm, that no man ^uer accused
Roman writers of falsehood, seeing and hearing daily so many clamours and
calumniations of Protestants against them: but his assertion is that no such
exceptions were ever taken against these ancient Roman Bishops, that gave their
^iues for Christ and his Religion: and consequently it is a notable imposture,
in M. Morton to obtrude to his Reader modern Roman writers, for ancient Roman
Bishops, of which fraud see more before Cap. 3. number. 13.14. etc.

9. Furthermore page 25. About Gratian abused.
of this his preamble he goes about to prove Gratian the Compiler of Popes
Decrees to have falsified a Canon of the Council of Mileuet (wherein S.
Augustine was) and for this cause as though he had now proved the same, he
writes in the margent this note, Gratian a falsificator, for that he had added
to the same Canon, a certain exception which Cardinal Bellarmine does not
allow: Bellar. l. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 24^. Tertio.
but now upon better search it is found, that M. Morton himself is the
falsificator, and not Gratian, both for that he cutteth of fraudulently the
beginning and first words of that Canon, and peruerteth the last. For whereas
the question was in Africa, whether Priests, Deacons, or inferior Clergy men,
might appeal from their Bishops of that Country unto others abroad (for of
Bishops there was no question but they might) the said Council of Mileuet
decrees thus in the foresaid Canon, The Decree of the Council of Mileu^^ in
Africa.
which is in order the 22. Placuit vt Presbyteri, Diaconi, vel caeteri
in^eriores Clerici in causis quas habuerint, qui de iudicijs Episcoporum suorum
questi fuerint, vicini Episcopi eos audiant etc. Quod si ab eis prouocandum
putauerint, non prouocent nis^ad Africana Concilia, vel ad Primates
Prouinciaru^ suarum. We de decree that Priests, Deacons, and other inferior
clergy men, in the causes which they shall have, if they complain of the
iudgem^nts of their own Bishops, let the next neighbor Bishops hear them
etc. And if any think good to appeal, it shall not be, but to the Counsels
of Africa, or to the Primate^ of their own Provinces etc. So says the Cano^.
But M. Mort. to make it seem that this restraint was of the Appeals of
Bishops to the Roman Sea, does cut of cunningly the first words of Priests,
Deaco^s, and other inferior Clergy men, set down in the Canon. And was not
this a cunning cut?

10. And then again whereas Gratian did by way of Commentary, as has been said,
add this exception, Nisi ^orte Romanam Sedem appellauerint, except perchance
any should appeal to the Roman Sea: which exception C^rdinall Bellarmine upon
good reason does in this thing impugn, as not agreeing with the matter in
hand, M. Morton does accuse Gratian, as if by falsi^ication he had added this
clause, as a part of the Canon, and therefore notes him for a falsificatour in
his margent: but the falsi^ication in both points is proved to have been on M.
Morto^s part, as you may read before more largely cap. 3. number. 18.19.20. etc.
So as here he is convinced of a double falsity.

11. Again Cardinal Bellarmine taking upon him in his Treatise of the Notes
o^ the Church to prove that it is one evident note of heresy and heretics to
hold any one condemned error that was held by any ancient heretic, and that
the Protestants of our time do hold many, he gives two examples out of the
heresies of the Pelagians, About simbolizing with Pelagians.
showing how Calvin, and diverse other Protestants did simbolize with them in
two principal heads of doctrine: whereof the first was about Original sin in
Infantes (which the Pelagians denied, and especially in the children of the
faithful) and the other about the distinction of venial and mortal synns,
which they also denied, and that Calvin, Zuinglius, Bucer, and other
Protestants did hold the same, but with some distinction concerning Original
sin; for that Zuinglius denied original sin in all men, Calvin and Bucer
in Christian infants only, and consequently that it was Pelagianisme.
Bellarmines words are these; Bellar. l. 4. de notis Eccle^iae c. 9. ^ Pelagiani.
Zuinglius negat simpliciter peccatum originale in quolibet homine: Bucerus
aute^ and Caluinus ^olum in filijs fideliu^, quos dicunt sanctos nasci, and
saluari etiam sine Baptismo: that is: Zuinglius does absolutely deny Original
sinn^ to be in any man: but Bucer and Calvin do only deny the same in the
children of the faithful, whom they say to be borne Saints, and to be saved
also without baptism, for which Bellarmine cyteth the places of the Authors
themselves, as Zuinglius lib. de baptis. Bucer. i^ cap. 3. Matthew. Calu. lib. 4.
Institut. cap. 15.. 20.

12. Out of which discourse M. Morton seeking to find some objections against
Bellarmine, pretermitteth first the one of the two heresies objected, Preamb.
page 63.
to wit, about the distinction of venial and mortal sin, and speaks only
of the point of Original sin, saying: Let P. R. for a while take Cardinal
Bellarmine into secret Con^ession, and first ask him with what conscience he
has charged Calvin with the heresy of the Pelagians, who denied that there
was any original sin in Infants, especially in the children of faithful
Christians. This is his demand, and for ground heerof he cites these latin
words of Bellarmine out of the forenamed place: Pelagiani docebant non esse in
hominibus peccatum originale, and praecipue in filijs fidelium. Idem docent
Caluinus and Bucerus. The Pelagians did teach that there was not Original
sin in men, Bellar. lib. 4. de notis Ecclesiae c. 9.. Pelag.
especially in the children of the faithful. And the same do teach Calvin and
Bucer: which words if you confer them with the words themselves of Bellarmine
before cited, who accuses not Calvin and Bucer of all the Pelagian doctrine in
this point, Three other falshoode^.
but only Zuinglius, and as for the other two, to wit Bucer and Calvin, he
accuses them for a part only, Zuinglius denying original sin in all, and
these later only in Christian Infantes, two tricks at least of wilful falsity
are discovered: the first, that in his charge he wi^leth Bellarmine to be
examined in confession about Calvin, whereas he ^pake of three together, to
wit, Zuinglius, Bucer and Calvin: the second that he accuses Bellarmi^e as
though he had charged Calvin with all the Pelagian heresy in this matter,
whereas he expressly prof^ss^th to charge him only with one point thereof
co^cer^ing the infantes of the faithful. Wherefore these words, ^de^ docent
Caluinus, and Bucerus (and this may be the third false trick) are not to be
found in Bellarmine, but are thrust in by M. Mor^on: nor cannot agree with the
distinction of Cardinal Bellarmine before set down, these things then I leave
to the Readers discretion. For though the points themselves for their substance
be not of great weight, yet is the mind of the writer as much discovered in
false tricks of small moment as of great; see more of this matter before Cap.
3. number. 62.63.64. etc.

13. It follows page 55. of this his preamble that treating of the
prohibition made by the ancient Council of Eliberis in Spain consisting of
19. Bishops not to set up Images in the Churches, About the Council of
Eliberis, and Sixtus Senensis.
and the diverse expositions of Catholic doctors about the same, what the
causes and motives might be of this prohibition for that time of the fresh, and
new conversion of that nation from Idolatry to Christian Religion, among other
expositors he cites the opinion of Sixtus Senensis for the last vpshot of the
whole matter ^aying thus: Sixtus Senen^. Biblioth. lib. 5. Annot. 247.
So that whatsoever the occasion of forbidding might have been, this is a
confessed conclusion of Senensis, that the Council of Eliberis did absolutely
forbid the worship of Images. And then ^etteth down the same in latin in his
margent, as out of Senensis al^o, in these words: Idcirco omnino ve^uit
Synodus Elibertina imaginum cal^um. But he that shall look upon the text of
the Author himself shall not find any such confessed conclusion, or any such
words of absolutely forbidding, and consequently this is convinced to be an
absolute untruth, for it appears clearly in Senensis that the prohibition was
only for a time, until the new converted Spaniards should be better instructed
in Christian Religion, and made to understand better the difference between
Pagan Idols, and sacred Images: so as here are two gross falsityes, first in
obtruding, as the latin sentence of Senensis, that which Senensis has not, in
words or sense, and then in translating the same so punctually into English,
and setting it down in a different letter, as though it were exactly so in good
earnest: and can there be any excuse for these sorts of procedings? Let the
Reader see more before c. 3. nu. 38.

14. Gregorius de Valentia is brought in by M. Morton against Bellarmine as
allowing of a sentence of Tertullian used by Bullinger the Caluinist as
orthodoxall, About Bullingers assertion of the Trinity.
and justifiable, to wit, Tres sunt in Diuinitate personae, non statu sed
gradu, non substantia sed forma, non potestate sed specie differentes: and M.
Morton stoutly cyteth in his margent for approving thereof Gregorius de Valentia
Iesuita de vnitate and Trinitate c. 9.. item Bullingerus, meaning thereby to
oppose the one of the^ against the other in this matter^ but when the thing is
examined, the words of Gregorius de Valentia are found to be these:
Bullingerus Sacramentarius etc. Bullinger the Sacramentary affirms that there
are three persons in Deity, which differ not in state but degree, not in
substance but form, not in power but kind: by which words (says Valentia) he
does not only overthrow the Godhead of the son, but even the whole Mystery of
the most holy Trinity.

15. So says Vale^tia against Bullinger for whose defense against Cardinal
Bellarmins accusation of Arianisme he is produced. And let the reader judge
whether this be an allowanc^ of that sentence for orthodoxall, which Valentia
says, as you see, to be so blasphemous as it does overthrow the whole mystery
of the Blessed Trinity. And the like lie you may behold uttered by M. Morton
against Cardinal Bellarmine himself in this very matter, affirming him to
expound as orthodoxall and justifiable, the foresaid heretical paradox of
Tertullian, whereas he expounds only in good sen^e the former part thereof: So
as here are two convinced falsi^yes, whereof you may read more largely cap. 3.
number. 88.89. etc.

16. There falls out a question between M. Morton, and Cardinal Bellarmine,
whether the form of arguing used by S. Cyprian were good and sufficient or no,
About S. Aug. and S. Cyprian.
wh^^ he defended the error of rebaptizing heretics a sufficientia
scripturarum exclusive, to wit, this or that is not in the Scripture, ergo, it
is not to be defended, it being the common form of arguing in the Protestants
of our days; and Bellarmine says, Supra c. 3. number. 107.108. and deinceps.
Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo Dei c. 7. Aug. l. 5. de bap. cap. 23.
no; alleging S. Augustine for his Authority, who defending the negative
against S. Cyprians error, to wit, that men returning from heresy were not to
be rebaptized (which was the opinion of the whole Church in his time, and
grounded upon unwritten tradition of the said Church;) reprehended that form
of arguing in S. Cyprian, as not good^, and sufficient, showing both that many
things b^sydes this, are taught and believed in the Church by tradition, which
are not in Scripture, and that S. Cyprian himself when he was out of necessity
of defending this article, made recourse unto unwritten traditions, whereunto M.
Morto^ answers thus. But whosoever shall consult with S. Augustine in the
Chapter specifyed, Pream. page ^6. and 67.
shall find that this point by himself is excellently commended, saying, that,
whereas Cyprian warns us to run unto the fountain, that is, unto the
traditions of the Apostles, from thence to derive a conduct unto our times, is
chiefly good and doubtless to be performed. So he.

17. But when S. Augustines discourse is examined, it is found wholly against M.
Morton: S. August. against M. Morton.
for though he do allow and praise recourse unto Scriptures when things may
evidently be proved from thence: ye^ does he not hold that only such things are
to be believed as are expressly therein contained, but rather both in this
controversy of r^baptization, wherein S. Cyprian does pretend to hold the
affirmative by Scripture and S. August. the negative by custom and tradition
of the Church, and prevailed also therein and in many other examples that
scripture only must not be the rule of belief, for that there are many things
which are, and must be admitted though they be not expressly in Scriptures. An
audacious untruth.
This is S. Augustins discourse, which being so, it shows a notable fraud,
and desire to deceau^ in M. Morton, that tells his Reader that S. A^gustine
did excellently commend that form of arguing in S. Cyprian, which he indeed
does largely and expressly impugn, whereof see more before Cap. 3. number.
107.108.109. etc.

18. In the 70. page of this his Preamble writing of Purgatory, About Purgatory
he seems to have set down one of the most manifest, and boldest untruths
that ever commonly I have read; for thus he writes: When I speak of Fathers
(for proof of the article of Purgatory) the most of them; when I speak of
Canonical Scriptures, all of them are ^ound by the judgment o^ their own
Doctors to be tortured wrested and forced, as it were, to say that which they
never meant. A most absurd assertion.
This untruth I say, seems so manifest and plain, as there needs, no other
proof to convince i^, but only the bare narration thereof. For how can it be
possible, that our Doctors do believe the article of Purgatory, if in their
own judgments they hold and teach that all Scriptures alleged for the same,
and the most part of Fathers, are made to say that which they never meant
therein, and this by turning, wresting, and forcing? Is there any man that will
admit so violent a fact as this? Or is there any man so light and foolish,
either Protestant or Catholic, as will give credit to so fond an assertion?
Whereof see more before, Cap. 3. number. 138.139. etc.

19. In the 71. page of this his Preamble M. Morton taking upon him, When the
two letters of T. M. were understood.
and promising to discover such notorious fashoods against me, as that he would
enforce me by virtue of mine own promise (as he says) never hereafter to
credit my self, begins with this in the first place, that I in the end of
the common Preface prefixed before my treatise of Mitigation did signify, that
when I wrote that Preface, I did not know whom the letters T.M. did signify:
and yet that in the dedicatory Epistle that goes before the said Preface I did
sundry times signify that the said letters T.M. did import Thomas Morton, and
this he sets down for the first notorious falsehood, that he was to handle
against me: but when matters are examined it is found that my said dedicatory
Epistle was written long after the Preface, and in the last place after the
whole Book was ended; and that this could not be unknown to M. Morton
himself, for that it is expressly set down both in the said dedicatory Epistle
as also plainly declared in the third Chapter of the treatise, when, and by
what means I came to know first the true signification of those two letters T.
M. after the writing of the common Preface, A ridiculous ouer^ight in M. Morto^.
wherein I denied to know it. So as this is convinced not to be any notorious
falsehood or falsity at all in me, but to be more then wilful, and ridiculous
in himself to charge me with it, as is showed more at large before, Cap. 4.
number. 10.11. etc.

About Holinshed Fox and Stow.
20. There follows page 80. of his Preamb. a great conviction of M. Mortons
wilful falsity, which I do not see how any ways possible he can avoid or
excuse: and the matter is, concerning the testimony of Holinshed in his
Chronicle, about the cause of Sir Thom. VViats Rebellion, which M. Morton had
stoutly denied in both his former Books of Discovery, and Full Satisfaction to
have had any relation to Religion, or mention thereof in his pretense, for which
he cites in his margent Holinshed only Anno 1553. and when against this his
Adversary P. R. cited the plain testimonies of M. John Fox as credible an
Author in his opinion as Holinshed, M. Fox an. 1554 page 1289.
M. Morton in this his last Reply shifteth of this, with saying that his
adversary played the Fox, Strange impude^cy
seeking to prey furthest of from home, for that he had cited Holinshed, and to
Holinshed he would stand, to wit M. Morton: whereupon P. R. looking better into
Holinshed finds the very self same testimony and words in effect, which
were alleged before out of Fox; and the like also set down by John Stow in
his Chronicle, which M. Morton could not probably but have seen. And how then
did he make that stout denial before mentioned in two or three bouts, and now
the third time does stand in it also? can this be excused? can this be thought
tolerable? can this be defended from wilful falsehood known to the speaker?
you may see more of this matter before, Cap. 4. number. 54.55. etc.

21. Furthermore page 94. of this his Preamble he going about to prove by
examples that some Popes have dyed disasterously, About the death of Pope
Anastasius.
names Pope Anastasius the second, and for testimony thereof cites in the
margent Ioan^ de Turrecreniat. lib. de sum. Ecclesiae, de Anastasio, whose
words he says are, been legitur Anastasiu^ diuino n^tu percuss^m i^^ter^sse,
It is well read that Pope Anastasius dyed stroke^ by the appointment of God:
and then he insulteth, that this is the testimony of one of our own Doctors;
but when the place is examined only it is found that Turrecreniata brings in
this by way of objection in the behalf of others, for these are his words:
Tertium etia^ hic inducunt exemplu^ de Anastasio, qui licet volueri^ reuocare
Acatium, non tame^ p^tuit, quia diuino nutu percussus est. Turre^r. l. 2. de
sum. Ecclesiae cap. 112.
Here also they bring in a third example of Anastasius, who albeit he had a
mind to recall the heretic Acatius (to wit, to his communion at the urgent
instance of the heretical Emperor called also Anastasius) yet he could not do
it, for that he was stricken by the hand of God, and so thereby prevented from
falling into that inconuenience^ which is the end whereunto Turrecremata
recites the example, to show the providence of God in preserving the Bishops
of Rome from falling into such inconveniences, though o^ (...) Authors also do
deny this example, for that Acati^^ was dead long before, which M. Morton
dissembling, as also that it was brought in the behalf of Popes, and as an
objection: Three fal^ities in one.
others by Turrecremata, and not setting down his true words, as now you have
heard, does by all these three means show that he wittingly dealt falsely,
whereof you may see more, Cap. 5. number. 30.31. etc.

22. It follows page 111. of the said Preamble that M. Morton to disgrace and
discredit the Decretalls and Extrauagants of Popes, About Pope Gregory's
license for printing the Canon Law.
avouches that Pope Gregory the 13. of late in this our time, did (by a
special breue) ratify the Glosses and Annotations (upon the said Decretals)
and gave the^ authority equivalent and answerable to the Decretals and
Extrauagants themselves, which seeming a strange fact of the Pope, the said
Breue prefixed, before that edition of the Canon law, was examined and it was
found that Pope Gregory did only therein give license and privilege, according
to custom, for printing the said Decretals, Extrauagants, and Corpse of the
Cano^ law, together with their Glosses and Annotations, as they were set forth
in Rome, and Roman edition, without any one word of equalling them in authority
the one with the other: which seems so notorious an abuse and imposture, as
unless we should imagine M. Morton to be a very simple and senseles man in
mistaking quid for quo, which I think he would be loath to be accounted, he
cannot be excused from manifest wilful fraud, whereof we have written before,
Cap. 5. number. 92.93.94. etc.

23. In the page. 64. of this preamble M. Morton accuses Cardinal Bellarmine
falsely to have ascribed unto Calvin the heresy of the Manicheans, About the
Manichea^ heresy imputed to Calvin.
saying: Again he at^ributeth unto Calvin the heresy of the Manichees, who
(says he) did condemn the nature of men, depriving them of Freewill, and
ascribing the Original and beginning of sin unto the nature of man, and not
unto his Freewill. So he. But when the Original text of Bellarmine is
examined, Bellar. l. 4^ de notis Ecclesiae cap. 9.. 8.
it is found that M. Morton instead of the words, says he (to wit Bellarmine)
should have said S. Hierome and S. Augustine do say so, for that Bellarmine
cites the first part of the words of S. Hierome, and the second as the words
of S. Augustine, which names of authority M. Morton cunningly clipping of, to
the end the Reader should not be moved therewith to see the common doctrine of
Protestants about Freewill to be accounted Manichean heresy by those two
Doctors, he recites the sentence as Cardinal Bellarmines own speech, and not
as of the other: and this the first trick of falsitie in this point.

24. The second is, that whereas Bellarmine does accuse Calvin to deny Freewill
with the Manicheans, M. Morton obiecteth unto him a contradiction in this
matter, as though he had granted elsewhere that Calvin had held the doctrine of
Freewill: whereupon he urges Bellarmine in these words: Pream. page 64.
This contradiction in this point is no more then this to charge Calvin with
that which he did not believe: is not this singular falsehood? But when the
matter is examined it is found that M. Morton endeauoreth to deceive his reader
with a notable equivocation about the time. For that Bell^^mine grants, that
Calvin a^cribeth Freewill to man before his fall, but not afterward, wherein
stands the controversy between us and Protestants, and therefore when he
says Calvin with the Ma^ichees does deny Freewill (to wit, after man's fall,
granting it before) it is no contradiction at all; for that both are true: and
consequently I do not see how it can be excused from wilful fraud, that M.
Morton here went about to deceive his Reader with so gross an Equivocation in
fact, and practice, the name whereof otherwise in sound of words he does so
eagerly impugn: about which matter see more Chap. 5. num^ 79.80.81. etc. So as
here are two notable frauds as you see.

25. But in the next place there is a greater multitude of frauds discovered
by me together, to wit, five, About the Nouatian heresy.
and I cannot see how any one can be excused^ For whereas M. Morton page 63 and
64. complayneth that Cardinal Bellarmine does make Protestants guilty of the
heresy of the Nouatia^s in taking from the Church all power of reconciling men
unto God (he should have said heresies in the plural number for that
Bella^mine recites two, Bellar. l. 4. de notis Ecclesiae c. 9.. Nouatianorum.
to wit this, and the denying in like manner the use of holy Chrisme;) he so
goes about to deliver his Protestants from this imputatio^ (I mean of the
first only, without saying any thing of the ^econd) as partly under the
Equivocation of the word Penance, understanding it now for private Penance as
it is a virtue only, and may be exercised by every man of himself, both in
wardly and outwardly of what religion soever he be: and then taking it as it is
a Sacramental Pe^nance, which prescribes a certain external form, and
requires absolution of the Church; he so intangleth himself and his Reader (I
say) with his defense, as he is convinced before in this our answer to have
committed five several falshoodes which cannot possibly be excused from
witting and wilful, whereof you may see more at large, cap. 3. of this our
Answer, number. 67.68. etc.

26. But yet there follows a more notable conviction of falsehood against him
for alleging page 84^ and 85. of his Preamble the Jesuit Doctor Azorius,
About Doctor Azorius.
as condemning all use of Equivocation, and that by five rules: whereof the last
is urged by him, as hitting the nail on the head, to use his phrase: but when
the matter is duly examined, it does so hit M. Morton on the head, that I take
pity to consider how he reeleth at the blow: for it makes him to fly and
conceal four rules of the five, for that they make wholly against him: As
namely the first which resolves that a Priest may Equivocate, and say he
knows nothing, when he is demanded any thing concerning Confession: the
second, that any man may Equivocate, when he is demanded by an incompetent
judge, even with an Oath, whereof he sets down 4. or 5. several cases
resolved by him, directly against M. Morton in this doctrine. His 3. rule also,
which concerns common conversation of men, determines, That whenever any
injury is offered to any man, it is lawful for him to use Equiuocatio^, either
in Oath or speech: and by this he resolves four other several cases against
M. Mor. whereof one is the famous Couentry-Case so often by him mentioned. The
fourth rule sets down no particular cases, Ten lies about Azor.
but only gives direction how we may not use certain forms of Equiuocatio^
if no injury be offered us: and to like effect is the fifth rule so much
esteemed by M. Morton: but for the former three containing the resolution of
ten several cases all directly against M. Mort. and his doctrine, being by him
both seen and read, and yet concealed and dissembled, do convince him of ten
several witting falshods, and cannot possibly be excused, for so much as he
alleges Azor, as denying all Equivocation, except he will say, that in
reading the self same pages and lines of Azor his eye sight did not serve him
to read the precedent four rules that resolved so many cases against him, but
only opened it self upon the fifth, which were a strange case. Or if he did
read them all, then it was a much more strange resolution to suppress and
embezell them, and yet to allege Azor against his Adversary with this
confident title, Preamb. page 84
that P.R. his Equivocation is proved a lie, and himself a ^alsificator by the
Confession of three Jesuits; whereof the first conu^ncing him is Azorius, a
great Cas^ist, and learned Jesuit, How will the poor man defend himself
here? See more of this before Cap. 4. number. 69.70.71. etc.

27. In the next place after this, M. Morton introduces for a second witness,
to use his words (for conuincing P. R. of falsehood) one Emanuel Sa another
learned Jesuit, About Emanuel S^: whether he contradicts all Equivocation?
in his Aphorisms, alleged by his former Adversary the Moderate Answerer,
which Emanuel says that some Catholic Authors there be, who do not allow
that in all Cases where the party demanded is not bound to answer, he may
lawfully Equivocate: and perhaps (says he) these later speak with better
reason then others that hold the contrary: Pream. page 86. Mo^erate Answer. cap.
10.
whereupon M. Morton does triumph exceedingly as though he had euicted, that
Emanuel Sa the Jesuit had contradicted all Equivocation, and thereupon enters
into this vain and childish insultation: Is it possible (says he) that my
Adversary can free himself from a falsity h^ere, Pream. page 86.
corroding the consci^ce? the Edition is but one, the translation is the same,
the place is well known etc. So he. And yet when the matter is examined he
himself is found to have both the corroding and corroded conscience, for the
many wilful falsityes used in this point.

28. As first, for that this is brought in and urged, as though Emanuel Sa did
affirm, that diverse Catholic Authors did contradict all Equiuocatio^ in
general, whereas he expressly speaks of some particular cases, that may
fallout, wherein the party demanded though he be not bound to answer: yet has
he not liberty at his own pleasure to equivocate without necessity, but ought
rather to hold his peace, especially when no violence or injury is offered by
the demaunder: which yet not withstanding was avouched to be but a particular
opinion of some, and left afterward by Emanuel himself.

29. Secondly he cutteth of the beginning and ending of his Adversaries words,
which do clearly expound his meaning: and thirdly he does conceal wittingly
five particular cases resolved by Emanuel Sa in favor of Equivocation against
M. Morton: Eman. Sa A^hor^ 25. de Conf^s. 8. de testib^
so as these be seven witting and wilful falsityes which by no art of
tergiuersation can be avoided. And by this you may see how the number of his
falsehoods would multiply upon him, Seven wilful untruths uttered together.
if I should pre^^e him with every one severally, and spend time therein: but
this would corrode too much, and therefore I remit the reader to that which has
been said heerof before, Cap. 4. number. 77.78.79. etc.

30. And now we shall draw toward an end, though many more of this kind do yet
remain which might be produced in this brief collection: as namely, About not
answering of Maldonate.
that which is handled by me before in the fourth Chapter of this book, where
M. Morton accusing me boldly and most eagerly, that I going about to satisfy in
my Treatise of Mitigation two different Authors Sotus and Maldonate, Pream. page
87. Mitig. c. 14 page 409.410.
that do impugn the vile art of Equiuocating (to use his contumelious words,)
I do pretermit wittingly Maldonate the third witness ( as the weaker adversary
will do his ouermatch) though he were cited by him in the self same place, to
the self same effect: But all this I do prove to be as full of falsehood and
forgery, as the former, containing at least foure^ or five wilful untruths.
For that in the place of my book by him cyted, neither do I treat of Genesius
and So^us together, but of Genesius alone: nor do I there endeavor to satisfy
any of their testimonies, for that there are none brought forth against me. And
thirdly I do urge M. Morton with an vn^nswerable testimony of Genes. in that
place, Five untruths together.
affirming the lawfulnes of some Equivocation, which he does neither answer,
nor go about to answer in this his Preambling Reply. Fourthly I do not join
Genesius and Sotus together in any one place throughout my whole Book. Fifthly
and lastly (for I will touch no more points) it is proved that the authority of
Maldonate brought in by M. Morton, makes nothing at all against Equiuoca^io^
but rather for the confirmation thereof, wherein I remit me to that which is more
largely treated before of this matter, number. 83.84.85. etc.

31. And now though I grow weary in recapitulating so large and loathsome a
list of wilful untruths, as you have heard, pretermitting many for avoiding
prolixity: About Polidore Virgil falsified.
yet cannot I altogether let pass in this last place one which is very
solemn. For whereas M. Morton in the Epistle Dedicatory of this Preamble to to
the Earl of Salisbury, had made a solemn protestation, that it should be to
him the greatest crime of all others if it could be proved that he durst to
make a lie before his Lordship; and before this again had affirmed the same in
effect to the Kings Grace himself in his Epistle dedicatory of his Full
satisfaction, assuring his Majesty of the vprightnes of his conscience, and
that he was a Minister of simple truth etc. now notwitstanding both to his
Majesty as also to the Earl, he blusheth not to utter many lies together, to
wit so many as you have heard by me convinced, but two especially in this very
place concerning an observation out of Polidore Virgil. For whereas in the said
dedica^ory unto his Maies^y ^e has these words: Polidore observes that the
Popes a long time in their election, had their names changed by Antiphrase viz.
the elected of he were by natural disposition fearful, was named Leo, if
cruel, Clement, is uncivil Urban, if wicked ^ius, etc. Preamb. page 90.
Now in this Preamble dedicated to my L. of Salisbury he being pressed to bring
forth his authority and words of the Author, he is constrained to convince
himself of two notable falshoodes and deceipts: first for that Polidore in his
latin text by himsel^e alleged does not say, that the Popes for a long time in
their election had their names changed by antiphrase, Polid. l. 4. de Inuent^
cap. 10.
as M. Morton falsely avouched, but, vt ei statim creato liceat nomen mutare,
that it was lawful for him that was made Pope presently after his election to
change his name, i^ he would: and this is only, and that a good one, to
affirm that Polidore observes that Popes for a long time did change their
names by Antiphrase: whereas he said only that they might do it if they li^t,
but he does not, nor cannot give any true example that ever any one did it for
this cause.

32. But the second delusion is much more singular: for whereas Polidore said
that he brings in this contemplation of his but in jest, and not in earnest.
non ex^raiocum dict^m sit, Pream. vbi^supra.
be it spoken but in pastime; M. Morton in his first allegation thereof in his
dedicatory to his Majesty as a Minister of s^mple truth, quite leaves out
these words, thereby to make his Highness think, that Polidore utters this
devise in good ^arnest without any excuse or interpretation thereof: but now
here in this other work to my L. of Salisbury being forced to lay them forth,
he deuiseth a new interpretation, saying, that non extra iocum dictum sit, does
signify that it may not be spoken without a jest, which is a very jest indeed,
but a lying and malicious jest. And (...) with these two new lies, I shall end
this recapitu^ation, referring the Reader for more particulers in this last
twofold lie to that we have handled more largely before in the fourth Chapter,
number. 12.13. etc.

33. And thus having made this short reuiew and collection of these 20.
branches of new, witting, and wilful untruths, The Conclusion.
containing in particular above fifty, as the Reader will find in perusing them
over, I shall pass to the tenth and last Chapter of all wherein,
notwithstanding all these euictions, you shall find the most strange confident
animosity of his own singular and simple truth, and the rarest braggs, vaunts,
protestations, prouocations and new Chalenges, that ever, perhaps, you heard in
your life: so as he proves himself a Cock of the game indeed, in crowing
lowdest, when he is most battered. We shall pass on then to see his crowings.

THE TENTH, AND LAST CHAPTER, CONTAINING NEW CHALLENGES, PROTESTATIONS, VAVNTS,
AND OTHER VEHEMENT assertions of M. Morton, that inwrappe him in bands of
further absurdities, then any of his former errors or ouersightes before laid
down.
PREFACE.
ALBEIT from the beginning of this Book, and especially in our Epistle
prefixed before the same, as well Dedicatory to the Universities, as also
Admonitory to M. Morton himself, we have made manifest, that the manner of his
answering in this his last Preambling defense was nothing else but a certain
flourish and outcry of words, thereby to astonish the Reader, and to divert his
attention from the substance of the matter it self, by protesting, promising,
threatening, vaunting, challenging and the like: yet for that he multiplieth
more these shifts, and relieth more upon them in the Conclusion and last
Paragraph of his said Preamble, then any where else before, intituling the same
a Challeng against P.R. I am forced in this place to call again into view this
idle argument of braggi^g, craking, Bragging and craking.
and outfacing, called in latin lactantia, sauouring either of a very vain
mind, or desperate cause, or both.

2. And to begynue with the matter it self, and with his manner of proceeding
herein, you have heard before what solemn protestations he has made, what
severe conditions he has specified, what grievous punishments he has
appointed to himself, if he essectuate not great matters in this his Preamble:
If he make it not manifest (to use his own words) that I have preuaricated in
my whole cause, Epist. dedicat. page 3.
betrayed my Countries State, disgraced the Roman Schools, and strangled my
own conscience, he refuses not to be condemned: and that above all other
crimes against him, he is content that this be added, that he durst a^^irme
thus much before my L. of Salisbury his honor.

Preamb.. 12. p. 43.
^. You have heard more over how he threatens so to press me in the matter of
Equivocation, as no wit of man should be able to excuse me. And again in the
next Paragraph ensuyng: if I prove not (says he) their doctrine to be as
bitter as the water of Meribah (he should have said Marah, A gross error
about Meribah.
as appears Exodus 15. v. 23. for Meribah was the sweet water that guished out
of the Rock, Pream. 49.
whereof both men and beasts did drink, Exodus 17. v. 7, Exodus 15.
and I marvel he would err so grossly) then let them note me (says he) for
a man above the nature of man malicious. Exodus 17.
He threatens to drive me to a vertigo and gyddines, that I shall repent, that
ever I took this matter in hand: but here he enters into more vehement and
patheticall protestations, which yet I do not see how he may well call
Challenges, Three parts of this chapter.
but rather certain discharges or deprecations for himself, which he divides
into three sorts, the first for his own person, the second against me his
adversary, the third concerning the cause in hand between us: and in every one
of these parts he has four members of challenge, so as in all they are
twelve in number: we shall run them over in order as they lie.

CONCERNING M. Mortons own person, and what new Protestations and Challenges
he makes therabout.. I.
HIS first challeng is this: His first charge concerning himself.
As for the integrity of my conscience (says he) I do auow, that if I have not
in the iealousy of my infirmity done that which no one to my knowledge has done
these many ages, to wit, reuiewed some of mine own books, and examined them
not as an Author, but as a Ce^surer, discovering such my escapes, as I could at
any time find, and publishing them in print with open animaduersions, to the
end that mine own correction might be my Readers direction: then I say I will
con^esse my self worthy of all the criminations of frauds, tricks, deceipts,
cosenages, and whatsoever opprobrious imputations P. R. either has, or can
fasten upon me.

5. This is his first protestation: To the 1. protestation.
whereunto first I say, concerning his last words, that albeit it were true,
that M. Morton had used this diligence which here he mentions of reuiewing
and censuring his own works, which yet I never saw published, this does not
so defend him, but that his adversary P. R. may justly fasten upon him the
imputations of falsehood, which he pretends to do: for so much as he might
^leightly or partially oueruiew his own works, and either out of blindn^sse of
selfeloue not see his own errors (which were hard to believe, they being so
manifest as before has been showed) or rather loath to strike the^ out for want
of other better matter to supply their place. And howsoever it be, P. R.
stands to the auouchment of his imputations, and appealeth to the trial
already made: which being apparently true, and in many manifest points not
reprouable, M. Mortons reuiew must needs condemn himself, either of lack of
sight, or want of conscience.

M. Morton out of the iealousy of his infirmity, as he calls it, did make so
diligent a search and inquiry upon his works, as here he says, for so much as
in this very book of Preamble in the few points that he takes upon him to
answer, he is forced to confess for his own defense, that sometimes he did
not see the Author whom he cyteth, as of Preamb. page 91.
Nauclerus about the false allegation, that Pope Adrian was choked with a fly,
in his second objection, and 8. Paragraph. And oftentimes he lays the fault
of his false allegations upon others, as upon one Richard Preamb. page 1^4. and
106.
Sto^ke Minister of London in sundry false citations of Gratian: as also upon
^rea^. 84.
Tol^ssanus about Otto Frisingensis; and upon Preamb. page 100.
Ri^ Can. for the falsification of M. Reinolds testimony: may this be called an
exact reuiew of his own works? what exact and diligent ce^sure did he use in
this reuiew? How did he discover his escapes therein, as here he professes? How
does he give me special Preamb. page 104.
thanks for pardoning him in one of his escapes, and for ascribing it to that
he had not seen the Author himself? calling this my curtesy a dram^ of sugar?
Was this diligence? Was this iealousy of his own infirmity? Nay he says more,
that he has per^ormed greater exac^nes in this point, then any one Author to
his knowledge for many ages. Is not this exc^ssiue ouerlashing against others,
and ouerweening in himself? What one Author can he bring ^orth among
Catholic writers, who in a book of this small bulk and bigness may be found
to have uttered the least part of such manifest untruths, as here have bin
proved and convinced against him

7. He has taken in hand before, Preamb.. 15. p. 62^
as you have seen, Cardinal Bellarmine, to search and pick some matter out of
him, that might seem to bear some show of untruth: but has bin able to find
no one, as we in the third Chapter of this our Answer have made it plain: and
yet is there great difference between the case of Cardinal Bellarmine and M.
Morton, Preamb. p^ 128.
if you consider it. For whereas he writes for some excuse of himself in this
place, that it is almost impossible for any man citing ^oure or five hundred
testimonies, Prea^b. 128.
as factors in their accounts, but that by chance he will err in some
particulers without note of ^raude or Cosenage: then much more may this be
yielded to the Cardinals works and authorities cited therein, Comparisons of the
exactnes in writing between Cardina^l B^larmin, and ^. M.
which no doubt are fifty for one at least, in regard of this Preamble, and
then ensues this comparison, that M. Morton having uttered so many gross and
witting untruths in so little a book, and the Cardinal so few, or rather
none at all, that M. Mort. can find and prove in so many thousand authorities
as in his volumes are cyted, it makes more notable the vanity of this first
challeng or brag, that he has done more in strict examination and censuring of
his own books, then any other author for many ages together.

8. Thirdly the reckoning is now made so clear and perspicuous, subductis ex
vtraque part rationibus, by casting the accounts most exactly on both sides,
especially by our last three precedent Chapters, to wit, of the fourtene
falsehoods objected against him which he chose out to answer but could not: and
then by the twice fourteen which he wittingly pretermitted as unanswerable:
and lastly the number of new lies and falsehoods uttered in discharge of the
former; the reckoning (I say) is made so evident and palpable, as it must needs
cause great laughter to see M. Morton come forth, The penalties whereunto T. M.
is alliable^ by his own obligation.
and say after all this, That if he have not in the jealousy of his infirmity
so reuiewed and examined his book, not as an Author but as a Censurer,
discovering his own escapes etc. he will confess himself worthy of all the
criminations, frauds, tricks and deceipts laid against him by his adversary:
wherein I see no other way can be taken by justice, but as in suites of
obligation when the conditions are not fulfilled, the penalties must be
undergone by the obliged, whereunto by band and obligation he is liable; that is
to say M. Morton must be condemned of all the imputations before recyted.

9. Fourthly, to the end it may appear, that not only I, who am his
Countryman, have observed this manner of dealing in his treatises written in
English but strangers also in such pieces as he has set forth in the Latin
tongue (though I confess in all truth and sincerity, that I never read or saw
any thing of his in that tongue) I shall here set down the words of a learned
stranger, that some days past wrote a letter out of Germany to a friend of his
about two books of M. Mortons confuted by him, and almost ready to go to the
prynt. I know not the very title of the said books, but I have the original
Letter of the writer imparted unto me by my learned friend, to whom it was
written, and I have showed the same to sundry others, who will testify that it
is not feigned by me. By which letter is evident, what stuff is contained in
the said two Books, and what opinion he has of the Author. And if I shall
understand that any fraud or falsehood is suspected on my part in this relation,
I shall procure the Answerer to cause this Epistle of his to be printed with
the said Answer: his words therefore are these, treating with his friend of
the edition of his said Answer.

The Censure of a stranger concerning two books of M. Mortons, set forth in
Latin, against the Jesuits.
Quid Mortoni editionem retardarit, in proximis iam perscripsi. Liber, quin
magnus sit, nullo breui^atis studio effici potest. Nam and Mortoni liber
crassus est, and ex nostrorum potissimum scriptis mendaciter citatis, totus
ille cento consutus est. Vnde, vt hominis mendacissimi impudentia prodatur,
necessarium est singulorum verba sic primo poni, vt abillo relata sunt; eadem
deinde cum fide ex ipsis Authoribus recensenda, cum tempestiua aliqua
Mortonianae artis commendatione. Primum librum (habet ille ad 100. circiter
Capita, and varias materias, imo omnes pene iam controuersas continet) prout ab
illo emissi^ est, totum confutaui: and tot in illo, adeoque crassa mendacia
demonstraui, vt frustra sit ad alterum progredi: in quo homo insulsissimus
plerumque ex primo repetit, and familiarissimis sibi figuris, hoc est mendacijs
alijs, aliterilla exornat: itaque ex hoc paucula ta^tum delibabo. Si Scribam
inuenero legendi gnaru^, dabo operam, vt exscribatur etc. Nam in hoc labor
suscipie^do non aliud spectaui, quam vt errantibus asieno sub nomine viam and
veritatem ostenderem. Vnde in singulis Capitibus Catholicum primo sensum, quem
Mortonus peruertit, exposui, and aliqua Scripturae vel Pa^rum authoritate
stabilini. Mortoni deinde mendacia and calumnias detexi. Quod factu non admodum
suit difficile, nisi quod laboriosum fuit Authors quos citat conquirere,
singulos excutere, vt de Mortoni perfidia euidenter constaret. Librum Passauij
reliqui, quo simul atque rediero (spero autem nosilluc ante Pentecosten
redituros) me operi ac^ingam etc.

Grecij 20. Aprilis 1608. G. I.

11. Thus that learned stranger: who I assure my self must needs laugh
heartily, if he shall understand that M. Morton makes such special
protestations and challenges of the integrity of his conscience and iealosy o^
his infirmity, and of the severe examining and censuring his own books before
they come abroad, and yet that they come forth with so many gross falsities,
as both he, and we, and all other his Readers that be not passionate do find. I
have not thought good to translate this Epistle into English, for that there be
some words more sharp therein, then I would willingly use against an Adversary,
whom I seek rather to pacify and satisfy with reason (if it be possible)
then to exulcerate by sharpnes of speech: albeit I cannot let pass to set
down the judgment of another learned stranger, extant in a printed book of
his in defense of Cardinal Bellarmin, whom M. Morton chiefly pretends to
impugn, but so weakly and absurdly, as the said learned man gives a very
contemptible censure of the whole work, saying: Gretzerus in ^ef^ns. B^lla^m.
page 435.
Hoc opus merito suo inter stulcissima, quae ex Nouatorum officina prodierunt,
sedem sibi deposcit; adeo fatue, stolide and insulse non dissertat, sed
delirat. Which words also for the forsaid cause I leave untranslated. And this
may suffice for his first challenge: there follows the second.

12. If I have not earnestly desired (says he) and by the law of love
challenged of my friends strict justice, in noting such deprauations as might
any way occur: His second Challe^ge.
and (least they should suspect their reprehension to become less acceptable
unto me) if I have not pro^essed it to be my greatest offense, not to be in
that manner offended: If I have bin ever so peruersly obstinate, as not willing
to be reformed by any adversary: then I will confess my self worthy of all
criminations, frauds, tricks, deceipts, cosenages etc.

13. To which challeng I answer, that if M. Morton have had this earnest
desire indeed, which he speaks of, and have requested his friends by the law
of love, to note in strict justice his d^prauatio^s, as he protests, we must
needs conclude, that either he has had few faithful friends to perform that
friendly office unto him, or that they were very careless in their
annotations, or he not very prompt to follow their aduertisme^ts, supposing the
multitude of faults that are found, whereof neither he, nor they did take any
notice, or seek to correct them. And as for his willingness to be reformed by
any adversary, M. Mort. preuaricateth his promises.
and that his greatest offense was, and is, not to be in that manner offended,
I do not see how it can be true or held for probable: for so much as my self
being his adversary in the cause and controversy between us, having sought
friendly in my book of Mitigation to admonish and reform him in many errors
and falsities uttered by him, he has been so far of from taking it in good
part, or not being offended therewith, as he has utterly lost himself through
impacience in diverse passages in this his answer, as before you have heard upon
diverse occasions, and no where will it more appear, then by the second part of
this his challenge concerning his adversary presently to ensue: wherein he
passes the scolding of any bad woman lightly that ever I have heard of, if
inuectiue scurrility be scolding. Wherefore in this he protesting one thing and
doing the contrary, within so few lines, it may easily be seen what credit may
be given to his words. Let us pass to his third challenge.

14. Although I can not (says he) but choose to be struck rather of a friend
who wounds, His 3. challenge.
that he may heal, t^en of an enemy, who intends only to hurt: Preamb. p.
127.
a friendly animaduersion, being as an Antidote, which is a reprehending of me,
least I might be reprehensible: and the taxation of an enemy being as toxicum
calummously poisoning whatsoever deserves good: yet if I have ever been so
wickedly perverse as not (whenever justly) to be willingly reproved by my
adversary, turning his venom in^o treacle, his deformation into reformation,
then I say, I will confess my self worthy of all the criminations as before.

15. This Challeng if we consider it well, is only a multiplication of words
without new sense or substance, The Answer.
for that in the later part of the former Challeng, he protested the same that
he does here: that he was willing to be re^ormed by any Adversary, which here
he repeateth again with some more Rhetoric of phrases, but no more truth.
For that I being his Adversary and reproving him of so many untruths, and
offering to stand to the trial, as now I have done, he has not only not taken
it patiently nor turned venom into treacle, but quite contrariwise treacle
into venom: for that my admonitions were treacle indeed to resist the venom
of a lying spirit infused by heresy, if he would have taken the benefit
thereof. And as for the Antidote, which here he speaks of to be reprehended
friendly, least he might be reprehensible; if it be so much to be esteemed as he
says (and so it is indeed) then much more obligation is there to be patient in
receiving reprehension, where a man is actually reprehensible indeed, and that
in so high a degree as I do pretend and prove that M. Morton is, by his false
dealing before laid down, which yet he holding for toxicum, I have very little
hope though much desire, that it may do him good: but to others I trust it
will, that are not so partially and passionatly interessed in the matter.

16. His fourth Challeng is uttered in these words: If in my ordinary course of
life (says he) any man can charge me with a bent to this vice of ^alsity,
though it were for hope of whatsoever advantage etc. then I will confess my
self worthy etc. His fourth Challenge.
Unto which Challenge, if so he will needs call it (for I never saw Challenges
run in this form) I have this only to answer, The Answer.
that the falsifications objected are extant a part rei, and avouched out of
his Books published in his name: and whether he wrote the same either of a
bent to this vice, or of a back, that is to say, of a necessity or kind of
compulsion for manteyning of a bad cause, I will not stand to dispute or
determine. Neither will I allege any thing injuriously against M. Mortons
person, which I do love from my heart in the true love of Christ our Savior,
wishing his best spiritual good as mine own, and do esteem him also for the
good parts that God has bestowed upon him, though I do pity the evil
employment thereof, in the cause he defends. And this shall be sufficient
concerning his chalenges and protestatio^s about his own person. Now to the
person of P. R. his Adversary.

CONCERNING the person of his Adversary P. R. and absurd Challenges made
against him.. II.
IF in any other place of his whole Book (which yet are many, as you have
seen, by the perusal thereof, and of my answer) M. Morton forgot himself, or
rather lost himself by vehemence of passion, grief and choler, he seems
principally to have done it in this place, where he ce^sureth his adversary in
four several challe^ges, which I have thought best to set down together, and
not to answer the^ severally, as I did in the fo^mer Paragraph. For that
indeed there is nothing in these but excess of intemperate heat in
co^tumelious speech. Thus then he writes.

18. Concerning the disposition of my Adversary (says he) if he be not
manif^sted to have so behaved himself in terms, Preamb. p. 128.
so dispitefully mal^gn^nt, as if the Capital letters o^ his name P. R. did
justly be^oken Princeps Rabulatum. 4. absurd Chale^ges.
^f not so dotingly ^a ne in ostentation of his own wit and learning, as if P.
R. Phormio Romanista. If not in desence of his cause in both the questions of
Rebellion and Equivocation so dis^olute, Praeuaricator Rasus. If not in his
criminations and objections of falsifications Perfidiae Reus etc. then So M.
Morton.

19. And does not the discrete Reader see by these manner of Challenges, The
Answer.
that the man has more need of compassion and commiseration from me then
confutation? Truly I cannot think so ill of his nature or condition, that he
would have fallen into this ridiculous distemperature of words, but upon some
great straites and extremities of mind. For first what Grammar scholar is
there, that has never so small measure of a malicious wit, that cannot invent
twenty of these opprobrious terms and combinations upon any two letters, that
shall be given him to that purpose? And do you not think that the letters T. M.
may receive in like manner variety of such allusions? at least wise the
interpretation of T. M. Thomas M^ndax or lying Thomas, The vanity of his
Chaleng^s con^uted.
could not fail to offer it self to every man's cogitation that had read the
multitude of witting and wilful untruths convinced by me against him before.
Wherefore this invention of revenge was a very poor and feeble one.

20. Secondly these opprobrious interpretations used here by M. Morton have
not only any truth, sap, salt, or acumen in them, but neither any mean
conueniency or congruity with the things whereunto they are applied. As in the
first, in regard of despitefully malignant terms, he will have P. R. to
signify Princeps Rabularum, Princepa Rabularum.
as though Rabula did signify a railer which is more I think then either his
dictionary or Lexicon will allow, though it import a more inte^perate kind of
action or defense then M. Morton can with any shadow of truth justly ascribe to
his adversary P. R. in this respect.

21. Phormio Romanista in like manner is very unfitly applied; Phormio
Romanista.
for whether he will allude to Phormio Captain of the Athenians; or to Phormio
the Philosopher in Hannibals time, or to Phormio the parasite in Terence, I do
not see how the said allusion may agree with any correspondence to the thing
here objected of doting vanity and ostentation of wit and learning. For
flattery is rather of other men, then of our selves.

22. But most impertinent is Praeuaricator Rasus in the third Chaleng ascribed
to dis^olute defense of his own cause: Praeuaricator Rasus.
whereas a Preuaricator is he that colludeth with his aduersary-Attorney to
betraie the cause, for which he will seem to plead. And whether I have done
so, and have betrayed mine own cause, giving the victory and conquest to M.
Morton, under pretense to impugn him, let the Reader be Judge that has seen
both our pleadings: only I must say that my will was not to do it. And as for
the word Rasus, it was put in and joined to Praeuaricator, without sense or
salt, as the proverb is. For what can it impor^ either to be shaven or be
long-bearded, to use collusion in treating of a cause? Wherefore this only came
in to correspond with the letter, and from some good esteem perhaps that M.
Morton holds of his own beard, with contempt of us, for that some among us
do use sometimes to cut or shave our beards: which custom notwithstanding he
cannot deny to have been in use in the ancient Christian Church, and held for
Religious for many ages past.

23. As first, to pretermit lower ages, l. ^. c. 22.
Venerable Bede does testify in his history of England, where also he gives
the reason thereof, and shows that the use o^ tonsure, and of crown, made in
their hair, was from the time of the Apostles themselves. Which in like manner
Lib. 2. c. 4. de divine. offic.
S. Isidorus almost 200. years before him does affirm, though he yield
another reason also thereof. Before S. Isidorus again Ep. ad Aug. quae est 26.
inter Ep. Aug. and ad Sabinian. Diac.
S Hierome, and Ep. ad Procul. Ep. 147. and l. de opere monach.
S. Austine do make mention of the same religious use of cutting their hair.
And so do the two Counsels of Conc. Carth. 4. can. 44.
Carthage, and of Conc. Tolet. 4. can. 40.
Toledo in Spain, the one holden at that time, the other a little after. Yea
the matter was so usual then, as the old Authe^t. collat. 7. tit. 5. c. ^.
Emperor Justinian speaks thereof in his Authentikes. And yet before these
two Fathers, also mentions the same In pa^nar. haer. 80.
S. Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, and does sharply reprehend certain Monks of
his days, that would needs be criniti, that is to say, to w^ar^ their hair:
and the same does Cap. vlt.
S. Augustine in his book De opere Monachoru^. And yet above this and before
this Lib. de virg.
S. Athanasius in his book De Virginitate does not only affirm Monks but
Nuns also and holy Virgins to have had this religious use in his days to be
shorn in the hair of their head. And with him do testify the same both S.
Ep. ad Sabin. Diac.
Hierome, and Hist. Laus. c. 41.
Palladius an ancient Historiograph^r of the same time. And before all these
again for diverse ages Lib. de Ecclesiast. Hierar. cap. 6.
S. Dion^sius Areopagita scholar to S. Paul makes mention of this use of
cutting of hair and cha^ging apparel in them that professed solitary or
religious life.

24. So as M^ T. Morton scoffing at us and our Church for this use and custom
of so many ages, scoffeth also at all Christian antiquity therein. But this
perhap^ is the glory of such Yonkers to scoff at their elders, and to frame to
themselves conquest and Victories upon their contumelies. But let us make an
end of this wise censuring of his Adversary.

25. His fourth and last contumely of Perfidiae Reus, Perfidiae Reus.
guilty of perfidy, is so deuoid of all faith and truth, as the guylt of
perfidy, if any be, must needs fall upon the unfaithfulness and infidelity of
the accuser, that raileth so bitterly without all ground or substance. For what
one thing has he proved before of perfidious dealing in me, who do cyt^ my
Authors, my arguments, my proofs, my demonstrations for every thing, whereof I
do argue or accuse him? And now in the reuiew thereof in this last Reckoning,
The vpshot of the Reckoning.
I do so establish my accounts against him, as there seems scarce any place
to remain for any probable defense on his part: If there be, let us have it,
the Book is extant, the Chapters are set down, the places are quoted, the
words are recited, the arguments and all^gations are examintd on both sides,
not one wilful falsity has been able to be proved against P. R. or any one
Catholic writer that could be picked out for that purpose; but many, and
manifest, gross, witting, and wilful have bin proved and defended and
convinced against M. Morton, though he profess protest and proclayme never so
much his innocence and s^mple truth to the contrary. Where then remains the
Charge of Perfidiae Reus? I am content to remit my self to the Judgment of
any two civil learned men of either of the Universities, to give sentence in
this behalf, though never so alienated from us in opinion of Religion. And
thus much of the men. Now of the matter, book, and cause it selfe^.

CONCERNING his Book and Cause it self, four other of M. Mortons
Challenges.. III.
IN the last place M. Morton makes new Challenges about the Cause and matter
it self, wherein he threatens great things to be performed by him; and that
upon great and severe penalties if he achieue not all that is put down in his
Challenges, to wit: That his Treatises be purged with fire, and himself forced
to recantation. Which conditions if his Adversary should accept, I doubt not
but he would quickly find himself in inextricable brakes, if we may frame a
Judgment of things to come, by things past: and of his prowess what he can
do, by that which he has done in time of most necessity. For if ever he could
do much, it was time to do it now, and show his valor when he was most
pressed, as you see he has been in these precedent Chapters, wherein he found
himself ouerloaden with multiplicity of apparent witting and inexcusable
untruths, so fastened upon him, and so earnestly exacted, as all his credit,
honor and honesty lay upon it to defend himself or give satisfaction. Which
not being able to do but by pretermitting wholly the most and chief points, and
falling down under the burden of the other; we may imagine what he will be
able to do for the time to come, T. M. a cock of the game.
especially seeing that he is so recharged with new Charges in the last
precedent Chapter, as if before he shrunk under the burden, he must needs now
both sink and fall down. And yet let us hear him crow once more at this very
last cast, like a battered Cock of the game beaten out of the Cockpit, as
before we have likened him unto.

27. Lastly (says he) for the cause, Preamb. 128.
if I do not avouch the Discovery of Romish positions and practices of
Rebellion to be just: I^ I prove not the Treatise of Mi^igation to be like an
Apothecaries box of poiso^, with the outward insc^iptio^ So he. And these
conditions I accept willingly. but well knows M. Morton, that bargain,
promise, or leesse he what he will, there will be no execution made against him,
and therefore he may be as liberal as he list in offering large conditions. But
let us examine in a word or two the particulers.

28. If I do not avouch (says he) the Discovery of Romish positions, and
practices of Rebellion to be just. The first challenge about the cause.
If he do not: But when? What time will he take? What day will he appoint? He
has had now three or four boutes and has done nothing. For first he proposed
his co^tumelious Discovery, alleging ten fond reasons for the same, which were
beaten back and turned against himself by his first ^duersary the moderate
Answerer: which he taking upon him to d^fend in his reply, entitled his full
Satisfacti^^, did so fully overthrow his ow^e cause, as has byne seen by my
Reioynde^, or Tr^atise tending to Mitigation, but much more by this his
Preambling answer, which lightly passes and walk^th over all, and touches
scarce any one point of moment appertaining to the matter. And for this I
allege ^or witnesses the former Chapters, wherein the exact view of all has
been made.

29. Secondly (says he) ^f I prove not the ^reatise of Mitigation to be like
an Apothecaries box o^ poison with outward inscription of Antidote: then etc.
The second Challenge or brag.
But what poison there may be in mitigation of exasperating proceedings toward
subjects that desire to live quietly and dutifully, reason teaches not: and
much l^sse I think Religion, whereof this man in word is a great professor. And
what ruynes and rufull ends the contrary has wrought upon sundry occasions,
experience the best Mystresse of ^^ue prudence has t^ught the whole wo^ld.

30. I do show and demonstrate in the first Part of my said Treatise, that M.
Mortons malicious humor in sowing diffidence and distrust between Prince and
people, and in egging forward the Magistrate by Sycophancy to exaspe^ation, M.
Mort. sycophancie.
is neither holy nor wholesome, nor profitable, nor secure, nor any way fitting
a Christian Commonwealth. And that whatsoever he obiecteth to move envy
against either doctrine or practice of Catholic Religion for disobedience to
temporal Princes, is false; first in it self in regard of Catholics, and
then is found infinitely more in those of his Religion. Why had he not answered
to these things in this his last Reply, and opened his Apothecaries box which
now he promises?

31. Thirdly (says he) If I manifest n^^ his specious and glozing Reasons for
de^ence o^ their mental Eq^iuocation to be no better then the apples of
Sodom, which vanish into ashes at the first touch, then will I be challenged
t^ recantation etc. The third Challe^ge.
But many touches, yea and many batterings has M. Morton made to these my
Reasons and proofs for the lawfulnes of Mental Equivocation, and never a one
of them has vanished or yielded to his batteri^. For if it had, we should have
been sure to have seen^ it in this his last Reply, when it stood so much upon
him to overthrow but any one of them, if he had been able. But we have now
beholden their strength and his weakness. For that I having set down my Reasons
for the said mental Reservation out of Scriptures, Fathers, doctors,
Scholemen, examples and other proofs for above two hundredth and fifty pages
together, M. Morton has not found out any one instance whereof to treat in
this his Reply, or to fasten his pen upon the same, but only the Equiuocatio^
of the poor woman Saphyra in the Acts of the Apostles, which yet I told him
before was no Equivocation, but a flat lie, as commonly his and his fellows
Equivocations are, whereof I have given many examples in the last Chapter of my
Treatise of Mitigation, both in himself, and his antecessours, M. Jewel, M.
Horn, M. Fox, Hanmer, Charke, Perkins, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Edward Cook,
and some others: whereof M. Morton thought not best to take upon him the
defense of any one in this his last Reply, but by silence rather to condemn
them all, and consequently here were no apples of Sodom to be found that
vanish at the first touch, but all are dusands and hard wardens that will weary
his fingers to bruze them, if I may trifle with him a little in following his
own comparison of apples.

32. Fourthly and lastly, says he: If I show not that the chiefest advantage
of Roman adversaries does consist in falsifications, then etc. His 4. and
fondest chaleng, or rather calumniatio^.
Whereunto I must answer with this distinction, for so much as M. Morton
speaks somewhat doubtfully, that if falsifications be taken here passiuely
with relation to Protestants, then I grant, that one of the chiefest adua^tages
which their Roman adversaries hau^ against them consists in falsifications
discovered daily in their books and writings. For that I confess that no one
thing does more confirm a Catholic mind in the truth of that Religion which
he pro^esse^h, then to see the enemies and adversaries thereof, How
falsifications of Protestants do help Catholics.
to be driven to utter such and so infinite apparent wilful falsities in
defending the contrary. For that no man doubtless of any credit, honesty, or
good nature would lie or falsity willingly, if he could defend his cause with
truth: Which consideration does greatly work also with many Protestants, that
be judicious, and desire indeed the truth it ^el^. So as in this sense I
confess, that one of the chiefest advantages of Roman Adu^rsaries does consist
in the fal^ifications of Protestant writers.

33. But if we take it, as I think M. Morton means it, actiuely in regard of
Catholic writers, as though our own fal^ifications were our chiefest
advantages against the Protestant Religion^ it is merely false. For how poor
should our Cause be, if we had no better proof for tho truth thereof, then our
own fictions and fal^ifications deu^^ed by our selves? whereof M. Morton has
not been able to prove any one, against any sort of Catholic writers in all
this his Preambling Reply, though wholly it was bent and intended by him to that
end, as may appear by the third and fourth Chapters of this our Re^kon^ng. And
on the other side, there are so many proved and convinced against him, Judgment
demanded against M. Mort.
as he neither is, nor ever will be able to answer the half of them, as you
may behold in the fifth, sixth, and eight Chapters immediately going before So
as this contradiction being so manifest in it self, I see not why I may not
call for judgment and justice against M. Morton, that his books be purged
with fire, and himself challenged to recantation.

34. But presently he leapeth away to the contrary side, and places himself in
the ^ea^e of a Conqu^^our, saying thus: But these things being (...) Gods grace
dir^ctly by me per^ormed, the fruit thereof wi^^be (Chr^stian Reader) to
establish thee in the truth of speech, and dutiful allegiance, and to put my
adversary P R. I hope unto silence, I pray god, to repentance. So he: and with
this he ends his Book.

35. And as for my silence, About his putting me to ^ilence.
what success M. Morto^s hope has had, you see by this my Answer, which has
been drawn out to somewhat more prolixity, as I suppose, then my ^ormer
Treatise it self of Mi^igation, which notwithstanding was far from my intent
and purpose at the beginning, meaning only to have made a brief conference of
things uttered by me in my Treatise of Mitigation, with the Answer of M.
Morton in his Reply: but I found such great store of aduantagious matter ^ast
out by him upon neces^ity of his bad cause, as I could not possibly pass over
the same without saying somewhat to each point; so as I have been enforced to
write more then I had thought to have done, for that he has given more
advantage, then I imagined he would o^ reasonably could in so short a work.
And thus much for my silence.

36. But as for my repentance for which he prays, I must profess that
hitherto I find no least motion of mind thereunto, nor yet cause to move that
motion, for the substance of the controversy it self: About my repentance.
though for the asperity of speech, I could have wyshed that sometimes it had
been more mollified, but the reasons inciting thereunto are s^t down more
largely in the Admonitory Epistle to M. Morton himself. Here only I will add,
that if I could persuade my self, that he could prove or perform directly or
indirectly the things which here he promises, I should not only be sorry, that
I had written against him in these matters, but should endeavor al^o to do the
works of true repentance indeed, which were to recall my said wrytings, and
confess that M. Morton had reason and truth on his side, and were not i^ these
points to be contradicted. But having seen, read, and examined with attention
so much of his works as I have, and this also with so great equ^nimity and
indifferency of judgment, as the love of truth and regard of mine own soul
could work in me; I have not found any one thing in the matters themselves
affirmed by me, that might cause the least scruple of mind: they being clear
and evident truths in the sight of him, that has the light of a Catholic
conscience. And for the manner of M. Mortons dealing, I must protest, that I
find it so vnsyncere (which I ascribe to the necessity of his cause) as I take
great compassion of him, and do beseech almighty God to give him true light to
see the dangerous way wherein he walks, whilst he seeks by sleightes and
indirect means to defend fancies of his own, and of his sect against the
truth, gravity, and authority of his Mother the Catholic Church.

AN APPENDIX CONCERNING A CASE OF EQVIVOCATION LATELY written out of England,
wherein resolution is demanded about the false Oath of two Ministers: Whether
it may be salued by the license of Equivocation or no? TOGETHER WITH A NOTE
OVT OF DOCTOR King his Sermon, preached at the Court 5. Nouemb^ 1608. so far
forth as it touches Equivocation. TO THE READER.
I Received, Gentle Reader, not long since by a letter of the 8. of November
anno 1608. from a fri^nd of mine dwelling in the North parts of England^ a
certain Aduertisment about a case of Equivocation, fallen out in those parts,
wherein my said friend requested my judgment, whether the same where tolerable
or excusable or not? And for that it seemed he had some right to urge me in
this matter, in respect of the Treati^e written by me of that argument against
M^ Morton, I thought my self the more bound to yield him some satisfaction to
his demand. The case then in effect was this.

2. A certain Minister in Yorkshire named Wh. (for I think not good to set
down all the letters thereof) dwelling at a town called Thorneley, if I miss
not the name, The case proposed.
being married and laden with many children, and there upon ^ot content with
the ordinary ti^he^, that we^e wont to be given and paid in that parish, beg^n
to urge one of his parishioners to pay him other tithes also out of a certain
closse or field, that was pretended not to have paid tithes before to other
precedent Incumbents. Whereupon this Minister devising with himself, how he
might further his own cause, resolved upon this mean among others, to deal
with another Mininister, which immediately before had possessed that benefice,
entreating him as well by request, as by offering him a piece of money (as
hither is written) to assist him in this behalf, by lending him the aid of an
oath, that he had received tithes before that time out of that closse or field.
Whereat though for a time the second-Minister did seem t^ stick much, ^aying
that he could not do it with the peace of his conscience; yet afterward i^
seems by the earnest persuasion and inductions of the other Minister, his
repugnance of conscience was so mortifyed, as he yealded to the others
entreaty; especially, for that he told him, that he had so great friendship and
acquaintance with those, that must be judges and examiners of the cause in
York, as he doubted not, but that their two oaths would carry it away.

3. To York Assizes then they went, where having taken their oaths, and
pleaded the case, at length they found not that success, which they expected:
For that the whole town and parish of Thornley offering themselves confidently
to swear and depose the contrary in behalf of the defendant (to wit, that
tithes were not accustomed to be paid out of that place) the Ministers had
sentence given against them, with no small note of public perjury. Whereof one
that was a particular friend of M. Wh. demanding the reason, how they could
swear or rather softweare in such manner, the thing being known to be so
notoriously false? He answered, that they in their own sense did swear truly
(behold then the case of Equivocation) and that so they were ready to prove
it, if they had been urged by the Judges therein, A fraudulent and lying
Equivocation.
to wit, that their meaning in swearing was^ that the former Incumbent had
received tithes out of that closse or field, or without that closse or field,
namly, in other closses adjoining, though not in the field. And with this
Equivocation of ( out) and ( in) they thought themselves cleared, both for
deceyuing the Judges, and their parishioners. Now then to the resolution of the
case.

4. And first of all by this we see, how these good fellows that do cry out so
hideously, and revel every where both in books, sermons and common speech
against the moderate and lawful use of Equivocation in just and necessary
causes, and for just and lawful ends, without hurt of any, do notwithstanding
use and practice themselves the same with contrary unlawful circumstances,
wicked ends and purposes. For that here ^hese two Ministers end was their own
interest, and hurtfully to deceive their neighbor and parishioners. Their
co^spiracy together by way of money, corruption, and bribes, was detestable.
Their guilefull deceiving their lawful Judges, that were competent in the
cause, and proceeded iuridically, was abominable. The scandal given to them
that knew they swear falsely, was impious. The obligation they had to answer
directly unto the sense and meaning of the said Judges, The resolution of the
case.
was indispensable: all which points are different in a lawful Equivocation.
Whereof I do infer, for resolution of the case, that this was no true or
proper Equivocation at all, but rather a flat lie, and open perjury, as by that
we have treated before with M. Morton in the s^co^d Chapter of this book may
appear more largly; but much more throughout diverse Chapters together in my
former Treatise of Mitigation.

5. And here now I would end with this alone, were it not that a new
peart-Brother-Minister of M Mortons is come forth of late with a new printed
Sermon, wherein he takes occasion after the imitation of M. Mortons vein, to
rail excedingly against all Equivocation whatsoever, without exception, and to
inueigh most impotently against Jesuits for defense and practice thereof, as
though they were the only and principal men, that did either allow or use the
same. Which is so shamlesse an assertion after he has seen what I have
written in my said book of Mitigation, concerning the multitude of learned
authors that for many ages have taught the same doctrine in public schools,
before Jesuits were heard of in the world, as this latter Minister can never
defend or excuse so manifest an untruth about Equiuocatio^, but by
Equivocation; feigning to himself some such absurd reservation in mind as his
foresaid brethren the ^orekshire-Ministers did, for saving their public
perjury. But let us hear what he says of the Jesuits about Equivocation.

6. What hope of truth (says he) or simplicity may be had from these men (the
Jesuits) or their impes, when they have not only practiced through infirmity of
flesh and pusillanimity, D. John King in his sermon at the Court p. 27
but with the faces of Sodom and Gomorrah ^aue patronized, published, and
persuaded to the whole world, the lawfulness o^ their Heterogenious and
Mungrill propositions. From henceforth let them ^ase the inhabitauts of Crete
from the deserved infamy, which the Apostle layth upon them, that Cretensians
are liars etc. So he.

7. But I would demand of this New-prachant-Minister, that is so hoate and
vehement in his calu^niation, when he, or his can prove, that any one Jesuit
in the world, amongst so many thousands as are extant, has ever practiced,
patronized, published, or persuaded any such Equivocation as this, which was
used by the Ministers of Yorkshire? When would either M. Southwell or M
Garnet, whom they are wont to accuse for this doctrine, have taken such an
oath, for deceauing their neighbor as those Ministers did? Was this out of the
infirmity of the flesh and pusillanimity, or rather out of covetousness and
iniquity? Was it with the faces of Jerusalem and Judah, or not rather of Sodom
and Gomorrah? Nay I would ask of this new Gamester, that is so exorbitant in
his outcryes, with what face he ca^ avouch so many manifest untruths in this
idle inuectiue of his, that cannot be excused from flat lies, Page ^3.
but by the pretense of some fond Equivocation or exaggeration? as namely when
he says and auerreth of Q. Elizabeth now dead, About Q. Elizab. sanctity and
meekenes.
that she was a Saint, and never did any thing against the Catholics in her
li^e: Iusta quid fecit? (says he) Mansueta quid fecit? Gracious and meek Lady
what has she ever done? whose finger did she ever cause to ache, and her heart
aked not with him? Whereto I answer, that the prisons filled, the mulcts
imposed, the confiscation exercised, the bowels of them that were quartered,
the heads of them that were beheaded, may suffice to satisfy this idle question
of the Minister, especially and above all, the royal and sacred Head of his
Majesty's Mother, most injuriously against all law of nature and nations, cut
of, and so many continual toils given by the said pretended Saint to the
kingdom of Scotland, See Buchanan, Holinshead, Hooker and others in the
histories of Scotland.
whe^by his Majesty's peace and person, life and state were not a little, nor
seldom endangered, as is evident to the whole world, and testified not only by
the wrytings of Catholics, but of Protestants also themselves. These things, I
say, do easily answer the flattering Ministers demand of, Gracious meek Lady,
what has she ever done?

8. And as for the other part, whose finger did she ever cause to ache, and her
heart aked not with him, is too to childish and ridiculous; and no man can read
or hear it, but with derision and laughter, her heart being known to have been
of other metal, then to ache for other men's fingers. For to pretermit these
particular afflictions laid upon particular people, whom now I have mentioned,
without compassion or aching of her heart, who does not know, that when all
Countries round about her, France, Flanders, Holland Zeland, Scotland, Ireland,
and some other states, were all in war and combustion, killing and destroyng
one another, about quarrels of Religion, principally set one foot and
mainteyned by herself, she passed her days in England in mirth and joy, as
all Courtiers of that time will remember: nor did so much as her finger ache for
their hearts aching, Q. Elizabeth made others hearts to ache, when her own aked
not.
for any thing that ever I heard of to the contrary. How then can this be
excused without some shift of Equivocal meaning in this false Minister, saying
one thing, and meaning another? For that in no sincerity of conscience can he
possibly think it to be true. This is then one example, let us see another.

9. He writes of the Jesuits thus in the same place: That their whole order,
institute, and practice are such, as they say in effect unto Christ, as the
Devils did, Page 26.
Quid nobis and tibi est Jesus? What have we to do with thee o Jesus? This
sentence being uttered in such an auditory, as that was, wherein his Majesty was
present, and much of the Nobility of the land, and so many learned hearers
besides, must needs presuppose, as to me it seems, that the vtterer had
perused well the Jesuits institute, An exaggeration about the Jesuits
institute.
and had conferred the same exactly, as also their life and practice with the
law and life of Jesus, and had found therein this extreme opposition and
contradiction between Jesus and Jesuits, no less then between him, and the
Devils themselves. But then me thought on the other side if this had been so,
he should have alleged some particulers at least: wherein this contradiction
did stand: and it had been perhaps no unfit argument to be handled in that so
great an assembly for discrediting that sort of people, throughout the world:
and those of the same order in England would have blushed to have made any
answer for not discovering further their own wickedness, wants or
imperfections.

10. But now seeing nothing at all brought forth to the view or trial, except
only certain idle Nicknames, Nicknam^ of Jesuits.
as that, the Jesuits are the great Mercurialists of the world, Archimedians,
Centimans (or men of a hundred hands a piece) o^ cou^terfait names, Jesuits by
antiphrasis, Suitae by apheresis, flyers of Jesus by dieresis, Iebusites by
agnomination, Ignatians in Spain, Theatines in Italy, Iesuines in Campania,
Scotiots in Ferrara, Priests of S. Lucia in Bononia, reformed Priests in
Modena, and other such like inventions of a ridiculous Grammatical and
Hystrionicall head, far unfit for that place and noble auditory. Seeing this, I
say, I assured my self, that the Author had no substa^tiall matter to produce
against them: for that otherwise this had been a worthy market to have sold his
wares with great gain and applause, if any he had had worth the bringing forth,

11. Wherefore I conclude with my self that this speech of the Minister
concerning the opposition between Jesus and Jesuits was as false an
exageration and lying Equivocation as that other before of the aching of Q.
Elizabeth's heart at the aching of other folks fingers. And furthermore I
considered, what a compari^^ might be made between the Institute and life o^
Jesuits, and this Minister with his fellows in England, in respect of the law
and life of Jesus, which of them go nearer the same. And albeit I do not mean
to ent^r in^o that matter, but rather leave it to some other, that may chance
to answer that idle and vain Sermon, and handle this point more largely and
particulerly: yet are there so many things apparently seen and known in the
world, which do lay fo^th this d^fference between Jesuits and Ministers
actions in this behalf, as noe intelligent man can but observe the same.

12. For what shall we say of the labors of Iesuite^ throughout the whole
world for conversion of Infidels, as in Mexico, Peru, Brasile, Aethiopia,
China, Iapone, Differences between the life and actions of Jesuits and
Ministers.
and in other vast Kingdoms, wherein above a hundred of them besides other
afflictions have shead their blood? Is this opposite to Jesus or no? Is this to
be compared to the actions of Devils? Do English Ministers take upon them these
labors? What shall I say of their manner of life, bare diet, simple apparel,
punctual obedience, strait poverty, exact chastity, much prayer, s^uere
discipline, continual mortification? Do not these things simbolize with the
life of Jesus? Or do Englsh Ministers trouble themselves much with such
matters? And has not this contumelious Minister, that so desperately presumes
thus to speak, a wi^e and good benefices? fares delicatly? sleeps his fill?
fasteth seldom or never? pestreth the Colledg^ with his brattes, which the
founder never thought of? decketh his body with the best apparel he can get?
pampreth his flesh? pursues all ways and means of ambition? flattereth,
raileth, lies in this his Sermon against Catholics, without all respect of
truth, ciuility, or honesty? Are not these actions opposite to Jesuits?
oposite also to Jesus himself, and conform to those of Devils, whom he
brings in saying, quid nobis and tibi est Jesus?

13. But I would not the Reader should think that the impote^t and passionate
behavior of this Minister had put me also into passion, though somewhat I
confess it has moved me. But I shall pass no further therein: it may be that
some other will supply herafter more fully, as before has been said. For as
for matter it will not want him: for if ever there was published a more fond,
unlearned, malicious, spiteful, opprobrious, and contum^lious libell, then
this, I am much deceived: and hardly can it be answered with patience, which
yet I wish the Answer^r^

14. But yet notwit^standing I cannot but add some few words more, about the
point it self of Equivocation, in regard of the excessive int^mperate s^olding,
which (as now in part you have heard) our English Ministers do use against the
same, and I take it to be peculiar to them alone: and this not so much out of
ignorance or stupidity, as some may imagine (in respect of the clearenesse of
the cas^ it self) as of obstinate wilful peruicacity in defending an absurd
cauillation, which once they have taken in hand to prosecute by right or wrong.
And so you have seen^ that the last named Minister King; though a very trifler,
and not able to answer any one of the arguments, reasons, Scriptures, Fathers,
examples and other anthorities alleged for the lawfulness of Equivocation in
the book of Mitigation, or at least wise did attempt to answer none (wherein
notwithstanding he should have yealded great assistance to M. Morton, The
Ministers agree to rail together.
that durst undertake the answer of no one) yet does he fall in iumpe with him
in raging and railing against the same: though if a man might come to deal
calmely with them hand to hand, and enter into a quiet and sober Reckoning
about the matter, as we have done before with M. Morton, I doubt not, but that
they would be forced to reason, even by common sense and experience it self,
and thereby see their own egregious folly. For I would demand them in good
earnest, what they think of the better and wiser sort of men, not only of our
religion, but of theirs also, who make a conscience to lie, for that they hold
it for a damnable sin, and yet would be loath to utter matters of secr^cy or
prejudice against themselves or others; and that these men be of the best sort
for example, which we have in E^gla^d, as namely privy Cou^sellours, Judges,
Magistrates and others, to whom businesses of importance, that require
secrecy, are committed: if these men should be demanded by persons of respect,
whom by a flat denial they would not willingly offend, what passed in this or
that matter, A case and instance proposed to the Ministers.
which were not convenient to be uttered, or that themselves by way of speech
or narration should fall into mention of such matter, whereof they would
disguise for the present the certain truth: what in this case would they do
think you? What would the say? What cuasion would they find to free themselves
from these inconveniences? For if they uttered simple truth^ they should break
secrecy: if they denied the same ^latly without Equivocation, they should lie:
if they refused to answer, they should both offend the person, whom they
would not, and oftentimes thereby confess that which they would conceal. For
that to say, I will not tell you, besides the offense, infers oftentimes a
secret confession of that, which he denies to tell. Wherefore who sees not,
but that commonly the refuge must be to Equivocation, that is to say, to utter
so much as in their sense is true, though the hearer mistake it in another
sense, and thereby the secrecy of the thing it self is conserved.

15. And is not this an ordinary practice even amongst the best men of what
religion soever, and such as most of all do detest lying? And how then do our
Ministers so rave against it? Nay can the common co^uersatio^ of humane life be
without it, where lying is avoided? Let us imagine that there were a man both
learned, prudent and godly, and adorned with all gifts belonging to a wise and
good man, but yet were of our Ministers opinion, never to conceal any thing by
Equivocation, and further then this had also a resolution more then our
Ministers have, to wit, not to lie at all for any respect whatsoever, out of
which two determinations it must needs follow, that he would simply deny or
confess whatsoever should be demanded of him: would any man ever commit
matters of counsel or secrecy unto him? Or were he a man tractable or
conuersable in a commonwealth? or fit to ma^nage any matter of importance,
though otherwise never so learned, never so prudent, never so good, never so
godly? I think no. Here then the absurdity or rather senseless stupidity of
our Ministers continual clamours and outcries against us for the moderate use
of this Equivocation in lawful occasions, is evidently discovered and rejected.

16. Neither shall it be needful for me to adi^yne in this place any further
store of examples and authorityes out of Scriptures for proof of the exercise
and continual use and practice of this kind of Amphibology, Equivocation, or
doubtful speech, when occasions require it, having showed the same largely and
abundantly before, even in the best men that ever were, as Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, and especially in our Savior Christ himself, that was
truth it self, and the wisdom of his eternal Father, it shall be sufficient to
remit the Reader to the particular place it self of my Book, which is the
ninth Chapter of the Treatise entitled of Mitigation, See the examples of
Equivocation in holy men throughout the 9. Chapter of my Treatise thereof.
divided into four parts, and all ha^dling this only matter o^ examples of
Equivocal speech used by the best me^: yet must I needs say, that having
considered since that time, and made some more particular reflection upon
diverse passages of the new Testament and speeches of our Savior, I find them
so frequent every where in this manner of concealing secrecyes, or things not
fit to be plainly uttered, by this doubtful and ambiguous kind of speech, as
in one only Chapter of S. John's gospel I find Christ to have used the same
above 7. Joan. 8.
or 8. times at least, setting down certain propositions, that of themselves,
and as they lie, are in the common hearers ear false, though true in the
speakers meaning by some mental reservation: which reservation though he
uttered not in words, yet is it necessarily understood: and this is properly
Equivocation in our sense and doctrine. And if our Kingly Minister in the heat
of his exaggeration will call these also mungrill and heterogenious
propositions, or M. Morton, out of his modesty, will term them, monstrous,
and impious illusions of the black-art, they would in these countries be
punished both of them for blasphemy, though at home among their friends I know
not how favorably the censure might pass upon the^: but of less then fond
impiety I think no man of judgment and discretion will, or can condemn the^.

17. The place then which I mean is the 8. Chapter of S. John's Ghospel, where
Christ our Savior entering into a large speech with the Jews, uses
Equivocation: Sundry Equivocations in our Blessed Saviors speech.
Ego non iudico quemquam, I do not judge any man: which seeming to be contrary
to that other saying of himself, within a very few lines in the same Chapter: I
have many things to speak and judge of you: and further in the same Gospel
three Chapters before: For neither does my Father judge any man, but has given
to me his Son all judgment: it does not appear how the proposition can be
true but by some mental reservation in the mind of our Savior; which being
examined by the ancient Fathers, what it might be, S. Chrysostom. with Leontius
Theophilus, and others, do think the said secret meaning or reservation of our
Savior to have been this: I do not judge any man in this my first coming, but
do reserve it for my next, at the day of judgment. Other Fathers gather
another, as though he had secretly meant: I do not judge any man, as you the
Scribes and Pharisees do, according to the flesh and outward show, but in
truth: yet neither of these reseruatio^s being uttered, they do make the speech
to be ambiguous and Equivocal, as cannot be denied.

18. In the same place he says to the Jews: If you persevere in my sayings,
you shall truly be my disciples, and: which freedom or deliverance the Jews
understood from te^porall bondage^ and therefore answered him, that they were
the seed of Abraham, and had never been in bondage to any: which error of the
Jews proceeded from the ambiguous speech of our Savior, reserving in his
mind, and not expressing in his proposition, what bondage he meant: for that
his reserved meaning indeed was of the bondage of sin.

Ego non quaero gloriam meam: Versu 5.
I do not seek my glory: and yet does Christ most justly seek his own glory
that is due unto him, and punishes them that give it not unto him: and so in
the verse immediately before he obiecteth this unto them, Vos inhonorastis me:
you have dishonored me: and in another place to his disciples he says, Joan.
13. v. 13.
Vos vocatis me Magister and Domine, and been dicitis, sum etenim. You call me
Master and Lord, and do well therein, for that I am your Master and Lord
indeed. Joan. 14. v. 1.
And in another place, Creditis in Deum, and in me credit. You do believe in
God, believe also in me, which is the highest honor, that he could exact: and
consequently there must needs be some mental reservation in this other speech,
when he says, that he seeks not his own glory, which the Fathres do
endeavor to seek out in their Commentaries.

20. It follows in the ^ame place: Amen, Amen, I say unto you, if any observe
my words, he shall never see death. verse. 51.
Abraham and the Prophets that were dead, notwithstanding they had observed the
words and commandments of God; and consequently in their sense Christ's
sentence could not be true: but our Savior had another intention and meaning
reserved in his mind, by which reservation the truth of the sentence was
justified: to wit, that they should not die in soul.

If I do glorify my self (says Christ) my glory is nothing: verse. 54.
which yet I think no man will grant to be true according to the letter, and as
it lies. For albeit Christ should ^et forth his own glory, yet may it not be
said, that this glory so published by himself, is nothing or vain. Wherefore
some reserved sense must here also be sought out; which according to the
opinion of sundry expositours is, that he meant this according to the opinion
of the Jews, who esteemed that Cap. 5. v^ 31.
As also a little before in the fifth Chapter, he used the like speech saying;
If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true. Which sentence I
think our Ministers themselves will not hold to be true in the sense which
here it bears: for then should they condemn our Savior of falfity, as often
as he affirms any thing of himself: and then must we of necessity run to
^ome reserved sense in Christ's meaning, which is the thing that we call
Equivocation, so reviled by our Ministers.

22. Furthermore in the very next verse, talking verse. 55.
Non cognouistis eum: you do not know him: which seems untrue in it self, for
that the Jews did profess to know him, and serve him above all people in the
world. And in the old Testament it is often said of them, that they of all
other people did best know God: and therefore some other reserved meaning must
Christ our Savior needs have had, then these external words do insinuate:
which reservation S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, S. Bid, and Theophilact upon
this place do think to have been this in Christ his s^cret meaning, that they
did not know God, as they ought to know him, by serving him, as he would and
ought to be served, according to the speech of S. Paul to Titus: Tit. 1. v^ 16.
Confitentur se nosse Deum, factis autem negant. They confess to know God in
words, but do deny him in deeds. So as here also an Equivocation of speech was
used by our Savior.

23. Again in the ensuing verse, which is the verse. 56^
Your father Abraham did rejoice to see my day: he saw it, and took joy
thereby. Which words in the common sense do seem to import, that Abraham had
lived with Christ, and had seen the day of his birth and life, and taken great
joy thereby: and so did the Jews understand his meaning to be, not only the
common people, but the Scribes and Pharisees also, when they said unto him:
thou have not yet fifty years of age, and have thou seen Abraham? wherein
notwithstanding they were greatly deceived, for that Christ our Savior had
another reserved meaning in his mind, which the holy Fathers do labor greatly
to expound unto us, what it was: and in what true sense our Savior said that
Abraham had seen his day: whose different opinions, reasons and conjectures I
will not stand to relate here; It is sufficient for me to have showed, that
this was an Equivocal speech of our Savior, whereby the hearers being
deceived, the truth of the speech may only be defended by a reservation in mind
of the speaker.

24. And finally in the next verse after this again Amen, Amen, dico vobis,
antequam Abraham fieret, ego sum. Amen, Amen, I say unto you, that before
Abraham was made, I am: which being an earnest speech, and as it were an oath,
as elsewhere we have noted, the Jews understood it, as it lies, that Christ
our Savior was borne in flesh before Abraham: and so it seems that he should
have meant according to his former speech, when he said, that Abraham desired
to see his day, and saw it, and rejoiced thereat: which was understood of his
incarnation or day in flesh, which Abraham in faith and spirit did see and
rejoice. But yet here when he says that he is before Abraham was made, he
must needs mean of his Divinity, and in that he was God: which S. Augustine
upon this place does excellently note to be so by the difference of the two
words, Abraham fieret, and ego sum, the one belonging to the creature, says
he, the other to the creator. So as more then one Equivocation is used by our
Savior in this one sentence: and if we lay all these Equivocal speeches
together, which are 8. or 9. at least contained within a piece of one only
Chapter of our Saviors talk with the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, we shall be
able to make some guess, how many might be found throughout the whole new
Testament and Bible, if we would examine the same particulerly, as we have done
this: and thereby see how true M. Mortons bold assertion was in his book of
full Satisfaction, that no one iota in all Scripture, page 49.
no one example in all Catholic antiquity could be ^ound for the same: His
terms also of, heathenish, hellish, heinous and impious Equivocation, Ibidem.
with other infamations of his brother-Minister King, may appear what
substantial ground they have.

25. For here except they will condemn our Savior himself of all these
objected impieties, they cannot condemn the manner of speech used by him,
especially in so grave and weighty matters: and if they permit the same in him,
then can they not condemn it in us, who have so good a warrant and president
for the same, especially seeing we do restrain our use thereof with many
limitations, as in our larger Treatise of that matter is set down, to wit,
that it may not be used in matters of religion, where confession of our faith
is required, nor yet in common traffic, and conversation of humane life,
where any may be prejudiced or damnified thereby: neither to any Judge or
lawful Magistrate, that proceeds lawfully, and has just authority to
demand us, and we obligation to answer him to his meaning. And finally except
some injury or prejudice be offered us (for avoiding whereof it is convenient to
use the refuge of this manner of speech) and except our speech be all ways
true in our own lawful meaning, we are not permitted by Catholic doctrine
to use the same, and much less with open lying, as the two Ministers before
alleged, and many of their fellows are showed to have done. And this I
think is so much as needs to be treated of this matter at the present, by
occasion of this Appendix.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS AND PARAGRAPHES.
THE FIRST CHAPTER,
ANswering to the first of M. Mortons three vain Inquiries, concerning the
wit, memory, learning, charity, modesty and truth o^ his adversary P. R. ( It
has 10. Paragraphes.) page 1.. 1. M. Mortons imputation of P. R. his with
examined (about the sleeping soldiers of Jerusalem.) page 3.. 2. M. Mortons
objection against P. R. his memory. (about the clause of reservation vtterred
in Latin.) page 10.. 3. Against the learning of P. R. especially in Logic.
(about a Logical argument of the competency of God.) p. 15.. 4. The ^xame^ of
that which M. Mort. obiecteth against P. R. in the same ^acul^y. (about a
division and subdiuision.) p. 32.. 5. The confutation of what M. Morton
obiecteth against the skill of P. R. in Greek and Hebrew. (touching the verse
of the Prophet Isay cap. 29. verse. 9.) page 41.. 6. What M. Morton alleges
against the Charity of P. R. (about vere and vero in Carerius.) page 46.. 7.
The objection of M. Morton against the modesty of P. R. (touching a false
allegation of Doleman.) page 49.. 8. An answer to M. Mortons calumniation of
the truth o^ P. R. (about the authority of Otho Frisingensis.) page 55.. 9. The
examination of this controversy of F^isingensis more at large. page 60.. 10.
The Conclusion and general Reckoning of all this Chapter, or Inquiry. page 70.
THE SECOND CHAPTER,
ANswering to M. Morton^ second Inquiry, whether P. R. may be judged a
competent Advocate in this cause, which he ha^h assumed: and o^ some other
poin^s b^longing thereunto: especially touching the title or argument o^ the
Book of Mitigation. (It has 2. Paragraphes.) page 76.. 1. What M. Morton
answers to the former part o^ my Treatise about Rebellion, and against the
title thereof, which in effect is nothing but a Cavil. page 79.. 2. What he
answers about the later Treatise, concerning Equivocation. page 91.
THE THIRD CHAPTER,
ANswering to M. Mortons thi^d Inquiry, concerning falsities objected by him
(though falsely) against Catholi^ke writers, but especially against Card.
Bellarmine, whereof no one can be proved. (It has 18. Paragraphes.) page
115.. 1. Of wilful falsehoods objected by M. Morton to sundry Catholic
writers: and namely his abuse offered to Franciscus Costerus. page 118.. 2. His
first example of voluntary falsehood falsely objected against three ancient
Popes. page 125.. 3. His second example of wilful fraud falsely o^iected
against modern Catholic writers. (about the Council of Eliberis in Spain.)
page 133.. 4. His third example o^ like deceit objected against the same
Catholic authors. (about the Council of Frankford in Germany.) page 140.. 5.
His fourth example of like falsehoods o^iected against the same authors. (about
the Epistle of S. Epiphanius touching images.) page 144.. 6. The second part of
this Chapter of insta^ces against Card. Bellarmine in particular touching
imputatio^ of old heresies. p. 149.. 7. The first objection against Card.
Bellarmine of false imputation of the Pelagian heresy to Protestants. page
152.. 8. The second injurious objection against Card. Bellarmine of false
imputation of the Nouatian heresy. page 15^.. 9. The third objection against
Card. Bellarmine for false imputation o^ the Manichean heresy unto Protestants.
page 166.. 10. The fourth objection against Card. Bellarmine about pretended
false imputatio^ o^ Arianisme unto Protestants. p. 170.. 11. The fifth
objection against Card. Bellarmine for fa^se imputation of heresies unto sundry
Protestants. page 174.. 12. His sixth and last objection against Card. Bellarm.
^or false imputation of the Sacramentary heresy unto Protestants. p. 176. 13.
The third part of this Chapter containing other objections against Card.
Bellarmine ^or falsifications in alleging other men's authorities. page 185..
14. His second objection against Card. Bellarmine touching false allegations.
page 192.. 15. The third objection against Card. Bellarmine touching false
allegations. page 196.. 16. The fourth objection against Card. Bellarmine
touching false allegations. page 199.. 17. M. Mortons Conclusion and
observation about the article of Purgatory examined. page 209.. 18. The sum
and Reckoning of all this whole Chapter. pa. 216.
THE FOVRTH CHAPTER,
Containing certain imputations of falsities and falsehoods falsely objected by
M. Morton against his adversary P. R. which are showed not to be such, but that
the obiectour falsifieth also in obiecting them. (It has 15. Paragraphes.)
page 221.. 1. His first objected falsehood against P. R. (about Tho. Mortons
name.) page 225.. 2. His second falsehood against P. R. (about the clause of
reservation in Latin.) page 230.. 3. His third objected falsehood against P. R.
(about presumptuous Doctors mentioned by S. Paul, 1. Tim. 2.) p. 232.. 4. His
fourth objected ^alshood against P. R. (about justifying of Goodman.) page
235.. 5. His fifth objected ^alshood against P. R. (about Knox and Buchanan.)
page 239.. 6. His sixth objected falsehood against P. R. (about Caluins
Autotheisme, and misplacing of Card. Bellarmines name in the margent.) page
242.. 7. His seventh objected falsehood against P. R. (about the justifying of
Protestants from rebellion.) page 246.. 8. His eight objected falsehood against
P. R. (about dissembling the wicked practices of Calvin, Beza, and others.)
page 248.. 9. His ninth objected falsehood against P. R. (about Sir Thomas Wiats
Rebellion, and the Duke of Suffolk, and others.) page 251.. 10. Four other
objections of M. Morton against P. R. in matter of wilful falsity: to wit, the
10.11.12. and 13. in M. Mortons Catalogue. (about the text of Isay, Carerius,
Frisingensis etc.) page 260.. 11. His fourteenth and last objected falsehood
against P. R. (about the doctrine of Equivocation granted for 400. years.) page
264.. 12. The opinion of the Doctor- Jesuit Ioannes Azor, about Equivocation
objected by M. Morton as making for him. p. 269.. 13. M. Morton his second
witness pretended against Equivocation, is the Doctor-Iesuit Emanuel Sa. page
275.. 14. M. Morton his third Iesuit-Doctor Ioannes Maldonatus brought in to
wit^nesse against Equivocation. page 280.. 15. The final Reckoning about this
whole Chapter with the conclusion of all these 15. Paragraphes. page 288.
THE FIFTH CHAPTER,
CONcerning the chief point intended by M. Morton in this his last Reply,
which is the clearing of himself from many notorious untruths, objected as
wilful and wi^^i^g by his adversary P. R. and how insufficiently he
per^ormeth the same. ( It has 15. Paragraphes.) page 292.. 1. The first
objected falsity pretended to be answered by T. M. (about Popes names changed,
out of Polidor.) page 295.. 2. The second Charge of wilful falsehood against M.
Morton. (about the death of Pope Adrian by a fly.) page 305.. 3. The third
Charge of falsehood against M. Morton, which he pretends to a^swere. (about
the assertion of Doctor Boucher perverted.) page 318.. 4. The fourth Charge of
falsehood pretended to be answered or rather shifted of by M. Mort. and cast
upon the Lord of Canterbury (about the abuse of M. William Reynolds.) page
324.. 5. The fifth imputatio^ of lying pretended to be answered by M. Morton,
or rather by M. Stock for him (about the decree of Gratian wrongfully
alleged.) page 332.. 6. The sixth imputation of falsehood pretended to be
answered by M. Morton with the help of the same M. Stock. (about another false
pretended decree in Gratian.) page 342.. 7. The 7. imputation of falsehood
pretended to be answered by M. Mort. (about the Extrauagant for the Gloss.)
page 352. 8. The eight imputation of falsehood pretended to be answered by T. M.
(about the heresy of Autotheisme objected to Calvin, and the corruption of
Bellarmines words therein.) page 358.. 9. The ninth imputation twice handled
before Cap. 1.. 5. and cap. 4.. 10. and now again brought in by M. Morton.
(about a place of Isay. cap. 29.) page 364.. 10. The tenth imputation twice
also handled before Cap. 1.. 6. and Cap. 4.. 10. ( about vere and vero in
Carerius.) p. 365.. 11. The eleventh imputation pretended to be answered, which
is handled also before Cap. 1.. 7. (about Doleman falsely alleged.) page 366..
12. The tweluth imputation handled before Cap. 1. and pretended now again to
be answered^ (about the succession of Protestant princes.) page 367.. 13. The
13. imputation handled before Cap. 1.. 8. and Cap. 4.. 10. and now brought in
again by T. M. (about Otho Frisingensis perverted.) page 367.. 14. The
fourteenth and last imputation of falsehood pretended by M. Morton to be
triumphantly answered. (about Lambertus Scafnaburgensis perverted.) page 368..
15. The Su^me and final reckoning of this whole Chapter. p. 390.
THE SIXTH CHAPTER,
Containing a recapitulation of many manifest untruths, wherewith M. Morton
being charged by his adversary P. R. did wittingly pretermit to mention them in
his last Reply, and thereby left suspicion that he could not answer them. (It
has 23. Paragraphes.) page 392.. 1. The first pretermitted falsehood by T. M.
(Vasquez mistaken and slaundered about the nature of heresy and pertinacie.)
page 393.. 2. The second pretermitted falsehood by T. M. (Azor corrupted about
the word pertinaciter.) page 398.. 3. The third pretermitted falsehood by T. M.
(Azor corrupted about the case of Couentry.) page 399.. 4. The ^ourth
^retermitted ^alshood by T. M. (Azor falsified as rejecting a case which he
plainly allows.) page 403.. 5. The fifth pretermitted falsehood by T. M.
(Card. Tolet abused about gross and a^fected ignorance.) page 407.. 6. The
sixth pretermitted falsehood by T. M. (Card. Bellar. egregiously injured about
the question of ancient gathering of Counsels.) page 409.. 7. The seventh
falsehood pretermitted by T. M. ( The Jesuit Salmeron much perverted in sundry
points.) page 415.. 8. The eight pretermitted falsehood by T. M. (Salmeron
again abused by egregious cauillation.) page 420.. 9. The ninth pretermitted
falsho^d by T. M. (about Dolma^ and other writers abused by him.) page 423..
10. The tenth pretermitted falsehood by T. M. (Carerius injuriously handled
about his opinion of Priesthood, and Kingly authority.) page 425.. 11. The
eleue^th falsehood dissembled by T.M. (Fra. de Victoria abused touching the
exe^ption of Clergime^.) p. 428.. 12. The twelfth falsehood pretermitted by T.
M. (S. Bonifacius Archbishop falsified notably in the question, whether a Pope
may be an heretic.) page 432.. 13. The th^rteenth falsehood wittingly
pretermitted by T. M. (S. Leo deceiptfully alleged about the oath of
Supreamacy.) page 436.. 14. The fourteenth falsehood pretermitted by T. M.
(Sepulueda abused about Equivocation.) page 439.. 15. The fitfeenth falsehood
preterm^tted by T. M. (Sotus manifestly perverted against his own assertion of
Equivocation.) page 442.. 16. The sixteeenth falsehood pretermitted by T. M.
(Cunerus falsified against his own meaning, about the nature of religion.)
page 444.. 17. The seventeenth falsehood pretermitted by T. M. (Cass^der and
Bellarmine abused at once about the mean of concord between Catholics and
heretics.) page 446.. 18. The eighteenth falsehood pretermitted by T. M.
(Royardus and Cunerus perverted against their words and meaning about obedience
to temporal princes.) page 452.. 19. The nineteenth ^alshood pretermitted by
T. M. (Sayer grossly abused about Haereticus pertinax^) page 454.. 20. The
twe^tith falsehood pretermitted by T.M. (Cicero falsified in the question about
swearing to a thief.) p. 457.. 21. The 21. and 22. falsehoods pretermitted by
M. Morton (of two abuses offered in citing Doctor Barkley.) p. 462.. 23. Of
ten other falsehoods set down together and dissembled by T. M. (Of diverse
authors falsified about the deposition of Popes.) page 464.
THE SEVENTH CHAPTER,
VVHerin are set down diverse other sorts of M. Mortons omissions, besides the
former; and namely in not defe^ding certain Clients of his, whose credit was
commended to his protection in the treatise of Mitigation^, and amongst others
Sir Edward Cook, now L. Chief Justice of the common Pleas. (It has 6.
Paragraphes. page 469.. 1 Of the pretermission of the chiefest points
concerning the argument and subject of Rebellion in my Treatise o^ Mitigatio^
p. 472.. 2. Of M. Mortons pretermissions in the second argument of my Treatise
about Equivocation. page 483.. 3. Other omissions of M. Mortons concerning the
defense of ten other Protestant writers charged with ^alse dealing, which
defense being remitted over unto him, was wholly pretermitted and concealed by
him. page 490.. 4. Of M. Mortons omissions concerning the de^ence of Sir Edward
Cook wholly pretermitted by him. page 500.. 5. The discharge and reckoning
about the former charge made to Sir Edward Cook. page 510.. 6. To the other
^oure Cases objected by M. Morton out of Sir Edward Cook. page 523.
THE EIGHT CHAPTER,
Which by occasion of two new Prefaces lately set forth by Sir Edward Cook
does handle diverse controversies with him, as well about a Nihil dicit objected
by him to his Adversary: as also about the antiquity and excellency of the
Municipall Common-lawes of England, and some other points. ( It has 6.
Paragraphes.) page 529.. 1. Of a new Preface set ^orth lately by Sir Edward
Cook now Judge: wherein he condemns his Adversary the Catholic Divine of a
Nihil dicit: and with what justice or injustice he does the same. page 531.. 2.
That the imputation of Nihil dicit does fall more rightly upon M. Attorney, as
does also the Nimium dicit, which is to utter more then is true. page 542.. 3.
Whether the common Municipall laws of England be more ancient and excellent,
then any other humane laws of the world. page 551.. 4. About four several
questions said to be propounded by the student in law, and solued by the Judge
for confirmation of the antiquity and eminency of our modern English laws.
page 573.. 5. How that the foresaid Nimium dicit, as it imports Falsum dicit,
is notoriously incurred by Sir Edward Cook in sundry other assertions also
appertayning to his own faculty of the law; which were pretermitted by the
Catholic Divine in his Answer to the fifth part of Reports. page 587.. 6. Of
another Preface instantly come unto my hands prefixed before the L. Cooks
seventh part of Reports, containing new injuries offered to Catholics by
him. page 604.
THE NINTH CHAPTER,
Which lays together another choice number of new lies made wilfully by M.
Morton, over and above the old in this his Preamble, whilst he pretends to
excuse or defend the said old. ( It has 20. several heads.) page 625. 1.
About the equiuocatio^ of Saphyra he affirms me to say, that there is an
Equivocation, which no reservation can save from a lie. p. 262. 2. About
Theodoret egregiously corrupted by him. page 629. 3. Claudius Espencaeus
falsified, and made to say, that which he does not. page 629. 4. Of Doctor
Franciscus Costerus notably abused, and made to write that which he never
thought. page 630. 5. About Gratian falsely accused for ^alsification. page
631. 6. About symbolyzing of Protestants with Pelagians, three witting
untruths. page 632. 7. Concerning the Council of Eliberis and Sixtus
Senensis, misunderstood. page 634. 8. Of Bullingers blasphemous doctrine about
the Trinity falsely ascribed to Gregory de Valentia. page 635 9. The contention
between S. Augustine and S. Cyprian about rebaptizing, misrelated. page 636.
10. Whether Catholic authors do speak contrary to their own judgments in
the article of Purgatory. page 637. 11. When the letters of T. M. came to be
understood what they signified. page 638. 12. About Holinshead and John Fox
guilfully alleged and stood upon. page 638. 13. Fraudulent dealing in
relating the death of Pope Anastasius. page 639. 14. About Pope Gregory the
thirteenth his license for printing the C^nnon-law, egregiously calumniated.
page 640. 15. How the Manichean heresy is imputed to Calvin: and T. Mortons
deceiptfull dealing therein. page 641. 16. About the Nouatian heresy objected to
Protestants and false tricks therein. page 642. 17. D. Azorius his five rules
about Equivocation fraudulently and falsely applied. page 643. 18. Whether the
Jesuit Emanuel Sa does co^tradict all Equiuocatio^ or no: and how egregiously
he is abused therein. page 644. 19. Whether John Maldonate were against all
Equivocation: and whether P. R. did fly to answer him. page 645. 20. About
Polydore Virgil falsified in two very material points. page 646.
Out of which twenty heads, above fifty particular falsities are deduced and
plainly demonstrated, besides the former.

THE 10. AND LAST CHAP.
Containing new Challenges, Protestations, vaunts, and other vehement
assertions of M. Mort. that wrappe him in ba^ds of further absurd^^ies, then
any of his ^ormer errors and ouersights before laid down. ( It has 3.
Paragraphes containing 12. new Challenges of M. Morton.) page 649.. 1. First
concerning his own person; and what new protestations and Challenges he makes
thereabout. page 651.. 2. Then concerning the person of his adversary P. R. and
four new Challenges against him. page 659.. 3. Thirdly about his book and
cause it self, four other Challenges wherewith he concludes his whole work,
offering to have it burned if he perform not what he promise^^^ page 664.
AN APPENDIX^
COncerning a case of Equivocation lately written out of England, wherein
resolution is demanded about the false oath of two Ministers, Whether i^ may
be salued by the license of Equivocation, or no? Together with a note out of
Doctor King his Sermon, preached at the Court 5. Nouemb. 1608. so ^ar ^orth as
it touches Equivocation. p. 671.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE OR INDEX OF THE CHIEF MATTERS HANDLED IN THIS BOOK.
A
ABsurdities of M. Morto^ cap. 2. number. 34. Adria^ the Pope whether choked with
a fly c. 5. n. 20.22. Ananias and Saphyra their fact discussed cap. 2. number. 23.
etc. The ridiculous Antiquity of the Venetian laws. cap. 8. n. 40. Appeals to
Rome cap. 3. number. 18. and cap. 8. number. 75. and seq. Azor alleged to condemn
Equiuocatio^ in that place, where he expressly avouches it. c. 4. n. 69. etc.
and cap. 6. n. 16.17. etc. See ibidem number. 9.10.11. etc.
B
BEllarmine charged to impute falsely Pelagianisme to the Protestants cap. 3.
number. 58. His true assertion touching the same. ibid. number. 61. He truly charge
Protestants with the heresy of Nouatus. ibid. n. 67. Most falsely accused of
contradiction by M. Morton touching a place out of Theodoret. ibid. n. 94. etc.
Item for cyting S. Cyprian and S. Augustine for traditions. Ibid. n. 104.105.
etc. Item for alleging S. Ambrose, S. Hilary, S. Augustine for Purgatory number.
123. Bellarmines words cu^ningly clipped and changed by M. Morton concerning an
error of Calvin and Beza. cap. 5. number. 96. Binius abused about the death of
Pope Urban, cap. 5. number. 34. Broughtons censure of the English Bible. cap. 1.
number. 67. Britans their manners, conuersa^^on and laws in Cesars time c. 8. n.
35.36.37. and deinceps. British laws. See Laws. Q. Brunde^ica her speech.
cap. 6. number 38.
C
Calvin entangled about Purgatory, and concerning his atrium or porch. c. 3. n.
92. Caluinisme is heresy by the judgment of other Protestants cap. 7. number. 6.7.
and 9. L. of Canterbury charged to have corrupted a passage in M. Reynolds.
cap. 5. number. 88. The place in Carerius about Vere and Vero examined c. 1. n.
70.71. Cassander abused cap. 6. n. 79. The Catholic Divine defended against
Sir Edward Cook. cap. 7. and 8. The particulers of his book cap. 8. n. 6.7.
etc. Not impossible for Catholics to live together in civil obedience with
Protestants. cap. 2. n. 5.6 etc. Greatest dangers not imminent by Catholics.
c. 2. n. 14. etc. The Censure of a stranger upon two Latin books of M. Morton
cap. 6. number. 76. Chrisme in Confirmation, impugned by Nouatians and
Protesta^nts alike, cap. 3. number. 71. Sir Edw. Cook his Equivocation cap. 7.
nu^. 47. his proofs against the Popes Supremacy proved to be nothing to the
purpose ibid. number. 71. Item to be falsely alleged number. 73.74. etc. The case of
Ed. 1. about bringing into England the Popes Bulls discussed. n. 74.75. etc^
He streineth his law-bookes n. 94. etc. 8. n. 8.4. His preface to the sixth part
of Reports answered cap. 8. per totu^. His judgment of a Nihill dicit. ibid.
number. 2.3. etc. The two causes of a Nihil dicit nu. 4.5. etc. His precipitant
manner of speaking against Catholics. nu^. 19. Sir Edward charged with a
Nimium dicit. number. 20.21.2^. etc. his untruth. n. 22. His railing speeches
against Catholics n. 26. and n. 104.113. His Pedanteria. n. 27. and 28. His
merry fiction of the Monk at Norwich. n. 59. the same auswer'd with a serious
history. n. 60 The four questions proposed by himself in a Students name,
discussed. ibid. number. 62.63. and deinceps. his bad illations n. 67. He
corrupts Cesars Commentaries about burning of wives for petty treason, number.
70.71. etc. His fraudulent dealing in the matter of Appeals, n. 75.76.77. His
false alleging of the law n. 82.83. etc. He forgets himself number. 85, in
fine His Preface to the seventh part of Reports injurious to Catholics number.
101.102. etc. His vaunting vanity ibid. number. 105. He mislyketh nouelty and yet
practices it. 106. His spea^h at Norwich n. 109. 110. etc. His threats against
Catholics n. 116. The tale of his fatfighting-Abbot nu. 118. his dreadful
commination against Catholic books n. 119. good counsel given to Sir Edward
number. 121. He misliketh spiritual books. n. 123. The Comedy betwixt M. Mort.
and M. Stock cap 5. number. 80. Contradictions of M. Morton for want of memory
cap. 1.. 2. n. 13 14.15. etc. Item about the maid. that examined S. Peter cap.
2. n. 33. Costerus notably abused by M. Morton c. ^. n. 10. etc. Touching the
Council of Eliberis about Images, see c. 3. n. 33. etc. as also of the
Council of Fra^kford c. 3. number. 46. etc.
D
DEcretals, see Greg. XIII. A hard Demand proposed to M. Morton c. 1 n. 99.
Another real Demand ibid. n. 114. Item another touching true and false writing
of Catholics and Protestants c. 3. number. 7. Dissimulation discovered in M.
Morton cap. 9. number. 6.7. Dolma^ perverted about the succession of Protestant
Princes c. 1. number. 76. Dowries, see Laws. Diuides c. 8. number. 71.72.73.
E
K. Ed. 1. abused by Sir Edw. Cook c. 7. n. 74.75. etc. etc. 8. n. 88. Item
Ed. 2. c. 8. number. 86.87. Item Ed. 3. c. 8. n. 87.88. etc. ibid. n. 98.99.
Emanuel Sa, see Equivocation. S. Epiphanius improued not the use of Images c.
3. n. 48. etc. Equivocation as it is false and lying, subdivided cap. 1. n. 45.
what is material lying Equivocation, and what formal ibid. n. 49.50.
Material Equivocation worse the^ material lying number. 56. it is never lawful
n. 61. Sundry cases resolved for Equivocation by Emanuel Sa c. 4. n. 78. see
more hereof cap. 7.. 2. n. 19.20. etc. of Equivocation of Protestants ibid. n.
32.33. etc. of Ministers and others ibib. n. 42. Espencaeus egregiously abused
cap. 1. n. 103. Q. Ethelwicks Charter discussed c. n. 65.66.67. etc To much
Exasperation always dangerous in any state c. 7. n. 16.17.
F
IN what sense M. Morton said that the chiefest advantage of his Roman
adversaries does consist in Falsifications c. 9. n. 32 His fond vaunt of
Fetters and shackels cap. 2. n. 35.36 B. Fishers opinion concerning Purgatory
wrongfully carped at cap. 3. n. 134. Flatterers and the effects that follow of
them cap. 2. number. 10. Forfeiture of lands for fellonie cap. 8 n. ^9. Fox his
lies ca. 1. nu. 116. Frankford, see Council. Frifingensis abused concerning
Gregory the 7. whom he commends cap. 1. number. 89.
G
GRatia^ falsely accused by M. Morton with diverse shifts cap^ 3. nu. 19. Item
his Gloss avouched for an ancient decree c. 5. n. 59.60. etc. again ib. nu.
73. Gregory the 7. Pope calumniated by M. Morton cap. 5. nu^. 114 etc. ibid. n.
132.133. Gregory the 13. falsely alleged c. 5. number. 92.
H
THe ancient heresy against the real presence^ cap. 3. n. 101. Heretics
severely censured by S. Augustine cap. 5. n. 76. The History of good counsel
given to a sick man^ c. 8. n. 60. Holinshed abused. c. 4^ n. 50. M. Horns
untruths c, 1, nu, 116.
I
THE use of Images not improued by S. Epiphanius ca. 3. n. 48. Jewels lies.
cap. 1. number. 115. etc. 6. number. 120. His Equivocation. cap. 7. n. 43.44. etc.
The truth of a speaker may depend upon the co^petency of the Judge c. 2, number,
29, 32.
K
THE case of a seditious makebate against his King under color of providence,
cap^ 2, number, 12. Kings how they have their authority from God, and how from
man, cap, 5, nu, 54. D. King the Minister his Equiuocatio^s in Append. n. 5.6.
etc.
L
LAmbertus Schaffuaburgensis abused by M. Mort. c. 1. n. 90. M. Morto^s Latin
wants the principal Verb cap. 3, num^ 39. Laws, the antiquity of our
English common Laws ca. 8, nu, 30.31.36. Whether ever altered by our
Conquerours. ibid. number, 43. etc. The British Laws altered by the Romans.
ibid. n. 46.47. Item by the Saxons, Danes, Normans, ibid^ n. 50. their
excellency, n. 54. They are showed to be defectuous in trial of life and
death. ibid. in the matter of Dowries. n. 56. in providing for younger brothers.
n. 57. in the wardships of pupils n. 58. in the liberty and avarice of L^wiers,
ibidem. S. Leo abused cap, 6, n, 62, 63. Lies of M. Morton. See cap. 2. n. 45.
etc. 9^ per totum caput. Logic of P. R. defended c. 1. nu. 45.46.47. etc,
M
MAncinus, see Carerius. The Maid that examined S. Peter. cap. 2. number. 33.
Principal points of the Mitigation repeated cap. 7. n. 5.6.7. M. Mort.
taxation of P.R. his memory, wit, skill in Logike, Hebrew, Greek etc.
discussed. c.1. per totum. His fond comparison of Catholic Priests with
Jewish. c. 1.. 1. His fond inference against his Adversary about the
resurrection, c. 1,. 1. his exorbitant and false exaggeration about the false
dealing of his Adversary cap. 1. number. 114. M. Mortons ridiculous interlude cap.
2 n. 2 His foolish insultation. cap. 2. n. 9. his vaunting entrance to the
impugning of Equivocation. ibid. nu. 20. and. 22 he is much troubled about the
example of Saphyra. ibid. n. 26.27. his childish mistaking. ibid. n. 36. his
miraculous victory. cap. 2. number. 44. The excess of M. Mort. malice c. 3. n. 3.
He uses five several false shifts and voluntary corruptions in one
accu^ation of Card. Bellar. ibid, 72, 73, etc. his three frauds concerning the
Manichean heresy objected by Bellarm. to the Protestants, ibid, number, 79, etc.
he calls diverse of the Fathers, Knights of the posts, ibid. n. 136, his false
accusation of Catholic writers, n. 137. He is much pressed with wilful lying
about the matter of Purgatory, n, 139, M. Morton in obiecting a contradiction
to P. R. lies himself, cap, 4, n. 6, he denies Sir Thomas VViats attempt to
have been against either Queen or State, ib. nu, 48. Fox conte^ned by M. Mor^^
and Holinshead belied ibid, n, 50, etc. He uses 5. different frauds at one
time about Azor, cap, 4, n. 74, His fraud in alleging Emanuel Sa, n. 75, 76,
etc. the like he uses in citing Maldonate, n. 82, 83: M. Morton cites diverse
authors for that thing, which they expressly do refu^e in the same places,
cap, 5, nu, 34, he confesses an exorbitant fault, and casts it on my L. of
Canterbury, nu, 88, for want of more matter, he does handle the self same
things diverse times to fill up paper, cap, 5, nu, 103, 104, etc. M. Mortons
corruptions in citing Cassander and Bellarm. cap. 6, n, 79. What substantial
matters handled in the Mitigation, are wholly pretermitted by him cap. 6. n^
116. M. Morto^s debts and acco^pts, cap, 7, n, 2, 3, etc. and n, 29. his bad
dealing n, 31, he defends not Sir Edw. Cook, n, 48. his helping the die, n,
75.76, etc, his five cases out of Sir Ed. Cooks Reports at large discussed and
answered, ib, n, 74, 75, etc. his fond comparings, n, 95, 96. his
pretermissions, cap, 6, per totum, his new lies added in his Preamble, cap, 9,
per totum. His vanting chalenges. c. 10. per totu^.
N
NAucleru^ abused by M. Morton about the death of Pope Adrian the fourth, cap
5, n, 20, 22. The Nicene Council not falsified by Zozimus cap, 3, n, 30. For a
Nihil and Nimium dicit, see in Sir Edward Cook. Two causes of a Nihil dicit c,
8. nu, 2, 3, etc. Nouatian heresy in Protestants, see Bellarmine.
O
OTho Frifingensis abused. c, 1, n, 87, 88.
P
PElagianisme in Protestants, See Bellarmine. Persecuting Judges come to ill
ends, ca, 8, nu, 117. S. Peter's answer to the maid concerning Christ. cap, 2,
n, 33. Pius V. scoffed at by Sir Edw. Cook cap, 8, nu, 108. Polidore Virgil
belied, c, 5, n, 12. Preamble of M. Morton, vain, obscure, and confused, cap,
2, n, 1. It is a great head with little wit ca, 2, number, 19. M. Mortons vain
descants upon the letters P. R. cap, 10, nu. 18, 19, P.R. his just demand to
have M. Mortons books purged by fire cap, 10, n, 3^. Pricket pricked by Sir
Edw. Cook for seting forth in print his Charge given at Norwich, cap, 8. number,
101. He is cleared from all malice against the Knight, n, 102, and 103.
Protestant Princes never censured by the Sea Apostolic, c. 2, numero 7.
Protestants agree with the Nouatian heretics, cap, 3, n, 71, inexcusable in
matters of rebellion, cap, 4, n. 39. Providence a principal part of prudence
cap, 2, nu, 10. Purgatory proved by Coc^ius out of many Fathers, cap. 3, n,
130.
Q
THe Question between M. Morton and P. R. cap. 2. n, 17. Of Queen Marie, see
Wiat. Of Queen Elizabeth, see the Appendix against King the Minister, In fine
operis.
R
REbellion by what religion most taught and practiced; c, 7, n, 13, 14,
Rebellion of Protestants. c, 4, number. 39, Rebellion of Wiat: See Wiat. M.
Reynolds exorbitantly abused, cap 5. n. 88. the blame and shame cast upon the
B. of Canterbury. Ibid.
S
THe Salamanders nature, ca, 8. n. 20. Saphyra, See Morton. The sleeping
soldiers at our Saviors Sepulcher. cap, 1, 1, n. 2. etc. The distinctiue
sign of true and false spirits, cap, 3, n, 5. The Stage Play of M. Morton,
cap, 2, number, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc, Stratagemes in war lawful although they be
Equivocations. cap, 4, number, 88. The Popes Supremacy confirmed by an invincible
argument of Costerus, cap, 3, number. 13. see more in S. Leo. Suspicions without
grounds breed nothing but vexations and iealousies in Princes minds. cap. 2,
n, 11, etc. Sutcliffs manner of answering Catholic books, cap, 6, n, 57. The
absurd Sillogisme of T. Morton again examined, cap. 1. number. 27^28. etc.
T
THe case of Tithes examined cap. 8. number, 92, 93. etc. Toleratio^ of diverse
Religions, see M. Morton. Traditions unwritten allowed by S. Cyprian, cap, 3,
nu, 111,
V
Untruths vrtered by M. Morton. See cap, 6, and 8, and alibi passim. Untruths
of other Protestants. See under the names of Jewel, Horn, Fox etc. Vows of
voluntary poverty approved by the Fathers cap, ^, number. 23. Pope V^banus his
death. See Binius
W
THe sweet waters of Meribah grossly mentioned by M. Morto^, for the bitter
waters of Marah cap. 10. n, 3, Wh. the Minister his Equivocation in Append. n.
2, 3. etc. VVitaker rejects all the Fathers at once. cap. 7. n. 45. William
Conqueror changed our English laws cap. 8. nu. 50.51. Misreported about
appropriatio^s by Sir Edward Cook n. 82.83. The Wit of P. R. taxed by M.
Morton cap. 1, n. 2, 3, etc. The lying Woman and lying Priests foolishly
paralleled by M. Morton, cap, 2, n, 38. VViats rebellion falsely defended by M.
Morton cap, 4, nu. 48. etc. See more in M. Morton.
FINIS.

