THE ISLE OF MAN: OR, The Legal Proceeding in Man-shire against SIN.

Wherein, by way of a continued Allegory, the chief Malefactors disturbing
both Church and Commonwealth, are detected and attached; with their
Arraignment, and Judicial trial, according to the Laws of England.

The spiritual use thereof, with an Apology for the manner of handling, most
necessary to be first read, for direction in the right use of the Allegory
thorowout, is added in the end.

By R. B. Rector of Batcomb. Summers.

The fourth Edition much enlarged.

LONDON, Printed for Edw. Blackmore, at the great South door of Paul's. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sr. THOMAS THYNNE, Knight, and to his
religiously-affected Lady, the Lady KATHERINE THYNNE: All saving graces in the
blessed way unto eternal Comforts are unfeignedly wished.
Right Worshipful,
SInce your departure, and now return to Longleate, (where the poor feel
your mercies in set times of relief and daily alms, and your tenants and
common neighboring Inhabitants good entertainment at the general time of
great house keeping) it was my hap to travel into, and thorowout the whole
Isle of man: now its usual with Travelers to discourse of their iourneying,
and to relate their Observations. And therefore let none object and say unto
me that of Persius, Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter: For I
found good in my pains taking: and bonum is communicativum and sui diffusivum,
and so quo communius, eo melius. In my very entrance, and afterward every
where I found written that old ancient precept, Nosce teipsum. This (...): The
scope of this book for one to see and know himself.
lesson I began to take out with diligent observation. And it brought to my
mind the Apostles charge, Quisque explorat seipsum, which I labored to put in
practice, and so sought my self in my self; for I remembered that saying long
since learned, Orbis quisque sibi, nec te quaesiueris extra. Thus my travel
became very profitable to me; and the variety of sights withal procured
delight, and turned my pains into pleasure.

In my traveling, I came to the County Town, or chiefest Seat there, called
Soul: Where I rested for some time, because it fell out to be the Assise week
for all that Island. Where I specially marked how in all things they proceeded
against Malefactors, according to the Laws of England: in this only lies the
difference: there is never but one Judge, whereas we have ever two appointed
in every Circuit, as we have now in this Western, very honorable and
religious Judges, quos honoris causa, non possum non nominare, Sir John Walter,
Lord Chief Baron, and Sir John Denham, another worthy Baron of the Exchequer,
lovers of virtue and Justice.

And indeed, such ought Judges to be, as was and is this Judge in Man. He is a
Judge of Iethroes choice, Exodus 18.
and verax, and Dei timens, and osor turpis lucri. He is divinely given,
prudent, impartial, and very quick (upon good information) in dispatch of
Causes. He was worthily attended, as he ought ever to be, with a worthy
Sheriff, with Justices of Peace, Knights and Esquires, Gentlemen of singular
note and fame in that Country. This I heard of them, and it appeared by their
practice, that they all stand for the maintenance of the laws, they see their
Sovereign well served, Justice duly observed, and judgment executed
accordingly.

They never side with any, for they hate faction: Pride and Envy, two restless
Make-bates, who for notorious misdemeanour, I saw bound to the good behavior.
So as now there a Caesar-like spirit, patitur superiorem, and a Pompey suum
parem. They run all one course, and as true Israelites, quasi vir vnus, for
public good. Therefore do the people live in peace, the land prospers,
Justice flourishes, virtue is exalted, vice suppressed, and the enemies at
home and abroad made to fear.

The whole discourse of this excellent order, and careful proceedings there by
me observed, from my first entrance unto the end, I am bold here to present
unto your Worships, whom I have now found diligent Readers of holy Scripture,
addicted to private prayer, besides set form for the whole family, to be
entertainers of the Preachers of Gods Word, giving freely to such, Benefices as
they hap to be void, not being seduced by men's offering large sums to procure
Aduousons before hand, as too many Patrons be in these days. Now the Lord God
Almighty hearten you in, and to these things more and more, and to every other
good grace, that may lively demonstrate to the world the power of saving
knowledge, in the use of Gods abundant earthly blessings so largely bestowed
upon you, with which earnest prayer unto God for you, and for a blessing upon
these my endeavors to further the same, I humbly take leave.

Your Worships in all Christian services, at command, RICHARD BERNARD.
Batcombe, May 21.
THE AVTHORS earnest requests.
FIRST, to the Worthy Reader, whosoever, to whom let me but say thus much of
this Discourse and allegorical narration; that in it sunt bona, sunt quaedam
mediocria, sunt mala nulla: Yet if any thing may seem distasteful, let thy
mind be to take it well, as Caesar's was, to interpret well the seeming
offensive carriage of one Accius the Poet toward him, and thou will not be
displeased. Thy good mind will prevent the taking of an offense, where none is
intended to be given. In discovery, attaching, arraigning and condemning of
finne, I tax the Vice, and not any man's person: so as I may say with one,

Hunc seruare modum nostri nouere libelli,

Parcere personis, discere de vitijs.

Thou have here toward the end of this discourse, the trial and judgment
upon four notorious Malefactors. Two of them the very prime Authors of all the
open rebellion, or secret Oldman, Madame Heart.
Conspiracies, which at any time ever were in that Island: The other two were
the principal Abettours and the chiefest Supporters of them. Their names,
their natures, and their mischievous practices, thou may find at large in
the narration.

There should have been, at that Assizes with these, the arraignment of
certain suspected Witches: but this was prevented, because the Grand-Iurie
Gentlemen could not agree to bring in their Billa vera: for that they made
question of diverse points, whereof they could not be resolved at that present.

1. Whether the afflicted did What to be considered of before men come in with
a verdict against supposed witches.
suffer by only some violent diseases in nature, producing strange effects,
like practices of Witchcraft? Which for want of a judicious Physician they
could not discern. See Doctor Cotta his trial of Witches.


2. Whether the afflicted were a counterfeit, as was one Marwood, the Boy of
Bilson, and one Mary Brosier? Or that he or she having some natural disease,
did make use thereof, and counterfeited the rest, as one Mainy did, who was
troubled with the hysterica passio?

3. Whether being a disease supernatural, yet might come upon the afflicted by
the operation of the devil, without the association of a Witch, as it happened
to Job, and others in the Evangelists? Or that the afflicted has a devil, and
is a Witch, and has by his or her own ways, brought this evil upon him or
her, without the practice of any other Witch?

4. Whether they might proceed upon mere presumptions against the suspected,
or rather stay till they had more certain and grounded pro^fet?

5. Whether they could (none of them being read in any learned Tractates
touching the practices of Witches) rightly examine the suspected to find out a
Witch, and so to bring him or her deservedly under the power of Authority?

There is now come forth, by the leave of Authority, a Guide Request to
Grand-Iury men touching my book of Witches.
to Grand-Iury men in cases of Witchcraft; my suit is, that they would be
pleased to accept of my well-meaning therein. In which all these points before
are fully handled; as also, That The sum of that book.
there are witches; who are most subject to be made Witches. How they prepare
themselves for the Devil: How Satan draws the^ to a league, and becomes
familiar with them. That there are good Witches, and the signs to know them.
That there are bad Witches, and how then practice, and what it is that they can
do, and how many things must concur in bewitching. What are the signs to
know one to be bewitched. That Witches may be detected. What are strong
presu^ptions of a Witch. What are the certain evidences against such an one.
How thoroughly to examine a Witch: With many other particulars set forth in 28
distinct Chapters, fully, and yet with great breuity. The death of five
brethren and sisters, lately condemned and executed for Witches, one more yet
remaining, formerly brought before a Judge, and now in danger to be questioned
again, has moved me to take this pain, not to prevent Justice, nor to
hinder legal proceedings; but that I may not be mistaken nor wronged, as I was
once, and more should have been, had not the wisdom and goodness of so
reverend a Judge accepted graciously of my upright Apology Judge Denham.
against vain Accusers.

I made a Petition then to my Lord the Judge, to the worthy then M. Sheriff,
and to all the Sir Rob. Philips.
Worshipful of the Bench then present, which I am bold to renew again more
publicly, and that now this third time, because it pleased that reverend Judge
so well to like thereof, and to second it, and is wished of many to find some
good effect at the length.

The state of poor prisoners Request to the Judges, the Sheriff, and
Justices, for spiritual food to poor prisoners.
is well known, and how their souls safety is neglected: and yet our Savior
gave such a testimony to a penitent thief, as he never gave to any mortal
man else; for he told him, that he should be that day with him in Paradise.

How blessed a work would it be, to have maintenance raised for a learned,
godly, and grave Divine, that might attend to instruct the^ daily? Twelve pence
a quarter, of one parish with another in our County, would encourage some
compassionate holy man thereunto: And what is this? Not a mite out of every
man's purse to save souls.

If with this instruction there The benefit of setting prisoners on work.
should be means to set them also on work, they might get somewhat for food,
for raiment. They might so prevent the miserable fruits of sloth; their minds
would be employed, their bodies be preserved in health, and not pine away,
and be consumed with vermin. Yea, enforced labor there, would terrify loose
vagrants, lazy wanderers, and the idle rout, from turning the eues, more then
either imprisonment or death hitherto has done. And besides, such as should
escape, would by this heavenly means of instruction, and bodily labor,
become, through Gods mercy, more profitable members in the Commo^-Weale
afterward: whereas now they become twice more the children of Belial, than
they were before.

Oh, let me be hold earnestly to beseech you, and in all humility to crave your
merciful and tender bowels of compassion toward them.

And first of you (right Honorable Sir Ioh. Walter L. chief Baron.
my Lords the Judges) who sit as Gods among men, to give judgment upon this so
Sir Io. Denham.
wretched, and so miserable a generation of mankind: that, if they die, they
may be more ready with all patience and submission of spirit, to receive their
just reward, and your doom of death upon them: or, if they be acquitted, and
so live, they may learn afterward to live the life of good Christians, and so
make a good use of their deliverance. And would not this rejoice your hearts,
to forward such a work, when your Lordships do know, that the blessed Angels
do rejoice at the conversion of Sinners?

Next of you (Worthy Master Sheriff) under whose wisdom, Mast. Symmes.
religious affection, tender mercies, and powerful habilities the Prison, and
the Prisoners be for the time present. Shall not this work set forward by you,
be unto you an everlasting remembrance?

Then of all you (Right Worshipful the worthy Justices of our Country) by
whose authority these offenders are sent unto prison. Oh that it might not
displease you, to hear me calling upon you by name, who, I hope, are
well-minded to such a blessed and charitable a work.

Ye deservedly honored Knights, Sir George Speak, Sir John Stowel, Sir
Francis Popham, Sir Henry Barkley, Sir John Windham, Sir John Horner, Sir
Edward Rodney, and Sir Robert George; And may I not here also name the worthily
esteemed of their Country, though not at this present in Commission with you,
Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Robert Philips, Sir Charles Barkley, and Sir Edward
Barkley? All to be graciously pleased to commiserate their lamentable case, and
to help forward this work of piety and pity toward prisoners?

O ye other worthies of your Country no less generously affected, John
Powlet, Robert Hopton, Edward Rogers, George Lutterell, John May, Fra. Baber,
To. Cuffe, Tho. Breerton, Io. Coals, William Francis, Rice Dauys, Thomas
Windham, John Harrington, If I mistake your places, I pray you pardon me.
Io. Harbin, William Capel, and Anth. Stocker Esquires, let the bowels of
compassion compass you about, that you may affect this so good a deed, and be
honored for ever in bringing to pass so rare a charity.

The work surely would bless you all. Alas, the Prison now is a very picture
of Hell, and (more is the pity) as the case now stands, is no less than a
preparatiue thereto, for want of daily instruction. It would be, by a faithful
ministry and bodily imploiment of them, a house of correction with
instruction, and so happily the way of life. Then might charity quicken up
justice to send offenders obstinately persisting in evil, and abusing their
liberty, unto prison, in good hope of their reformation. The loss of their
corporal liberty, might through Gods mercy, then gain them spiritual
freedom: Health by labor would be preserved, and their souls by wholesome
instruction saved.

The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, persuade your welldisposed hearts, to
such an vnbegun work, among so many good deeds very famous in this renowned
Nation. The spirit of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth rest upon you, to cause
you to affect this, and in time to effect the same, by stirring up the Country,
and by your own mercies in your life times, you giving, and at your deaths
bequeathing something thereunto. Even so be it, and the Lord God Almighty be
with you all herein, Amen.

My suit is to every Keeper Request to the Keepers of prisons.
of a prison, if they be no kin to Master Newman, the Jailer in this
discourse, that yet they would take acquaintance of him, and become better
known to him. That their prisoners may by their virtues and religious care,
be betier disposed.

My request to poor prisoners Request to the poor prisoners.
is, to redeem their time ill spent; to call to God for mercy and pardon: and
to move them hereunto, let them in serious meditation put themselves in mind
of these things. 1. That their liberty abused, Meditations for them while they
lie in Jail.
God has by the hand of authority taken from them, as unworthy to live freely
in a Commonwealth. 2. That as they neglected and despised spiritual means of
salvation, they are now deprived thereof. 3. That as before they delighted
only with wicked company, now are they shut up one with another together. 4.
That their rags are ensigns to them of their ragged conditions. 5. That
their filth and ver mine tells them of their filthy conversation, and their
many sins and corruptions. 6. That their want of food is a punishment for
such of them, as have abused Gods blessings to gluttony, drunkenness, and the
fruits thereof, wantonness, and filthy uncleanness. 7. That their prison is
as it were, a picture of hell, to mind them of their end, whither they are
going, if they do not amend. 8. That their expecting of the Assizes, is an
instruction to look for Jesus, the Judge of all the world. 9. That their
chains, fetters and bolts teach them to consider the nature of their sins,
which hold them bound to answer at the Bar of Gods Justice. 10. That their
desire of life by a Psalm of mercy, should move them to desire eternal life,
through the mercies of God in Jesus Christ, who will be gracious to every true
believing penitent: which graces (poor prisoners) God send you: and fear
only to die eternally.

Before I end, I have a Request to professors of the Law.
suit to all that profess the Law, that if in this Allegory, fetched from
such terms, as be better known to them, than to my self, I do mistake, they
would be pleased to pass over that, and make use with me of the spiritual
sense, which is the drift of my labor herein. And so at the length, I take
leave, with my prayer to God for the peace of Jerusalem, and for a prosperous
success to all that love the Israel of God, with our Countries glory and
safety.

Amen.
THE ISLE of MAN, OR, The Legal proceedings in Man-shire.
LAMENT. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways.
THE lamenting Prophet JEREMY in his days full of lamentation and mourning,
seeing and also partaking with others of those miseries, which befell the state
of the Jews, justly procured at Gods hands for their sins, does here give
them advice what was best to be done, that in this their distress GOD might
show them mercy; and that was to repent and turn unto the LORD, to the
effecting whereof, he counsels them 2. things laid down in my Text. 1. To
search out sin, 2. and to put it to trial.

In the handling whereof I will proceed as here we do against a lewd and
wicked Malefactor, legally, according to the laws of this Realm.

The first part of my A search to be made for sin.
Text is to Search: we know, that when one has offended the laws, has
committed any felonic, murder, treason, or done any outrage, for which he is
to be apprehended, he presently flying and hiding himself, is pursued, and
sought after; dilligent search is made to attach him.

The Malefactor here Sin is the great malefactor.
which does so much harm on every one, every where without ceasing, is Sin.
This is a notable Thief and Robber, daring to set upon any. He robs God of
Sin robbes us.
his honor, and man of Gods favor. This Thief stole from Angels their
excellency of glory, from our first parents their innocence. This is he that
robs us of our graces, the spiritual money which we have in the purses of
our heart, to help us in our journey to heaven. This Villain bereaueth us of
our goods, drives away our cattle, spoileth us of every temporal blessing,
of our health, our peace, our liberty, and plenty. He it is that utterly
undoes us, and makes our estate miserable, that we cannot thrive in any
thing, Body or Soul.

This is a Murdering Thief, wheresoever he Sin does kill if it be not
killed.
breaks in, by day or by night, there will he either kill or be killed; Man
and sin cannot both live together. Most bloudily cruel he is, for he will
spare none. He slays the hoarie head, and kills the tender Mother with the
newborn Babe. He regards no person, no sex, no age, of so murtherous a
disposition is he, and so inhumanely barbarous.

He is a very strong thief, Sin is strong.
no human power can subdue him; he takes man and binds him: for Iniquity
Prou. 5. 22.
takes the wicked, and holds him with the cords of his own sins. He will
bear rule where he comes, all must obey him. He will command the Reason,
reign over the Will, and swagger over the Affections, and lead captive Romans
7. 23.
the whole man, and make him serviceable to his lusts; yea, and make him spend
his whole estate to maintain him in his lustful humors; whether it be in
Pride, or Drunkenness, or Gluttony, or Idleness, or Whoredom, or whatsoever
else it is; he both must and will have maintenance, else will he set all on
fire: for Wickedness Isa. 9. 18.
burns as fire.

This is an ungrateful Sin does him the most hurt that most loves it.
and mischievous Thief: for let any entertain him and favor him, he will
work their overthrow. Yea, so vile a Villain is he, that the more any make of
him, the worse he is to them: for, he withholds all good from Ierem. 5. 25.
them, he procures mischiefs to light upon them. Ierem. 4. 18.
He keeps out Grace from having any entertainment. He smothereth The evils
which sin does.
Conscience for speaking; hardens the Heart for feeling; blinds the
Judgment from discerning; stops the Ear from hearing any good counsel;
lameth the feet from walking in Gods paths; benummeth the Hands from doing
duties of Charity, and makes the Tongue to falter in speaking of holy things.
Neither yet does he this only; but he works Enmity betwixt his Favorite
and his best friend, even between God and his own Conscience. And to make up
the height of his Mischief; the more to strengthen himself against his
foolish and unhappy friend, he, at unawares to him, lets in, and that into
the best room, (even the Heart) his great and most deadly enemy the Devil.

Thus Covetousness did let him into Judas heart, Mat. 26. 14, 15.
and set him on work to betray Christ. Flattery let him into the hearts of the
1 Kings 22.
false Prophets, to deceive Ahab. Carelessness lets him in, to hinder the fruit
Matthew. 13.
of the Word. Loss of Matthew. 12.
Gods graces lets him in, and seven worse with him, to ruin a man utterly.
Hypocritical vainglory, and Covetousness did let him Act. 5. 10.
into the hearts of Ananias and Saphira: for vain-glorie made them sell all, to
make a show to be like Barnabas: but Covetousness with unbelief advised them
to withhold some of the money, lest they should happen to want: but how to do
this, and keep their credit they knew not; therefore Hypocrisy, Vainglory,
Covetousness, and Unbelief called in Satan, to hear his counsel; who taught
them to lie unto the Holy Ghost, but to the death of them both. Thus we see,
what an ungrateful Villain sin is to his best friends.

Lastly, this Thief is a Sin is very subtle.

Heb. 3. 13.


pestilent subtle Thief. Sin is deceitful; it beguiled Adam, David and
Solomon: Yea, Saint Paul, one once rapt up into the third Heaven, does
acknowledge that it deceived Romans 7. 11.
him. And whom has it not deceived? He is therefore carefully to be avoided
and taken heed of: and this robbing, murdering, strong, ungrateful,
mischievous and subtle Thief diligently to be sought out.

But before Search can be made, a Watch must be A watch set to epsy out sin.
set to espy him out, that he may be attached.

The Watchman appointed The watchman is one.
for this purpose, is godly jealousy, who has ever an holy suspicion of a
man's own ways, lest in any thing, at any time, he should mis-behaue himself.

This vigilant Watchman has with him two Assistants, Assistants are two.
ever to accompany him; the one is Loue-good, a zealous fellow for God and good
duties: the other is Hate-ill, an angry and waspish fellow, and of a fierce
countenance against sin.

These three ever keep together, so as Sin cannot so cunningly enter, but
they can as quickly epsy him, and as speedily pursue him, and put him to
flight.

The place where these are set Watchmen, is called Soules-towne, a town The
Town watched.
of great resort, a thorowfare, never without Travelers, Travelers.
ill motions, day and night; and the Posts, Posts.
which are Satan's suggestions, ever and anon pass through, and many at the
Common Inn, the Heart, The Inn.
take up their lodgings.

This Town is very spacious Town large.
and large, for besides many Back-sides, By-lanes, and Out-corners, there are
four great streets: Sensestreet, Streets are four.
Thought-street, Wordstreet and Deed-street; in some of which this lewd
companion Sin, and his Cope-mates will be found wandering.

When the Watch is set, they have a Charge given Charge given to the Watchmen.
them by one in authority, which is this; Keep thy Soul diligently: and
withal Deuteronomy. 4. 9.

Preu. 4. 23.


to have a watchful eye to the Inn, and to take heedlest at any time there be
an heart of infidelity to Heb. 3 12, 13.
depart from the living God: commanding also the Watchmen to exhort one
another daily, lest their hearts be hardened with the deceitfulness of sin.

These Watchmen have A watch word.
also a Watchword given them, even a word of preventing Grace; saying to them,
This is the Way, walk Isa. 30. 21.
in it, when they are turning to the right hand, or to the left.

To this Watchword, Godly-Iealousie with his Associates do willingly attend,
keeping carefully the watch, so as the Thief is descried, and presently they
make Hue and Cry after him.

This Hue and Cry is The Hue and Cry.
written by the Bible clark, and contains infallible Eleven ways how to know
sin.
marks to discover sin, whereby it may be certainly known; and they are
these:

1 By the Law of the ten Commandments: for by it comes the knowledge Romans 3.
20. 7. 7. 1 John 3. 4.
of sin: for every failing in that which is commanded, and every thought,
word and deed against that which is forbidden, is sin.

2 By every exhortation to virtue, and every dehortation from vice: being
appendices to the Commandments, showing what we ought to do, and what ought
to be shunned and avoided of us.

3 By every Threatening Isa. 1. 11. 18. 3. 14. and 5. 20.
which is the word of Gods displeasure for Sin.

4 By punishments inflicted, Act. 5. 5. and 13. 11.
which is certainly Gods hand for sin; for Ier. 25. 6. Lam. 3. 33.
were he not provoked by Sin, he would not afflict us.

5 By the humble confession Josh. 7. 20. Psalm. 15. 5, 14. 1 Samuel 12. 19.
of such as have acknowledged their Sins in particular.

6 By plain accusations Mat. 27. 4. 1 Timothy 1. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 9.
laying Sins to men's charge, Isai. 59. 3, etc.

7 By reproves and checks 2 Chr. 19. 2.
for Sin, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.

8 By Places numbering 1 Samuel 2. 19.
up Sins by name in sundry Scriptures, Romans 1. 29, 30, 31, 32. 1 Timothy 1. 9,
10. 2 Timothy 3. 2, etc. 1 Cor. 5. 11. Galathians 5. 19, 20, 21. Reu. 21. 8. Pro.
11. 1. Mich. 6. 11.

9 By the description of Sin, showing what it is, as in 1. Ioh. 3. 4. and 5.
17. To. 14. 23. Pro. 21. 4. and 24. 9. and 14. 21.

10 By the Description of godly men negatiuely, by such things as they ought to
avoid, as in Psalm. 1. 1. and 15. 3. 5. and 24. 4. Ezekiel. 18. 6, 8. Isa. 33. 15.
Psalm. 101. 3. and 16. 4.

Lastly, by the Description of wicked men, by their bad qualities and
conditions, Psalm. 10. 2, 11. and 12. 2. 4. and 57. 21.

The Hue and Cry thus Who carries the Hue and Cry.
set out, it is carried by the Spirit of Supplication, crying mightily to the
Lord for grace and mercy to help in time of need, as David did; who saw Sin
before him, and then made he Hue and Cry, saying: Have mercy upon me, O Lord,
according to thy loving Psalm. 51. 1, 2.
kindness, according to the multitude of thy mercy do away all mine offenses.

This Hue and Cry must not be let slip at any hand, but be carried along in the
pursuit, lest in following of sin, men be deceived, and solid Virtues be
attached in stead of Vices. For this we must know, as Vices have not a few
friends, (as after shall be showed,) so Virtues have many enemies ready to
inform against them, that they may be pursued after as Malefactors, that Sin
in the mean while may seek shelter and escape: and the enemies are these:

1 One Mr. Outside, in Virtues enemies.
the inside a carnal Securitan, a fellow that will 1. Outside, and his
description.
come to his Church, keep his Sundaies and Holydaies: But yet in the
Congregation while he sits among others, sometimes he is nodding, and
sometimes fast a sleep; and if he abide waking, then is his mind wandering
abroad, so as he remains still ignorant, without any effectual power of the
Word; and being out of the Church, he is presently upon his worldly business.

This fellow cannot abide What he is an enemy to.
any after-meditation, or Christian Conference with others of that which he
has heard; and if he epsy any meeting together for this purpose, then he
makes information against them, and is ready to send the Hue and Cry, as
against a privy Schismatic conuenticling, and unlawful meeting. This is a
vulgar Ignoramus, and a blockish Adversary.

2 The second is, Sir Worldly-wise, 2 Wicked worldly-wise described.
a very fool to God, a selfe-conceited earth-worme, whose wisdom is from
below, and Lam. 3. 15.
therefore sensual, earthly, and deuillish, who proudly What he is an enemy to.
with much disdain, condemns and contemns the wisdom which is from above,
pure and peaceable, sincere and charitable; and is ready to send the Hue and
Cry after it, as after foolish and doting Simplicity.

3 The third is Sir Lukewarm: 3. Lukewarm his description.
this fellow is a temporizing time-seruer, Jack on both sides, he is all in
the praise of moderation and discretion, one very indifferent between this and
that: He cannot endure What he is an enemy unto.
fervent zeal, but would have Hue and Cry sent against it, as against a fiery
mad-brain'd rashness.

4 The Fourth is Sir Plausible Civil, a fashionable 4. Plausible Civil, his
description.
fellow, framed to a comme^dable outward behavior for ciuility, but in matter
of Religion he has no more, but what he has by common education, custom, and
example of others. To the life of Religion What he is an enemy to.
he is a stranger: strict serving of God, and a more narrow search of our
ways, he holds to be foolish scrupulosity, and is desirous to have the Hue
and Cry sent out against it, as against fantastical preciseness.

5 The Fifth is, Master Machiauell, 5. Machiauell, his description.
a mischievous Companion: all for policy, little for piety, and then in
pretense only: He is a very Iehu, zealous against Baal, to root out Ahabs
posterity, for the more sure settling of the Kingdom to him and his: but in
state Idolatry, a very Jeroboam, to keep the kingdom from being reunited to
Judah. He cannot suffer What he is an enemy to.
gainful abuses to be reformed: but if any attempt any such thing, he accuses
them for factious turbulent spirits, and so would he have the Hue and Cry made
against their endeavors as against some Puritanicall trick.

6 The sixth is one Libertine: 6. Libertine, his description.
this licentious fellow has a Chiuerell conscience, caring for nothing but how
to pass on along his life in pleasurable contentments. Religion by him What he
is an enemy to.
is held to be but a devised Policy to keep men in awe of a Deity; and
therefore when he sees Religion to be made conscience of, he presently causes
Hue and Cry to be made against it, as against Hypocrisy. This profane enemy
laugheth at, and mocketh at Christianity.

7 The seventh is, Scrupulosity: 7. Scrupulosity, his description
this is an unsociable and a snappish fellow, he makes sins to himself more
than the Law condemns, and lives upon fault-finding. Weaker Apprehension is
his Father, and Misunderstanding his Mother, and an Uncharitable heart his
nurse. The use of What he is an enemy to.
Christian liberty, if it be more in his conceit than he pleases to like well
of, then would he have the Hue and Cry sent against it as against carnal
security. This is a riged and censorious Adversary.

8. The eight is the Babbling Babylonian: 8. Babylonian his description.
this is a doting companion, and superstitiously foolish: he boasts of
Antiquity, though his ways be Nouelty: yet he will have it the Old Religion,
and if any forsake it as Idolatry, those he Whom he is an enemy to.
condemns for Schismatikes, and labors to have the Hue and Cry sent out
against all Reformation in Christian Churches as against Heresy. This is a
bloody Antichristian Adversary.

These are the principal Informers (for I pass by petty companions) which
endeavor to misleade the pursuer of sin, and to set him to attach very
eminent and excellent Virtues for Vices. Therefore it is necessary to have
Sin set out by marks infallible in the Hue and Cry: else this subtle
Villain Sin will craftily beguile the pursuer, and will escape either by the
shifts which he can make to deceive him, or by his many friends he has to
keep him from being apprehended.

The shifts which commonly a Thief makes to Shifts by which sin escapes are
principally two
escape in his flying away, are two:

1 Is his Counterfeiting the habit of an honest man: so Sin craftily puts
upon himself the show of 1 By a show of Virtue.
Virtue, as Iehu did piety, for the getting of a Kingdom, and establishing of
it to himself: whose sin was covered with a pretended and hypocritical
zeal for the Lord. Ananias and Saphira made show of liberality like that of
Barnabas, not discernable till Peter discovered it. For as Satan can transform
himself into an Angel of light, and his Apostles into the Apostles of Christ:
so 2 Cor. 11. 15, 14.
can Sin, the seed of Satan, put upon it self the counterfeit of virtue.

2 A Thief will alter 2 By the name of Virtue put upon Vices.
his name, and by assuming the name of an honest man oftentimes escape away;
and after this manner also escapes Sin, Vice getting upon it the name of
Virtue. And so What Vices get the name of Virtues.
Drunkenness escapes under the name of good-fellowship; Covetousness under the
name of Good-husbandry; Filthy Ribaldry, under the name of Merriment; Pride of
apparel, under the name of Decency and Handsomnes; bloody Revenge for wrongs
offered, escapes under the name of Valor. Foolish wastfulnes, under the name
of a frank and liberal disposition; Superstition under the name of Devotion
of Forefathers and the old Religion. Remissness in punishing, under the name
of Gentleness; Flattery, under the name of Vnoffensiuenes; Luke-warmnes in
Religion, under the praise of Discretion; and many such like foul Vices, do
thus deceitfully hide themselves, and so escape vnattached.

If by these his shifts he cannot escape Godly-iealousie, that constant
pursuer, then will he seek to be helped by his kindred and friends: for sin
has many, Friends of sin, and how they show it.
who will either so defend him, or excuse him, or deny him, or hide him, or
make him so little in fault, as will almost persuade Godly-Iealousie, that it
is even needless so eagerly to pursue after him.

1 The first of these is 1. Ignorance, how a friend to sin.
his Grandsire-Ignorance; for he knows no sin, he cannot read the Hue and
Cry: he breeds sin, and brings him up, and makes no conscience of it: if
sin get into his house, he holds himself safe enough.

2 The second, his brother 2. Error, how a friend to sin.
Error, the son of Ignorance; this fellow mistaketh all, and misconstrueth
the whole Hue and Cry, and can find no fault with sin, and so endeavors to
send the pursuer another way.

3 The third is his Cousin 3. Opinion, how a friend to sin.
Opinion, and this will hold the pursuer with a long and tedious disputation,
questioning the Act, whether it be a sin or no? And will endeavor by
probabilities to make it no sin, that so he might make the pursuer to
desist. Thus sins of profit and such as may prevent certain dangers are
disputed, Pro and Con, as men say. The sin of Usury by many is brought under
Opinion, as lawful some way.

So the Sin of Idolatry, to go and hear a Mass without inward reverence,
as it was disputed in Queen Mary's days, to prevent the eminent danger of
death then; Many sins evident enough are made disputable if they yield profit,
or be delight-some to the flesh, or such as may help to keep a man's person or
state in safety; for all these Opinion will be a Proctor.

4 The fourth is, one Master 4. Subtilty, how a friend to sin.
Subtlety, his wit being attended on by little Conscience of the truth. This
man comes with his distinctions to clear an Act from sin; thus with his
latria and doulia, he will have Idolatry no Idolatry: so with his biting and
not biting, and lending to the rich upon Use, but not to a needy brother,
damned Usury must be no Sin. This Subtilty of wit with a chiuerell
Conscience, makes foul sins to pass along as no sins.

5 The fifth is called 5. Custom, how a friend to sin.
Custom; this old Sire, patronizeth many vain and sinful practices. By this
Mat. 27. 18. 16. 21, 26.
the Jews held it no sin in them to demand, and in Pilate to let loose to
them, a wicked Barrabas, one Ioh. 18. 39, 40.
worthy to die for insurrection and murder.

6 The sixth is a Popish fellow called Forefathers: 6. Forefathers.
he aduanceth his Ancestors and their worth, and thinks so well of them,
that to imitate them is no sin. Thus the Samaritanes justified their false
Ioh. 4. 10.
worship.

7 The seventh is one Sir Power; he makes ever 7. Power, how a friend to sin.
that warrantable, which Law establishes, ordains and decrees. Great and
capital sins in the Romish Synagogue are thus countenanced.

8 The eight is Sir Sampler, 8. Sampler, how a friend to sin.
who produces for patterns great men's and learned men's examples, as if they
could not do amiss: Ier. 44. 17.
but whatsoever they do or say, it must be good and lawful, and therefore
imitable without sin.

9 The ninth is Sir Most-doe, who maintains 9. Most-doe, how a friend to
sin.
sin from a general practice, because multitudes do it here, and there, and
every where; and therefore no sin to do such a thing, which almost all, or
the greatest part do.

10 The tenth is one Sir Silly, 10. Silly, how a friend to sin.
one made all of good meaning, who will qualify the fact by thinking no harm,
or intending well. Thus would Saul have justified 1 Samuel 15. 15.
his rebellion, and Abimelech excused his Genesis 20. 5.
taking of Abraham's wife. And thus vain persons excuse their wanton
communication, lascivious songs, foolish iestings, and such like, saying, they
mean no harm, they only make themselves merry. Thus Sir Silly is he that
makes simple souls plead good meaning for all their foolish superstitions,
blind devotions, and licentious merriments.

The eleventh is Vaine-Hope: 11. Vaine-hope, how a friend to sin.
this teaches to put off the fault to some other, as Adam to Euah, and Genesis 3.
and 4.
Euah to the Serpent, and to deny the fact, as Cain did, even to God himself,
hereby hoping to shift off sin, and to escape punishment, who makes God all
of mercy.

The twelfth is the Lord Presumption: 12. Presumption, how a friend to sin.
he fears not judgment, he blesses himself in his evil ways, he makes
a covenant with Death, and a league with Deuteronomy. 29.
Hell, and suffers sin to be his daily guest, and will let the Hue and Cry
pass Isa. 28. 15, 16.
along without any fear of peril, as nothing at all concerning him.

The thirteenth is Sir Wilful, 13. Wilful, how a friend to sin.
hating to be reformed: this is an obstinate friend for sin, who will
wilfully defend it, and be careless of all reproves. This fellow in contempt
will tread down the Hue and Cry under his feet, and maintain sin.

The foureteenth is Sir St. like, 14. St. like, how a friend to sin.
which under the show and shadow of Piety, and pretended honesty, will cover
much iniquity, and hide it for a time, that it be not taken by the pursuer with
the Hue and Cry; such were the Hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees.

These great ones, and many other more, are the friends of this Thief and
Rebel: but yet for all these Favorites, Godly-Iealousie Godly-iealousie will
not be deceived by these
espies him out, and his harbor, and presently goes to a Justice of Peace, to
procure a warrant for the Constable to attach him, and all his Companions with
him.

The Justice is not one of a mean rank, or any petty Justice, but the very
Lord chief Justice of Heaven Lord chief Justice.
and earth, the Lord Jesus: for it is he that can give the warrant to attach
sin, no other warrant will sin obey.

The Warrant is the Warrant, and he form hereof.
Power of Gods Word. The Form of which warrant is, (as you see in my Text) to
search out and attach sin with all his Associates, and to bring him and them
before Authority, to answer to such things as shall be objected against them,
in his Majesty the King of Heavens behalf.

The procuring of this warrant, is by going unto, and conferring with some of
the Lord Chief Justices Secretaries, Secretaries to the Lord chief Justice.
the Writers of holy Scripture, setting down this charge, as Jeremy does
here, to search and try our ways.

This Warrant procured, Godly-Iealousie takes and carries to an Officer which
has Authority to make search and attach sin.

This Officer, without which sin neither can, nor The Officer to attach sin, is
Understanding.
indeed will be attached, is Understanding, who knows what sin is.

Now as there be four sorts of Officers which may attach Felons by warrant,
The Deputy-Constable, the Tithingman, The Petty Constable, and the Head
Constable: so is the spiritual Understanding fourefold.
Officer fourefold.

1 The Deputy-Constable 1 Deputy-Constable.
is commonly some Neighbor, entreated to perform the office in the others
absence: this is the very shadow of a Constable, and will not willingly
intermeddle in any thing: so as the people where he dwells, may do, for all
him, what they list.

This Deputy Constable in this spiritual Towneship, is the Understanding
Understanding darkened. Ephesians. 4. 18. 1 Ioh. 2. 11.
darkened, the son of Ignorance, and grandchild of Blindness of heart:
this is a blind Constable, and has never an eye to see with.

This suffers all disorder Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. The evils under it committed.
in the whole man or Soule-Towne-ship. Here be such as be alienated from the
life of God, past feeling, given over to work all uncleanness with greediness.
All the affections are quite out of order, and no care taken for their
reformation: for this foolish fellow imploieth himself about his grounds,
cattle, sheep and oxen, about buying and selling; as for the estate of his
soul, he is to it a very stranger: He knows the price of corn, oxen, and
sheep; but what is the excellency of Virtue, what the evil of Vice, what the
price of his soul, he neither knows, nor cares to know.

2 The Tithingman, 2 Tithing-man.
which commonly is a mean fellow, and so contemptible, as few or none care for
him. And therefore hereupon is very little or no reformation where he has his
dwelling. If any amendment be sought, it is only for some notorious shameful
misdemeanors, and he must be much called upon for this too, else no
reformation thereof; and as for many other offenses, there is no care had at
all.

This Tithing-man is Grosse-vnderstanding, like Grosse-vnderstanding, and the
evil thereof.
one purblinde, who cannot see a far off, but only gross transgressions
forbidden 2 Pet. 1. 9.
in the Law, according to the sound of the bare letter only; as Theft, Murder,
Adultery, and so forth. The spiritual meaning and large extent of the
Commandment, he is wholly ignorant of. This purblinde Tythingman suffers a
number of disorders in his Towneship, and must be much urged to see very gross
and foul misdemeanors; else will he not seek to reform them.

3. The Petty Constable, 3. Petty Constable.
which is some civil honest man of the Parish, and perhaps has some Country
learning, but yet is an one-eyed fellow, halfesighted, and so passes by many
faults.

This Petty Constable is the Understanding somewhat Understanding somewhat
cleared.
cleared: he has an insight into the Moral Law, who by civil education,
some Art and learning, and an outward form of Religion, and reading in the
Bible now and then, can speak of the Gospel Historically, and prettily
discourse of Religion.

But this his knowledge is only superficial, for neither in the Common Law,
which is the Law Moral, neither in the Statute Law, the Law of the Gospel, or
Law of Liberty, is he any professed Student. He is no Innes of Court man,
never brought up in the Inner Temple. He makes neither the Common, nor Statute
Law his profession.

As he is no Student in A mere civil honest man, who, and what a one.
these, so he is no practitioner, but only aims at civil behavior, common
honesty, and cares to be held only a Christian at large, and to profess the
Religion of the present State, without any more curious endeavor to proceed
farther to find out the power of Religion.

Therefore where this What he only looks unto.
kind of understanding dwells, there care is had only to see to disorders
against civil honesty and common Moral duties, and against courses apparently
dangerous to his outward estate; and those things which may offend the most or
the greatest sort amongst men. This halfe-sighted Constable, a superficial
fellow in divine truth, aims at no more.

The sins immediately What sins he regards not.
against GOD and against his Gospel, as unbelief, impatience, pride,
disdain, envy at other men's gifts, presumption of Gods mercy, abuse of his
favors, and many such, he takes no notice of, but permits them to live
where he has to do, without control.

4 The Head or chief 4. Chief Constable.
Constable is a man of a right and good understanding, knowing his Office, and
the duties thereto belonging, with care and conscience to discharge the same:
for he is studious in both laws, and a good practitioner therein.

This Chief Constable Illuminated understanding, and the excellency thereof.
is Illuminated understanding: this is one, that has both his eyes to see
with, of nature and of grace, he is well read, both in the Common Law, the
Law-Morall, and the Statute Law, the law of liberty, the Gospel of Christ, he
has been a long Practitioner in both, and is called the spiritual 1 Cor. 2.
man, who can discern and judge of all things.

The place of his common His habitation is Regeneration.
abode and dwelling, is in Regeneration, a very healthful, comfortable and
commodious habitation. He is no straggler, but loves to keep home, and to
look to his office.

He has an excellent His Family.
Family, his Wife is called Grace, his two sons, Will and Obedience; his
three daughters, Faith, Hope, and Charity; his two servants, Humility and
Self-denial; and his two maids, Temperance for his Summer House of
Prosperity, and Patience for his Winter-house of adversity.

This Chief Constable, The good he does.
where he dwells, keeps very good order, he suffers not the Rebel Sin to
rule and swagger in the Town ship of his soul.

If Drunkenness, as once in Noah, or Adultery, as once in David, or Pride of
heart, as once in Hezekiah, or Envy, as once in Mirriam, or such like happen
to be found where he has to do, he speedily sends them packing. For
though they may at unawares perhaps creep in, and be found where he
dwells, in some Street of his Town, yet they get there no abiding place:
Though he cannot ever and at all times prevent their creeping in, yet he
always takes care that they settle not themselves where he has to do, but
will dislodge them whersoeuer he shall find them: for he is very careful in
his office, to discharge it to the utmost.

This Chief Constable is he to whom Godly-Ielousie brings his Warrant, to
seek out the Rebel Sin and to attach him. This is that which apprehends
sin.


This Constable having received the warrant, presently addresseth himself to
make the search. But for that sin is Master full (especially every Which has
intecedent, concomitant, and subsequent sins.
capital Sin, which is attended on by many other) and will not easily submit,
but dare make opposition against authority, till he be ouermastered: therefore
this man takes with him sufficient company, to watch sin for escaping, to
go very strongly to attach him, and to hold him when they have him, so as
never a friend may dare to side with him.

First, he takes his own ^ydants. Two Ser^ants.
two servants, Humility and Self-denial, which ever in every search
necessarily attend him.

Then going together, 2. Neighbor. Godly-Sorrow, and his seven Sons.
he calls upon his next neighbor, Godly-sorrow with his seven sons, ready
to bear them company, 2 Cor. 7. 11.

The first of these is Care 1. Care.
to find out sin, that it may not be hid.

The second is Clearing, 2. Clearing.
which, when he espieth sin, will not wink thereat, nor partake with it.

The third is Indignation, 3. Indignation.
a fierce fellow, which can never look upon any sin, but with a godly anger.

The fourth is Fear, not natural or dastardly fear, 4. Fear.
nor servile fear, all too base-minded to attach sin; but such a fear as
makes him to stand in awe of God, rejecting all fellowship with the wicked and
partakers with sin.

The fifth is Vehement desire 5. Vehement desire.
to apprehend sin, to be in Gods favor, in love with the godly, and free
from his own corruptions. This is a stirring fellow.

The sixth is Zeal, who 6. Zeal.
dare seize upon even the most Capital Rebel, for he is like to Phinees,
ready to thrust him through, and to kill him wheresoever he finds him.

The seventh is Revenge, 7. Revenge.
who answers to his name; for he desires to pay sin home for the wrong
he has done him, and would have him proceeded against to the uttermost. This
fellow Iustily lays hold on sin, and binds him at the Chief Constables
command, to lead him away.

These are able to take prisoner the sturdiest Rogue, the stoutest Rebel, and
strongest Thief. What Sin in the soul is it, which this Chief Constable
with his men, his neighbor Godly sorrow, and his seven Sons cannot
ouer-master, and lead by Gods grace captive, and make it the Kings Prisoner?

As the Constable goes with these his many neighbors, and with his own
servants, to the number of ten besides himself, A couple of busy fellows.
a couple of busy fellows uncalled thrust in themselves to increase the
number.

The one of these is Self-love, a pestilent fellow: 1. Self-love, what evil
he does.
for he not only can hinder the Constables diligence in taking pains to
search, but in searching to be too partial, and ouerrespectiue to himself, if
the sins sought after be either pleasurable or profitable: but also withal,
he can dull the spirit of Godly-sorrow, and do his seven sons very great
mischief, as by their confessions afterward it does appear.

Therefore when the Constable Understanding espieth him, he commands forth
with his servant Self-denial to put him out of the company for hindering
Self-denial remoues him.
the search.

The other is Self-conceit; 2. Self-conceit, and the mischiefs thereof.
the former lewd companion disordereth all the affections; this blinds
judgment, by the ouerweening of a man's self, and will pick the Warrant out
of the Constables pocket, and will blow out the candlelight which is in the
Constables hand, if he be not prevented.

This wretched fellow of all wise men is held a fool: for The way of the Pro.
12. 5. and 3. 5, 7.
fool is wise in his own eyes, and there is more hope of a fool than of him
that is wise in his own conceit; and therefore are we dehorted from being wise
in our own eyes, or leaning to our own wisdom; and a woe Isai. 5. 21.
is pronounced against such: yet is the fool a very dangerous fool, and a
knave too; he will so deceive by flattery. He will make a man believe his
ways to be clear in his own Prou. 16. 2, 25.
eyes, when the end thereof is death. Yea, can beguile a generation of men, and
make Pro. 30. 12.
them to think themselves pure in their own eyes and sight, and yet are not
washed from their filthiness. Such as conceited fool was the Laodicean
Angel. Revel. 3.


The Constable therefore commands his man Humility, Humility puts him away.
to thrust this fool and knave out of their company, before they make search
for sin: for if these be suffered to go along with the rest, labor is but
lost, sin will never be found out and attached.

Now when the Constable has rid away these two troublesome companions, (for
they usually go together) then he goes on to the place where he knows that
sin has taken up his lodging.

The place is a Common The Inn Mistress Hearts house.
Inn, an Harlots house called Mistress Heart, a receptacle for all Villains,
Whores, and Thieves, and for all dishonest persons whatsoever, none denied
house-roome or harbor there.

And that she is such a dishonest woman, is clear and evident, as in her
arraignment shall be fully proved.

But to cover her naughtiness as much as she may, she has gotten into her
house one called Old Man, Old man. Eph^, ^. 22,
corrupted by her deceitful lusts, to become her husband, when indeed she is
his own daughter; and so live they in incest together, and keep rout and riot
night and day. If any honest Traveler (a good and godly motion) happen
sometimes to fall in there unawares, he is straightway denied entertainment.
Her answer is by and by, that her lodgings are taken up for other manner of
men, there is no room for any such troublesome guests as these be: none can
be merry for them where they come, hindering all good fellowship.

The house which this Harlotry dwells in, has many in lets, Five doors Five
doors.
open for their guests to come in at. These five doors are the five senses.

The first is the door of 1. The door of Hearing.
Hearing: the first that ever was open to let in sin, as we may learn in the
Serpents beginning to tempt Euah. Genes. 3.


At this door enters What evils enter by hearing.
in Lying, slandering, backbiting, filthy Communication, Flattery, Swearing,
Error, Heresy, False-doctrine, Tale-bearing, Blasphemy, and with these enter
also ill Opinions of one another, vnchari table judging, Ill-suspicion, rash
credulity, and many other sins, caused and committed by the tongue, through
want of wisdom and charity.

The second is the door 2. The door of Seeing.
of Seeing, at this enter in the lusts of the eye; Fornication, 1 John 3. What
sins enter by seeing.
Adultery, Covetousness, Desire of Naboths Vineyard. The marriage of the
Sons of God with the Daughters of men: Achans Genes. 6. Ios. 7.
Theft, who saw a wedge of gold, and desired it, and took it: many are Psalm.
119. 37. Job 31. 1.
the sins which enter in by this door, through want of Chastity and
Contentment.

The third is the door of 3. The door of Tasting.
Tasting; at this enter in Riot, Gluttony, Drunkenness, The sins which enter
by this sense.
Reuellings, and the fruits thereof, Chambering and Wantonness, Prodigality,
Quarrelling, and Fighting; and many other cursed effects of seeking Prou. 23.
2, 20, 21.
to satisfy the appetite: 1 Cor. 5. 11.
which the godly man auoideth, and also the very occasion thereof, by Sobriety
and Temperance.

The fourth is the door 4. The door of Smelling. Prou. 7. 17. What enters
here.
of Smelling; at this enter in foolish Niceties, Perfumings, and other
allurements to daliance, Effeminatenesse, and such like.

The fifth is the door of 5. The door of Feeling. Romans 13. 13. What enters
here.
Feeling; at this door enters Wantonness, Lasciviousness, and other fruits
of the flesh.

These be the doors by which all sin ordinarily enters into the Heart,
except Original sin bred within, and brought from the womb; as also Sarans
immediate suggestions, suddenly cast into the Heart.

When sins enter in, Degrees to the heart.
at any of these doors, They first come into the Hall, where attends
Hall-attendant, Commonsense.
Commonsense to welcome them.

Then they go into a Parlour attendant, Fantasy.
Parlour, a more inner room, and there stays Fantasy to entertain them.

After this, they ascend into an upper Chamber, and Chamber.
are there received of Intelligence, Intelligence.
who presently acquainteth Mistrisse Heart, the Mistrisse of the house with it,
which is in her Dyning-room, what are the Dyning-roome.
company and number of her guests come in: For this Hostess is a stately Dame,
and is not to be spoken with by and by. Thus as you have heard, are her guests
entertained and brought in unto her.

With her are eleven Daughters attending her Mistress Hearts Maids.
as Maids, lewd Strumpets, and as impudent Harlots as her self.

These eleven waiting-Maids, 11. Passions.
are the eleven passions of the Heart, corrupt, disorderly and immoderate
wautons, which be these.

The first is Love, set all 1. Love.
on pleasures, profits, honors, and wholly upon worldly and fleshly Vanities;
contrary to that in 1 John 2. 15. Love not the world, nor the things that are
in the world.

The second is Hatred, 2. Hatred.
which is contrary to Love, setting it self against Gods Word, good men, and
good things, a mischievous maid ever setting one another at odds, and
disquieting often the whole house and the table of guests.

The third is Desire, never 3. Desire.
content, but would have sometimes this, and then that, now here, now there,
never resting, never satisfied with either riches or honors, or variety of
pleasures.

The fourth is Detestation, 4. Detestation.
contrary to Desire, which loatheth and cannot endure good counsel, good
company, godly conference, much less reproof or any opposition in her ways.

The fifth is Vaine-hope, 5. Vaine-hope.
which possessing the heart, makes it foolishly presumptuous.

The six is Despair, contrary 6. Despair.
to Hope, which causes acts against reason, against nature sometimes: as it
did in Achitophel, in Saul, in Zimri, in Judas, who killed themselves. It also
makes men run into dissolute and rebellious courses, even to walk wilfully
Ier. 18. 12.
on in evil, as being without hope.

The seventh is Fear, 7. Fear.
which passion does so slauishly captiuate the mind, as it will make a man
forget his duty to God, so as he may escape danger with men, as it did Peter,
and Pilate: and is ever a false friend in adversity.

The eighth is Audacity, 8. Audacity.
contrary to Fear, which makes a man foole-hardy, without deliberation to
thrust himself into imminent dangers, as it did the Israelites. Numb. 14. 40.


The ninth is Joy, which cheereth a man when he 9. Joy.
has that which he delights in, be it never so ill, as it did the
inhabitants of the earth at the destruction of the two Prophets. Reu. 11. 10.


The tenth is Sorrow, contrary 10. Sorrow.
to Joy, which afflicts the soul, causing weeping and wailing, lamentation
and mourning, often with an outcry, as in the land of Egypt. Exodus 12. 30.


The eleventh is Anger, 11. Anger.
which comes upon a man, not only for apparent injury, as on David 1 Saw. 25.
against Nabal, but upon imagined wrongs, as on Haman against Mordecai, Hest.
3. 5.
Naaman against Elisha, 2 King. 5. 13. 1 King. 22.
and Ahab against Micaiah.

There is no passion contrary to this: for though quietness be contrary to
Anger, yet its no passion: therefore they are but eleven, as Thomas Aquinas In
his Sums.
reckons them.

Besides these attending very diligently on Mistress Heart, she has a
man-seruant Mistress Hearts Man servant.
called Will.

This Will has three at Will is made the servant to all.
command under him, the Feet, the Hand, the Tongue, like the Hostler, Tapster,
and Chamberlain. All these are at Mistress Hearts and her Maids commands.

If Love in a Maid affect Love.
a young man, though all her friends be against it: yet mark how she sets
Will on work for her. I Will have him (says she) though I never have good
day with him. Will here must make the match against all gaine-saying. Judah
Genes. 38. 16.
he lusted after one he saw in the way (not knowing it to be Tamar:) Will must
here make the filthy bargain. What, says she, will thou give me? I Will
(says he) give thee a Kid.

As Love sets Will a work, so does Hatred, as Hatred.
we may see in Esau, I Will Genesis 27. 41.
kill my Brother Jacob. So does Desire, as in Adoniah, 1 Kings 1. 5.
who said, I Will be King. In Gehezi, greedy of gain, 2 Kings 5. 20.
I Will run after him: Will here made the feet to run, the tongue to speak,
the hands to receive. So in Judas, to betray Matthew. 26. 15.
Christ, Will must do it. What Will you give me, and I Will deliver him into
your hands? Thus to these and all other Passions, this Will is made a
packe-horse, a slave, and without him they can do nothing. Will is the man
that must ever do the deed for every Passion, though they be contrary one to
another: miserable is his service, that must be commanded by so many
Mistresses, and so disagreeing among themselves one from another.

When the Heart has entertained her guests thus as you have heard, The hearts
provision for sins.
and received them into her Dyning-roome, provision is presently made for them,
yea she has it ever ready for them, as never being without many guests.

The Table is spread, Table, Instability.
which all must sit at, and this Table is Instabilitie: for inconstant are the
thoughts of the whorish Heart.

The Table therefore is not square, but round, turning about both for more
company, and also that her guests may take their places every one of them as
they come without discontent.

For albeit there be degrees and differences of sins, yet to her they are
alike welcome, one as well as another: although some at one time sit nearer to
her than at another, as guests do that sit at such a round Table.

The Table-cloth that Table-cloth, Vanity.
covers it is Vanity: for upon Instabilitie with such vicious guests, what
can there be but Vanity? This Solomon found in all his Inventions, Eccles. 1.

The Bread set on the Bread.
Table, is the Fitness of every Sins proper object, without which, sin
Actual can no more live than a man without bread.

The Salt which seasoneth Salt.
sins appetite to feed it self is Opportunity, for time, for place, for
person; this sharpneth sin to be working, as the appetite to receive food,
when it is well seasoned.

The Trenchers to eat Trenchers.
on, are Strength of every man's Nature to act Sin.

The Napkins to make Napkins.
clean their hands and mouth in eating, are the pretended shows of Virtue,
contrary to these Vices, by some good works (so they wipe their mouths, as
the Harlot in the Proverbs) and by some good deed of either one kind or other
outwardly done: and thus they wipe clean their singers, and will not be
thought to be the unclean persons which they are taken for.

The Dishes of Meat set before them, are only Dishes of meat
three.

The first is the Lusts of 1 Is the lusts of the Flesh.
the Flesh, and this is served up in the Plate of Pleasure.

Of this Dish feeds Who eats of this.
heartily Adultery, Fornication, Incests, and all other of the like nature.

The second Dish is Lust 2 Lusts of the Eyes.
of the eyes, and this is served up in the Platter of Profit.

Hereon feeds Covetousness, Who feeds on this.
Usury, Oppression, Briberie, Extortion, Dishonest gain, and such like. Of one
of these two Dishes doeall sins taste, except the sin of Swearing, in which
is lewd profaneness of Heart, but neither pleasure nor profit as in other
sins: though by swearing ungodly men sometimes in buying and selling make
gain unjustly.

The third Dish is Pride of life, and this is served 3 Is the pride of life.
up in the Charger of worldly Estimation. This is a very windy meat, which
puffs up the mind with vaineglory of an empty title of some honor, as a
bladder is with wind, and yet is very costly feeding.

On this Dish feeds Who feeds on (...).
Arrogancy, Pride of spirit, Love of Eminency, Desire of Superiority, and
Outward Reverence, and such like, for which they are made to pay well.

The Drink which they drink to make them digest Drink.
their meat, is the Pleasurablenesse of sin for the present.

The Waiters at this Table to give attendance that Waiters.
nothing be wanting, are the eleven Maids, with Will their man.

These Harlots humor How Mistress Hearts Maidens humor their guests,
their guests, and are ready at a beck to give contentment.

Where Incontinencie sits, there Wanton-Loue will wait.

Where Displeasure is, there Hatred will attend.

Where Covetousness is, there insatiable Desire will be.

Where Flattery, that base-humoring disposition to get grace and favor
sits, there Fear to offend will stand by.

Where Impatience takes his place, there Anger is ready waiting to do his will.

Where Inconsiderateness sits, there Audacitie and Foole-hardinesse will wait.

Where sullen Malecontentednesse sits, there Despair will soon give
attendance.

Where Iouialitie takes his place, there Joy will bid him welcome.

Where Credulity sits, there Vaine-hope will be.

And thus they attend upon the Table, to give their guests all content to the
utmost.

After full feeding follows Taking away, vexation of spirit.
the taking away of these Dishes of Pleasure, Profit and Honor.

Now where Vanity was the Table-cloth, what can the taking away be, but
Vexation of spirit, as Solomon speaks? for it is with Eccl. 2. 11.
these, as with guests in an Inn, all merry and pleasant while they be
eating and drinking, till the Chamberlain comes to take away, and gives
them a round reckoning, and then they take to their purses with almost a deep
silence: so unpleasing is payment on a sudden.

After Supper, Mistress Heart provides them their Lodging.

The place they lie in, is Lodging.
but one room for all their Guests, but it is large enough for all: the room
is Natural corruption. Natural corruption.


In this room lies Mistress Heart, all her Maids, her man Will, and all her
guests together, like wild Irish.

With these eleven Harlots lie these guests in so many several beds. Several
Beds.


1 In the Bed of Love, lie Wanton thoughts, Lasciviousness, Loves Bedfellowes.
filthy Communication, Fornication, Adultery, Whoredom, and other sinful
uncleannesses.

2 In the Bed of Hatred, do lie Mindfulnesse of Hatreds Bedfellowes.
Wrongs, Ill speaking, Backbiting, Slandering, Railing, Quarrelling, Fighting,
Revenge, Murder, and such like.

3 In the Bed of Desire, Desires Bedfellowes.
do lie, Covetousness, Theft, Oppression, Robbery, Fraud, Coozenage, and
such like.

4 In the Bed of Detestation, Detestations Bedfellowes.
lie want of Charity, disunion of Spirits, Discord, plotting of Destruction,
and such like.

5 In the Bed of Vainehope, Vain hopes Bedfellowes.
lie violent assaies, to effect what they hope for: sometimes neglect of
lawful means, presumption of mercy, abuse of Gods favor, and profaneness.

6 In the Bed of Despair, Despaires Bedfellowes.
lies Male-contentednesse, Unbelief, servile Fear, and such like.

7 In the Bed of Fear Fears Bedfellowes.
do lie Cowardlinesse, Flattery, Faint heartedness, Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation.

8 In the Bed of Audacitie Audacities Bedfellowes.
lie these, Headiness, Rashness, Daring, Desperate attempts, and such like.

9 In the Bed of Anger do lie, Impatiencie, Railing, Angers Bedfellowes.
Backbiting, Quarrellings Murder, and such like.

10 In the Bed of Joy lie Joys Bedfellowes.
Wanton delights, Foolish jesting, Leuity, and a world of Vanity.

11 In the Bed of Sorrow lie worldly griese, unquietness, Sorrows Bedfellowes.
murmuring, discontentednesse, and such like.

Thus are these lodged in Mistress Hearts Chamber, and there she lies also
with the Old Man, and Will her man.

The Bed which they lie The Bed is Impenitency.
upon is Impenitencie, and the Couerings are Hardness The two Couerings.
of Heart, and Carnal Security, in which they lie snorting carelessly, till
the Chief Constable come upon them, and attach them all one after another, the
greater villains, and the lesser Thieves, not sparing any: He fears not to
attach the Capital, neither passes he by any of their meanest associates.

The attaching of sin What the attaching of Sin is.
is nothing eise but the Apprehension of Gods wrath, striking us with fear,
through the terror of the Law, and our guiltiness of the breach thereof.

For in this spiritual attaching, it is as in the attaching of Felons, who
knowing themselves guilty of the breach of the Laws, are stricken with fear,
in their apprehension of death, which they know they cannot escape.

These Thieves thus apprehended, the Constable carries them to the next
Justice, by authority of his Warrant.

The Justice is Wel-informed Justice is Welinformed judgment.
Judgment, able to examine every Malefactor, that is, every Sin, brought
before him.

A Justice of Peace must What a one a Justice should be.
be a man of wisdom and experience: so this spiritual Justice must be a
Judgment well-informed in wisdom and discretion, wisely to proceed against
Sin.

It is meet that a Justice be learned in the laws, to know how to proceed
legally: so must this spiritual Justice be learned both in the Law and
Gospel, to know what sins are committed against either of them, and thereafter
to proceed.

A Justice is commonly to be one in that Country where he is an Inhabitant: so
this Justice must be every man's Well-informed Judgment within himself, not
another man's: for it is not another man's Judgment, that can sit down in his
soul, to try and examine his heart and ways, but his own Judgment. For who
knows what is in a man, saving the 1 Cor. 2. 11.
spirit of a man which is in him?

The Justices Office is to What his Office is.
preserve Peace, and to see the laws observed, and to see to the suppressing
of all disorders, routs, ryots, robberies and conspiracies: also to take order
for all Vagabonds, stout and sturdie Beggars; yea, to see the reformation of
all unlawful gaming, and every misdemeanour whatsoever, by Law prohibited;
contrary to the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, and the quiet of the
Weale-publike; so this spiritual What well informed Judgment is to do.
Justice, his Office is to see Peace kept between God and himself; to see the
Laws of God observed, and to see all disorders in his soul, as vagrant
thoughts, sturdy resolutions, riotous behavior, every misdemeanour, in
thought, word, and deed, forbidden by Gods Law, contrary to the Peace of a good
Conscience, and the quiet of the soul; contrary to the dignities of a
Christian, and the honor of our Sovereign Lord the King, CHRIST JESUS.

When a Malefactor is brought before a Justice, How to deal with a Malefactor.
the Justice is first to examine him, then to set it down, then to bind some
over to prosecute against the Felon at the Assizes, and lastly, in the mean
space to send him to the Goal, if he be not baileable.

1 He is (as is said) 1. Examine.
to examine the party apprehended and brought before him, and to demand his
name, then to enquire after the fact and the nature of it, with the occasions,
causes and degrees, with the associates, evident signs, the fruits and effects
thereof; so this spiritual Justice is to examine sin. Examine Sin in 8.
things.


1 To know the name 1 Name and nature.
and nature thereof, and to what Commandment it belongs, so that he may
consider what Statute of God is broken.

2 What were the Occasions 2 Occasions.
offered, as David, by looking out, saw Bathsheba washing her self.

3 What were the Causes 3 Causes.
moving thereto, as Envy in the Jews to put Christ to death, and in Cain to
kill Abel.

4 What are the several 4 Kinds.
Sorts under one and the same Capital Sin: as under Theft, Covetousness and
Coozenage; under Adultery, Fornication, Selfe-pollution, etc.

5. What be the Degrees 5. Degrees.
in the same Sin; as in stealing, not from the rich, but from the poor; not
from a stranger, but from a Christian brother, from Father and Mother: So
committing uncleanness, not only with one of no kin, but with one nigh in
blood: in killing not an unknown person, but against nature, his Father,
Mother, his Wife, his Child, himself. 6. Concomitance.


6. What sins accompanied the same: as the making of Vriah drunk, and the
murdering of him, accompanied David's adultery.

7. What are the Signs 7. Signs.
thereof, as the rouling eye, filthy speech, and wanton dalliance, are signs
of adultery: all such ornaments and vanities of which Esaias speaks, are
ensigns of Pride.

8. What Fruits and 8. Fruits.
effects did follow thereupon: as from Will Worship and Idolatry comes
ignorance of God: from this liberty to sin; from this obstinacy; from this
contempt of Gods true worship, and sincere professors thereof; and from this
at last comes bloody persecution.

2. In Examining, the 2. Write the Examination.
Justice is to set down the Examination and Confession of the party: so this
spiritual Justice, after he has thus examined his ways, he is to set it
down: This is a Serious consideration of all his sins and offenses, and such
a remembrance of them, as may make a man to forsake them, and to turn his feet
unto Gods Statutes, as David did. The Examination Psalm. 119. 56.
without this, will be in effect as nothing: this must not therefore be at
any hand omitted.

3 The Justice is to 3. Bind over.
bind some over to prosecute against the Felon, at the next Assizes and Jail
delivery: so does this spiritual Justice bind over True Repentance to follow
the Law, and to give evidence True Repentance follows Sin to the death.
against this Felon, Sin; which he is very ready to do; for it cannot be,
(if a man's judgment be Well-informed upon serious examination with a careful
and considerate remembrance of all his sins) but that he must needs perforce
be made to sorrow for them, and upon true repentance, pursue them to the death
with a deadly hatred.

4 The Justice finding 4. The Mittimus.
the offender not bay leable by Law, he makes his Mittimus to send him to the
Jail, there to be in durance to the next Assizes: so this spiritual Justice
does: for he knows by the Law of God, that the Romans 6. 23.
reward of sin (of what kind or degree soever, Genes. 2. 17.
greater or less, though but in thought) is not baileable by any man. No Ezekiel.
18. 20. Deuteronomy. 17. Gal. 3.
man is able to answer God for the least deuiation from Gods Law, for if he
continue not in all things which God commands, he is accursed.

Therefore none being sufficient to lay in bail to answer God for the sin,
nor sin in itself Psalm. 49. 7, 8.
baileable, he makes his Mittimus, and delivers it into the Constables
hand, to carry him to the Jail.

The Constable, you have heard, is Illuminated Understanding.

The Mittimus given Mittimus.
him, is the active power of the Well-reformed Judgment, forcing the exercise
of the Understanding against sin, to find out remedies to keep it under.

The Chief Jailer is Chief Jailer, Master New-man.
Master Newman, placed over the prisoners, and made the Gaole-keeper by the
Sheriff; for the prison is his, and he is to answer Ephesians. 4. 24.
the King for them.

The Sheriff is True Religion Sheriff is True Religion.
wrought in man's soul.

The Vnder-Sheriffe is an Vnder-Sheriffe, Holy-Resolution.
Holy Resolution to perform what the Sheriff commands, and what he is by
his Office to do.

If any Prisoner, Sin, break out, the Sheriff, Religion, must bear the
blame, saying, This is your Religion, is it?

The Jail is Subjection: Jail is subjection.
for, says the Apostle, (as if he were the Jailer) I keep under: here is the
keeper: my body; here is the prisoner: and bring it in Subjection; here is
the prison. When sin is brought under subjection, that it does no more reign,
(as it does in all natural men, but not in the regenerate) then it is put in
prison, but not before.

Now the Chief Jailer, Master Newman, has with him three Vnder-Gaolers 3.
Vnder-Gaolers.
to look well to the Prisoners, and all little enough, they be so many and so
exorbitantly unruly, ready to break prison daily, if they be not diligently
seen unto.

This Master Newmans three Vnder-Gaolers are his Hands, his Eyes, and his Feet,
without which he can do nothing, and they are these which are named by Saint
Paul in his Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10.
Epistles.

1 Is Saving Knowledge. 1 Knowledge, what prisoners he looks unto.
This looks to these sorts of Prisoners: Ignorance especially wilful, Error,
Vain opinions, Iangling Sophistry, false Doctrine, Col. 3. 10.
Heresies, Doctrine of devils, and such like. 2 Holiness, what prisoners he
sees to. Ephesians. 4. 24.


2 Is True Holiness: he looks to all the transgressors of the first Table: as
to Atheism, Paganism, Iudaisme, Turcisme, unbelief, desperation,
presumption, confidence in strength, riches, places, policy, and multitude: so
also to Willworship, Imagery, mere outward service without the inward,
Papistry, and all corruptions of GODS Worship: likewise to Blasphemy, rash
swearing, false swearing, cursing, idle talk of God, contempt of his Word and
Works, a Vicious life. Lastly, to Sabbath-breaking, neglect of public
worship, profaneness, persecution of the truth, and to an infinite number of
other sins against God and true holiness.

3 Is Righteousness: 3 Righteousness, what prisoners he takes care of.
this looks to all the sins against the second Table; as to rebellion,
disobedience, murder, malice, adultery, fornication, theft, and coozenage, to
falsewitnesse-bearing, to backbiting, to coffeehouse, and to all other
transgressions, many and manifold, comprehended under, these Commandments.

Now because these prisoners Sins be unruly.
be unruly, if there be not a strict hand kept over them: therefore lest they
should at unawares break forth, to the danger of the Sheriff Religion, the
Jailer Master New-man has Fetters, Gieues, Bolts and Manacles to hold them in,
and to have them at command:

And they are these: Respect unto the Commandments Spiritual Bolts and
Fetters.
of God in all our ways: Holy Meditations; lawful Vows, Religious Fasting,
seruent Prayer, and conscionable Practice of our Christian duties to God and
man. All these are strong chains and linkes, to keep under and to fetter the
body of sin, and all the fruits thereof, and to hold them in subjection, to
keep the whole man in Obedience unto God, when they be fastened and knocked on
by Gods Word an hammer.
the Hammer of GODS Word, and the effectual Ier. 23. 29.
power thereof.

But it is not enough thus to imprison them, and to see them bolted and thus
fettered, but also for him to see the Prison be Prison to be seen to.
strong: for the Prisons of the best Keepers that ever were, have been broken:
Drunkenness brake out from Noah, rash and unadvised speeches from Moses,
Idolatry from Solomon, Adultery from David, cursing and false-swearing from
Peter.

Therefore the Jailer, Master Newman, must look daily to the Prisoners, and to
see the Prison house sure; and to do this, Doors of t^^ Prison to be fast
locked with several keys.


1 He must see the doors, which are his senses, to be shut, and to have a
care to lock up Taste (that Drunkenness and Gluttony break not out) with the
key of Moderation in eating and drinking. To lock up Hearing (that Credulity
break not out) with the key of Trying before we trust. To lock up Seeing
(that Uncleanness break not out) with the key of Continency; and to bar
this door fast also with Contentation, that Covetousness break not forth.

2 In the next place he must take heed that no lewd Companions lurk Lewd
Companions.
about the prison house, either by day or by night, lest they cast in Fyles, to
file off the bolts; or picklockes to open the doors, to let the Prisoners
escape.

These lewd Companions are the Devil, the wicked, and our own Corrupted
Reason. Their files and Files and picklocks.
picklookes are Suggestions from Satan, evil counsel from Men, Worldly, and
fleshly Arguments of our own inventions, to make no conscience of sin, but
to file off all those bolts, and to open the doors of Senses, that sin may
break loose, and get out of subjection, to the Gaolers overthrow and utter
undoing, if diligent watch be not kept.

3 He must see to the Walls of the Prison, that Walls, whereof built.
they be strongly built with good stones cemented together. These are Moral
Virtues, and Evangelical Graces, by which, as by Walls, our Sins and our
natural Corruptions are kept in. Though Master Newman lock and bar the
doors, yet if the Walls be weak, the Prisoners may get out.

4 And lastly; he must Foundation of subjection. Romans 6.
look well to the Foundation of the house, that it be not undermined. The true
Foundation of Subjection of Sin, is the Power of the death of Christ, and of
his Resurrection, into whom by Faith, through the Operation of his Spirit, by
the Word, we are engrafted.

This must not be undermined by the Popish Doctrine of Free Will, and Abilities
of our selves to ouer-master Sin.

All these things well and diligently looked unto, the Prisoners will be kept
safe in the Jail under Master Newman, until the time of the Assizes.

And thus much for the first part of my Text, the Searching, the Attaching, and
Imprisoning of Sin. The other part, which is the Trial, follows.

THE SECOND PART.
AT the time of Assizes, the time of trial.
Assizes by the Kings appointment, comes the Judge, attended on by the
Sheriff, the Justices of the Peace, and such as necessarily are to be there,
for the dispatch of such businesses as come to be tried and adjudged.

The Judge coming in place, he has his Seat or Bench, and being set, the
Commission is read.

The Judge is a Judge of Oyer and Terminere in the Circuit where he is
appointed to sit. The Judgment here is absolute, without any appeal from his
Sentence.

The Judge spiritually understood, attended upon by Religion the Sheriff, and
the Under Sheriff Resolution, is Conscience.

From this Judgment is no Appeal, for he is in Judge is Conscience.
GODS stead, therefore must his Sentence stand, and we must submit to it.

The Seat or Bench on Bench is Impartiality.
which this Judge sits, is Impartialitie; for Conscience well-informed, will
judge in Righteousness and Truth, without all partiality, without respect of
any person. He regards not the rich and mighty, no Bribe can blind him,
neither does he pity the person of the poor, to give for pity an unjust
Sentence; but as the truth is, so speaks he.

The Commission is the Commission, active power of Conscience.
Active power of Conscience, given of God by his Word, to condemn the nocent,
or to quit the innocent, except this Commission be lost. Commission lost, is
the dead, seared, or benummednesse of Conscience.


Sometimes it is lost, as when conscience is dead, as in all ignorant persons,
or seared with an hot iron, as some men's have been and are; such as fall from
the faith and are past feeling, 1 Timothy 42. Ephesians. 4. 19.
by reason of the blindness of mind, and hardness of heart: or else
benumbed, as in those that fall into some grievous sin, as did DAVID, who lay
therein, until Nathan found the Commission, and acquainted him with it, when
he said, Thou art 2 Samuel 12. 7.
the man.

If the Commission be lost, the Power of Conscience lies dead, seared and
benumbed, then the Judge can do nothing till it be found: and being found, it
is read openly.

The reading of this Reading the Commission.
Commission before the whole County, is Every man's experimental Knowledge of
the power of Conscience, by which is acknowledged his Authority, to sit as
Judge over every thought, word and deed of man.

The Circuit of this Circuit, in which Conscience sits and judges.
Judge is his Own Soul, he is not to sit and judge of other men's thoughts,
words or deeds, but of the thoughts, words, and deeds of that man, wherein he
is. A man's own Conscience is Judge of himself; to judge another is out of his
Circuit, neither has he any Authority from the King of Heaven, to enable him
so to do, Knowledge may go out to see and discern of other men's ways, but
Conscience keeps ever at home, and sits within to judge of that man's courses,
whose Conscience he is. Conscience only troubles a man for his own sins, it
cannot for another man's, but as far forth as he has made them his own, and
being accessarie to them by commanding, Accessaries to sin.
alluring, counselling, commending, excusing, defending, or winking thereat,
when he ought by his place to have punished the same.

This Judge in this Circuit is Judge of Oyer and Oyer and Terminere.
Terminere; He will hear before he does judge, and he will truly then judge
as he hears; for as he is impartial in judging, so is he prudent and
careful to know what and whereof to give sentence, before he does judge. This
is the Judge.

The Justices of Peace in Justices of Peace.
the County are there, and do sit with the Judge, and are in Commission with
him. Of these some are of the Quorum, and of better rank, some are meaner
Justices, and take their place lower.

The Justices of Peace Justices of the Quorum.
in the Soul of better rank, are Science, Prudence, Providence, Sapience: the
Inferiors are weak Wit, common Apprehension, and some such like.

These Justices have their The Justices Clerks.
Clerks, there ready with their Examinations and Recognizances. Justice
Science, his Clerk is Discourse: Justice Prudence, his Clerk is
Circumspection: Justice Providence, his Clerk is Diligence: Justice Sapience,
his Clerk is Exporience: Justice Weak-wit, his Clerk is Conceit: and Justice
Common-Apprehension, his Clerk is only Sense; a couple of poor Justices.

With the Judge and Chief Justices are in Commission, the Kings Sergeant, and
the Kings Attorney.

The Kings Sergeant is K. Sergeant.
Divine Reason, a man of deep judgment in the Laws of his Sovereign,
swaying much with the Judge.

The Kings Attorney is K. Attorney.
Quick-sightednesse: both are excellent helps and Assistants to search out,
and to handle a Cause before Judge Conscience.

For Quicke-sightednesse will soon espy an error in pleading, and Divine
Reason will enforce a just conclusion, and so move the Judge to give sentence
according to equity and right. If these should be wanting, many matters would
go amiss.

There is also the Clerk Clerk of Assizes.
of the Assizes, the keeper of the Writs, that has all the Inditements.

This Clerk is Memory, Memory.
which retains all those names of every sin, with the nature of the
Offense: and what God has in his word written against them, and what
complaints Repentance has made against them.

Besides this Clerk, there is the Clerk of the Clerk of Arraignment.
Arraignment, who reads the Inditements.

This Clerk is the Tongue, Tongue.
making Confession of our sins.

Lastly, there is the Crier. Crier.


This is the Manifestation of the Spirit.

Before the Clerk of the Arraignment reads any Indictment, it is first
framed by the Complainant. Complainant.


This Complainant is true Repentance or godly Sorrow. Repentance.


The framing of the Indictment Framing of the Indictment.
is the laying open of sin, as it may be known and found out to be sin,
according to the true nature thereof.

Moreover, an Inquest, or Grand-Iury there must be, Grand-Iury.
by whose Verdict the Offender is indicted, and made a lawful Prisoner; yet is
this Indirement no conviction. What these agree upon, is delivered up in
writing to the Justices. On the back of this Indictment, framed by the
complainant, they write either Ignoramus, or Billa vera.

If the former, then the complaint is judged false; Ignoramus.
it is left in record, but the Prisoner is not indicted.

If the latter, the prisoner is indicted, the Indictment Billavera.
read, and the prisoner brought to the trial at the Bar.

This Grand-Inquest or Penmen of Scriptures are the Grand. jury.
Jury, are the Holy men of God, whose writings are the Holy Scriptures in the
Old and new Testament.

By the Verdict of these, every thought, word and deed of man, is either freed,
or made a lawful prisoner.

But yet this Verdict is no lawful conviction of particular men, till they be
rightly applied.

If they write upon the What Gods Word makes not sin, is no Sin.
Indictment or Bill framed, Ignoramus; that is, if the holy Scriptures of God
declare it not to be a Sin, it is no finne: for Where there is no Law, there
is no Romans 4. 15.
transgression. Not the complaints of all under Heaven, not all the Laws of
men, Decrees of Counsels, the Commandments of Popes, can make that a sin,
which they write Ignoramus upon.

Therefore the Bills of Indictment framed by False informers what they be.
those false Informers before mentioned, Formality, Worldly wisdom,
Lukewarmnesse, Mere civil honesty, Machiauilian Statisme, Libertinisme,
Scrupulosity, and Papistry, against Christian Conference, godly Sincerity,
true Zeal, strict Conversation, Reformation of disorders, and the rest, are
false accusers, and have upon their complaints, written by the Graund-Inquest,
an Ignoramus, and therefore by these worthy Justices, Justice Science, Justice
Prudence, Justice Providence, and Justice Sapience, are not to be admitted,
nor Judge Censcience to be troubled therewith, though all the Popes, the whole
Popish Church, all Popish Counsels, and all the Popishlyaffected Statists in
the world plead for them, for that thought, word, or deed is no sin, no
Breach of Gods Law, on which these write Ignoramus; Conscience (as is said) is
not to be troubled with such Bills of complaint.

But if these write Billa vera, that is, if the holy Penmen have set down
That which is condemned by God, cannot be dispensed with by man.
any thought, word, or deed for a sin, not all the Popes Dispensations and
Pardons, not all the subtle Distinctions of the most learned, no custom, nor
any thing else whatsoever, can acquit it from Sin, but sinue it is, and so
must it be taken as a lawful prisoner, to be brought to the Bar, and
indicted, and put upon the Jury of Life and Death.

The Bill being found true, then they proceed unto the Arraignment.

The Prisoners are brought forth chained together, and set to the bar before
the Judge.

The Prisoners are Sins, Prisoners Sins.
(as you have heard before) the Old Man, with Mistress Heart, her Maids, and
Will her man.

Their Bringing forth is Bringing forth.
the Manifestation thereof by the Jailer, M. Newman, Knowledge, Holiness and
Righteousness.

They are chained; for Chained.
sins are linked together, as Adultery and Murder in David; Pride with
Hatred of Mordecai in Haman; Covetousness and Treason in Judas; Covetousness,
Hypocrisy and Lying in Ananias and Saphira; yea the breach of all the
Commandments in the fall of Adam and Euah. They therefore are brought out
chained together.

The Bar is the Apprehension The Bar.
of Gods wrath due for sin.

After all this, when the Prisoner stands at the Bar, a Jury for life and
death is impannelled, who are for the King, and are sworn to give in a true
Verdict, according to their Evidence.

This Jury is a chosen Company of excellent Petty-Iurie.
Virtues, the fruits of the Spirit, delivered in by the Sheriff Religion to be
called, and to be of this Jury in the behalf of the Kings Majesty, JESUS
CHRIST, to go upon the prisoners, the Fruits of the Flesh, which stand at the
Bar.

Their names being given up, they are called, as the Clerk of the Arraignment,
the Tongue, names them; then the Crier, Manifestation of the Spirit, calls
Jury called by name.
them one by one to appear, as the Clerk names them; and they are these.

1. Call Faith. Crier. Vous aues Faith, which purges Acts 15. 9.
the Heart.

2. Call Love of God. Crier. Vous aues Love of 1 John 5. 3.
God, which is the keeping of the Commandments.

3. Call Fear of God. Crier. Vous aues Fear of Prou. 1. 7.
God, which is the beginning of wisdom.

4. Call Charity. Crier. Vous aues Charity, which 1 Cor. 6. 13.
rejoices in the Truth.

5. Call Sincerity, Crier. Vous aues Sincerity, which makes a true Israelite,
John 1. 47.
in whom there is no guile.

6. Call Unity. Crier. Vous aues Unity, which makes men to be of one heart,
and Acts 1. 14. and 2. 1. Ephesians. 4. 3.
is the bond of Peace.

7. Call Patience. Crier. Vous aues Patience, which works experience, and by
which men possess Romans 5. 4. Luke 21. 19.
their souls.

8. Call Innocence. Crier. Vous aues Innocence, which keeps harmless.

9. Call Chastity. Crier. Vous aues Chastity, which keeps undefiled.

10. Call Equity. Crier. Vous aues Equity, which does right to every man.

11. Call Verity. Crier. Vous aues Verity, which ever speaks truth.

12. Call Contentation. Crier. Vous aues Contentation, which ever rests
satisfied.

Then the Clerk says Countes.

And so the Crier says to them, Answer to your names.

Then the Clerk names them, and the Crier tells or counts them.

Faith, one. Love of God, two. Fear of God, three. Charity, four. Sincerity,
five. Unity, six. Patience, seven. Innocence, eight. Chastity, nine.
Equity, ten. Verity, eleven. Contentation, twelve.

Then the Crier says, Good men and true, stand together, and hear your charge.

With all these Graces should the soul of man Craces wherewith we should all
be qualified.
be endued to proceed against Sin, we should be able to say, that we have
them by the manifestation of Gods Spirit, and also to know their power and
virtue, and distinctly to be able to reckon them, and so wisely to esteem
them, as the good and true gifts and graces of God; which have a charge given
them, which is every grace his The charge what it is.
proper gift, and all coniointly have power to discerue of any sin, and to
give a just verdict thereupon.

This Jury, thus called The Jury, look on the Prisoners.
and impannelled, are commanded to look upon the Prisoners at the Bar, upon
whom they are to go.

This is when we oppose Virtues to Vices in our meditation, that so by the
excellency of the one, we may see the foulness of the other, and so come to
the greater love of Virtue, and to the more deep hatred of Vice. This is the
Jury of virtues
Jury of virtues profitable looking upon vices the prisoners at the Bar.

The prisoners, though they stand together, yet are they to answer one by one.

So Sins must distinctly A distinct knowledge of sin necessary
one by one be arraigned: for we cannot proceed against sin, but upon a
particular knowledge thereof.

A general, and so a confused notion of sins (which yet is that which is in
most men) will never make a man truly to see how his estate stands with God,
and so to bring sin unto death.

The Prisoners, at the sight of the Jury, and naming of them, have leave to
challenge any of them; if they can give good reasons against this or that man,
they are put off the Jury, and other chose in their stead.

These prisoners seeing Jury challenged.
such a Jury, presently begin to challenge them.

Unbelief he cries out What virtues and vices be in opposition.
against Faith, as his Enemy. Hatred of God, against the Love of God, as his
Enemy. Presumptuous sinning, against the Fear of God, as his Enemy. Cruelty,
against Charity, as his Enemy. Hypocrisy, against Sincerity, as his Enemy.
Discord against Unity, as his Enemy. Anger, Rage, and Murmuring, against
Patience, as their Enemy. Murder, Fighting, and Quarrelling, against
Innocence, as their Enemy. Wantonness, Adultery, Fornication, and Uncleanness,
cry out against Chastity, as their deadly Enemy. Coozenage, Theft, and Unjust
dealing, against honest Equity, as their Enemy. Lying, Slandering, and
False-witnesse-bearing, against Verity, as their mortal Enemy. And lastly,
Greedy desire, Covetousness, and Coffeehouse, cry out against Contentation,
as their enemy.

All these together challenge the whole Jury, crying out and saying, (Good my
Lord) these men are not to be of the Jury against us; for your Lord-ship
knows very well, and none better, that they are all of them our deadly
Enemies. Your Honor knows, that every one of them has petitioned the Lord
Chief Justice very often and importunately, Virtue binds corruption to the
good behavior.
to bind us all to the good behavior, and to cast us into prison, as we have
been by their means. They have made Master Newman the Keeper and his
vnder-keepers to deal very hardly with us.

It is well known (my Lord) that Chastity procured Master Newman almost to
famish Incontinencie to death. Good my Lord, consider of us, these are our most
bloody and cruel enemies: We appeal to your Lordship, to God and to all good
men, that know both them and us, that it is so.

Our humble suit to The Prisoners Petition to the Judge.
your Lordship therefore is, that more indifferent persons may be chosen to go
upon us, else we are all but dead men. We do know (my Lord) that there are
here many other of very good and great credit in the world, fit to be of this
Jury, men very well known to your Lordship, and to Master Sheriff, and the
Worshipful Gentlemen. These are men of worth, (my Lord) of far more esteem
every where, than these mean men here, picked out of purpose by Master
Sheriff. These (my Lord) of the Jury, are men of small reckoning in the
Country. These live scattered here and there, almost without habitation, except
in poor Cottages; so as we marvel (my Lord) how they can be brought in for
Freeholders, hardly any one of them is of any account with men of great
estates, and of worth, in the Land. Good my Lord, consider of us.

Then the Judge asks them, what those men be, of whom they speak, and what
are their names?

Then they answer, My Indifferent Gentlemen.
Lord, they are these; Master Naturalist, Master Doubting, Master Opinion,
Master Careless, Master Chiuerell, Master Libertine, Master Laodicean, Master
Temporizer, Master Politician, Master Outside, Master Ambo dexter, and Master
Newtralitie, all (my Lord) very indifferent men betwixt us and them. Gentlemen,
Freeholders, of great means; we beseech you (my Lord) to show us some pity,
that they may be of the Jury.

The Judge informed by those worthy Justices of the Quorum, concerning these
men so named by the prisoners, and knowing the honesty and good credit of the
chosen Jury; their exceptions against them are not admitted of, and so these
indifferent Gentlemen are passed by.

The Clerk therefore is commanded to go forward, and then he reads the
Indictment of every one in order, one after another, as they be called forth by
name, and set to the Bar.

The first which is called out, is the Old Man.

Then says the Clerk, Jailer, set out Old Man to 1. Old Man arraigned.
the Bar.

Then he is brought to the Bar, and commanded to hold up his hand, and his
Indictment is read.

Old Man, thou art indicted His Indictment.
here by the name of Oldman of the Town of Euahs Temptation, in the County of
Adams consent, that upon the day of Man's fall in Paradise, when he was driven
out, thou did dest corrupt the whole nature of man, body and soul, leading all
and every of his Posterity, coming by generation, with the body of Sin;
making him indisposed to any thing that is good, framing lets to any holy duty,
and polluting his best actions, but making him prone to all evil, bringing him
captive to imperious lusts, and so causing him to live in continual rebellion
against GOD, contrary to the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, JESUS
CHRIST, his Crown and Dignity.

What say thou to it?

He pleades Not guilty, and so puts himself to the Trial.

Then the Crier calls for evidence against the Evidence.
Prisoner.

Then comes forth David.
David, whose Evidence is this: I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin has my
Psalm. 51. 5.
Mother conceived me. Jobs Job 25. 4.
is this; He cannot be clean that is borne of a Woman. Isaiah, his Evidence
is, Isa. 48. 8.
That all are transgressors from the womb. Saint Paul's Saint Paul.
Evidence is most clear; for being asked what he could say? He answered, (My
Lord) this Old Man has bin the death of very many. I have woeful experience of
him, a wretched Romans 5. 15.
man has he made me. He took occasion by the Commandment, Romans 7. 8. 11.
13, 21. 15. 19, 23.
to work all concupiscence in me. He deceived me and slew me, wrought Death
in me, so that in my flesh dwells no good, but when I would do good, evil
is present with me, so that through him, the good I would do, I cannot, and
the evil I hate, that I do; He makes war against the law of my mind, and
brings me into captivity to the Law of Sin. Thus (my Lord) is in me the
Body of Death, from which I desire to be delivered: and this is that I can say.

The Evidence being thus clear, the Jury presently being all agreed, give in
their Verdict, and Verdict.
being asked what they say of the prisoner at the Bar, guilty or not, they
answer, Guilty.

Then he asks what he can say for himself, why sentence should not be
pronounced against him?

Good my Lord, says he, I am wrongfully accused, Old-mans plea.
and am made the man I am not, there is no such thing as Original Corruption.
Pelagius and Anabaptists.
Pelagius a Learned man, and all those now that are called Anabaptists, (who
well enough know all these Evidences brought against me) have hitherto, and yet
do maintain it, that Sin comes by imitation, and not by Propagation, and
inbred prauity. Good my Lord, I beseech you, be good unto me, and cast not
away so poor an Old man: (good my Lord) for I am at this day 5556. years old.

Then says the Judge, Old Man, the Evidence is clear, those thou have named,
are condemned Heretics; and as for thy years, in respect of which thou
crauest pity, it is pity thou have been suffered so long, to do so great
and so general a mischief as these good men do witness against he.

O my Lord, I beseech you then a Psalm of Mercy.

Old Man, the Law of the King allows thee not the benefit of the Clergy, for
The reward of Sin is death: Romans 6. 23.
This is his Majesty's Decree, unchangeable, as the Law of the Medes and
Persians.

Good my Lord, that is Object.
meant only of Actual Sin, and not of me.

That is not so; for Original Answ.
Sin is Sin, and all men know, that Children die, that never sinned by
Imitation, nor Actually, Romans 5.
after the similitude of Adams transgression. And Death goes over all, in as
much as all have sinned. If sin were not in Infants, they could not die,
Hear therefore thy Sentence.

Thou (Old Man) have by The Sentence.
that name been indicted of these Fellonies, Outrages, and Murders, and for
the same arraigned; thou have pleaded Not-guiltie, and put thy self upon the
Trial, and art found guilty; and having nothing justly to say for thy self,
this is the Law: thou shall be carried back to the place of Execution, and
there be cast off, with all thy Ephesians. 4. 22.
deeds, and all thy members Colos. 3. 9. 5.
daily mortified and crucified with all thy lusts, of every one that has
truly put on Christ.

This Sentence pronounced, the Sheriff is commanded to do Execution; which
Religion, by his Under Sheriff Resolution, sees thoroughly performed.

The Executioner is he Executioner.
that has put on Christ, Gal. 5. 24.

This Prisoner thus proceeded against, the Jailer is commanded to set out
Mistrisse Heart to the Mistrisse He tried.
Bar, who is commanded to hold up her hand, and then is her Indictment read.

Mistrisse Heart, thou Her Indictment.
art here indicted by the name of Mistrisse Heart of Soul, in the County of
the Isle of Man, that also upon the day of Man's fall in Paradise, thou becamest
corrupted, accompanying the Old Man, and also Will thy Romans 2. 5.
man, and have been so hardened, that thou could not repent, and so blind,
that thou becamest past feeling, and have made men to give themselves over to
all lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness, Ephesians 4. 18,
even with greediness, to be also very slow to believe all that the Prophets
Luke 24. 25.
have spoken: and to be so enraged with choler, sometimes as to run
mercilesly on Innocents to murder them, and to cause men most cursedly to
depart Acts 7. 54.
from the living God. Thou have been, and art also in confederacy with all
and every evil thought, word, and deed committed against God and Man. Matthew.
94. ^^d 21. 34.
Thou have been a receptacle of all the abominations of every Sin whatsoever,
and have had conference ^^hn 13. 2. Acts 5. 3.
with Satan to lie unto the holy Ghost, and for greedy gain, at the devils
suggestion, have set some on work to play the Traitors to the shedding of the
innocent blood of our Sovereign, John 13. 2.
contrary to the Peace of the King, his Crown and Dignity. What say thou
to this Indictment? Guilty, or not guilty?

She answers, Not guilty, and puts her self to the Trial.

Then the Crier says, If any man can give Evidence against the Prisoner at the
Bar, let him come; for she stands upon her deliverance: then come in such as
can say any thing against her, and first is Hearts accusers.
Moses.

Moses, what can you Moses.
say against this prisoner? look upon her, see if you know her.

My Lord, I know her well enough, she made me and my brother Aaron ^sal. 106.
32, 33
to speak so unadvisedly with our lips by her passion, that we could neither
of us be admitted to go into the land of Canaan. This I can say of her, that
every imagination of her Genesis 6. 5. Genesis 8 21.
thought is only evil continually, and that naught she has been from her
youth up.

Moses having ended, then says the Judge, is there any more?

To whom answer is made, yes (my Lord) there is Jeremy the Prophet.

Jeremy the Prophet look Jeremie.
upon the prisoner, can you say any thing on the behalf of his Majesty?

My Lord, this I can say, that she is deceitful above Ierem. 17. ^^
all things, and desperately wicked: so that no man without Gods special
assistance can either find out her devices, or escape her treacheries.

And this moreover I know, that she has been sent unto and forewarned to wash
her self of her wickedness: and yet for all this she does lodge still ill
thoughts in her house. Ierem. 4. 14.
Yea (my Lord) she has seduced many from God, Ier. 7. 24. and 9. 14. and 11.
8. and 13. 10.
making them to walk after her evil counsels and imaginations, to their utter
destructions. And I am truly informed, that there is ever the place where the
enemies of their own souls do work their Psalm. 58. 2.
wickedness and mischiefs.

Is there any more Evidences?

Yes, my Lord, here is Ezekiel. Ezechiel.


Ezekiel, what can you say?

My Lord, I can witness thus much; Such is her Ezekiel. 20. 16. and 33. 31.
lewdness, that she followed after Idols, and after Covetousness, which is
Idolatry, both high Treason and Rebellion against God. Yea so very shamelesly
and lawlesly she carries her self, that if such lewd companions come not in
to her, she will go out and follow them.

These be witnesses enough, says the Judge, to condemn her, but is there any
other;

Yes my Lord, please you here are more: here is Saint Matthew.

Saint Matthew, what can you say against the Prisoner at the Bar?

My Lord, I have heard S. Matthew.
it from the mouth of my Lord Chief Justice himself (when I did attend upon
him, he having occasion publicly to speak of her) that out of the heart do
come Matthew. 15. 19.
evil thoughts, Adulterics, Fornications, Murders, Thefts, Conetousnesse,
Wickedness, Deceit, Lasciuiousnes, an evil eye, Blasphemy, Pride and
Foolishness. All these evils he witnesses to come forth of her house: so
that it is evident against her by his honors undoubted testimony, that she is
an harbourer of a company of very bad and insufferable guests. Saint Mark,
Saint Mark. Mark. 7. 21, 22, 23.
here next me, can witness as much.

It is very true my Lord.

Here is an Harlotrie indeed (said the Judge.) Jury, if you be agreed give in
your verdict, what say you of this Prisoner? Guilty or not Guilty?

We say guilty, my Lord.

Woman, what can thou say for thy self, that Sentence according to Law
should not be pronounced against thee?

Ah, good my Lord, take pity on me, a poor weak old woman; These men
speak against me the Hearts plea for her life.
worst that they can, because I would not be ruled by them. They speak of
malice my Lord. If I have misdemeaned my self any way, it was by this Old man
my Fathers misleading, (my Lord) by whom, I thought, that being a woman I
should be wholly guided. But hear me (good my Lord) I beseech you, let not
these men's testimonies cast me away. For I did dwell with as good men, and
better than they are, or ever were (my Lord) as other can witness, to my great
co^mendations

Then says the Judge, who are those I pray you?

I dwelt (my Lord) with King David, with King Solomon, Psalm. 101. 1. 1 Chronicles.
29. 19. 15. 17.
and was in their house held to be a perfect Heart: so was I after accounted in
King Asa's house. Yea my Lord, with Abraham the Father of the Faithful, was I
found Faithful, and such has been my credit, that I was well spoken of even
to God himself by good KING Hezekiah. That Nehem. 9. 8. Esai. 38. 3.
all this is true that I say, I beseech you to ask Isaiah the Prophet, as also
Nehemiah, and others that have recorded the same.

Besides all these (be pleased to hear me, good my Lord) ask all the Country
Ignorant people praise their heart.
people, and they will with one mouth speak well of me. They have (say they) a
good Heart toward God and that, ever since they were borne, they never found
me so wicked as these witnesses are pleased to speak. I hope therefore (my
Lord) that you will be pleased to be good to me, good my Lord pity a very old
aged poor woman, as ever you came of a woman.

Woman, Woman, for The Judges speech to her.
the witnesses against thee, they are without exception, and thy own mouth
does condemn thy self, in that first, thou do confess, that thou would
not be ruled by them when these holy men were sent unto thee, and that with
special command from his Majesty to see thee reformed. Again, that thou
do acknowledge thy self to have been wholly led by the Old Man, one now
most justly condemned by the Law to be crucified.

As touching David's heart, Solomon heart, Asa his heart, the faithful heart of
Abraham, and the upright heart of Hezekiah, never an one of these was thy
self, thou do lewdly seek to deceive by equivocation, and to beguile the
standers by with thy Matthew. 13. Luke 8.
tricks of Jesuitical cousenage. True it is, that there The heart is twofold.
is great commendations of an Heart, and the same to be an honest and good
Heart, an upright Heart, a faithful Heart. But woman, this is the heart
sanctified and purged by Sanctified.
faith in all those that are borne anew of water and the holy Ghost: but this
is not that which thou art, the natural and corrupt Corrupt.
heart: Thou art that commendable heart in name only, but not in quality:
therefore thy boasting is vain, thy pleading subtlety, verifying Ieremiahs
evidence of thee, that thou art very deceitful.

As for the vulgar praising of thee, it is through their own self-love, and
foolish self-conceit, and their utter ignorance of thee, that makes them to
speak so well of thee. Thou do therefore but trifle away the time, and
trouble the Assembly.

As for thine age, it procures thee no pity at all, because thou have
beguiled, undone, and bewitched so many. Thine age should have taught thee
better things, but thy obstinacy in wickedness would not suffer thee. Hear
therefore thy Sentence.

Thou Mistress Heart have been indicted by the Sentence against Mistress Heart.
name of Mistress Heart, of those Fellonies, Murders, Conspiracies and
rebellions, and for the same have been arraigned: thou have pleaded not
guilty, have put thy self to the trial, and been found guilty, having
nothing justly to say for thy self. This is the Law. Thou Her punishment.
shall be carried back from whence thou came, and there live condemned to
perpetual imprisonment under Master Newman the Keeper, without bail or maine
prize. Jailer, take her to thee, look to the prisoner, and keep this Heart
Prou. 4. 23. Hebr. 3. 12.
diligently, and take heed lest there be at any time in you an heart of
Infidelity to depart from the living God. Master Sheriff Religion, and the
Under Sheriff Resolution, do see it performed very carefully and speedily
according to the sentence given.

After Mistress Hearts arraignment, and condemnation, wilful Will is
commanded to the Bar, and to hold up his hand, and his Indictment was read.

Wilful Will, thou art indicted Will arraigned.
by the name of wilful Will, of the Town of Free, and in the County of Evil,
that thou partaking with Old Man, and lewdly living at the bent of Mistress
Heart, have been a Champion for them, ready to act all their villainies, and
upon every motion of theirs, or any solicitation of those her harlotrie maids,
her passions, have from time to time gathered together all the powers thou
could make within this Isle of Man, to raise rebellion, and by force and
arms have often attempted to rush in and upon this Majesty's Garrison,
appointed for the safe keeping of the Town of Soul, and so of the whole
Island, and thereby have given occasion to the Enemies, to seek to invade the
same, contrary to the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and
dignity.

What say thou to this Indictment, guilty or not guilty?

His answer was, not guilty (my Lord) and so put himself upon his trial by
God and the Country.

Then were witnesses called Witnesses called out.
out, and the first of them was the Captain of the Garrison, which was one
Captain Reason.

This Captain coming before the Judge, was asked what he could say, for the
King, against the prisoner at the Bar?

My Lord, says he, by my Captain Reason.
Sovereigns appointment, I was made Captain of this Garrison in Soul; and
his Majesty also was pleased to place this Prisoner in the same for his
service, but yet under me, and at my command, and not to do what he himself
listed.

But he having conceited himself to be free, and not under controlment, and
being grown Full, he has by the bewitching of Mistrisse Heart, and her Maids
endeavored to bear all the sway, treading down with contempt all my lawful
commands. I made many fortifications against his violent Reasons and arguments
to convince.
courses, to restrain his out-roades, lest thereby he should have made way for
his Enemies breaking in upon us, to the danger of the whole Island: but all
these fortifications very often he has defaced, and by the force of strong
passions, has borne them down before him, without any regard of supreme or
subordinate authority whatsoever. He may well (my Lord) be called wilful Will,
for except he be more under subjection neither I his Captain, no^ ever an
Officer in the whole band, will be obeyed, yea, assuredly (my Lord) if he be
not curbed the whole Town of Soul will be overthrown, and all the Island fall
into the Enemies hand, to the great dishonor of his Majesty And this is that
which have, for the present, to say My Officers, if it please your Lordship to
have them called, can say very much against him.

Then says the Clerk, Crier, call in Captain Reasons Lieutenant.

What Is his name, says the Crier?

He is, says the Clerk, called Discourse.

Lieutenant Discourse, The Lieutenant his witness.
come into the Court, Vous aues the Lieutenant.

Lieutenant, what can you say touching this wilful Will, the prisoner at the
Bar?

My Lord, my Captain and I have had many occasions of much conference upon
very serious business, into which this Prisoner has often intruded himself,
and thereby has greatly hindered our designments. For say we what we could,
he would have all things go after his pleasure, and only to satisfy the
lust of Mistress Heart, and some of her drabs, on whom he has attended, and
by whom he hitherto has been too much ruled, and I may say, most strangely
bewitched, having no power to deny them any thing.

Our Ancient (my Lord) can further inform you.

How call you him says the Judge?

He is called (my Lord) Profession.

Then says the Crier, Ancient Profession, come into the Court, Vous aues,
Profession.

Ancient, What can you say for the King against the Prisoner at the Bar?

My Lord, when I bare The Ancient his Witness.
my colors of a Holy conversation, and displaid the same in Word and Deed
before the company, he has attempted, and that not seldom to rend and tear
them; and this not only within our selves: but sometime also before, and in
the very sight of the Enemy has sought to deface my Colors, through his
violent disposition, untamed nature, with the help of enraged passions, to my
utter disgrace, and not to mine only, but to the whole band of good qualities,
gifts, and graces, in the Town of Soul.

So heady he is, and so peruersly bent to his own will, that he never
regards, for the present, what may happen afterward. Our two Sergeants can
more at large discover him, if it please your Lordship to hear them: Here they
stand by me.

What do you call them, says the Judge? My Lord, says the Ancient, the one is
Sergeant Unity, and the other is Sergeant Order, worthy Soldiers (my Lord) and
very serviceable for good government.

Sergeant Unity, come in, What can you say of this Prisoner?

My Lord, when all the Sergeant Unities winesse.
whole band lovingly, as one man, were obedient in all things, he upon every
least discontent did mutiny, and endeavored to set us at ods one against
another. He has adhered to secret Conspiracies of inbred Corruptions; yea, and
has not been only found to favor, but also to stand for, and to grace our
open enemies, even Satan's suggestions, and the pompes and vanities of this
wicked world; to whom he has been so serviceable, as if he had been a pressed
Soldier for them, forgetting his faith and allegiance to his own Sovereign.
If he be not (my Lord) suppressed, he will at the length be our utter
overthrow. My fellow, Sergeant Order, can say more.

Sergeant Order, What is that you have to witness against the Prisoner?

My Lord, whenever he Sergeant Orders winesse.
comes out of that lewd Harlots house, Mistress Hearts, and from among her
young Strumpets, he is so enraged, as he behaueth himself more like a savage
beast than a man: All is by him put out of order, our Captain cannot rule him,
especially when he has gotten a pestilent fellow, one Obstinacy to accompany
Company is to Wilfull-Will.
him, and another cogging deceitful companion, called Show of good, to hearten
him in his forward courses and bad inrendments. Of himself he is ill enough,
but these (my Lord) make him altogether incapable of good counsel, or of the
best advice that our Captain can give him.

Where are, says the Judge, these fellows; why were they not apprehended, and
brought in hither with him?

My Lord, as soon as he was attached and brought under authority, they both
presently fled. Our Captain Reason made diligent search after them, but could
not find them. For my Lord, these Companions durst never appear with him, but
when they knew him to be wholly bent to his own will, and when they were very
sure our Captain had not strength enough with him to withstand them, otherwise
they would keep close, and not apparently be seen to countenance him. If
order might be taken for apprehending of these, there would be some hope of
better government in this prisoner, if he hap to be released.

Upon this the Judge gave order to Master Sheriff, to his Vnder-Sheriffe, and
to all the Justices of the Bench for the speedy apprehending of these two lewd
and rebellious companions. Then the Crier was commanded to call in one witness
more, which was one of the Corporals of the Band, whose name was Discipline,
who being there attending presently appeared.

The Corporal being at the Bar, it was demanded of him what he could say,
more than had been spoken?

My Lord, says he, though Corporal Disciplines witness
very much has been spoken, and that most truly against him, yet have I more
to say than hitherto has been spoken by any of them. It is well known, my
Lord, to the whole Corpse de guard, how unruly he has been after the setting
of the watch. Such conceit he has ever had of his freedom (my Lord) that my
very name has been odious unto him. He has gotten such liberty, that he
could never endure Will is a great hinderance to spiritual war^are.
to be disciplined. Our arms he has taken and made them often unserviceable.

Our Powder of holy affections he has damped, the Match of feruency of spirit
he has put out: the Small-shot of spiritual eiaculations he so stopped, as
in time of need they would not go off; of the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of
God, he quite took away the edge: he brake the Helmet of salvation, bruised
the Breast Plate of righteousness: the Shield of faith he cast away, and
unloosed the Girdle of verity. The points of all the pikes of divine threats by
presumption he so brake off, as they had no force to prick the Heart. He
would (after the Watch was set) of himself without the Word go the round, and
diverse times meeting the Gentlemen of the round, holy Meditations and divine
Motions, he would stop their passages and turn them back again. And not
seldom has he fallen upon the Sentinels, quick apprehensions, and put out
their eyes, so as they could not, if the Enemies had approached, have discerned
them.

My Lord, by his wilful unruliness, and by his obstinate Masterfulnesse, he
has often endangered the whole Island of man, the lower part called Corpse, and
the higher called Soul; and in a manner delivered them into the Enemies hand.
For the common Soldiers, the powers and faculties of both are too often swayed
by him to follow him in his rebellious courses. And therefore, my Lord, if he
be not suppressed and brought in obedience to our worthy Captain, he will
surely at the length yield this his Majesty's right into the hands of foreign
powers, which daily watch to have by him some opportunity to invade us. They
have (my Lord) often assailed our Castle of Confidence, raised upon the Mount
of Gods mercies, hoping only upon his help to make a breach therein and
entering to cast us out; we therefore beseech your Lordship to have justice
against him.

Then says the Judge, you ask but right, and that which in my place I am
bound to yield you, without respect of persons.

Honest men of the Jury, you have heard what all these Gentlemen have witnessed
against him, if you be agreed of your Verdict, give it in, what think you of
the Prisoner, guilty or not guilty?

They answer, guilty, my Lord.

Then the Judge turns his speech to the Prisoner, Wilfull-Will, thou have
heard what all these have witnessed against thee, what can thou now say for
thy self, why the sentence of death should not now be pronounced against thee?

My Lord, I am a Gentleman Will speaks to the Judge.
free born, and ever like a Gentleman brought up in Liberty. And though I was
in some sort to be ordered by Captain Reason; yet I ever held my self his
equal, and stood upon my freedom of choosing or refusing, or of suspending the
action. He had no authority to enforce me further than it pleased my self. I
have always bin a freeman (my Lord) from servile obedience to any man, and owe
subjection to none but only to my Soueraign. I cannot deny but that Captain
Reason has offered daily to advise me, and I have not ever wholly rejected his
counsel; if I have at any time miscarried, it was through the lewd Mistress
Hearts deceiueablenesse, and the violence of these her passionate affections
misleading me, for want of deliberation before I either chused or refused the
thing objected before me.

I do here (my Lord) ingenuously confess the truth of all that which these
witnesses have spoken against me, for which I heartily crave pardon.

I also do freely acknowledge, that I stood too much upon my birth, and Gentry,
as too many at this day do, having never a good quality besides to brag or
boast off. I took it for Abuse of birth and gentry.
granted, that my Gentry stood in idleness, pleasurable delights, hawking,
hunting, and haunting Tauernes, drinking of healths, whiffing the Tobaccopipe,
putting on of new and variety of fashions in Hat and in hair, in clothes and
in shoe ties, in boots and in spurs, in boasting and bragging, in cracking
of oaths, in big looks, great words, and in some out-bearing gestures the
forms of Gentry; which I verily supposed should sufficiently of it self have
borne me out, in all my extrauagant courses, in my licentious liberty, and
lascivious wantonness in Mistrisse Hearts house, through which I was brought
into all these rebellious disorders, for which I justly deserve my Sovereigns
indignation, of whom I humbly crave mercy and forgiveness. Good (my Lord) take
pity upon me.

Wilful Will, I am sorry Judges speech to Will.
that thy deserts are no better, being so well-borne, and that thou have so
abused thy Gentry to thy shame and confusion, through thy vain mistake, and
foul abuse of the conceit of Gentry, which consists of nobleness of spirit,
honorable endowments True Gentry, what.
of mind, praiseworthy qualities, and serviceable employments for thy King
and Country; and not in such base conditions as thou have named, unfitting
altogether true Gentry, being indeed the fruits either of degenerating spirits
from the worth of their Ancestors, or the property of new Vpstarts, never
having had the right breeding of true Gentry, nor the understanding of the true
qualities of a Gentleman indeed.

But seeing thou art humble and penitent, and may do his Majesty good
service hereafter, thy deserved sentence shall be deferred off, till his
Majesty's pleasure be further known concerning thee: yet in the mean space
thou art to be bound to thy good behavior, and be carried back again, to
remain under the custody of Master Newman. Jailer, take him to thee, and see
him forth coming whenever he shall be called for.

Then, said he, I humbly thank your Lordship, and so bowing himself to the
Bench, he is carried away from the Bar, to the place from whence he came, to
remain Prisoner until he should be released.

After he was removed, the Jailer was commanded to set Mistress Hearts Maids
to the Bar. But upon deliberation they were sent to Ward again unto another
time. The reason was, for that two great Traitors and Rebels, chief amongst
the damned crew, were presently to be arraigned, which would take up the
allotted time before the Court should break up and the Bench arise.

These two were Covetousness Two capital sins.
and Idolatry, Capital Thieves, pestilently mischievous against God, his
Worship and Service, against the Church, and against the Co^mon-weale.

Covetousness was joined with Idolatry, because he is also called Idolatry.
Col. 3. 5.
Now all other Prisoners removed, and the Judge with the Bench ready for
Covetousness tried.
these, the Clerk wills the Crier to command the Jailer to set Covetousness
to the Bar, which the Jailer does forth with.

Then says he unto him, Covetousness hold up thy hand and hear thy
Indictment.

Covetousness, thou art His Indictment.
here indicted by the name of Covetousness, in the Town of Want, in the County
of Neuerfull, that from the day of thy first being thou have been the root of
all evil, having 1 Timothy 6. 10.
made some to play the Thieves, others to commit Treason against our Sovereign
Lord the King; others to murder Mich. 22.
Innocents for their inheritance. Thou art also here indicted for bribery,
extortion, oppression, usury, injustice, cousenage, unmercifulness, and a
multitude of outrageous Villainies: besides thy hindering men in holy duties and
means of Salvation, forcing them headlong to their destruction, contrary to
the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity.

What say thou to this Indictment, guilty or not guilty?

He answers, not guilty (my Lord) and so he puts himself upon the trial.

After this, the parties The first Evidence against him is Repentance.
that can give Evidence are called in, and first Repentance is commanded to
produce his Witnesses.

Repentance, what can you say?

My Lord, since the Prisoner was committed to prison and put into Ward, some of
my witnesses are dead, as Achan, Ahab, and Judas.

Then, says the Judge, look the Records, Clerk, and read them.

My Lord, I read here What evil Covetousness has done.
that Acan confessed that by Covetousness he was Josh. 7.
moved to look upon a wedge of gold, and so coveting, stole it, and with it a
Babylonish garment, to the death and destruction of him and all his. Also I
here find, how through Covetousness Ahab longed for poor Naboths Vineyard,
and so eagerly, as he fell sick for it, because he could not have his will.
But Iesabel procured by his leave and liking the death of Naboth and his 1
King. 21.
sons, and so got possession of the Vineyard. Moreover, I find here, that
Judas confessed how he betrayed the innocent blood of our Savior through
covetousness and desire of money. This is all the Confession, my Lord, in the
Records.

Then the Judge wills the Constable and his Assistants which were at the
apprehending of him to be called, who make their appearance.

Constable, what can you say, and those that were with you, against this
prisoner at the Bar?

My Lord, when we It troubles and darkens the understanding.
went to make search for him, he hid himself so close, as we had much ado
at first to find him in Mistress Hearts house; who had almost persuaded us
that he had not been there, until I learned David's care to prevent
Covetousness.
it from David the man of God, whom I had found Psalm. 119. 36.
petitioning the Lord Chief Justice for a Warrant of the good behavior
against the Covetousness of the Heart. Then thought I, certainly he is here
in this house: for if David feared to have him in his Heart, that gave so many
millions of gold and silver, 3300. Cart-load of Treasure for the building of
the Temple, can I think him Without diligent search its hard to find out our
Covetousness.
not to be here? I sought therefore diligently, my Lord, and found him; but
before I could attach him, he was got into a dark corner and attempted to
blow out my Candlelight, and to have escaped me. But I and my Company took
such diligent heed to him, as he could not get from us: yet before we could
bind him, and bring him away, he endeavored to mischief as many as came
near him, and would by no means obey my Warrant, as the rest here (my Lord
(can tell if you please to hear them. Then began every one of them to speak.

Care complained, that Cares complaint.
he had almost choked him with the world and worldly businesses, so as he
had no leisure to mind heavenly things.

Clearing accused him Clearing accuses him.
that he had so undermined his understanding at unawares, as almost he had
broken the neck of his good name, and reputation of his profession and
Religion.

Indignation complained that he had well nigh lost Indignation complains.
his life by him: for whereas before he could not behold Sin, but with an
holy anger, now profit of Sin, through this cursed Covetousness, made him
look cheerfully upon it, and heartily welcome it for profits sake.

Fear complained, that Fear speaks against him.
he did bewitch him: for said he, whereas before I was tender hearted, and
trembled at Gods Word, desire of gain made me loath to lose my commodity
though I got it with Sin.

Vehement desire did greatly Vehement Desire hurt by him.
complain of his violent setting upon him, to make him eager after earthly
things, so as he could hardly take any rest.

Zeal complained, that Zeal blunted.
he struck himself hard upon the head, as the blow made him, in hope of
gain, almost without sense of Gods glory, which before he preferred above all
things in the world.

Lastly, Revenge complained, Revenge made weak.
that the Prisoner had attempted to murder him, and so wounded him, as whereas
before he could master sin, now he was grown so weak, as any gainful
sin was able to master him, and to bring him under command.

When these had spoken what they could, the rest were brought to give evidence,
and these also were men of very good account, and of great worth in their
Country; Master Other Witnesses produced.
Church, Master Commonweal, Master Household, Master Neighborhood, and
Master Good-worke, who having answered to their names, they give in Evidence
one by one.

Master Church, what can you say against the prisoner at the Bar?

My Lord, I am not able Master Church is Witness.
to reckon the particular mischiefs he has done against me. There falls
never a Benefice of any reasonable value, but he sets many to run and ride
after it, and to offer largely for it, and makes some Patrons thieves, and to
admit many an Ignoramus into the charge and cure of Souls: and many a Minister
to be a perjured Simonist before God. He makes not a few to heap up means,
not only for maintenance, but also to make themselves great; and many which
come in freely to neglect the care of their flocks, and to seek after their
fleeces, to care to be rich, and to follow so after the world, as that either
they give over to preach, or do make them preach at home very idly, seldom,
and unprofitably, though abroad, either for their hire, or applaudity more
diligently and commendable.

When People come to People hindered by Covetousness in the Church.
Church (my Lord) he marreth their devotion and haleth their souls out of the
Church, to make them to be walking their grounds, talking with their friends,
plotting businesses, and to be going some journey, to be at some Market or
Fair, to be counting their debts, following their debtors, reckoning up their
loan upon Usury, their profits and gain, here and there, not without fear of
losses. And all these things (my Lord) with many other worldly thoughts, whilst
their bodies are in Church. When people come from Matthew. 13. People hindered
coming out of the Church.
the Church, he choaketh the seed of Gods Word, that it thriueth in very few,
and of these few, it is more in talk than in practice. He keeps (my Lord)
many from the Church, causing them to set the Lords Day apart, not for his
service, but for their worldly affairs, because they will not take another
time for hindering their profit in the week days.

Much more (my Lord) I have to say, but I am loath to be too tedious.

You Master Church, have spoken sufficiently and enough to condemn him.

Call Master Commonweal.

Master Commonweal, what can you say on the Kings behalf against the
Prisoner at Bar?

My Lord, this man Master Commonweal, his accusation.
has entered so far into all businesses, as he has almost utterly undone
me. He propounds Offices to sale, and so makes the buyers to sell their
duties for profit to make up their moneys. He has monopolized commodities into
his hands, inhanced the prices of things, to the great grieuance of the Kings
Subjects. He (as your Lordship well knows) has miserably corrupted the
course of Justice, by briberie, by making many Lawyers plead more for Fees,
than honestly, for the equity of the cause; by delaying the cause, by removing
it from one Court to another, till men be undone. He has, to get his desire,
suborned false witnesses, counterfeited Evidences, and forged Wills. Good my
Lord, let some order be taken with him, else he will utterly bring me to ruin
and all mine for ever.

Call Master Household.

Master Household, what can you say concerning the Prisoner?

My Lord, this wicked Master Household his witness.
Covetousness keeps holy exercises out of private houses; he will not let
parents have any time to instruct their children, he makes Masters use their
servants more like beasts than men, they are so wholly employed in worldly
businesses: as for their souls there is no care taken, but they are left to
live as soule-lesse men. He causes niggardly housekeeping, and ouerlabouring
of servants. He breeds much contention, chiding, and too much use of ill
language by Mistresses and Dames, yea, between men and their wives in their
Family, to the great grief and ill example of their children and servants.

Yea, (my Lord) he Cruelty of Covetousness.
has made children to be cruel to their Parents, brethren and sisters to hate
one another, near of kindred and blood to go to Law one with another, for and
about dividing goods, lands, and inheritances; yea, I can witness this, that he
has made them murder one another: Children their Parents, Husbands their
Wives, and one Brother another. It would be too long to particularize, how
great evils, and how many ways he has injured me and all mine. But because
other witnesses stand here by me, I will trouble your Lordship with no more
complaints at this time.

Call Master Neighborhood.

Friend, What is it that you can say touching this prisoner?

My Lord, this unhappy Master Neighborhood his witness.
man has altogether disunited men's affections, so as in our Town there is
very little love: hardly will one do another a good turn freely, but either
it must be one for another, like for like, or in certain future hope for
gain. This wretch has almost banished all friendly society; every man is so
now for himself, as he neglects his neighbor almost wholly. He makes them
trespass one another, to rob cunningly one another in buying and selling, and
to fall out with bitter railing, and vnneighbourly languages for a penny loss,
and causes many suits and brabbles. We are (my Lord) indeed miserably
disquieted, and almost utterly undone by him. For (my Lord) we were a company
of very good neighbors till he became Landlord: here dwelt Amity, Good
neighbors and peaceable.
Kindness, Gentleness, Love, Peace, Charity, Patience, Goodness,
Readie-good-will, Forgetfulness of wrongs, Sociablenesse, Good-turnes, and
Joy: but most unjustly by his cruelty and wrong dealing he has displaced
them, and brought (my Lord) a company of infernal spirits, for so I think I
may without offense call them, which are these: Hatred, Gal. 5. Ill Neighbors,
and very unquiet.
Malice, Envy, Wrath, Anger, Churlishness, Discord, Niggardliness,
Sturdinesse, Romans 2.
Strife, Debate, Variance, Emulation, Sedition, Wrangling, Fraud, Deceit,
Malignitie, Despite, Unnaturalness, Implacablenesse, Unthankfulness,
Fierceness, 1 Timothy 3.
Highmindednesse, Selfeloue, Makebate, and Unmercifulness. The best that he
brings in (my Lord) are Costlesse complement, Faire-Speech, The best kindnesses
of the covetous.
How do you, Goodmorrow, Good even, Glad to see you well, Word-welcome, Will
you drink, Farewell, Yours to command, and such like; also one Little-good,
with another called Soone-lost, and amongst these No-harme No-harme, the best
man among the covetous.
is greatly commended, but never a Good man amongst them, much less any
Too-good to be found in the Parish, except more in name, than in deed. And
this is that which I have to say, my Lord, at this time.

Call out Master Good-worke.

Master Good-worke, what can you say touching the Prisoner?

My Lord, there has M. Good-worke his accusation.
been so much spoken that I need say nothing: yet none have more just cause to
complain than I have: for he has endeavored to his utmost to root me out,
Covetousness an enemy to good works.
and all my posterity, Bounty, Liberality, and Hospitality.

My Lord, we by reason of him, daily stand in fear of our lives; all the
country cries out of him, in their love to us, who well know how often he
has attempted to murder us.

He has put out of joint both the arms of my Son Bounty, and almost broken
the back of my Son Liberality, that he hardly at any time goes upright, and
all know this, that he has violently set upon my Son Hospitality, and forced
him out of doors, and in his stead has let in Pride of apparel, Sumptuous
building, Affectation of vain Titles, whom he has made to shut up doors,
persuading them that to maintain their state, they must increase their
revenues, by new purchases, by racking of rents, by inhauncing their fines and
incomes, all little enough to uphold their outward state, and vain pomp
abroad. And this (my Lord) is that which for the present I have to say.

Then it was asked if all were come in that should give Evidence?

Answer was made, My Lord, here is only one man more, poor Poverty brought
hither by authority to give Evidence, may it please you hear him.

Call in Poverty.

Poverty, What can thou say against this prisoner at the Bar?

Good my Lord, I have Poverty his grievous complaint against Covetousness.
reason to curse the day that ever I knew him, and he only it is that has
brought me to this poor state.

I was a man of some The covetous are unmerciful in seeking their own gain.
credit, my neighbors well know, till I had to do with him, who would lend me
nothing but upon Usury, and that upon great bonds and morgage of lands: and so
greedy a Wolf was he upon his prey, that if I missed but one day of payment,
he would take the benefit of the Morgage, or forfeiture; or if he forbore
longer, I paid him by presents and gifts so much with the use, as made me to
groan under the burden, feeling my self in an irrecouerable Consumption.
Sometimes to keep day with him, I was enforced either to buy for time, or else
to sell something out of hand to make ready moneys: either of which was as
bad, or worse than the biting of usury, for when William Greedy a brother of
his, or also Gain his Cousin perceived my need, oh how did he in selling for
time extort from me; and in buying for ready money press me? So that to
escape a whirle-poole, I fell into devouring gulfes, and thus he undid me.

And not being therewith content (woe unto him,) when I became Tenant (my Lord)
who was before a good Freeholder, he put into our Landlords It depopulateth
Parishes.
heart, to depopulate our whole Parish of Wealth, (for so it was called) and
there in stead of many honest Inhabitants and good housekeepers, he set a
Shepherd and his Curre to feed his flocks. This also is he (my Lord) that
makes men of fair lands (which might live well on their own Revenues and
demaines) to take Farms into their hands, and to drive out such as had been
merciful releeuers of their poor neighbors. In our poor estate we have
sought to him for relief, but in stead of comfort, he has railed on us,
threatened to whip us, and to send us to the House of Correction. Nothing will
Covetous will give nothing but by Law.
he do for us, but what by Law he is enforced unto, though he keep his
Church, and can sometime also talk of Religion. He beggars all of us (my
Lord,) on work he will not set us, and yet will not suffer us to seek abroad
for relief. He never sees us, but his heart rises against us. He rather will
adventure his own damnation, than part with one penny, except it be to go
gay, to buy and purchase for him and his. Yea (my Lord) that all may know his
merciless cruelty when we have wanted relief, and begged of him, he has
Covetousness provoke to theft.
counseled us to shift for our selves, and steal out of the stackes of Corn
in gleaning time for bread, to break hedges, to steal wood or coal in the
night, to make us fires, to pluck sheep, or sheere off their wool for
clothing, to rob Orchards for fruit, to steal geese, hens, ducks, pigges
and sheep, for flesh meat, to cosen men that set us on work, and to make us
poor people hateful to God and man. For he cares not, (my Lord) so as he
may not be charged any way, what we do, or what becomes of us.

And yet to make up the height of unmercifulness, he will be the first, if
we of mere extreme need do amiss, that will cry out against us and pursue
us to death. This has ever been his course hitherto, (my Lord) consider
rightly of us, and pity our case, I beseech you, good my Lord.

Poverty, thy case indeed is to be pitied: Jury, you have heard the Evidence
of all, what say you of the prisoner at the Bar, is he guilty, or not
guilty?

Jury, Guilty my Lord.

Covetousness, thou have heard what al these witnesses have laid to thy charge
and spoken against thee, what can thou say for thy self, why sentence upon
these honest men's verdict should not be pronounced against thee?

My Lord, I stand for my Covetousness plea against Poverty.
life, let it please you with patience to hear me: and first touching this
impatient ungrateful out-crying fellow Poverty; It was not I my Lord, when he
was wealthy, but his then daily and only Companions, What makes men poor.
Sloth, Carelessness, Prodigality, Goodfellowship, Goegay Good-cheere,
wantonness, Improuidence, Little-worke, and Many-mouthes, which (my Lord) cast
him into a Consumption, and like Canker worms consumed him quickly. I confess
he came to me often to borrow, but when I saw Excuses of the covetous in
lending.
his vain courses of expense, I was very loath to lend to him, But that he so
earnestly entreated me, even with tears in his eyes oftentimes protesting,
that I should greatly pleasure him, yea, and save him and his estate from
ruin, if I would do him that kindness, to lend him in his need.

Thus (my Lord) was I moved and drawn on to lend him, according to the
Statute, only I took good Security, because I perceived him to be wastfull.
Advantage I never took, but only when I saw that he was an idle fellow and
careless, and would never keep day, then I would only threaten him to
terrify him, (my Lord) and if he then brought any kindness to my wife, it is
more than I know of, and more than I desire of him.

Sometimes he would offer to sell me the land In buying.
morgaged to me, when he could not pay, and told me that of necessity he
must sell it, and if I would not, another should buy it. Then I thought my
self as worthy to have it as any other in all reason.

For my threatening of In not giving.
him and his Company, when they went a begging; true it is, because I say,
that as they had consumed themselves, they thought to rely on me, and so in
like sort to have eaten me up too: for idely had they lived, and work they
neither could nor would. And whereas they accuse me that I compelled them to
steal, herein they very much wrong me (my Lord) for it was their Love to live
idely, and their Pinching necessity, which led and enforced them to fall to
shifting and stealing, and not I my Lord.

Touching their Landlords depopulating of the In depopulating towns.
Town of Wealth, they their own selves were the very cause thereof, for that
worthy Knight and my kinsman, Sir Worldly Wise, when he saw how some by suits
of Law, others by Drunkenness and Riot, others by Pride and Idleness did
waste their estates, so as they were neither able to till their land, nor to
stock their grounds, he bought their estates one after another, and so left
them to buy or hire for themselves elsewhere. And when thus they had removed
themselves, he sought the welfare of the Commonweal, which was to hold up
clothing (my Lord) the chiefest means Pretense of public good.
here to set the poor on work, which cannot be without wool, and wool
cannot be had without flocks of sheep.

If this Worthy Knight, and good Commonwealths man took any advice of me, it
was for public good. Good my Lord, consider that Poverty is impatient, ever
complaining, and very unthankful to his best friends, if they do not always
supply his wants.

You know this (my Lord) to be true, and all the Worshipful Justices of the
Bench.

Touching Master Church His answer to Master Church.
his accusation; unworthily does he lay the faults on me; for when any do ride
post so for Benefices when they be fallen, they are set on (my Lord) sometime
by Perking Pride, sometime by Neighbor Need, What makes Ministers to run so
for livings.
and all of them by Master Haste to get the living, and by Master Fear to come
short of it. It was never I that made them offer such sums of moneys to
Patrons, (for it is my manner to advise my friends to be ever sparing of their
purses:) but it was their ouerforward friend, Master Hope-to-preuaile that
counseled them to make such profers.

I am not (my Lord) Who make Ministers so negligent.
the cause of any Ministers negligence in his Function, but a couple of base
loytering fellows dwelling with such Ministers, commonly called (my Lord) the
Parsons men Ease and Idle, by whom such Ministers are too much led.

If the people profit not under those that be painful Ministers (my Lord) the
fault is not through What hinders people from profiting under the Word.
me, but the fault is in Inbred, Ignorance, Dullness, Old man, Mistress
Heart, and Wilful Will her man, and Maids hating to be reformed, Dislike of
Teachers either for their person Psalm. 50. 1. King. 22. Ios. 6. Mat. 13.
or doctrine, Want of love of the Truth, Contentedness to live and die in
Ignorance, and the very Devil himself (my Lord) their utter enemy. These
ought to bear the blame (my Lord) and not I.

For Master Commonweal Answer to Commonweal.
(my Lord) I marvel that he should thus abuse me, and wrong me, for (my Lord)
he knows well, that I have many ways enriched such as belong unto him: his
cunning Merchants in trading, and his crafty Lawyers in pleading. I have
helped many a mean man to a great estate, and many a base birth to be counted
of the Gentry. Forward have I been to help all sorts of every estate, of
every profession and of every trade and course of life, and must I now be
questioned for my life?

Concerning Master Answer to Household.
Household, he has no reason of all others to blame me; for I taught him how
to be wary in his housekeeping, how to manage his estate for his best thrift,
how to advantage himself in buying and selling Corn and Cattle, how to let
and set, and hire grounds, to graze and fat Cattle, and (my Lord) I ever
sought his profit in all my courses. He has no cause thus to accuse me to
your Lordship. He had never gotten up to have maintained so great a Family, but
by me. I raised his Father from a base Cottage, to be a Freeholder, and so
himself to be Master of a great Family and household. If any such evils have
happened under him, as he complayneth of, let him accuse Unnaturalness,
Impatience, Unruly What Is makes debate in a family.
Passions, and such like makebates, and withal the Suggestions of Satan, which
do set men on such mischiefs, and not me (my Lord.)

For Master Neighborhood, he may of all other Answer to Neighborhood
be ashamed to accuse me so, because he has lived much better and nothing
worse by me (my Lord) for I caused to be removed from him and his neighbors,
in their often and idle meetings (which they pleased to call Good-fellowship) a
Company of very Unthrifts, Waste, Riot, Prodigality, Bad society.
Drunkenness, Gluttony, Idleness, Carelessness, Needlesse-Expence, and a rout
of very Rascals, with reverence be it spoken (my Lord.) I taught him and all
such as he is, a better way to live, and a more thriuing course, to look
diligently to their estates, and to take good courses to save, to get, and to
increase their means. As first having abandoned such lewd company before
named, in the next place, I advised them to put away their bad Men-seruants,
Bad men-seruants.
Slack and Slothful, Careless and Wastfull, Gor-belly and Tospot, Weak and
Way-ward, Loue-bed and Drowsy, Light-finger and Lurching, Gamester and Gogay,
Slipstring and Wanderer, Scape-thrift and Spendall, and such like unprofitable
Hindes. And withal to rid themselves in like manner, of al their bad
Maid-seruants, such as Bad Maid-seruants.
these, Pranker and Prattle, Wanton and Loue-sick, Sleepy and Slugge, Sweetlip
and Dainty, Gadding and Forgetful, Greene-sicknesse and Tender, Driuell and
Slut, also and above all the Choare-woman, and her daughters Pocating and
Filch, with all their fellows.

And in stead of these (my Lord) I commended unto them a company of
Men-seruants worth entertainment, Thriftie men-seruants.
all one man's children, the sons of mine honest Neighbor Good-husbandrie; as
Care and Forecast, Makehas^e and Wary, Thriftie and Pinch, Advantage and
Holdfast, Cunning and Catch, Watchful and Toilesome, Homely-fare, and
Meane-clad, Clouted-shooe and Patch, Vp-betimes and Labor, Last up and
Trusty, Getting and Lockfast, Spend-little and Get-much, Take-time and
Lose-nought, Debtlesse and Gain, with such other profitable servants.

And because I knew that Maid-seruants answerable to them were as necessary, I
advised the best I could to provide such also, the daughters of
Good-hous-wiferie; as Eager and Spare, Quick and Profitable Maids
Nimble, Trusty and Timely-vp, Health-full and Chaste, Euer-doing and Silent,
Witty and Pliant, with other of the like nature helpful to uphold a man's
estate. By which good counsel of mine (my Lord) Neighborhood lives now
richly, and not beggarly, Need knockes not daily at his door, either to beg
or borrow, as he was wont to do.

Concerning the last Answer to Good-worke.
man Master Good-worke, he has least cause of all others to complain for that
same which he pleases to call in me Oppression, Usury, Extortion, and what
not, have built many a fair Almes-house, many a goodly Hospital in the Land
(my Lord) and have also given by will, many a large Legacy to the poor, and
much to public uses.

My Lord, when I was Covetousness a Roman Catholic.
a Roman Catholic in our Forefathers days, none was than in more grace and
favor with all the Clergy than my self. By me the holy Father the Pope
greatly increased his Treasury, by my Counsels the Prelates gat up to such an
infinite wealth and to such glorious dignities: by me (they making Religion a
cloak for me to put on) they got such stately houses for their dwellings, and
for the variety of their orders, built in the best places of every Nation, and
such yearly Revenues, as did exceed, for their certain maintenance.

Good my Lord, let it please your Lordship to think better of me, than these
men, procured for witnesses have suggested, for falsely have they spoken
against me. Good my Lord, good my Lord, do me right I beseech you.

Stand up, stand up Fellow, Judges speech.
I have heard with Patience these thy verbal Apologies: thy subtle shifts to
acquit thy self, thy fair shows to win thee credit, if it wear possible,
thereby to procure thine own release. But know, that yet for all that thou
have said, the Indictment against thee stands firm, and the Evidence against
thee is good, which here my brethren the Kings Sergeant, and the Kings
Attorney, and these worthy Gentlemen, Justices of this County likewise affirm.

It is very true which your Lordship says.

Good (my Lord) before you pronounce sentence against me, as you be a righteous
Judge, hear me, but this once more?

What have thou to say yet for thy self?

My Lord I am endited Covetousness would find an error in the indictment.
by a wrong name, my name (my Lord) is Thrift, and not Covetousness, as all
this while my Adversaries have borne your Lordship in hand.

Then the Judge asked Justice Sapience where his examination was? The Justices
Clarke called Experience brought it forth and read it: In which his name was
found to be Covetousness, and that by the witness of his neighbors, to whom
he was very well known.

Fellow, says the Judge, why do thou deny thy name?

My Lord I do not deny The Covetous will be only held thriftie.
it, for my name is Thrift; but when I get up some wealth, the envy of my
neighbors gave me this other nickname: and so common it grew, by their so
often calling me, as I lost my other name among them. But there are diverse of
my honest neighbors, which love me, and are glad of my welfare, they have told
me, that my name formerly was Thrift; and they do assure me, that I am untruly
called Covetousness.

Then says the Judge, who be these, and what are their names?

My Lord, one is Master Faire-speech, Who they be that call Covetousness
only Thrift.
a loving kind man: and another is Master Soothing his kinsman, both of them my
familiar friends: whom I have often enuited and welcomed to my house. Also many
other of my good neighbors do affirm as much to me, as my neighbor Needy,
Retainer, Dependant, Workman, Hireling, Tenant, Feareman, Fainhart,
Loath-to-offend, Clawbacke, and Fawning; for though some of these be but poor
men, yet I have ever known the^ all to be so honest, that they have hated to
slatter me; There are besides these (my Lord) other very substantial Gentlemen,
as Master Lucre, Master Bribery, Master Opression, Master Harddealing, Friends
to the Covetous.
Master Scrapgood, Master Niggard, Master Pinch-poore, Master Extortion, Master
Basemind, Master Chubrich, Master Usury, Master Hardhart, Master Louegood,
Master Suckingaine, and Master Griphard, all these (my Lord) and other more of
my good friends, have much marvelled, that I would suffer my self to be so
falsely called Covetousness, by these my Accusars, my ever hateful and
malicious enemies, such as is Master Pity, Master Relief, Enemies to
Coueteousnesse.
Master Liberality, Master Bounty, Master Hospitality with certain lend
Companions such as Careless and Wastfull, Pride, and Prodigality, Idle and
Bellicheare, with the like haters of my thriuing and provident courses: for I
have heard some Preachers say, that he which provides not for his family is
worse then an Infidle: and I would be loath to be hold such a one, that am a
Christian man. And (my Lord) if it please you to hear me, and also to believe
me, I have ever hated Covetousness: What the Covetous may do.
for I keep my Church, I say daily my prayers, and now and then, as I may
attend it, I hear Preachers, yea such, as be held of the incercut, ever
railing against the Covetous; I have been Patron of many a good Benifice, and
have ever given them freely; and if it happened, that I reserved out of them
any Tithes; it was then upon my Chaplens thankfulness, and only upon an
honest composition. I have given alms now and then, I have not been
altogether so straight handed to the poor, when I sold or let any thing as
often I did, the price set upon the same ever was so reasonable (as my Stewards
and Bailiffes Covetousness has saire pretenses.
told me for I trusted them,) that if one would not give the money another
would. If in housekeeping I have been any whit sparing, it was only warines
to avoid Riot, Excess, Drunkenness and Gluttony, which every honest man
hates. If the poor (so many as came) were not all relieved, it was for that I
saw beggars to increase thereby, and so I may do more harm then good by my
alms: for while some came from far, for an alms or a penny, they might have
earned at home in that time perhaps two pence, yea a groate sometimes, making
their going and coming a whole days labor, I gathered (my Lord) what I have
gotten, by Gods blessing, and great paines-taking, for present and for future
maintenance of my self, my wife and children after me, and I meant withal,
when I died, to have given something to the Church, something to the poor, and
a reward to a Preacher, to Preach my funeral Sermon: and somewhat more,
perhaps, to other good uses.

Good my Lord, I beseech you consider of me, The Covetous will justify
themselves.
I have ever had a good mind to wrong no man, but only have striuen carefully
and honestly to thrive in this hard world: and if all my courses be never so
strictly observed, they will only prove me to be Thrist, (which is my right
name) and not Covetousness; It has been my ill hap, though I have done good
deeds, to be very wrongfully abused, either by such as have envied my good
prosperity: or by some railing Tenants, or by some bordering Neighbors that
cannot buy of me, how, when, and what they list, at their own prices: or by
some unthankful persons not satisfied according to their humors, though
rewarded above their deserts. Good my Lord, be good unto me, and be not
carried away with the words of my malicious envious Accusers.

Fellow (says the Judge) but that I only sit to judge, and not to be thy
Accuser, I could tell thee, First, that those thou have before named, to prove
thee to be Thrift, and not Covetousness, are either slatterers, or fearful
to displease thee, or wretched men, companions in evil like thy self: And
therefore their witness is nothing worth: Next, that all thou have alleged
concerning One may be Covetous and yet do many commendable things
thy Religion, thy almsdeeds, thy housekeeping, and the rest, do not clear
thee of Covetousness: for the Scribes and Pharisecs would pay Tithes, fast
weekly; make Mat. 6. Mat. 23.
many and long prayers, yea they heard John Baptist a severe Reprouer of sin
and Christ Jesus too, who sharply reprehended them: They would give alms,
adorn sepulchers, and do many things which thou do come far short off,
and yet were they very covetous. The young man that Luke 16. 14.
came to Christ, and stood upon his well doing toward all men, and that Mat.
29. Mar. 10. 24.
from his youth up: yet was he a Mamonist; and trusted in his riches. There
were certain Jews as one Propher tells us, who Eze. 33. 30. 32.
would hear Sermons, seem to delight therein, show love to their Teachers in
word, and speak to others to go and hear them, yet their hearts followed
after their covetousness. In a word, the carriage of thy own speech uttered
in thy own praises, sauoureth strongly of Covetousness. But as I said I will
not be both an Accusar and thy Judge: we will hear witnesses for the King in
this point also: call in witnesses.

Then the Clarke wills the Crier to call in one Master Proof and one Master
Signs.

Master Proof and Master Signs come into the Court, to give evidence against
the Prisoner at the bar, or else you forfeit your Recognisances. Vous auez
Master Proof, and Master Signs.

Master Proof stand up to the bar, that my Lord may hear you: give room
there.

Then says the Judge, Master Proof look upon the prisoner, do you know him?

Yea (my Lord) I have known him from a child: his name is Covetousness.

But he denies it now, says the Judge, and calls himself Thrift.

My Lord, be of late is grown ashamed of his name, but neither is, nor ever
was ashamed, either of the nature or practice of Covetousness, as I and Master
Signs here do well know, and are able to make good against him.

Then you hold not his name to be Thrift.

No verily (my Lord) though he has often pretended it, to cover his odious,
though very true name: yet is it not to be denied (my Lord) but that one
Thrift dwelt, where he now dwells, and indeed, he is a slip of Thrift, and
thus it was.

This Master Thrift, Thrift turned basely covetous and how.
was once Steward to three worshipful Gentlemen, Master Liberality, Master
Bounty, and Master Hospitality, and carried himself very commendably in their
services, and afterward for himself, when he came to be an housekeeper,
until he fell in acquaintance with a very pestilent subtle base Pettifogger,
who gave The Devil.
him such bad counsel as unhappily brought him to fall into familiarity The
petigree of of Covetousness showing the true proof thereof, in whom so ever
it is.
with one Distrust, and suddenly to marry a daughter of his called Not content.
Through this his unhappy father in Law ever urging, and his unquiet wifes
solicitation, he was much altered in his nature and condition from that which
he was before. Of this woman Notcontent he had diverse children, among the
rest, Care, Fear, Spare, Hardfare, Toilesome, and with all, one called Gain:
Those former Sons were sour, sad, lumpish, froward, and very unquiet: But
this Lad Gain was a pleasant youth, and often made his parents very merry, and
therefore though they neglected not the other, yet their chiefest delight was
set upon this.

This Son they so cockered, and made so much off, as they suffered him to
set his love upon one Coveting, a very harlot, and withal the base daughter of
Desire, upon which filthy harlotry he begat this fellow Covetousness, the
prisoner now at the bar: who when he was but a very babe, so continually lay
sucking at his mother Couetings breasts, as she had not milk enough for him,
and therefore with her husband Gains consent, she put him to be nursed, and
nourished up of one Grecdie, the wife of Money-loue; Now so it fell out, that
these two, had a daughter called Hopet' increase, to which he at ripe years
was married, who between themselves, as also by the help of their Parents, on
both sides, of his Parents Gain and Coveting; and of her Parents Greedy and
Money-loue, they did grow rich and very great. And so insatiable has he been
ever in getting, as he justly deserves to be called Covetousness his very
true and proper name. And this is that which I have to say (my Lord) and I hope
it may give the Jury satisfaction, that he is not indicted by a false name.

If you have spoken Master Proof, then Crier, call in Master Signs, says the
Judge.

Master Signs says the Crier, stand up to the bar.

Then the Judge asked him, if he knew the prisoner?

My Lord, says he, I have known this man of a long time, his name is
Covetousness: He was so borne, and brought up, as Master proof has witnessed
to your Lordship, and to the Jury.

But (says the Judge) you have heard him deny, that this is his name, what
evident tokens can you therefore decipher him by, that the Jury may know him to
be the very man?

My Lord, though I know him to be blinded with Selfeloue, and with an over good
conceit of himself, as rich men commoly be, so says Solomon, as also that he
is Pro. 28. 11.
flattered by such, as he himself has named to your Lordship, that he will
never believe what I shall say; yet will I deliver undoubted tokens to the Jury
for them to know assuredly, that he is the very man, according to his name; a
right Mamonist. Signs of a conetous person.
For, my Lord he cannot deny that he was ever content with his estate, Heb. 13.
5. but through the love of money, which he coueted after, he has labored and
made haste to be rich. 1. Tim. 6. 9. Pro. 23. 4. Pro. 28. 20. and never would
be satisfied, Eccle. 5. 6. 10. nor have enough, Esaias 56. 11. For as riches
increased, so he set his heart upon them, Psalm. 62. 10. His chiefest joy was,
because his wealth was great, and because his hand had gotten much, Job. 31.
25. he has received silver, rather then instruction, and gold rather then
knowledge; Pro. 8. 10. His trust was in his riches, Pro. 11. 28. Ier. 48. 7.
His wealth was his strong City, Pro. 10. 15. and as a high wall in his conceit,
Pro. 18. 11 Greedy has he been of gain, and through his greediness, has he
troubled his own house, Pro. 15. 27. by chiding, chasing, turmoiling, pinching
fare, and such like means; He has increased his estate by unjust gain and
oppression, Pro. 28. 8. and 22. 16. Gifts he has loved and received, Pro. 29.
4. Esaias 1. 23. In his abundance he has not had power given him to live
plentifully, Eccles. 6. 2. but has spared more then needs, Pro. 11. 24. He
has eaten upon other men's labors, Esaias 3. 14. and his Neighbors labors he
has used without recompense, Ier. 22. 13. For he always only looked to his
own ways, and to his own gain, Esaias 56. 11. Studying to join house to
house, and field to field, that he might be alone, Esaias. 5. 8. He has built
houses by unrighteousness and wrong. Ier. 22. 13, He has made dishonest
gain, Ezech. 22. 13. 24. And gotten greedily by extortion. Ezech. 22. 12. His
eyes and his heart were only for Covetousness, Ier. 22. 17. Besides all these
(my Lord) he has suffered the cares of this world, and deceitfulness of
riches to choke the Word of God, that it has been without fruit in him. Mat
13. 22. He never devised liberal things, Esaias. 32. 8. nor to despise the
gain of deceits, Esaias 32. 8. Any proposition tending to cost was ever
displeasing to him, and like the young man in the Gospel, would Mat. 19.
he go away heavily: as one grieved to part with his goods. As an Ahab he never
could see a Nabothes Vinyard lying commodiously for him, but he eagerly gaped
after it. If he gave to the poor, and to good uses, it was of necessity not
freely, 2. Cor. 9. 5. sparingly, and not bountifully, not cherefully, and of a
willing mind, pleading not to be so rich, as men took him to be, Pro. 13. 7.

And whereas this man says, that he has ever When does a man bare
Covetousness.
hated Covetousness, (as indeed he ought to have done,) Pro. 28. 16. Surely
if he had, then would he (my Lord) with David (one that bestowed infinite
treasures to holy uses) have prayed against the Covetousness of his own heart,
Psalm. 119. 36. He would have been more liberal, more bou^tiful, more given
to hospitallity, and more ready to good works, then he has been hitherto. He
would be like Cornelius giving much alms. Act. 10. 2. My Lord I have known
him to watch opportunity, to get advantages both of rich and poor: If Master
Liberality, Bounty, Hospitality, Goodworke, Church, or Commonweal, did ever
employ him, he then would make gain of them all to himself: Where he found
any good fellows for his turn, as Waste, Prodigality, Pride, Idle, Needy, or
Simple, as long as they had any thing, he would speak kindly to them, offer
to lend them upon pawnes, or morgages, till he had undone them, which he that
hates Covetousness would never have done.

To be short (my Lord) all the witnesses produced already, with the just
complaint of poor Poverty: proclaim his name to be Covetousness, yea, (as
your Lordship has well observed) his own speeches and practices, cry shame
against him.

Would a man hating Covetousness commend the practice of Sir Worldlywise, as
he has done?

Would he commend, The cruelty and baseness of Covetousness.
and entertain in his service, Cunning, and Catch, Advantage, and Holdfast,
Rackrent, and Ouerreach, Makemuch, and Pinchhard, Sparepurse, and Niggard,
Hardsare, and Churl, Coldwelcome, and Wishrid, Scarcedrinke, and Farewell,
with a company of base Hangbies, such as these, Slipthrif^, and Poorewage,
Lackmeanes, and Loyterer, Tag and Ragge, with Soliue, and Orbegone. If
Covetousness did not ouersway him, he would surely abandon all such
contemptible Companions which are ever a disgrace to Liberality, Bounty, and
Hospitality, such fellows as these before named, they s^orne to have abiding in
their mansions.

I have been (my Lord) somewhat to long, I fear me, but I hope, I have
satisfied your Lordship and the Jury: and spoken, but that which is truth.

Master Signs (says the Judge) you and Master Proof, have performed the
parts of honest men.

Sirrah Sirrah, thou that have so impudently denied thy name, here before the
face of thy country: being so clearly proved against thee every way, what
can thou yet allege for thy self, that now the sentence of death should
not be pronounced against thee?

Good my Lord a Psalm of mercy.

What! can thou, so notorious a Traitor to God, to his Church, to thy King,
and to thy Country, now imagine, to reap any benefit by thy Clergy?

Good my Lord, I pray your Lordship of mercy, Good my Lord.

Fellow hold thy peace, and hear with patience, thy just deserved judgment.

Covetousness, thou have The sentence a (...) Covetousness.
been indicted by the name of Covetousness of all the aforesaid Felonies,
Cousenages, Oppressions, and Murders, and for the same thou have been at
reigned; thou have pleaded not guilty, and have put thy self upon thy trial
and been found guilty, having no more to say for thy self, this is the Law.

Thou art to be counted Idolatry before God, and Ephesians. 5. 3.
also the root of all evil, and so damned a sin as not to be named amongst
Christians, and that such as by thee are made covetous 1. Cor. 5.
are to be abandoned of all good men, as of God they are abhorred, being worthy
of eternal death; and have no inheritance Psalm. 10 3.
in the Kingdom of Christ and of God, but upon Romans 1. 29. 32.
them must come the wrath of God, as upon the Ephesians. 55.
children of disobedience. Thou art therefore as a rotten member of the Col. 3.
5. 6.
flesh to be mortified and cut off.

Master Shireffe, do Excecution which the Under Shireffe sees performed.

Jailer, set Papistry to the Bar.

Papistry hold up thy Papistry indicted
hand.

Papistry, thou art here indicted by the name of Papistry, of the City of Rome,
in the County of Babylon, that thou being a bastard Christian begotten of
Heresy, Iudaisme, Paganism, have by violent force and arms invaded the
territories of the Church of God, and by Spanish Inquisitions, bloody
Massacres, stabbing, poisoning, and killing of Kings, Gunne-powder plots,
Treasons, Rebellions, and other hellish practices, usurped authority and
thrusts upon Gods people their humane traditions, inventions, superstitions,
will worship, Heresies, Jewish Ceremonies, and Paganish Idolatry to the
damnation of many Christian souls contrary to the peace of our Sovereign Lord
the King, his Crown and Dignity, what say thou hereunto, art thou guilty or
not guilty?

Not guilty my Lord.

By whom will thou be tried?

By God and the Country. But (good my Lord) let me have another Jury
Papistries petition.
chosen, I do not except against the former Jury, Faith, Love, Fear,
Charity, Sincerity, Paitence, Innocence and the rest, but (my Lord) though
they be honest men, and have well discharged themselves in their Virdict upon
other Prisoners; yet have they not such Judgment and Understanding as others
have, to discern of my case, and the truth of the Evidence which shall be
brought against me.

Papistry, because neither thou nor any of thy slanderous Fauorits may say,
that thou have been proceeded against rigorously and unjustly, without respect
to the truth of the cause, I am content to call a new Jury, if here we can
have so many as will make up the number.

I humbly thank you (my good Lord) God reward your Lordship for it.

Master Sheriff, impannell a new Jury of very substantial men, the chiefest
you can find, and fittest to go upon this Prisoner now at the Bar.

My Lord, I supposed, that as he would crave, so from your Lordships vprightnes
he should obtain this favor, therefore have I prepared a full Jury to this
purpose.

It was done wisely of you (Master Sheriff) let them be called.

Crier call in the Jury. A Jury against Papistry.


1. Call Common Principles, Vous aues Common Principles.

2. Call Apostles Creed, Vous aues The Creed.

3. Call Second Commandment, Second Commandment come in.

My Lord I cannot get in.

What Is the matter?

My Lord (says the Crier) the Papists keep him out.

Command to let him in, Vous aues the Second Commandment.

4. Call Pater noster, Vous aues Pater noster.

5. Call Holy Scriptures, Vous aues Holy Scriptures.

6. Call the Apocrypha, Vous aues Apocrypha.

7. Call Counsels, Vous aues Councels.

8. Call Ancient Fathers for the first 600. years after Christ, Vous aues
Ancient Fathers.

9. Call Contradiction amongst themselves, Vous aues Contradiction,

10. Call Absurdity of Opinion, Vous aues Absurdity of Opinion.

11. Call Consent of their own Men, Vous aues Consent.

12. Call Testimony of Martyrs, Vous aues Testimony of Martyrs.

Count, says the Clerk.

Then the Crier bids them answer to their names.

Common Principles, one; Creed, two; Commandment, By these twelve means
Papistry may be confuted
three; Pater noster, four; Holy Scriptures, five, Apocrypha, six; Council,
seven; Fathers, eight; Contradiction, nine; Absurdity, ten; Consent of their
own men, eleven; Testimony of Martyrs, twelve: Good men and true, stand
together and hear your charge.

My Lord, here are some more summoned by Master Sheriffs authority.

Who be they Master Sheriff?

Master Law with his sons, Civil, Canon, Common, Master Law and his sons.
and Municipall.

Well, let them attend the Court for the Kings service, for use, if need be.

Papistrie, if thou can ^ustly except against any, I give thee leave to
challenge any such of the Jury.

Good my Lord, only Holy Scriptures is by Papistrie chiefly excepted against.
one of the Jury I except against, which is Holy Scriptures, except it be our
own Translation.

Well, says the Judge, I For Papist may be confuted by their own translation.
See my Book of Rheme, against Rome.
am content it shall be so, let it be either Montanus, or the Rhemist, or the
Vulgar Edition, we desire a just proceeding with all the indifferency that may
be.

Then the Crier calls aloud; If any man can give Evidence, or can say any
thing against the Prisoner at the Bar, let him come in, for he stands upon
his deliverance.

Here is my Lord a worthy Gentleman M. Verity.

Master Verity, come near, what can you say concerning the Prisoner at the
Bar?

My Lord, this I am able Master Verities evidence against Papistrie.
to iustisie. First, that he has been a False Teacher from the beginning,
fraught with error and heresies, teaching as the false Teachers Like false
Teachers in Doctrine.
did, such as be recorded in Scripture, if they were paralleld together, as the
Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. 1.
Traditions and Reader mark the doctrine of false Teachers of old, and Papists
now.
Commandments of men, Mat. 15. 2. Mar. 7. 8, 9, 13. Col. 2. 22. Venial sins
2.
Matt. 23. 16. 18. Childrens 3.
neglect of Parents for Churches 4.
profit, as they pretended, Mat. 15. 5. Mar. 7. 11. Superstitious observations
5.
in meats and holy days, Matthew 15. 11. Col. 2. 16, 21. Laying heavy burdens
upon 6.
the people, Luke 11. 46. Justification 7.
by works, therewith troubling the Churches, Gal. 2. 18. and 3. 2. and 5. 4.
12. Voluntary Religion and Wilworship, Col. 2. 18. 23. The 8.
worship of Angels, Col. 2. 18. 9.
Carnal liberty, 2. Pet. 2. 19. Reu. 2. 1^. 20. And Teaching 10.
for filthy Lucre, Tit. 2. 11. 11.
Thus are they, as were the False Teachers (as the Scriptures in the New
Testament set them out) like in all these things.

How like they are (my Lord) to after Heretics, learned Whitaker in his Book
De Ecclesia, in the first Question, shows in many particulars.

Secondly, (my Lord) he has used the very same Like false Teachers in
practices.
practices which False Teachers have used: he does to make way for his
Doctrine, Worship and Advancement, even as they Practice of false Teachers.
did. Col. 2. 2. 23. 2. Tim. 3. 5, 6. 2. Pet. 2. 3, 4.
They played the Hypocrites in outward humility, in long prayers and forms of
Devotion, and so mislead silly women. Mat. 15, 2. and 7. 3. 1. Pet. 1. 18.
They graced their Doctrine with show of Forefathers. Luke 11. 5.
They took away the Key of Knowledge, and neither would enter into life, nor
suffer others. 2. Tim. 4. and 1. Tim. 4. 7.
They told the people old Wives Fables, and told lies in hypocrisy. Ephesians. 4.
14.
They used sleights and cunning craftiness to deceive. 1. Tim. 4. 20.
They boasted of their learning, using profane and vain babbling, and
oppositions of Sciences as they termed it. 2. These. 2. 2. Act. 15. 24.
They pretended Revelations, Apostolical Traditions, and alleged counterfer
writings. Reu. 2. 20. Nehe. 6. 14.
They had the Prophetical woman and deceiving Prophetesses, Mat. 7. 23. Deuteronomy.
13. 1, 2.
They had their Miracle-workers, Casters out of Devils, and Dreamers of
dreams. Act 17. 7. and 24. 5. and 18. 13. and 25. 7. 2 Cor. 10. 10. Act. 24 5.
They would slander men's persons, and the Doctrine of saithfull Teachers, and
lay to their charge what they could not prove, speaking of them contemptuously,
and railing on them. Ioh. 8. 39. Mat. 3. 9. 2 Cor. 11. 13, 22.
They boasted to be the true Church, and that by Succession they were of the
Fathers. Romans 16. 18. 1. Cor. 2. 1.
They would use fair and soothing words, and teach with enticing words, and
did strine for excellency of speech of man's wisdom to deceive. Act. 4. 18.
and 22 1. and 6. 24 and 26. 10, 11. and 30. 50. and 22. Reu. 2.
When they could not prevail by fair means, then they would suborne false
witnesses: they threatened, beat, imprisoned, banished and slew the faithful
Teachers and Christian Believers. Act. 23. 1^.
They would plot conspiracies to the shedding of blood, and the Priests must
be acquainted herewith before hand to encourage them hereto. Acts 13 50.
They would make open insurrections, and stir up great personages to take part
with them. And what rebellion, treasons, conspiracies, insurrections, and
persecutions this Papistrie has wrought, my Lord Bishop of Chichester has
openly discovered to the world in his Book of Thanksgiving for our deliverance
from all these Popish Traitors Priests and Jesuits.
Traitors, Morton, Sands, Parsons, Campion, Ballard, Watson, Clarke, Garnet,
Priests and Jesuits: Stuckly, Someruile, Throgmorton, Parry, Babbington Popish
Traitors laics:
and his Company; Lop us, Tyrone, Markam, Brook, with others; Percey, Catsby,
and all the Gunpowder Plotters; Laics. And this (my Lord) is not what I
could, but what I thought sufficient to testify at this time, because I would
not be tedious.

Master Verity, by this you have uttered, it is easy to see how this man has
followed, both the false Teachers in Doctrine, and the Enemies of the Gospel
in their practices. If there be any more witnesses, let them come forth.

Yes my Lord, here is Sir Christianity.

Sir Christianity, what is it that you have to say against this Prisoner at
the bar?

My Lord, I was commanded to be here to Sir Christianity his evidence against
Papistrie
day to give evidence what I know against this man, and this I am willing to do
for the service of my Sovereign. This it is (my Lord) which I have to say,
that this man with his Associates, has in stead of Christian Religion, set up
a service of Iudaisme and How Papists are like the Gentiles, Se Mathias Hoe on
Reu. 11, 2. from p. 1. 419. to 453.
Paganism, which I am able to prove in a multitude of particulars: but
because I am loath to be tedious in my relation, I have brought here with me
Three Books, that the Jury may judge of all the particulars, or they may be
read before the Prisoner, if your Lordship shall be pleased to have it so.

What books Sir Christianity?

My Lord, one is that, 1. Books 1. Three Conformities.
that is called The Three Conformities set out lately. The other is, De Origin
2. De Origin Papatus.
Papatus, set out by one Doctor Morisin, and dedicated to his late Majesty: and
the third is, our learned Countriman Doctor Raynolds his Conference with Heart
never answered of 3. Roynolds and Heart.
any papistto this day, who shows how the Popish service is like unto the
Iewishin very many particulars and wherein they be more Heathenish, then Jewish.

I am content to have the^ read to spare your speech touching ye Jewish service.

So having been read, the Judge yet wished Sir Christianity to declare openly
how Pagan like Papists be, and as the Heathenish Idolaters in Israel and Judah
were, and only out of the undoubted Testimonies of Scripture, and the
Apocrypha books, because those learned Authors had omitted it.

My Lord, I shall (says Sir Christianity) perform this task with as great
brevity as I may: that this Prisoner (if it be possible) may see how wickedly
he has dealt with men's souls to set up instead of Gods Service, an
Idolatrous, and Pagan-like Papists like Pagans in many things.
Worship.

Romans 1. 22.
These Pagans set forth God like a man. Ier. 7 18.
The Idolatrous Israelites had a Queen of Heaven: Dan 9. 4. Isa 41. 7. and 44.
10.
they had Images of gold and silver, brass, iron, wood, Ier 1. 4. Baruch 6 45.
Deuteronomy. 7. 5. and 12. 3.
and stone, and some of clay: some molten, some carved and graven, some 2 King
17 41. 2. Chron 33. 7. 19. and 34. 4. Judge. 18. 18 Ezekiel. 2^. 14, 15, 16. and 8.
10. Numb. 33. 52.
portrayed upon walls, and other Pictures. Some were likemen, Dan. 3. 1. 1.
Sam. 5. 3, 4. and some like Women, Act. 19. 27. 2. Machab. 1. 13. 1. Sam. 31.
10. some lke Beasts, (like S. George and the Dragon) Exodus 34. Wisd. 11. 15.
They adorned Adorned images
them with silver and gold, Ierem. 10. 4. and set Crowns upon some of their
heads, covering them with costly garments and of diverse colors, Deuteronomy. 7. 25.
Hab. 2. 19. Baruch 6. 8, 9, 14, 15, 29, 39, 50, 55, 58. Ezekiel. 16. 18. Wisd. 13.
14 carrying a Scepter in the hand, or a dagger, or an axe, Baruch 6. 14, 15.
They set them up with great devotion and solemnity, with music and melody,
Dan. 3. 3. Music.
with singing, dancing, and other delights, Exodus 32. 5. Dancing. Temples.
They built Temples for these Images, Joel 3. 5. 2. Machab. 1. 13, 15. Baruch
6. 18. which were the houses of their Gods, Judge. 17. 4. 1 Samuel 5. 2. and
called them Sanctuaries, Isat. 16. 12. They had Chapels for them, Chapels.
Amos 7. 12. Yea, they Images in every place.
set them upon tops of hills, 1 King. 14. 23. 2 King. 17. 10. They had them in
private houses, Judge. 17. 4. 18. in chambers, Ezekiel. 8. 12. and in secret
places, Deuteronomy. 27. 15. They had their pleasant Groves planted, Ier. 17. 2.
Groves.
1 King. 14. 23 and there also had their Images, 1 King. 15. 13. 2 Chronicles. 15.
16. 2 King. 17. 10. They had their standing Pillars and Images, as the Papists
Standing Pillars as Crosses be.
their Crosses, Deuteronomy. 12. 3. and 16. 22. 2. King. 17. 19, Leu. 26 1. these were
in the head of Highways and Streets of Cities, Exek. 16. 31. Ier. 11. 13. The
multitude Ignorant allured to idolatry.
were allured by the gorgeous decking of them, Wisd. 14. 20. and 15. 5. 6. Yea,
they doted upon Doted on Images
them, Ezekiel. 8. 10, 11. They worshipped them, bowed unto them, and fell down
before them, Dan. 3. 2 Isa. 44. 17. Ios. 23. 16. They would lift up their eyes
unto them, Ezekiel. 33. 25. Pray Prayed to them.
unto them, 1. King. 18. 26. Hab. 2. 16. Isa 44. 17. Kiss Kissed them.
them, Hos. 13 2. 2. King. 19. 18. set up Candels before Candles set up before
them.
them, Baruch. 6. 19. Make vows to them, Baruch 6. 35. Vows.
and go on Pilgrimage Pilgrimage.
to some of them very far, Ier. 51. 44. expecting some miraculous cure from
the Image, Bar. 6. 41. In entering into their Temples they sprinkled themselves
with water, Altars they had of ston^, Isa. 65. 3. they used vain repetitions
Altars.
in their prayers, Set numbers of prayers.
Mat. 6. 7. They measured their Religion and goodness thereof by plenty, Ier.
44. ^. They had their sacrificing Priests, Act. 14. 13. and Sacrificing priests.
they were shaven Priests, Baruch 6. 31. 32. Sometimes Shaven.
they were of the basest of the people, 1. Kings 12. 31. whosoever would, might
for money or for money worth, make himself a Priest, 1. King. 12. 31. 2.
Chron. 13. 9. And some served for base wages, Judge. 17. They had then Priests
Concubines.
Concubines, Baruch 6. 11. Hos. 4. 14. Some of them would we are hair clothes
Wearing of hair cloth.
and torment themselves, 1. King. 18. 26. 28 Zach. 13. 4. and of a Devotion in
a Will Worship mac^r^te Wilworship.
their bodies, punishing and not sparing their bodies, Col. 2. 23. Their
Teachers taught for hire, Mich. 3. 11. 2. Taught for hyre
Pet. 2. 13, 15. Reu. 2. Tit. 1. 11. For gifts, they would promise life and
peace, Ezekiel. 13. 22. Ier. 23. 14, 17. In their service they had variety of
Music, Dan. 3. their set Variety of Musik.
holy days, Exodus 32. 2. Holy Days. Nuns or holy women.
King. 13. They had their holy women attending the Idol-seruice, Ezekiel. 8. 14.
working for them, 13. 18. 2. King. 23. 7. and prophesying lies, Ezekiel. 13. 22.
and were great worshippers of the Queen of heaven, Ier. 7. 18. and 44. 19.
They had also their several Several proprotectors for Countries.
gods for their several Countries as Papists have their Saints, 2. King. 17.
29. and 18. 34. They would pray to these and swear by them, Ier. 5. 7. and 12.
16. Ge^. 31. 53. 1. Swear by the^.
King. 19. 2. 2. King. 17. 35. Zeph. 1. 5. Some in Israel which fell to
Heathenish Idolatry were like Church Papists; for they Some like to our Church
Papists.
would worship Idols and yet go to Gods house and hear his Prophets, Ier. 7.
8, 10. 2. King. 17. 41. Ezekiel 14 3, 7. and 20. 1, 31 and 23. 29. When Idolatry
was cast our of the Church (as we have done the Idolatry of Rome) the Idolaters
They did speak against serving of God after his word.
would condemn it, as an ill act in them, and speak against the serving of
God aright, as papists doagainst us, 2 King. 18. 22. They worshipped toward
the Worshipped God to the East.
East, Ezekiel. 8. 16. They were very superstitious, Superstitious.
Acts 19. They lived in very gross ignorance of Ignorant.
the truth, and in liberty of sinning, Isa. 44. 18, 19. and 45. 20. Ephesians. 4.
18, 19. Wisd. 14, 15, 16, 17. They worshipped they knew not what, Ioh. 4. 22.
Their Festiuals after their Idol-seruice they spent in earing, How they spent
their holy days
drinking, singing, dancing, Exodus 32. 6. 18, 19. They had their reuellings and
meetings Reuellings.
full of excess riot, 1 Pet. 4. 3. And would wonder a^, and speak ill of such
as would not be like them. They had Brothel houses, Slewes.
Ezekiel. 16. 24. 2 King. 23. 7. 1 King. 15. 12, 13. and 14. 24. and 22. 26. They
had amongst them Conturers, Conturers.
Wizards, Charmers, Obseruers of times, Southsayers, Exodus 7. 11.

Isa. 9. 13.

Leu. 19. 37.

Ier. 27. 9.

Dan. 2. 4.

Deuteronomy. 18. 10. and 11. 14.

Isa 2. 6.

Dan. 2. 2.

Isa. 47. 13.

Act. 16. 17. and 19. 19.


Astrologers, Starregazers, and such like. To these the people resorted and
consulted with, 2 King. 21. 6. 1 Samuel 5. 2. 1 Chronicles. 10. 13. Hest. 3. 7. and 9.
24. Deuteronomy. 18. 14. Isa. 19. 3. and 47. 12, 13. Hos. 4. 12. Ezekiel. 21. 21. Ier. 8.
17. Act. 8. 10. They sacrificed to Nets, and burnt incense to Draggs, Hab. 1.
16. They believed that some of their Images were approved of their great God
from heaven, Act. 1^. 35. They were cruel and They were bloudily minded
bloudily minded against all that were against their Idolatry, Hos. 10. 14. and
13. 16. 2. King. 21. 15, 16. Judge. 6. 30. 2 Chronicles. 24. 18, 21. The Idolaters in
Israel and Judah brought in the Heathen, as Gods plague upon them, to punish
them for their Idolatry, 2. Chro. 24. 23. and 21-16. 17. and 33. 11. and 30. 6.
10. 17. 2. Kin. 17. 18. as the Papists have brought the Turks upon the
Christian Papistrie the cause of Turks prevailing.
world by their Imagerie and Idolatry, Reu. 9. They were stupid and without
Sottish in their idolatry and obstinate.
understanding in their Idol-making, and in setting them up to worship them,
Isa. 44. 14, 20. and so continued therein obstinate as the Papists do. And
thus have I showed what I can say (my Lord) touching the Heathenish Idolaters
and their practices.

Your evidence is so clear (Sir Christianity) as hereby all may see, how
Pagan-like Papists be in their Imagerie, Priests and Temples. Is there any
further evidence?

The^ stands up M. Attorney Master Attorney General, his evidence against
Papistrie.
General: and did prove him to be guilty of high treason both against the
person Papists are guilty of treason.
and the laws of his Sovereign. My Lord (says he) this fellow under pretense
of Religion (for all must be covered with his shadow) has set up another
spiritual They have another Head.
Head over the Church, besides Christ, (even Antichrist his greatest enemy) as
is sufficiently proved. He has set up also Mediators Another Mediator.
of intercession besides Christ: also in his rebellious pride of heart he has
exalted man's Merit, and made him a party Savior of himself, by satisfactory
punishments either here or in their seigned Purgatory. Thus is he a Rebel and
an Abettor of Rebels against Christ.

Again, the Law of Christ (the holy Scriptures) How Papists do blasphemously
abuse the Scripture eleven ways.
he has notoriously corrupted and abused many ways. 1 He makes it no perfect
rule. 2. He teaches 1.
blasphemously that 2.
the Original is corrupt, and so shakes the faith of all such as rest on the
Scriptures. 3. He has added to 3.
them men's writings called Apochrypha, to make them Canonicall^a. He has
feigned a traditionall word 4.
and equalleth the same with the Scriptures. 5. He debarred 5.
for a long time the translating of Gods Word into a known tongue, to keep
the people from the understanding thereof. 6. Being enforced at length to
translate it, he has or 6.
purpose done it corruptly, and with many uncouth and obscure words, has
hidden the truth still, to keep the people in blindness. 7. Yet this their so
corrupt and obscure Translation is not admitted indifferently to all, but to
some, and to these under license, for which they pay money. 8 These parties, 8.
though they may read the Scriptures, yet must it be with the Popes
Spectacles, and may not see farther than the false Teacher pleases, nor
conceive otherwise of the Sense than he suggesteth, though the Text be never so
clear of it self. 9 They blasphemously 9.
publish, that the Scriptures are a Nose of Wax, a dead Letter, sowterly Ink,
dumb Judges, and a black Gospel, inkie Divinity, and may have one sense
Causanus in his Epist. Log. Bohem
one time, and another at another time, according to the Churches state and
condition. 10 They set up a 10.
corrupt Latin Translation, for as authentical as the Originalls in the
Hebrew and the Greek. 11 And 11.
Lastly, they brought into the Church in stead of the holy Bible a book of
Lies to be read. Thus is this wicked wretch guilty of High Treason against our
Sovereign.

Besides that, he has counterfeited his Majesty's Broad Seal, inuenting new
Sacraments never Counterfeit Sacraments.
of Christ's institution, and has conspired and plotted the death of an
innumerable multitude of his Majesty's Subjects in a most cruel and bloody
manner, my Lord, he is no way longer to be endured: for we shall never be at
Papistrie not to he tollarated.
Peace as long as he may have liberty to live; for he is a rank Traitor to
our King and State, an underminer of Religion and the true Church of Christ,
and an enemy to our peace and welfare in the Commonwealth.

Gentlemen, (says the Judge) you of the Jury have heard Master Attournies
witness, also what both Master Verity and Sir Christianity have spoken against
him: now that you have heard the evidence so fully, what say you touching the
Prisoner, is he guilty or no?

Then the Foreman, in the name of all the rest, answers; Guilty, my Lord.

Whereupon the Judge turns to the Prisoner, and says; Papistry, thou hear
what grievous iniquities, foul and filthy abominations, murders and massacres
have been laid to thy charge; thou have heard the Verdict of these so learned
and well approved Gentlemen, chosen without all partiality to go upon thee. And
they in their judgment, upon their consciences, have found thee guilty. What
can thou say for thy self that sentence of death should not be pronounced
against thee.

My Lord, the Jury assuredly is corrupted by some Papistries appeal.
means or other, else would they never have found me guilty: for our learned
men have cited many of these in my behalf, and therefore I appeal from them
to a General Council, for the Trial of their honesty in this Verdict.

Upon this lewd surmise and brazen-faced accusation, all the Jury fell a
murmuring, being much grieved to be taxed of faithlesnes and perjury. The
worshipful gentlemen the Justices and Master Sheriff began to speak in their
behalf, but the Judge standing up, staid them and made answer for them.

Papistrie: to be brief The answer to Papistries appeal.
with thee, thou art shamelesly impudent to accuse these worthy Gentlemen: for
justly proceeding according to the clear Evidence to thy face. For thy learned
men, they have only cited the names of some of these, but without their
knowledge or consent. Yea, many testimonies they bring under their names, which
indeed are proved to be counterfeits, abusing their unadvised Readers in their
unjust defense of thee. As for thy Appeal to a General Counsel, its but to
set a good face upon an ill cause; for thou know that we have long desired a
Free General Counsel, but not a gathering together; like the lewd Conuenticle
of ^rent.

But art thou not ashamed to conceit the bringing of these men's verdict to the
trial? We must by them be tried, and not they by us. By what can thou try
the Principles of Religion? will thou deny them? must Fathers, Councels,
Scriptures and al be brought under our Judgments? Thou had no cause to
tax the Jury; if any had bin in fault, it should have been the Witnesses:
but can thou tax Verity of lying, or Christianity of falsehood? As for Master
Attorney, his speech is no more then your own words, writings and practice do
testify.

Hear therefore thy Sentence, justly deserved before God and men.

Papistry; thou have bin indicted A picture of Papistrie.
by the name of Papistry, of all these former treasons, rebellions,
co^spiracies, gunpowder plots, murders, massacres, falsehood, heresies,
Iudaisme and Paganism, and of that thy detestable Idolatry, and for the same,
have been arraigned, thou have pleaded not guilty, have put thy self upon thy
trial, and being found guilty, having no more to say for thy self, this is
the Law.

That thou the Mystery of Iniquity, with the old Papistry condemned to the pit
of hell. 2. These 27.
Serpent, called the devil, or Satan's, thy father, with thy lewd mother, that
Reu. 12. 9. and 17 3. 9. and 20. 4. and 19. 20.
great Whore, drunk with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, which sits upon
a Scarlet-colored Beast, as also with that false Prophet the son of
Perdition, thy guide and governor shall be cast alive where the Dragon is,
into the Lake of fire, burning with Reu. 14. 10. 11.
brimstone, there to be tormented with all thy marked ones in the presence of
the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, without rest day and night,
the smoke of which torment shall ascend up for ever and for ever, without
mercy or hope of redemption.

After this Sentence, there is made an Oyes, and The Court breaks up.
so the Court breaks up; the Judge arises, the Justices and Gentlemen
attend him, the Sheriff with the Vnder-Sheriffe and his servants go before
with the sounding of a Trumpet, and so do conduct him to his Lodging, and there
do leave him with rest and peace.

Laus Deo.
The Contents of this little Book for spiritual use, besides the literal
delight in the Allego^ie.
In the first part.
1. THat which is most hurt full to man is sin: set out under the name of a
notorious Malefactor, page 2. to 10. 2 That God has given to such as be his,
heavenly graces to watch over their ways, and to find out their sins, set
out by Watchmen. p. 10. to 13. 3 That God has given us helps, in his holy
word, to find out and to know sin to be sin; set out under the name of an
Hue and Cry, p. 14. to 18. 4 That some people are so wickedly bent to sin,
that, to hide their own sinful courses, they become deadly Enemies to most
excellent virtues: set out under the names of Master Outside, Master
Worldliwise, and the rest. p. 18. to 25. 5 That sin escapes often under the
name and cloak, or habit of virtue; set out under the shifts, which thieves
use to make, to escape their pursuers. p. 26. to 28. 6 That sin has many to
favor it, and who chiesty they be: set out under several names. p. 29. to
36. 7. That yet for all these shifts and these Favorites, a godly man will in
obedience to Gods Commandment search it out: set forth under the Constables
Warrant from the Lord chief Justice. p. 37. to 38. 8 That to search out sin is
required Understanding, set out by an officer, which has authority to search.
p. 39. 9 That not every understanding, but the understanding illuminate by
grace, is that which can find out sin: set out by the Deputy Constable, the
Tythingman, the Petie Constable, and chief Constable. p. 39. 46. 10 That where
such understanding is, there is a gracious reformation; set out by the chief
Constables family. p. 47. to 50. 11 That this understanding, to apprehend
sin, needs other graces to assist it in his spiritual search: set out by
the name of the Constables men servants, his Neighbor, and his Neighbors
children. p. 50. to 53. 12 That truly and uprightly to proceed in search of our
sins, we must before hand remove self-love, and self conceit; set out by
two busy companions. p. 54. to 56. 13 That the place in the soul, where
principally sin is to be searched out, is the heart: set out by a Common
June. p. 57. to 58. 14 That the five senses are so many inlets for sin into
the heart, and what kinds of sins enter in at every several sense: set out
by the Iune-doores. p. 59. to 62. 15 That sins possess not the heart
forthwith from the sense, but in a natural order, and by degrees; set out by
the Hall, Parlour, Chamber, and Dining room. p. 63. 16. That the passions of
the heart are many, and what is their force and effects; set out under Mistress
Hearts Maids. p. 84. to 69. 17 That the will of man is miserably misled, and
made as a very slave to the deceit of the heart, and passions thereof: set out
by the name of Will her master. p 69. 70 18 That sins once entertained into
the heart, do there find matter of nourishment, there to abide and rest: set
out by an Hostess entertaining plentifully her Guests, from a Table well
furnished, diligent attendance, lodging rooms and beds, p. 71. to 80. 19 That
ill ordered affections, and ouerswaying passions are accompanied with many
evils: set out by Guests lodged in several beds. p. 80. to 83. 20 That where
the heart does nourish up sins, there the sinners live securely without
repentance, through hardness of heart; set out by lodging in a bed securely
after full diet. p. 83 21 That where the understanding is sanctified, there the
heart is struck with Gods fear to shake off security: set out by the
Constable attaching a Fellon. p. 83. 22 That upon this fear of God, a well
informed judgment will fall to a true and serious examination, of all a man's
ways, whereby godly sorrow is wrought, to follow sin unto the death: set out
by a Justice of Peace, his office, his examining a fellon, binding some over to
prosecute against him, and sending him to prison. p. 84. to 95. 23 That a
regenerate man, horn anew, gets at length masterie over his own heart, and
brings his body into subjection: set out by Master Newman the Jailer. p. 95.
to 97. 24 That the new man is renewed in knowledge, holiness, and
righteousness; by the heavenly power whereof he is kept and preserved from all
the evils of sin and wickedness against either God or his neighbor: set out
by the three under Goalers. p. 97, 98, 99. 25 That a godly man uses all holy
means to curb sin, and to keep in corruptions of nature, that they break
not forth to the disgrace of Religion: set out by fettering of Prisoners, and
carefully looking to the Prison house. p. 100. to 105.
In the second part.
1 That there ought to be a time of trial, and a just condemning of sin in our
selves: set out by an Assizes. p. 107. 2 That God has set in every man a
Conscience to judge of his own ways without all partiality: set out by the
Judge of Assizes. p. 108. to 113. 3 That Conscience must be well informed of
all the particulars whereof it is to judge, else it will not, nor cannot judge
aright: set out by the Justices and others sitting in Commission with a Judge.
p. 113. to 117. 4 That the holy Scriptures are the only rule to proceed by
against sin: set out by a Grand Jury. p. 117. to 124. 5 That he which would
proceed strictly against all and every sin, is a man to be qualified with
many virtues; set out by a Petty Jury. p. 124. to 130. 6 That as vices be, so
vicious persons are opposite to virtues, and virtuous men: set out by the
prisoners challenging the Jury p. 130. to 135. 7 That there are a generation
of men setting themselves wholly for the world, which are neither true lovers
of virtue, nor haters of vice, but so as either may be useful for themselves:
set out under a full Jury of indifferent Gentlemen. p. 135, 136. 8 That there
is in every one an inbred corruption foul and evil: set out under the name
of Oldman. p. 137 to 145. 9 That the heart is desperately wicked, most
deceitful and vain; ^et out by the name of Mistress Heart arraigned and
condemned. p. 145. to 160 10 That the will of man is most rebelliously bent
against all due subjection: set out by Wilful Will arraigned. p. 160. to 184.
11 That Covetousness is a most cursed sin, the root of all evil every
where; set out by all the Witnesses produced against it. p. 184. to 187. 12
That Covetousness is a deceitful sin, having many pretenses subtly to
cover it self; set out by the answers thereof at the arraignment. p. 187. to
232. 13 That Covetousness is not honest thrift, as is clear by proof, and
the evident signs of Covetousness set out by witnesses; Master Proof and
master Signs. p. 232. to 263. 14 That Papistrie is Idolatry, a patcherie of
heresy, Iudaisme, and Paganism: set out in the arraignment thereof. p. 263.
to 265. 15 That there are twelve ways to confute Papistrie; set out by the
impanelled Jury against it. p. 265. to 269 16 That Verity it self, and true
Christianity are against Popery: set out by the two produced witnesses,
discovering the falsehood, impiety, cruelty, treasonable practices, and the
abominable ido latrie thereof. p 269. to 302.
These things are the substance of all this book An answer to such as censure
this book.
couched within the allegorical narration: which is no dreaming dotage, no
fantastic toy, no ridiculous conception, no old wives tale told; some have an
humor to delight in finding of faults; some are so envious that they cannot
look upon any thing which is another, but they must needs disgrace it:
Perhaps some kicking lade in reading is galled, and therefore does winsh. Some
are so ridgedly grave that, forsooth, it is a miss to read that, wherein they
may have occasion offered any way to laugh or smile: when they may remember
that even Abraham, the gray headed, old aged, and grave father once laughed; as
they themselves will also, whosoever they be, when the humor takes them.

If any dislike this little book for want of matter, let him be pleased to
consider No want of matter for religious uses.
these one and forty particular instructions before set down, with the
natural and moral Phylosophie comprehended therein, how also families may be
well governed and also religiously; how love may be preserved among
Neighbors, what evils are the disturbance thereof, and what be the base
conditions of the Nigards and pinching worldlings, contrary to such as be of a
bountiful and liberal disposition.

Besides all these things let them be pleased to attend to the scope of the
Book, wherein two things are principally aimed at. The scope of the book.


1 To discover to us our miserable and wretched 1 To know our selves by nature.
estate through corruption of nature. For the laying open hereof, there is a
lively description of sin, with the power, nature, fruits, and effects
thereof; how it first came, how entertained, bred, and brought up, by whom, and
where, with the several kinds of sin, and the differing conditions of
sinful men, opposing virtuous courses, and under what color they so do, to
their own ruin at the length.

2 To show how a man 2 How to boreformed.
may come to a holy reformation, and so happily recover himself out of his
natural wretched estate. To work this, here is delivered how a man is to
search out sin, what necessary graces are required thereto, with the helps
how to discover sin, and to know sins to be sins; what commonly be the
lets and hindrances in the discovery and search of our sins; what to do,
having sound out our sins, and how to become humbled thereby, and how to sit
down to judge of our selves without all partiallitie. Moreover here is
manifest, what gifts and graces are requisite to an holy life. Lastly, how we
may know sin to be subdued, and in whom it is truly overcome.

These things being the true scope and right use of this Book, and the matters
therein contained so behoofefull and necessary to every true Christian, I hope
no sober minded man can, much less will find fault with it.

If the manner laying The manner is allegorical.
those things down in a continued allegory, be the offense to some, I do
suppose they know, that Nathan did teach a David 2. Sam. 12. Ca. 5.
by an allegory: Esaias and Ezech. 17. 2. and 19.
Ezechiel taught the Jews so too, and that our Savior spoke many parables to
his hearers.

If any think it had binfit Objection answered.
for a younger wit, then for one grown old and gray headed; surely Nathan,
Esat, and Ezechiel were not young; neither did those forms of speaking derogate
any thing from their holy aged grauities. And it may be thus to allegorize upon
such a subject matter from all these passages, in politic government,
required some more experience, then some perhaps, conceit, though the thing
done to their hand may seem now most easy.

But the fault, if a fault, peradventure, is nor simply imputed for making an
allegory: but in following it so largely, and for inserting (as it were
interlude wise) some things, for the weightinesse of the matter therein
contained, not seeming grave enough as the parables of Christ, and his Prophets
were. For sin and sinful courses of men should be so deciphered, as the
Readers might rather be moved to lante^t, then occasioned to laugh.

First for the largeness, it is no more then the necessity of the intended
discourse required, as the scope before mentioned may sufficiently witness.
The parables of our Savior in S. Luke, and of Ezechiel, Ca 15. and 16. Ca. 17.
and 19.
were large, and they were prosecuted according to the nature of those things
from whence they were taken, to lay open fully thereby what they intended, and
this is but so, and no more.

I confess the matter of this allegorical discourse to be such (as may
appear by the manifold lessons before laid down, being the summarie Contents
of the book) as ought to work in every Christian Reader sorrow of heart in
the deep consideration of his miseries, till he be recovered out of his
wretched estate: and withal to cause a diligent endeavor in sober sadness to
better his condition of living Christianlike before God; neither of which is
prevented by the manner of handling, if all would do, as some have done, first
to read it after the letter, and then attend piously to the spiritual sense,
they would attain to that, which in so penning it, I aimed at. I knew the
natures of men in the world; I persuaded my self that the allegory would draw
many to read, which might be as a bate to catch them, perhaps, at unawares and
to move them to fall into a meditation at the length of the spiritual use
thereof: which I well hoped that others more religiously bent, would at the
first discern and make benefit of.

If two or three passages carry not that gravity in show, as some, perhaps,
could wish they did; Let these consider therein those places the enforced nature
of the allegory. Then how that else wherein all the rest of the book the carriage
of the matter is very far from the nature of so odious and so base a
comparison, if it be in the hand of a piously affected and well minded Reader.
Lastly, that even those few passages are sharp reproves; and are no more an
occasion to guilty parties, with the conceits thereof to make themselves merry,
then that great Prophet Eliah his mocking (in a matter none more weighty) was
to the Priests of Baal, when yet, perhaps, some stands by of the wiser sort,
abhorring Baal, might smile secretly thereat.

There is a kind of smiling and joyful laughter, for any thing I know, which
may stand with sober gravity, and with the best man's piety, justly occasioned
from the right apprehension of things, else had not Abraham fallen into it, nor
holy Job, Genesis 17. 17. Ca. 29. 24. Psalm. 52. 6.
nor the righteous in seeing (which is strange) matter of fear. Well, I have
clothed this book as it is: It may be some humor took me, as once it did old
Jacob, who apparelled Joseph differently from all the rest of his brethren in a
party colored coat. It may also be that I took (as Jacob did in his Joseph)
more delight in this Lad, then in twenty other of his brethren borne before
him, or in a younger Benjamin brought forth soon after him.

When I thus did apparel him, I intended to send him forth to his brethren,
hoping hereby to procure him the more acceptance, where he happily should
come: and my expectation has not failed; deceived altogether I am not, as was
Jacob in sending his Joseph among his envious brethren. For not only hundreds,
but some thousands have welcomed him to their houses. They say they like his
countenance, his habit and manner of speaking well enough, though other too
nice be not so well pleased therewith.

But who can please all? or how can any one so write or speak, as to content
every man? If any mistake me, and abuse him in their too carnal apprehension,
without the truly intended spiritual use, let them blame themselves, and
neither me nor him: for the fault is their own, which I wish them to amend?

You that like him, I pray you still accept of him for whose sake, to further
your spiritual meditation, I have sent him out with these Contents, and more
marginall notes.

His habit is no whit altered which he is constrained by me to wear, not
only on working days, but even upon holy days and Sondayes too, if he go
abroad. A fitter garment I have not now for him: and if I should send out the
poor Lad naked; I know it would not please you.

This his coat, though not altered in the fashion, yet is it made somewhat
longer. For though from his first birth into the world it be scarce half a
year, yet he is grown a little bigger; but I think him to become to his full
stature: so he will be, but as a little pigmie to be carried abroad in any man's
poket.

I pray you now this fourth time accept him, and use him, as I have intended
him for you, and you shall reap the fruit, though I forbid you not to be
Christianly merry with him. So fare you well in all friendly wellwishes.

R. B.
May 28. 1627.
FINIS.
Errata.
Good Reader I pray in page 137. for incircut read nicer-cut.

(...)
