Descensus Astraeae. THE DEVICE of a l'ageant, borne before M. William Web,
Lord Mayor of the City of London on the day he took his oath, being the 29.
of October. 1591. Whereunto is annexed A Speech delivered by one clad like a
Sea Nymph, who presented a Pinesse on the water bravely rigd and mand, to the
Lord Mayor, at the time he took Barge to go to Westminster.

Done by G. Peele Master of Arts in Oxford.



Printed for William Wright.

The Presenters Speech. SEE lovely Lords, and you my Lord behold
How Time has turned his restles wheel about
And made the silver moon: and heavens bright eye
Gallop the Zodiac and end the year
Whose revolution now begets a new
The days that have created and confirmd
A worthy Governor for Londons good,
To vnderbeare under his Sovereigns swaie
Impartial Justice beam, and weau'd a Web
For your content, and her command in all,
You Citizens of this Metapolis
Whose honor and whose oath to gratulate
Lordings behold what Emblem I present.
Astraea daughter of the immortal Jove,
Great Jove defender of this ancient town,
Descended of the Trojan Brutus line:
Offspring of that courageous conquering king.
Whose pure renown, has pierced the worlds large ears,
In golden scrolls, rolling about the heavens
Celestial sacred Nymph, that tendes her flock
With watchful eyes, and keep this fount in peace:
Guarded with Graces, and with gracious trains,
Virtues divine, and gifts incomparable.
Nor lets blind superstitious ignorance,
Corrupt so pure a spring: O happy times
That do beget such calm and quiet days,
Where sheep and shepherd breath in such content.
Honor attendes her throne, in her bright eyes
Sits Majesty: Virtue, and Steadfastness
Possess her heart, sweet mercy swaies her sword.
Her champion armed with resolution,
Sits at her feet to chastise Malecontentes,
That threat her honors wrack. And Time and Kind
Produce her years to make them numberless
While Fortune for her service and her sake,
With golden hands does strengthen and enrich
The Web that they for fair Astraea weaue.
Long may she live, long may she govern us
In peace triumphant, fortunate in wars
Our fair Astraea, our Pandora fair,
Our fair Eliza, or Zabeta fair.
Sweet Cynthias darling, beauteous Cyprias peer
As dear to England and true English hearts,
As Pompey to the Citizens of Rome:
As merciful as Caesar in his might.
As mighty as the Macedonian king,
Or Trojan Hector, terror to the Gree^es.
Goddess live long, whose honors we advance,
Srengthen thy neighbors, propagate thine own:
Guide well thy helm, lay thine anointed hand
To build the temple of triumphant Truth,
That while thy subjects draw their peace from thee,
Thy friends with aid of arms may succor'd be.

Astraea with her sheephook on the top of the pageant. Feed on my flock among
the gladsome green
Where heavenly Nectar flows above the banckes.
Such pastures are not common to be seen,
Pay to immortal Jove immortal thanks:
For what is good fro heavens hie throne does fall.
And heavens great Architect be praised for all.

Superstition. A Friar sitting by the fountain. Stir Priest, and with thy
beads poison this spring,
I tell thee all is banefull that I bring.

Ignorance. A Priest. It is in vain her eye keeps me in awe,
Whose heart is purely fixed on the law:
The holy law, and bootlesse we contend,
While this chaste nymph, this fountain does defend,

Euphrosyne. Whilom when Saturnes golden reign did cease,
and iron age had kindled cruel wars:
Envy in wrath, perturbing common peace,
engendring cancred hate and bloody iarres:
Lo then Olympus king, the thundering Jove,
raught hence this gracious nymph Astraea fair,
Now once again he sends her from above,
descended through the sweet transparent air:
And here she sits in beauty fresh and sheene,
Shadowing the person of a peerless Queen.

Aglaia. A peerless Queen, a Royal princely dame,
Enrold in register of eternal fame.

Thalia. The Graces through their balm about her sacred head,
Whose government her realms true happiness has bred.

Charity. That happiness continue in her land,
Great Isreal's God, spiing of all heavenly peace:
And let thine angels in her reskew stand,
With her lives wane done Englands joys decrease
O let her princely days never have fine,
Whose virtues are immortal and divine.

Hope. Such virtues as her throne do beautify,
And make her honors mount and skale the sky.

Faith. Where hope of her eternal bliss does rest,
Conceived in her sweet and sacred breast.

Honor. With radiant beams, reflecting on the earth,
Even from the snowie brows of Albion,
Beyond the utmost verge of Christendom,
As bright as is the burning lamp of heaven,
Shines my mistress honor, in whose fame
The heathen carrols sing and all admire,
From Icy Tanais to the seuenfold Nyle,
Her glory that commands this Western I Will.

Champion. In whose defense my colors I advance,
And girt me with my sword, and shake my lance:
These British Lions rampant in this field,
That never learned in battails rage to yield:
Breath terror to the proud aspiring foe,
Ranging the world commanding where they go.
Therefore in vain this misproud Malecontent,
Threatens her state whose harms the heavens prevent
Sit safe sweet Nymph among thy harmless sheep,
Thy sacred person angels have in keep.

1. Malecontent. What means this, I strive and cannot strike,
She is preserved by miracle belike:
If so then, wherefore threaten we in vain,
That Queen, whose cause the gracious heavens maintain.

2. Malecontent. No marvel then although we faint and quail,
For mighty is the truth and will prevail.

In the hinder part of the Pageant did sit a Child, representing Nature,
holding in her hand a distaffe, and spinning a Web, which passed through the
hand of Fortune and was wheeled up by Time, who spoke as follows. Time. Thus
while my wheel with ever turning gyres,
At heavens hie heast serves earthly men's desires,
I wind the Web that kind so well begins:
While Fortune does enrich what Nature spinnes.

A speech on the water delivered in the morning at my Lord Majors going to
Westminster.
List gentle Lords, and bubling stream be still
And whistling winds your angry murmur cease
Let Thetis Nymph unfold the goddess hest:
Behold imbarckt thus bravely as you see,
Laden with treasure and with precious ore
From where in Tellus veins the parching sun,
Does gold and glittering munerals create,
Are come these strangers lovingly inflamde
To gratulate to you my lovely Lord.
This gladsome day wherein your honors spring.
And by the bar that thwarts this silver stream,
Even to the beauteous verge of Troynouant
That deckes this Thamesis on either side,
Thus far these friends have pierced, and all by me;
Salute your honor and your company.
Thrice worthy Praetor of this ancient town.
The mortar of these walls tempered in peace,
Yet holds the building sure, as are the sprigges
Wouen from the spreading root in knottie box.
Labor fair Lord as other Majors of yore
To beutifie this city with deserts.
So wish these friendly strangers, man by man
Pass with aduisement to receive thy oath:
Keep it inuiolate for thy sovereigns hope,
Virtues pure mirror, Londons great mistress,
Vnsheath the sword committed to thy swaie,
With merciful regard of every cause.
So go in peace happy by sea and land,
Guided by grace, and heavens immortal hand.
FINIS.

