A FUNERAL ELEGY UPON THE Death of the Right Honorable, most religious and
noble Lady, FRANCES, Late Countess of WARVVICK, who departed this life at her
house in HACKNEY, near unto LONDON, In the Month of June last past. 1634.

By HENRY PEACHAM.

-- Et festinantes sequimur. LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Francis Constable.
1634.



Ad Lectorem.
Aspice ut hoc clypeo bini jungantur in uno,
Quos Amor, at que tori junxerat una Fides:
Sic fato functi, terra tumulantur in una,
Et simul aethereo gaudet uterque Polo.
TO THE TRVLY HONORABLE, Sir JOHN WRAY Knight and Baronet, Sir CHRISTOPHER
WRAY Knight, and Master EDWARD WRAY Esquire.
Right Noble and Worthy Gentlemen:
I Have presumed, the first, to bewail in public, the death of the much
honored, but more lamented Lady, the Countess of WARWICK your deceased A^nt,
so re^owmed, and beloved for her Pi^tie and Goodness, that she needs no
Memorial at all, and in truth, Fame profits not the dead, as a Poet says.
Nil juv it fama sepultos.
But in regard she has been so fair a President for Posterity to imitate,
and that my self have been much bounden unto he, for her Honorable respect
ever toward me, I could not mourn to my self, beside moved to the contrary
by a particular occasion. Some few years ago, her Honor sent unto me, and
requested mine advice, far the erecting of a Monument in SNARFORD Church for
her self, according to the convenience of the place: I drew the Model of one,
and presented her Honor with the same, adding (as was her desire) a plain,
but short and proper Inscription, leaving underneath a space for an Epitaph,
there to be inserted after her death, that might contain some dozen lines or
more, which (if I should outlive her) it pleased her Honor to impose upon me
to perform: I promised her I would, though out of the natural goodness, and
sweet humility of her mind, she never affected praise, or applause, either in
life, or after her death, for any good de^^ that ever she did. So that since
herein I could not ^^^forme my promise, her Honors mind, for the disposing of
her corpse at the time of her death (for some reasons perhaps known unto her
(...)) being altered, I took mine own time, and ^^^entured (as drawing the
C^rtaine from an excellent Picture) to show her to the beholder at the full,
and in a fair light.

Wherefore, at my little leisure would serve, it spare hours, shortly after
her death (being employed in a toilsome calling) I composed this small Poem,
which under the protection of your names (who are so much beloved and honored
in Lincolnshire; moreover, Brethren, her Nephews, and Exequ^tors to her last
Will and Testament) I consecrate to her eternal Memory, and offering (for her
sake) the same in all dutiful affection unto your Patronage, I take leave.

Yours devoted in all observance, Henry Peacham

The Epistle to the Reader.
REader whosoever, hold me excused, that upon so excellent a Subject, I have
wrought so inartificially, and like that Brick-layer of Antwerp, because he
could set stones in Mortar, undertook to set Diamonds in Gold. True it is,
there are some persons of that transcendent worth and desert, that all
indifferent praise falls short of them, as there have been some men beyond
imitation for their excellency in their several Faculties: and though this
regard only might have enjoined me Silence, beside the disesteeme of Poetry
in this latter age of the world, (wherein, to scorn learning, and to know
nothing, are accounted Gentlemanlike qualities) yet seeing living Examples of
Virtue are so few and rare (appearing but here and there one, in a whole
Country, like stars in a mistie or dark night) and that I knew not how to
require the many favors I formerly received from her Honor, beside the
friendly respect I have found from the most and nearest allied in blood unto
Her, I have adventured once again with ORPHEUS to raise up EURIDICE, my dead
and forgotten Muse, to review the light, it being now eleven years since I
published any thing in this Elegiack kind; which then was an April SHOWER,
upon the death of that truly Noble, and very learned Lord, Richard Earl of
Dorset: and soon after, upon the too untimely decease of the most virtuous and
hopeful young Lady FRANCES, daughter to Sir WILLIAM WRAY Knight, (and sometime
wife unto that worthy and generous Knight Sir ANTHONY IRBIE of Boston) who
lies buried at ASHBIE, where the Lady WRAY her Mother (a religious,
charitable, and bountiful Lady) at this time lives.

And whereas in this Elegy of mine, by a Parergicall digression, I make
mention for the Honor of the Shire, of many brave and excellent spirits it
has bred, I have not done it without example of the best approved Poets: And
as (...) says of Germany, so I may say of this Shire, that it is Hominum
(...), a shop of men, where they may be found serviceable, either for affairs
of Peace or War: besides a Discour^e which I had with a very Honorable and
a learned Personage, at his table, concerning this Subject, gave some occasion
thereof.

For this Noble Lady deceased, if I have fallen short of the just report of her
worth, and have not showed her with that luster and life I ought, and is she
deserved, I crave pardon of those who know her best, and from whom I should
have received information (for doubtless her charitable deeds were great and
many) but those who were nearest about her, after her death being disp^^sed,
and far off; I have in a manner altogether out of my knowledge, collected the
substance of what I have written; imitating those Painters, who when they
cannot get the life, are feign, for the grosser lights and shadows, to be
beholding to their memories. Farewell.

Epitaphium.
Vere piissimae, ac illustrissimae Heroinae, D. FRANCISCAE Comitissae
WARWICENSIS Aedibus suis propriis HACKNEIAE prope LONDINUM, Mense Junio,
denatae. 1634.
H^^ FRANCISCA j^^es Comitissa sepulta Sepulchro,
LINDENSIS patrii gloria sola soli.
Qu ^m non usque ad^o tituli non census honore^
Sanguine (...) stem^ ^ ducta virum.
Tenostreas inte^ (...)
(...),
Quam Pict as (...) Derquam (...) casto
Relligion is an, (...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...). In eXtreMo IVDICIo, Jesus sIt tIbI Jesus. MDC.XXX.IIII
A Funeral Elegy.
IN what place of the Heavens, upborne from hence,
Pure Soul, Aegelorum ministerio, Luc. 16.
keep'st thou thy happy residence,
That thither our swift-winged Zeal may fly,
To gratulate thy full felicity:
Not bring thee back with tears, our prayers, or vows
Accuse the Fates, or call for Cypress boughs
To veil thee sleeping (borne to bed by Death)
When thou in vain art sought of us beneath:
Heavens glorious Palace more adorning far,
Than Cassiopeia, Cassiopia wife to Cepheus, who co^^nded in beauty with the
Nymp^t of the sea, and was turned to a sign in Heaven.
or bright Fac jubar ut semper Capitolia nostra so^umque. Divus ab excelsa
prospectet Julius (...). Ovid (...) 15.
Caesar's star.
No, honored Lady, be it far from me,
These ill-tun'd accents should solicit thee,
Bewail thy state or fate, who do possess
A Crown and Kingdom with that happiness,
Tongue never yet has uttered, nor can
Pierce the dull thought of frail and mortal man.
I take but time and leave a while to sum
The parcels of our losses in her tomb,
As in an Ocean, that are sunk and fled,
And never more shall be recovered.
A loss wherein so many had a share,
That Towns and Tenants well-nigh undone are:
A loss for which fair LINCOLN from her hill,
Does to her City streams of tears distill;
It weeps, and by her River does convay
Her salt-abundant sorrow every way;
And as a Mother, who has lately lost
Her dearest daughter, whom with care and cost,
She from her tender infancy has bred,
And in all goodly Science (...):
With bitter tears, and wringing often her hands,
Amidst her neighbors dumb and sobbing stands,
Incapable of comfort, and would feign,
Even with her imgers dig her up again:
Such grief (and it not greater) do I guess
The heart of all this County does possess:
LINCOLN, whose soil has ever fertile be^ne
Of such Heroique Spirits, that between.
Earth-bounding The Isles of Orkney beyond Scotland Ukima Thule, Virg.
ORKNEY, and the Hodie, Thylensell: two Islands without the streights of
Gibraltar, in the farthest part of Spain next to Africa.
Gods of Spain,
They may for merit scaree be matched again:
Who, while a time I leave her Honors hearse,
Embellish with your glorious names my verse,
Her name to Fame I may the more endeare,
Withal advance the honor of the Shire.
Lincoln anciently by Bid and others called LIND^COLLINUM (from the situation
upon the top of an ^ill, and also LINDUM, whence that part of the Shire beyond
the River of WITHAM was called LIND^^^, or (...) By the Normans it was called
NICO^-shire, by a Metathesis or transposition of a letter, as we find in a
certain deed made by JOHN of GAUNT, be^inning thus: (...) (...).

I will not turn the Anuals (as I might)
Of antique ages, bring again to light
Those warlike natives, who by (...) flood
So often imbrued their swords in Danish blood,
Nor that religious King of Mercia, who
Here kept (...) Court eight hundred years ago.
OFF A King of MERCIA, who kept his Court in (...) Castle of Stallingburgh in
the County of Lincoln, now being part of the inheritance of that Noble and
right worthy Gentleman, Sir Edward A^scough Knight: here also was Saint
E^kenwald (sometime Bishop of London) borne, as I was informed by Master
Linall, a great Searcher of Antiquities in this County.

With many a learned, many an holy man,
Wherewith this spacious Shire abounded than
Rest they in peace, some few I Will only name
Of later times, deserving equal fame:
Then for her home-borne; first, this soil may vaunt
Great BOLLINGBROOKE, the son of JOHN of GAUNT.
Henry Plantagenet (who was Henry the fourth) borne at Bollingbrooke in
Lincolnshire, son and heir of JOHN of Gaunt, by BLANCH daughter and co-heire
of Henry, the first Duke of Lancaster, who took to wife MAR^^, daughter, and
one of the two heirs of Hump^rey de Bol^^n, Earl of Hereford, Essex, and
Northampton, and Constable of England. He lies buried by Marie his wife, in
the Monastery of Christ's Church in Cantuarburie, under a pillar in the North
I Will. To this Church King Henry, with Thomas Arundell, Archbishop of
Cantuarburie, were great benefactors: he died, Anno 1412.

Then that brave Worthy, WILLOUGHBIE the Great,
Who wily PARMA, Du^ Parmensis insignis dissimulandi artifex. Cambden in
Elisabetha.
did so soundly beat
From BERGEN, with his ever honored Son,
Earl LINDSEY living, loved of every one.
It was in the year 1588. PARMA lying before BERGEN two whole months
together, was beaten thence by the valor of the L. Willoughbie Governor, Sir
William D^urie, Colonel Morgan, and many other resolute and brave Commanders
being then in the Town, at what time were knighted for their valor, Sir
Francis Vere, Sir Thomas Knolles, Sir Nicholas Parker, and Sir John Poolie, etc.

But how can my weak Muse thy merit crown,
Great President of honor and renown,
Thrice-Noble (...), the survlving glor^
Of Eighty eight, and subject of that story,
When thy enraged thunder-belching BEAR
SPAINES floting Castles did to pieces tear.
The L. Sheffield Baron of Butterwick, and Earl of Mowgrave, who to his great
praise and honor did notable service in Eighty eight, in that famous fight
with the Spanish Armado, being then Captain of the White Bear, one of her
Majesty's ships royal.

With PELHAMS also Grandfather to Sir William Pelham now living
father and the son,
Whose feared black lances their great honor won,
When the row the heart of B^^GIA they ran,
Conducted by the silver The crest of the Pelhams.
Pelican.
Sir The grandfather came out of Sussex.
William Pelham, who being at that time General of the Horse, overran (says
Cambden) all Brabant, Anno 1586. As he was an absolute Soldier, so his son was
also a great Soldier and Scholar, as any Gentleman in the Shire, having left
behind him a sufficient testimony hereof; whose son is Sir William Pelham (a
very worthy and noble Gentleman) now living, of Brocklesbie in Lincolnshire.

And expert OGLE, able to command
A XERXES Army, if that need should stand.
Sir John Ogle borne at Piachbeck in Holland, a very honorable Gentleman, and
my especial friend, with whom I lived in UTRECHT, when he was L. Governor
thereof, whom (as well for Honors sake, as his own especial deserts, having
done great service to the States in the Netherlands) I could not but (in this
place) remember.

With all-lamented BOROUGH, who did see
Too late their errors, who attempted REE.
Sir John Buroughs borne at Stow by Gainesburgh and slain (being shot into
the belly) before the Fort there.

And as it were a Nurserie of men,
Dread Sovereign CHARLES, this County does again
Send thee thy Champion, hopeful DIMOK, he
Whose CARE HOLDS KIM^, An Anagram. Charles Dimok.
whom time shall shortly see
(Such is his towardness, virtuous education)
The flower not of the Shire, but of the Nation.
Whose father Sir Edward Dimok (not here to be forgotten) was a Gentleman as
well deserving in his time, as any other; for he was of a noble and co^^agious
spirit, learned, and had traveled the most parts of Europe.

With HARWOOD, SMITH, and numbers unnam'd here,
All children of their mother Lincolnshire.
Sir Edward Harwood borne at Bourne, and a Colonel in the Netherlands, slain
(as it was reported) before Mastrecht, he was by his last will and testament a
great benefactor to the town of Bourne. Captain John Smith borne at Alford in
the Marsh of Lincolnshire, who served under the Prince of Transylvania, and
made a great discovery in the North parts of America.

Now as if Nature seemed loath to part
These ablest men of Arms from those of Art,
She here again produced for tongue and pen,
Great Statesmen, many grave and learned men:
The wisest BURGHLEY, Atlas of our State,
Our Englands PALINUR^ (whose care of late
In greatest storms of danger, Aeneae nauta. Virg. Aeneid. 3.
steered the helm,
And saved from wreck our far engaged Realm)
His birth acknowledged unto fennie BOURNE,
Though STAMFORD holds his ashes and his urne.
Sir William Cecill Knight, Lord Burghley, and Treasurer of England, was borne
at BOURNE in Lincolnshire, Anno 1521. His fathers name was Richard Cecill, one
of the Wardrobe to King Henry the eighth, of the house of Alterynnis in
Wales, his mothers name was Jane, heir of the noble house of EXINGTON, and of
the WALCOTS: He died 1598. and was buried at Saint Martins in Stamford. Of
this ancient family of the WALCOTS is Master ANTHONY WALCOT of Lincoln, my
loving friend, descended.

And honored Henneage, of that ancient race
Of Haynton, here take your deserved place,
So true a servant to ELIZABETH,
And by King JAMES even honored after death.
Sir Thomas Henneage Knight, borne in Lincolnshire, he served Queen Elizabeth
35. years a privy Councellor, Vice-Chamberlaine and Chancellor of the Duchy
of Lancaster. He had only one daughter Elizabeth, married to Sir MO^LE FINCH
of Eastwell in Kent, who brought him a great estate, who after her fathers
death (in regard of his former deserts) was by King James created Viscountesse
Maidstone, and Countess of Winchelsea: He died October 17. Anno 1595. and
lies buried under a fair Monument, in the Quire of S. Paul's Church in London.
Of this family was Sir Robert de Henneage, tempore Henrici primi: and since the
time of Edward the third, Anno regni ejus 16. they have continued Knights or
Esquires, and in continual succession Lords of Haynton (John Henneage Esquire,
being at that time in possession thereof) unto Sir George Henneage now living,
and Lord of Haynton.

The reverend WHITGUIFT, Borne at Grimsbie.
Cantuarburies Grace,
Whose memory shall never Time deface:
And FOX, Borne in Boston in the Butcher Row, or Shambles there.
who did so painfully compile
His Martyrs, breathed first, Boston, in thy soil:
Then those grave Judges, MOUNSON, DALLISON,
With STAMFORD (LINWOOD) and late ANDERSON,
Here borne, shall live while awful Justice reigns,
And (her Tribunal) Westminster remains:
Now WAINFLET borne at WAINFLET, (who did found
And build that goodly Structure from the ground
Of MAGDALEN in OXFORD) place we here,
A Benefactor unto all the Shire.
William de Wainflet, sometimes Bishop of Winchester: His fathers name was
PATTEN, and lies buried in Wainflet All Saints, under a fair monument of
Alabaster, erected at the charge of this Bishop his son, who in his Episcopal
ornaments (with another brother, who by his habit seems to have been a Deane
or an Abbot,) support the pillow under their fathers head.

And next to him, else second unto none,
For that great work his charity has done,
Ensues SUTTON, M^. Sutton was borne at Knath by Gainsburgh, his father was
sometime Towne-Clerk of the City of Lincoln.
who for his intent
Deserves be styled the Magnificent.
And prudent WRAY, chief Justice of our Land,
To whom the subject which we have in hand
Has more relation, than unto the rest,
Far be it thy bounty should be here suppressed,
And that the Muse should so ungrateful be,
As (with the chief) not to remember thee;
To whom our CAMBRIDGE is obliged more,
Than any other named heretofore:
For her fair MAGDAL^N, enlarged so
By his great gift, which that the world may know
A WRAY did raise her to a fair estate,
She wears his Arms and liverie on her gate.
This College was first an Hostell of Monks, afterward repaired by the Prior of
Ely, and the Abbot of R^msey and Walden, and at length made a College by the
Lord Thomas Aud^y Baron of Walden, and Lord Chancellor of England, and endowed
it with possessions, Anno 1542. what he left undone, was finished by the
Honorable Sir Christopher Wray Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Common
Plea^, and father of this deceased Countess.

And future ages, though afresh, shall see
His Image in these works of Piety:
His name no less shall be beloved hereafter,
As being father to so good a daughter.
Thus from the nature of the tree and root,
We easly guess the goodness of the fruit.
Now should I first (as is the common use)
This Ladies lineage, and allies produce)
So honorable, many, or declare
Of blood, of rank how high her husbands were,
S. PAUL the first, who drew his pedigree
From those of FRANCE, and bare their Armorie.
C^st a di^^ D' Aegent, nu Li^n ramp and, (...)

To that great house of LU^^MBOURG allied,
And many a noble family beside:
Next honored WARWICK, who did with his name
Impart his Honor, gave her half the same:
A sitter better match there could not be,
He was right noble, good, and so was she.
Robert Lord Rich, created Earl of Warwick, in the year 1618. August 6. His
first wife was Pen^lope, daughter to Walter Earl of Essex; this Lady, widow
to Sir George St. Paul, was the second, he died at his house in H^lborne,
March 24. 1618. and was buried at Felst^d in Essex with his Ancestors.

But what availes all this, it is not Blood,
Alliance, Honors, Fortunes make us good:
These are but rind, or outside seeming fair,
Which touched, will turn to ashes or to air:
Blood, honor, riches, though she had them all
In full abundance; yet I cannot call
The same her glory, All things which are beside the principal purpose, as in
a picture, trees, towers, flowers, etc. when the principal perhaps is the face
of a man.
which indeed but are
The foiles of Fortune, Goodness well may spare,
Which as PAR^RGA'S pass we by and see
Of her own self, how great, how good was she
I pass her childhood and those tender years,
Wherein, best, simple Innocence appears.
(Yet those same years do oftentimes presage
An hopeful harvest in a riper age)
And with her youth begin, which Parents care
Informed, in every Science that was rare,
And commendable Art, that might concern,
Or suited with Nobility to learn.
But first RELIGION, they the groundwork laid,
Whereon as BASIS all the other staid;
And hence that goodly structure of her mind
Proceeded, wherein with more state she shined,
And glorious luster, than in that array
Of gold and jewels on her wedding day.
Her greatness, first of all she taught to know,
It was the greater while it kept below;
Pyramid-like the higher reared up,
The less it seemed, and waxed at the top:
No overweening scorn her brow did cloud,
Additament of honor made her proud,
That well she might that Royal Motto claim
Of great Samper eadem.
ELIZA, Evermore the same.
The Court and City seld frequented she,
Where all brave Dames and Beauties love to be;
Her own fair SNARFORD, second unto none,
For site, delight, sweet contemplation,
At home detained her, keeping open door
To neighbors, strangers, and the needy poor.
Now blush (ye Dames) who leave your Mansion-(...)
The fragrant fields, the healthful Country (...)
Your walks, your woods, your flowrie gardens (...)
To live immured within a stinking street,
Exchanging your all-welcome giving gates
For some small wicket, fit to break our (...)
TO avoid expenses, spending, and to fly
Your Countries, but for hospitality:
Or learn what fashion most is in request,
How is this Countess, that Court Lady dressed;
While ye, your beauteous faces so disguise,
We neither see your foreheads, nor your eyes:
(Like Dutch Boores houses, She allowed (...) yearly to a Preacher at Wel^^n,
a town by her. Also twenty ^ounds yearly toward a Sermon^n Ancaster.
where the straw hangs over
The low-thatcht eaves, and does the windows cover)
That wont the seats and Indices to be
Of Spirit, Love, and Ingenuitie:
Nor did her private house her bounty bound,
That but the center was, from whence, around
It did disperse it self, in golden streams,
(As Ph^^bus wont his bright and burnisht beams
Betime, when as AURORA'S cheeks are red,
To see him creep from THETIS silver bed.)
For as she was Religious, Beside she ga^e exb^b^tion to many Scholars in the
(...) of Cambridge ^ Magdalen College, and (...) a Benefa^^^ to other (...)
there. She allowed (...) ^ounds a year to a Preacher, to (...) Lincoln.
so did she
Promote all works of Christian Piety.
Where Preachers wanted (as alas they want)
Were livings small, and their allowance scant;
Her Honor bounteous stipends did afford
To painful Teachers of the Sacred Word:
Nor did she this in places one or two,
For her own glory, (as be some that do)
But wheresoever (...) of w^nt did hear;
(No matter where) (...), without the Shire.
And (like her Maker) (...) hear the cry
Of ^oorest prisoners, (...) did lie.
When on these waters ^he did cast her bread,
And even their souls at her own charges fed. (...)

(...) relate ((...) own to all)
Her (...) RAISO^ (...) Hospital,
Her care of orphans, widows, whom she fed,
She clothed, and in their sickness nourished:
Her bounty to her servants in her life,
Her love of peace, still hating suits and strife:
Her favor to her Tenants round about,
Of whom she never turned any out,
Or raised their rents, or failing at their day,
Took re-possession: no, she took their pay,
As they could best provide it for her, then,
Perhaps, if need, gave something back again.

Oh happy thrice, who made this worl her friend,
To make her way to Heaven at her end,
For if cold water given, ^inde regard,
Imagine we, what then is her reward.
She buried not her Treasure in a box,
And that again enclosed with sundry locks
From theevish hands, but up to Heaven before
She sent it, borne by prayers of the poor:
She knew how here from basest covetise,
All evils, with contempt of God arise:
With love of riches who entangled are,
Do easly fall into the Tempters snare;
How poison in this Idol Gold does lie,
That take away the life of Cha^itie.
Parts father and the child, then sets the mother
At odds with husband, daughter with the brother.
Yet did she naught profusedly bestow
For ostentation, or a trumpet blow
When she gave alms, but ever did impart
Them secretly to need, or due desert.
Nor thought it she disparagement by stealth,
Sometimes in sickness and their perfect health,
To lay by state, and conversant to be
With Tenants, parling of good husbandry.
So would AUGUSTUS leave his Roman Court,
And to the meanest Citizens resort,
And with them in their houses drink and eat
Familiarly, for Majesty so great,
Not (like a bow) can always stand extent,
But must sometime have its relaxament.
Thus was she truly humble, courteous, mild,
And nobly gracious to the poorest child.
Ah that I said this woeful word, She was,
But she, and we, and all of flesh must pass:
We follow fast as Pilgrims, thou do die,
Even reading this, and writing so do I.
How (...) thing, Psalm. 39. ^. Wisd. 5. 14. Esaias 64 6. Osea 10. 7. lacob. 4. 4.
Psalm. 102. 3. Wisd. 5. 9. Wisd. 2. 5.
alas, is wretched man?
By holy Scripture termed well a sp^^,
A Lease, a Bubble, F^^th, the Down that flies,
A wasting Vapor, Smoke, a Cloud in skies,
A P^st that hasting makes not any stay,
A Shadow swiftly vanishing aw^
A Ship that no impression leaves behind
Where it has past, Job 9. 26. Wisd. 5. 10. Psalm. 73. 19. lob 7. 7. Psalm.
90. Job 14. 2.
a Morning Dream, a Wind,
Hay, Gras^e, a Flower (from whose fair golden cup.
The early Sun does pearly Nectar sup,
Upbraiding with her blush the crimson morn,
But ere the evening down with since is shorn)
A Bird, Esaias 38. 10. Wisd. 5. Job 76. Job 24. 19. Psalm. 90. 5.
an Arrow, and a Shepherds tent,
A Weavers web cut off, a Vestiment,
Snow water that dissolveth with a drought,
A short told Tale, a Candle quickly out.
That we no sooner from our mothers womb
Do draw this air, but hasten to our tomb:
The Rich, the Poor, the Little and the (...),
Unlearned, Learned, Wise, Psalm. 49. 3. Job 3. 19. Psalm. 49. 10. Fat^ non
servant ordinem inter senes and juvenes, Son. 1 Paral. 29. 15. Ecclesiastic.
40. 11. 2 Samuel 12 18. 1 Reg. 14. 17. Genes. 5. 27. 1 Reg. 2. 10. Senes. 4. 8.
and wanting wit,
Death keeps no rank, or will be wooed to stay,
Brooks no excuse, entreaty, or delay,
For Age ne Sex he cares, all is one,
They as all Waters to their Seas must run:
If Infancy might have excused been,
Sure David's son a longer date had seen:
Or if old Age might pass with Death for plea,
He likely would have spared Methuselah:
Or if a Kingdom could preserve from death,
Sweet ISREAL'S Singer had not wanted breath:
If Piety, that bloud-imbrued CAIN
His righteous Brother never should have slain:
If Wisdom, Learning, 2 King. 11. 43.
and a boundless wit,
As ever Heaven vouchsafd to mortal yet,
Then SOLOMON had lived still to write,
And store us with his knowledge infinite.
Nor could his Nimblenesse AHAZA^L save, 2 Samuel 2. 1^. and 23. Judge. 16. 30. 2 Samuel 18. 23.

Or Strength the strongest SAMPSON from his grave:
No more did Beauty ABSALON the fair,
When death did hide him in his golden hair.
If Beauty could, what could more beauteous be,
Than sometime (in her younger years) was she;
Before that Time did turn to silver wire
The tresses, which APOLLO might admire:
And buried now the bed in frost and snow,
Where Lilies late did with the Roses grow.
Divine Impression of thy Makers glory,
Sweet Beauty, why art thou so transitory?
Who with Ambrosian dainties feed'st our eyes,
And with our souls so near do sympathize:
Leading all captives, whom thy power encloses,
In ^ands of burni^ht gold, and chains of Roses.
See (Ladies) what it is that make you proud,
A very nothing, an IXIONS cloud, Jupiter (...) ^ing Ixion to be in love wi^^
Juno, deceived (...) with a cloud, which be made like Jun^, etc.

When most beloved, pursued, embraced and kissed,
Dissolves it self to vapor and to mist:
A blushfull blossom, pleasing to the eye,
No sooner blown, but blasted by and by.
Why did ye (Heavens) ever Death permit,
The worlds sole Ranger, Bow-bearer of it,
To kill what flesh he pleases, where, and when,
Making the Grave his Lodge, his CACUS den^
Because a spade he uses for to bear,
Ye did ordain him Earths chief Gardener,
Uprending by the roots such flowers as these.
But let vile weeds dispred them as they please:
He crops the Prim^ose, Violet, or Pink,
Lets Poppies flourish with their banefull stink.
But far be it, we blame you Heavens for this,
It was old ADAMS fault, his soul amiss,
The father of us all, when he forgate
His Makers hest, and that ru'd apple ate:
So that from Edens fair forbidden Tree,
Death can till now derive his pedigree;
And with the best of Romes great Senate show
His Images (if need be) on a row:
There is no Royal blood, or Noble race,
But must arise, and give his greatness place.
De^^^^ King of He^aulds over looking tombs,
At Church all placing in their proper rooms,
All marshalling at Funerals and Feasts,
Ranking with all equality his guests.
And Ladies ^ee, that commonly contend
For highest place at Church, or Tables end;
How quickly can this enemy of life
Decide the quarrel, and compound your strife.
Death's Harbinger, the King of Heaven does send,
To see you lodged at your progress end:
He is a prime Court-gamester, that will vie,
And see the Rest of Royal Majesty:
Let Honor, Love, Time, Fortune, with him play,
He sweepes the stake, and carries all away:
Though privileged in this beyond his Dead, 1 Cor. 25. 26.

Himself is last, who must be conquered.
How bitter is his memory to him,
Who does in plenty and abundance swim,
Devoures all dainties, keeps his downie bed,
No worldly care, to vex his careless head?
He does distaste his gentle Palate more
Than Galls, or Antieyrian Hellebore:
He loathes the wall that Death is painted on,
And trembles at his fleshlesse S^^kton;
Memento mori, and the Day of Doom,
That Masterpiece of Michael Angelo a famous painter, who wrought that
excellent piece.
Angelo in Rome
Do damp his spirit, and offend his eyne,
He better likes the draughts of Icones obscenae Aretin^
A^e^ine.
But to the man who lives in distress,
In Want, in Prison, friend and fatherless,
To age, that weary of the world does see,
From bad to worse how times declining be,
To They were called Bedread, who used to read, or pray upon their bead, lying
in their beds (not able to work) in oven sho^ in London and other places,
having a basin set before them for such as gave them any (...), to cast it (...)
bed-read, and the long tormented sick,
How happy is thy welcome, Death, how quick
Do they embrace thee, as the weary guest
Calls for his Host, and first would be at rest
Yet did not torment, any tedious pain
Solicit Death for her, although a gain
Unto the Godly, no, she did affront,
By faith, its fury, and insulted on it:
Her soul to him commending, by whose merit
She hoped, life eternal to inherit.
And when she saw the fatal hour draw (...),
She should be seen no more of living eye,
About her she her dearest friends does call,
Advise and comfort all she can, withal
Bless^th her servants, wills them not to weep
For her, who shortly in the Lord must sleep,
And resting, her eternal Sabbath keep:
On toilsome earth no more, no more with them,
But in the Court of new Jerusalem.
To mutual love exhorts them, and to trace
The paths of Virtue, in their lives short race.
This said; of all (while all stand weeping by)
She takes her leave, Qualem virgineo demessum pollic^ s^orem, etc. Virgil.
Simile.
and so does sweetly dye.
Even as the Hiacynth does change the hue,
Which (from the tender stalk where late it grew)
Some Virgins dainty finger off has torn,
And that sweet tincture which did it adorn,
Not fully faded, by degrees does dye,
Where some small remnant still affects the eye:
Even so a color livelesse does she keep,
And lovely seems, as one but fast asleep.
Now as a Bird that from the eagels fled,
Unto the neighbor wood where she was bred, Simile.

And meeting with a many of her kind
At liberty, her self has gladly joined
To their Harmonious Consort, even so she,
From her Earths prison now exempt and free,
Sings Hallelujahs with the Saints above,
Communicates in bliss all heavenly love,
From whence (me thinks) I hear her say, A lieu,
Thou trostlesse Earth, who with thy shows (...)
Thy silly children do as Babes beguile,
Who when (poor things) have played with a while
Thy ^ands and toys, thou do their cradles fit,
And make them ready for the loathed pit:
Adien ye Courts, but Cotes of clay and stone,
Whose Turrets now, (me thinks) I tread upon;
And as an Ant-hill, view the world below,
Mark how you silly creatures, to and fro,
Do toil your selves within your poor abode.
By taking up, then laying down your loads,
(...) comes the owner with a spade,
And lays all level, what your car^ has made.
^en, my SNAR^ORD, once so dear to me,
(...) now the house of my eternity:
(...) brave Earls, Earls of Warwick and Holland. Sir John Wray, Sir
Christopher Wray, and M^. Edward Wray, the (...)
my sometime sons, and you^
My dearest (...) in affection now
With whom I leave my worldly state in trust,
Known for (...)
(...) poor neighbors, who (...) g^ne:
(...) dear friends, my follower, (...) one,
Mourn for your selves, and cease to mourn for me,
(...)
The or the like ((...) pardon, Lady ^are,
(...) not right) thou (...) there,
There where true (...),
Where Quires of Angels (...)
(...)
All, whereof we are ignorant below,
(...) the brightness of that (...),
Which here but throw a (...)
(...)
Till the loud Trumpet, at the (...) day,
Thy body shall awaken from the dust,
When (...) and W^^, with all the (...)
(...)
(...)
(...) FINIS
(...)

