MINERVA BRITANNA OR A GARDEN OF HEROICAL Devises, furnished, and adorned with
Emblemes and Impresa's of sundry natures, Newly devised, moralized, and
published, By HENRY PEACHAM, Mr. of Arts.

LONDON Printed in Shoe-lane at the sign of the Faulcon by Wa: Dight.

ICH DIEN.i. ( Germanice,) Servio.
Epigramma Authoris.
Se dicit Servum modo patre supersti^e Princeps,
Ephesians. 4. 1.
Primus at Imperio Servus ICH DIEN Anagramma.
HIC, IN DE regit.
TO THE RIGHT HIGH AND MIGHTY HENRY, ELDEST SON OF our Sovereign Lord the
KING, Prince of Wales, DVKE of CORNWALL and ROTHSAY and Knight of the most
noble order of the GARTER.
MOST EXELLENT PRINCE. Having by more then ordinary signs, tasted h^eretofore
of your gracious favor: and evidently known your Princely and Generous
inclination, to all good Learning and excellency. I am emboldened once again,
to offer up at the Altar of your gracious acceptance these mine Emblemes: a
weak (I confess,) and a worthless Sacrifice, though an assured pledge, of
that Zeal and Duty, I shall for ever most Religiously owe unto your
Highness: showing herein rather a will to desire, then worth to deserve, so
peerless a patronage. Howsoever the world shall esteem them in regard of
their rude and homely attire, for the most part they are Roially descended, and
repair into your own bosom (far from the reach of Envy) for their
protection. For in truth they are of right your own, and no other then the
substance of those Divine Instructions, his Majesty your Royal Father
praescribed unto you, your guide (as that golden branch to AENEAS, AEneid^ 6.
) to a virtuous and true happy life. It is now two years since I presented
unto your Highness some of them, then done by me into Latin verse, with their
pictures drawn and limned by mine own hand in their lively colors; wherein,
as near as I could, I observed the Method of his Majesty's BASILICON DORON,
but by reason of the great number I had since that, newly invented: with some
others collected, (tieng my inven^^on to ^o one Subject as before) I am here
constrained as well of Necessity as for variety sake, to intermixe (as it were
promiscue) one with the other in one entire volume, the rather because of their
affinity and end, which is one and the self same, that is, the fashioning of
a virtuous mind. I dare not discourse at large unto your Highness, of the
manifold Use, Nature, Liberty, and ever esteemed exellencie of this kind of
Poesy: it being the rarest, and of all others the most ingenious, and wherein,
the greatest Princes of the world, many times have most happily exercised their
Invention: because I doubt not, but your Highness already knows whatsoever I
might speak herein. Only what I have done, I most humbly offer up the same
unto your gracious view, and protection. Desiring of GOD to beautify and
enrich your most hopeful and Heroique mind, with the divinest gifts of his
grace, and knowledge, heartily wishing, there were any thing in me, worthy of
the least favor, and respect of so excellent a Prince.

To your Highness, The most sincerely and affectionately devoted in all duty
and service. HENRY PEACHAM.

To the Reader.
I have here (kind Reader) sent abroad unto thy view, this volume of Emblemes,
whether for greatness of the chardge, or that the Invention is not ordinary: a
Subject very rare. For except the collections of Master Whitney, and the
translations of some one or two else beside, I know not an Englishman in our
age, that has published any work of this kind: they being (I doubt not) as
ingenious, and happy in their invention, as the best French or Italian of them
all. Hence perhaps they term us Tramontani Sempii, Simple and of dull
conceit, when the fault is neither in the Climate, nor as they would have it,
in the constitution of our bodies, but truly in the cold and frozen respect of
Learning, and arts, generally amongst us: coming far short of them in the
just valewing of well deserving qualities. To begin at the foot of their
Alps, and so descend by Germany (which Bodine truly terms officinam
hominum, a shop of absolute men for all Arts) how she has excelled in this,
as in all other rare Invention, witness the many volumes she has sent us over
of this Subject. With what excellent Bodies, and Motto's, have the Netherlandes
especially Holland, and Zealand, upon sundry occasions (as the recoverie of
their Liberty, the overthrow in eighty eight, and the like) commended their
Invention to the world? as we find in Meteranus, and others. I should seem
partial, if I should lay to your view, the many and almost inimitable
Impresa's of our own Country: as those of Edward the black Prince, Henry the
fourth, Henry the seventh, Henry the eight, Sir Thomas Moore, the Lord
Cromwell, and of later times, those done by Sir Phillip Sydney, and others. Nor
were it needful since their Memory is fresh, and many of their sheildes yet
scarce dry in the world. Who has ever seen more witty, proper, and
significant devises, then those of Scotland? (to omit more ancient times) as
that of King James the third, devising for himself (to express the care he
had of his country and People) a Hen sitting over her Chickens, with the word
Non dormit qui custodit: as also of James the fowrth, taking to himself a
bifront, or double face, placed upon the top of a Column: the heads crowned
with Laurel, the word Vtrumque: meaning (as it is thought) he would
constantly, and advisedly like Ianus, observe the proceedings as well of the
French as the English, holding them both at that time in Jealousy. Many and
very excellent have I seen of his Majesty's own Invention, who has taken
herein in his younger years great delight, and pleasure, by which thou may
see, that we are not so dull as they would imagine us, nor our Soil so barren
as that we need to borrow from their Sunne-burnt brains, our best Invention.
Whereas I have here dedicated many Emblemes to sundry and great Personages,
(yea some to Foreign Princes,) I have herein but imitated the best approved
Authors in this kind: as Alciat, Sambucus, Iunius, Reusnerus, and others: they
being such, as either in regard of their transcendent dignity, and virtues,
deserve of all to be honored: or others whom for their excellent parts and
qualities, I have ever loved, and esteemed: or lastly some of my private
friends, to whom I have in particular been most beholden some way or other.
Wherein I trust thou will not condemn me, since I have no other mean then by
word to show a thankful mind toward them.

It is not my intent here (which I might well do) to diseourse at large of the
Nature and Liberty of Emblem, wherein it differs from the Impresa; because
herein I have been already prevented by Paulns Iovius. Sambucus. Mr. Sam.
Daniell.
others. The true use hereof from time to time only has been, Vtile dulci
miscere, to feed at once both the mind, and eye, by expressing mistically and
doubtfully, our disposition, either to Love, Hatred, Clemency, Justice,
Piety, our Victories, Misfortunes, Griefs, and the like^ which perhaps could
not have been openly, but to our praeiudice revealed. And in truth the bearer
herein does but as the Travailer, that changes his Silver into Gold, carry
about his affection in a narrow room, and more safely; the value rather
bettered then abated.

Accept I pray thee in good worth, what I have here done, not for any hope of
reward, or gain, but only for thy pleasure, and recreation, Imagining thou
art delighted (as I have ever been my self) with these ever esteemed, honest,
and most commendable Devises.

Thine assuredly, HENRY PEACHAM.

AD AVGVSTISSIMVM ET LONG NOBILISSIMVM HENRICVM WALLIAE PRINCIPEM.
Carmen Panegyricum.
Quae damus ista novis excusa EMBLEMATA formis,
(Docta sonare prius numeris sua verba Latinis;)
Accipe quo soleas vultu, votisq secundis
Annue, parva licet, nec sint te Principe digna.
Cum rabidus late torreret SIRIVS arva,
Flavaque anhelantis premeret Sol terga LEONIS,
Fronde sub vmbrosa patulae requievimus vlmi,
Ad ripas GRENOVICA tuas; (vbi THAMESIS vnda
Alluit ANGLIGENVM regalia tecta Monarchae.)
Hic vbi sollicita dum plurima m^nte revolvo,
Adstitit insomni coram pulcherrima Virgo,
Tecta caput galea, gemmis auroque nitente:
Pone suas diffusa comas, clypeusque sinistra,
GORGONIS ostendens argenteus ora MEDVSAE:
Vndique fraxineam dum dextra viriliter hastam
Torquet, et incerto circum era verberat ictu.
Obstupui, et gelidus tremor inde per ossa cucurrit,
Cum Dea facunda extemplo sic ora resolvit.
Pone metum Vates, animos timor vrget inertes,
Consilijque venit sani notissimus hostis:
Hinc citus exurgas et summi Principis Aulam
Ipete, qua silvas Nymphae coluere virentes:
Qua DRYADVM seeds THAMESIDOS vnda salutat,
Turrigerumque caput iactat RICHMVNDIA coelo.
Est HENRICUS ibi, quo non clementior alter,
Quoque Deus nostro dederit nil dulcius aevo;
Aemulus Heroum veterum ac virtutis avitae;
(Et mea siquid habent vnquam praesagia very)
PIERIDVM pater, et doctis decus omne futurus.
Excipiet longos hic laeta front labores,
Aspice vt huic desint provecti Iudicis ora,
Nec sulcat faciem minitantis ruga Tyranni:
Candor inest vultu placidus, men's concolor isti.
Insuper invitet te Bibliotheca referta,
Artibus omnigenis MVSAE quam struxit Asylum:
Namque feros toto compescuit orb tumultus
Candida PAX, coelo laetis invecta triumphis.
Non furit indomitus MARS ferro et caede nefanda,
Buccina non orbis exosaque matribus arma;
Infestant nostras subitis terroribus oras.
Iam posuere NOTI immites, creberque procellis
AFRICVS, et BOREAS solito sunt carcere vincti:
Occidui spirant ZEPHYRI, nunc omnia Tellus
Parturit, atque novo rident animalia Vere.
Dum Nymphae ducunt circum per opaca choreas,
Et Rosa verna viret, silvis dum mill sonoras,
Gutture multiplici renovat PHILOMELA querelas:
Ad gelidos fontes, vel forte legaris in vmbra,
Gratior aut hospes sis (post convivia) mensae.
Vix ego servo librum, properantem visere tecta
Regia, et HENRICI notos pietate Penates.
Iste tibi veniat modo qualiscunque libellus,
Inconcinna, levis, male culta, incompta MINERVA,
Hanc precor excipias placide, (Dignissime PRINCEPS.)
Maiori interea nitetur carmine Musa,
(Pone legens rerum vestigia lata tuarum)
Vt magnum resonent GANGETICA littora nomen;
Et reducem ( Arthurum.
) HEROEM horrescant grassantia late,
(Sacrilege ACHMETES) olim tua castra BRITANNVM,
Cum tua non tantum tibi serviet vltima THVLE
Vaticinor, toto regnabis latius orb,
Et reditura tuis sunt aurea secla BRITANNIS.
Tu vero interea vive, (Augustissime PRINCEPS,)
Ducat et ad seros CLOTHO tua fila nepotes:
Vt tua te longum, BRITANNIA laeta fruatur,
Immensumque tuis repleas virtutibus orbem.
HENRICUS PEACHAMVS.

AD D. HENRICVM PEACHAMVM DE SVA MINERVA.
Prodiit ex cerebro IOVIS, alma MINERVA profundo;
Vt quondam cecinit PINDARVS ore fluens.
Prodiit ast ictu VVLCANI emissa securi:
Dum caput AEGIOCHI percutit ille IOVIS^
Prodiit e coelo RHODIIS dum depluit aurum,
Aureus est in quo nata MINERVA dies;
Prodiit et cataphracta: caput been casside tecta,
AEgide tuta sua, cuspide tuta sua.
Fabulae applicatio.
Est PEACHAME, IOVIS cerebrum tibi, prodiit illinc
Hic liber, ingenii vera MINERVA tui.
Singula sunt in eo quamvis extempore nata,
VVLCANI liber hic totus habebat opem,
De summo ( PEACHAME) polo, tibi depluet aurum,
Illico et incipient, aurea secla tibi.
Armatur galea, clypeo, ense, MINERVA BRITANNA,
Et contra MOMOS, est ea tuta satis.
Ex puris Iambis. Ad eundem.
Iniquus aestimator ille ducitur,
Suo metitur omne qui modo ac pede;
Sapitque perparum ille, cui nihil sapit,
Nifi quod approbatur a sua nota.
At aequus ille, quisquis addit ipsius
Opinioni, acu^ioris arbitr^
Probationem, et acre testimonium,
Et ^ius, et suis videns ocellulis.
Peritiorum amica testimonia
Habes, labor de tuo probissimo;
Nec illa pauca, laud te ferentium
Ad astra, sicut hoc meretur inclitum
Opus. Mihi nec est opus quid amplius
Loqui, quasi adderem mari meas aquas;
Tamen quod ipse postulas, ego libens
Eos sequor, meumque iungo calculum.
PECHAME perge fausto vt incipis pede
Et ede plura, lividumque ZOILVM,
Malumque virus huius invidentiae
Teruntio valeto, cuncta qui potest,
Placere non potest ei, ipse^ IVPITER;
Nihil morare candidum lapillulum,
Nigrumque faecis infimae, places quibus
Sat est placere, doctioribus viris.
THO: HARDINGVS.

IN CLARISSIMI VIRI D. HENRICI PEACHAMI POETAE ANGLI CANTABRIGIENSIS Minervam
Britannam.
Nendo tulit palmam de stulta PALLAS Arachne
Ingenij, cum lis inter utramque foret:
Nec satis. offensam facto illam habuisse MINERVAM
Legimus, et poenas inde dedisse Deae.
Tela ^ua est opus hoc ipsa vel PALLADE dignum
Ingenio, et doctae facta labor manus
Quam culpare velit quisquis, vel vincere certet,
Fata fere^ stolidae MOMVS araneolae.
Hannibal Vrsinus Neapolitanus.

SOPRA LA MINERVA BRITANNA DEL SIGr: HENRICO PEACHAMO. ODE.
Tosto ch' almondo apparse
Questa PALLA nouella,
Fulmino d' ira, ed' arse
GIOVE d' invidia, e sdegno.
Tremo la terra, e lo stellante regno.
Stupido APOLLO fisse
Le luci riverente
Nel Padre, e cosi disse
Mentre la terra lieta
Albel lume di lui, torno quieta.
Esposto ha fuor dal seno
ANNA Regina,
La BRITANNA GIVNONE
Parto: non giaterreno;
Ma quel novello MART
Promesso al mondo in non Gildam et Merlinum fortasse intelligit.
mentite carte.
Da un tronco DANO altiero,
Fiorito e 'l PRENCE HENRICO
Ritratto illustre, et vero
D' ARTV. cui sort accerba
Tolse quello; chi a questi il Ciel riserba.
Visto'l novello parto,
Illuminar la terra:
Invido dal ciel parto,
Bramando dar in luce
Altro parto chi servi al novo Duce.
Dal capo di PEACHAMO,
Lieto discopro al mondo
Quel che cotanto bramo,
Che quegli vsci d' ANNA
Questi produce MINERVA BRITANNA
Giovan: Batista Casella.

AV TRES-EXCELLENT ET TRES-DOCTE POET MONSR. HENRY PEACHAM SONNET.
On cognoit des grands Dieux ou l' aise ou la doleur,
A ces pourtraicts astres, que le Ciel nous figure:
Et leurs fills, ces Heroes de leur noble valeur,
En leurs riches blasons tousiours ont quelque Augure.
Tell fust l' ancien devis, qui premier fust parleur
Des Misteres plus beaux, la voix et l' escriture,
Luy servoient come aux Dieux, d' un servile MERCVRE
Truchemens a qui manque et le vray sens et l' heur.
PEACHAM, ce beau devis est ton choix, et ta Muse;
Les points Hebreux, le traicts don't le MEMPHITIQVE use,
Ains Diue mesme, et le Ciel, to apprend ce style vieux
Que tu peux bien nommer, la MINERVE BRETONNE;
Car par dessus la Grecque, on luy doibt Couronne;
Si le filer n' est plus, que le scavoir de. Dieux.
N. M. Fortnaius.

UPON THE AUTHOR AND HIS MINERVA.
PALLAS thou have a second champion bred,
As great in Arts, as was stout DIOMED
In Arms; that against enraged MARS could stand,
And dared to wound fair VENUS in the hand:
The ARGIVE fleet his sole Arm could defend,
And with the Gods he durst alone contend;
All this thy influence gave, and more desired,
Like power thou have into this brain inspired:
Thy champion too, whose Arts are famed as far,
As was TYDIDES for his deeds of war.
We know thou art MINERVA that alike
Hold'st Arts and Arms, can speak as well as strike.
Tho: Heywood.

UPON THE AUTHOR AND HIS MINERVA.
All eyes behold, and yet not all alike,
Effects, and defects, both are in the eye,
As when an object against the eye does strike,
The imagination straightwaies does implie
Shapes, or what else the object does present,
Weaker or stronger, as the sight is bent.
Within the mind two eyes there are have sight,
To judge of things interior having sense;
Foresight, and Insight, Judgment makes them bright,
And most perspicuous through intelligence.
Foresight, foreseeth harms, that may ensue:
Insight, does yield to reason what is due.
Then let not men deem all with corp'rall ei'ne,
Eyes may deluded be by false illusions:
Eyes may be partial, eiesight may decline
By weakness, age, or by abusions.
Pride, envy, folly, may the sight pervert,
And make the eye transgress against the heart.
With outward ei'ne first view, and mark this book,
Variety of objects much will please^
With inward ei'ne then on the matter look,
Foresee the Authors care, and little ease
TO invent, to imprint, and publish for delight,
And for reward but craves your good insight.
Peacham my friend, I must confess to thee,
My Insightis but weak; such as it is,
I verdict thus, no better work I see
Of this same kind, nothing I find amiss,
If any fault there be, it is not thine,
The fault shall rest in men's imperfect ei'ne.
William Segar Garter. Principal king of Arms.

TO MASTER HENRY PEACHAM. A VISION UPON THIS HIS MINERVA.
Me thought I saw in dead of silent night
A goodly City all to cinders turned,
Upon whose ruins sat a Nymphe in white,
Rending her hair of wiery gold, who mourned
Or for the fall of that fair City burned,
Or some dear Love, whose death so made her sad:
That since no joy in worldly thing she had.
This was that GENIUS of that ancient TROY,
In her own ashes buried long ago:
So grieved to see that BRITAIN should enjoy
Her PALLAS, whom she held and honored so:
And now no little memory could show
To eternize her, since she did infuse,
Her Enthean soul, into this English Muse.
E. S.

Nisi desuper. To my dread Sovereign JAMES, King of great BRITAIN. etc.
A SECRET arm out stretched from the sky,
In double chain a Diadem does hold:
Whose circlet bounds, the greater BRITANNIE,
From conquered FRANCE, to Tibi serviet ultima Thvle, Virgil: THVLEM procu^
Axe remotam.

Claud^an.

Sch^t^and. et nautis nostris ^odie Thilen^el.


THVLE sung of old:
Great JAMES, whose name beyond the INDE is told:
To GOD obliged so by twofold band,
As borne a man, and Monarch of this land.
Thus since on heaven, thou wholly do depend:
And from (...). Homer.
above thy Crown, and being have:
With malice vile, in vain does man intend,
T'vnloose the knot that GOD has linked so fast:
Who shoot's at (...). Homer.
heaven, the arrow down at last
Lights on his head: and vengeance fall on them,
That make their mark, the Sovereign Diadem. (...) page ^.
Nubibus e^ d^plici vi(...),
Q^od proc^l a nostro (...):
N^^ al^a ^e lege Deus (IACOB^) ligavit,
(...), fecit, et esse vi^um.


Initium Sapientiae.
A POYSONOVS Serpent wreathed up around
In scaly boughtes, a sharp two edged Sword,
Supported by a book upon the ground,
Is worldly wisdom grounded on GODS word,
The which unless our proiects does sustain,
Our plot is naught, and best devises vain.
What ever then thou hap to take in hand,
In foremost place, the fear of GOD prefer,
Firmamentum est Dominus timentibus eum. Psalm: 24.
Else, like the Fool thou buildest on the sand,
By this (the Lesbian Aristot: in Ethicis.
stone) thou can not err,
Which who so does, his Consilioru^ gubernaculum lex divina sit. Ciprian in
Epistolis.
first foundation lay,
Contriues a work that never shall decay.
Squammiger in gyros gladio se colligit anguis,
Naturam signant quae POLITIA tuam; Basili: Doron. lib: 1. page: 3.

Effera Iustitia est, Prudentia vana SOLONIS,
Haec nisi sustentent Biblia sacra DEI. T^^or igitur DEI solus est, qui
custodit hominum inter se societatem, per qu^m vita ipsa sustin^tur, m^nitur,
gubernatur^ etc. Lactantius de Ira divina. Cap 21.


Cui cedet.
Two hands togeither here with griping hold,
And all their force, do strive to take away
This burning Lamp, and Candlestick of Gold,
Whose light shall burn in spite of Hell for ay:
And brighter then the beams of PHOEBVS shine,
For it is the Truth so holy and divine.
Which foul Ambition has so often vexed,
Quoties hominibus praeesse desidero, toties Deo meo prae^e contendo. August:
super Psa^m:
And swelling pride of Praelates put in doubt,
With Covetuousnes that greedy Monster next,
That long I fear me since it had been out,
Did not thy hand (dear Savior) from above
Defend it so, that it might never move. ^asil: Doron. l^b: 2^ page: 38.
Perdita Avarities, et dira Superbia, Pestis
Christiadum infoelix, Ambitioque simul:
Certatim vt tentent extinguere lampada verbi,
Ni tua succurrat (CHRIST miserte) manus.


G^egor: Moral: 2^.
Summus locus been regitur cum is qui praeest, vitiis potius quam fratribus
dominatur.
Omnis adeundi honoris ecclesiastici abscinderetur ambitio, ^i se iudicandos,
Origin: s^per E^^^^: ad Roman:
potius quam iudicaturos hi qui praeesse volunt populis cogitarent.
Nusquam tuta.
The silly Hind among the thickets green,
While naught mistrusting did at safety go,
His mortal wound received with arrow keen
Sent singing from a Sheepeheard's secret bow;
And deadly pierced, can in no place abide,
But runs about with arrow in her side.
So often we see the man whom Conscience bad
Does inwardly with deadly torture wound,
From Mala conscientia in solitudine anxia, et sollicita est. Seneca Epist: 14.
place to place to range with Fury mad,
And seek his ease by shifting of his ground
The mean neglecting which might heal the sin,
Perfecto demu^ scelere magnitudo eius intelligitur. Tacitus 14.
That howerly ranckles more and more within.
Dictaeus volucri quam fixit arundine pastor
Cerva fugit, nullis convalitura locis; Basil: Doron. lib: 1. page: ^5.

Cons^ia men's sceleris quem torquet, vbique pererrat,
Vulnere neglecto quod miser intus alit. Tran^u^l^itate conscie^tiae nil
beatiu^ ex^^gitari potest. Aug^stin: 21. de ci^itate DEI.

Conscientia aff^ctuum corrector et animi paedagogus. Origin.



Philautia.
Vide Alciatum. Einbl: 69.
A VIRGINS face with Robes of light array,
Why has (Self-love) our Poets thee assigned?
Philaut: Love should be young, and fresh as merry MAY,
Such clothing best agrees with my mind.
What means that poisonous Serpent in thy hand?
Philaut: My bane I breed, by this you understand.
In The other hand say why that looking glass?
Since in thee no deformity I find,
Philaut: Know how in Pride Self-love does most surpass,
And still is in her Imperfections blind:
And save her own devises Quod volumus sanctum est. Augustine: contra
Cresconium Grammat:
does condemn,
All others labors, in respect of them.
Cur Virgo incedis Philautia? PHILA: Virginis ora
Pasili: Doron. lib: 2. page: 65.
Malit amor. S^rp^ns q^id simios^ ma^u?
Phil^^t: Pectore viru^ alo. Speculum sed consulis. PHI: inde
Caetera d^dignor, dum m^as^la plac^nt.
Humanae traditiones.
AT last my branch does wither and decay, Omnis plantatio quam non pla^taverit
pater meus coelestis, eradicabitur. Math: 15.

And with the ruin down my self do fall,
Whose pride did loath on surer ground to stay,
But needs would reign as KING upon the wall,
To overlooke in scorn the shrubs below,
That did (I find) in greater safety grow.
By this same tree, are all Traditions meant, Si ad divinae traditionis caput,
et originem revertamur, cessat o^nis error humanus. Ciprian ad Pompeium.

And what else hammered out of humane brain,
That on the Rock, to rest are not content,
But puffed up with pride, and glory vain;
Unto their shame, do moulder down, and fall,
As does this Elder growing on the wall.
Spreta cado tandem lapidum compage soluta Basili: Dor^n.

Nec terrae ramos r^bar ^gere meos:
Sic freta elangu^n^ humano cuncta c^rebro,
Vt stabilis fugiant foedera firma DEI.
Cuique et nemini.
My hope is heaven, the cross on earth my rest,
The food that feeds me is my Saviors blood,
My name is FAITH to all I do protest,
What I believe is Catholic and good,
And as my Savior strictly does command,
My good Tunc veraciter fideles sumus, si quod verbis promittimus, operibus
adimplemus. Gregor: Homi^: 29.
I do with close and hidden hand.
Nor Heresy, nor Schism, I do maintain,
But as CHRIST'S coat so my belief is one,
I hate all fancies forged of humane brain,
I let contention and vain strifes alone;
If ought I need I crave it from above,
And live with all in Charity and Love. Basil: Doron. lib: 1. page: 11.
Crux mihi grata quies, sola et fiducia, coelo
Me terris la^t^nt ^ulnera (CHRIST) t^a:
Sancta Fi^e^ dic^r, cunctis mea dogmata pando
Abdo sed occu^te Religionis opus.


Titus. 3.
Curent b^nis ope^ibus pr^^sse qui credunt Deo.
Mors fid^i ^st separatio charita^i^, cred^s in ^^ris^um? fac C^risti opera vt
vivat fides tua. Bernar: in C^^t S^^m: 24.

(...) nec ^^^es.
The Ethiopian Princes at their feasts,
Did use amid their cates, and costly cheer
A deadmans head, to place before their guestes,
That it in mind might put them what they were:
And PHILLIP daily caused one to say,
Oh King remember that thou art but clay. Memorare novissima et no^ peccabis in
eternum. Ecclesia^^^ 7.

If Pagans could bethink them of their end,
And make such use of their mortality, Timor futurae mortis quasi cla^is
carnis om^es motus superbiaeligno crucis affigit. Aug: lib: ^ de doct:
christiana.

With greater hope their course let christians bend,
Unto the haven of heavens foelicitie;
And so to live while here we draw this breath,
We have no cause to fear, or wish for death.
Perge tuo laute genio indulgere PHILIPPE, Basil: Doron. lib: 1. page: 17.

Imperium cernis quam brevis hora manet:
Non properans timeo lethum men's conscia recti Mortem optare malum timere
peius. Seneca in Oedipo.

Inculcat quovis tempore CHRIST veni. Sed hoc meditatum ab adolescentia esse
debet, mortem vt negligamus, sine qua meditatione, tranquillo esse animo nemo
potest. Cicero in lib: etc senectute.


Psalm^ (...). To the right Reverend Father in GOD, (...). Basilic: Doron. lib:
1. page: 11.

TO sundry keys does Liber omnis Psalmorum similis est vrbi pulchrae, atque
magnae, cui aedes co^plures diversaeque sint, quarum fores propriis clavibus
diversisque claudantur, quae cum in vnum locum co^gestae per mixtaeque sint.
etc Hilar: in prolog: psalmor explanat
HILARIE compare
The holy Psalms of that prophetique King,
Cause in their Natures so disposed they are,
That as it were, by sundry doors they bring,
The soul of man, oppressed with deadly sin,
Unto the Throne, where he may mercy win.
For would thou in thy Savior (...). Athanasius tomo primo in Episti ad
Marcellinu^ de interpreta: psal^ (...).
still rejoice,
Or for thy sins, with tears lament and pray,
Or sing his praises with thy heart and voice,
Or for his mercies give him thanks always?
Set DAVID'S Psalms, a mirror to thy mind,
But with his Zeal, and heavenly spirit ioin'd. Clavibus innexis h^mnos
HILARIVS ^^^at,
Iess^i ceci^^t quos pia Musa senis,
Et vere, innumeros aditus hi quip^e recludant
Men's quibus aetherei pulsat Asyla DEI.


Priu^ ablue sordes.
WHO takes in hand to turn this sacred book,
And heavenly wisdom, does from hence require,
His hands be clean, I wish him first to look:
No Dog or Swine, that walloweth in the mire, (...). ^esiod:

Let dare to come, this precious Jewel nigh,
The foe to filth, and all impuritie.
But if thou needs wilt launch into this sea,
Where Lambs may wade, and Elephants may swim,
Cast all unclean affections away,
And first with hearty prayer call on him,
Whose holy Spirit must guide thee in the sense,
A thousand times else better thou were thence.
Sacra tuis manibus quicunque volumina versas
Sordibus immunis quaere salutis iter: Basil: Doro^. lib: 1. page: 10.

Quoque volutaras carnis prius exue coenum,
Aut Sus c^nsilium linque lutosa DEI. Veluti in coroni^ flores es^e puros et
s^aves, ^isi pura sit et ^^sta manus contexens: Tuitiensis.
sic non satis est vt in sacrarum litera^^m l^ctione ve^ba si^t sancta et pia
nisi pura etiam ac sanctissima mente haec legantur, ac a^i^o concipiantur.
Cicero.
Ad Divos cast adeunto.

Sic pacem habemus. To the High and mighty JAMES, King of great Britain,
TWO Lions stout the Diadem uphold,
Of famous Britain, in their armed paws:
The one is Red, ^cilicet Anglicus et Scoticus.
the other is of Gold,
And one their Prince, their sea, their land and laws;
Their love, their league: whereby they still agree,
In concord firm, and friendly amity.
BELLONA henceforth bound in Iron bands,
Shall kiss the foot of mild triumphant PEACE,
Nor Trumpets stern, be heard within their lands;
Envy shall pine, and all old grudges cease:
Brave Lions, since, your quarrell's laid aside,
On common foe, let now your force be tri'de. Vnum sustentant gemini Diadema
Leo^es^
Concordes vno Principe, mente, fide.
F^edere iunguntur (...), coe^oque, saloque,
Nata ^^^bus Pax h^c inviolanda^n a^et.


Quae plant^vi irrigabo.
THE Thistle armed with vengeance for his foe,
And here the Rose, fair CYTHERAEAS flower;
Together in perpetual league do grow,
On whom the Heavens do all their favors power;
For what 1. Cor 3.6.
the Almighties holy hand does plant,
Can neither cost, or careful keeping want.
Magnifique PRINCE, the splendor of whose face,
Like brightest PHOEBVS virtue does reviue;
And far away, light-loathing vice does chase,
These be thy Realms; that under thee do thrive,
And which unite, GODS providence does bless,
With peace, with plenty, and all happiness.
Terror hic hostilis, Cypriae sacra illa puellae,
Carduus vnanimes, et rosa verna virent.
Quae gelidus coelo foecundans imber ab alto
Omina dat regnis (sum Monarcha) tuis.
TO THE THRICE-VERTVOVS, AND FAIREST OF QVEENES, ANNE QVEENE OF GREAT BRITAIN.
In ANNA regnantium arbor. ANNA Britannorum Regina. Anagramma D: Gul: Fouleri.

AN Olive lo, with branches fair dispred,
Whose top does seem to pierce the azure sky,
Much seeming to disdain, with lofty head
The Cedar, and those Pines of THESSALIE,
Fairest of Queens, thou art thy self the Tree,
The fruit Non classes, non Legiones, peri^de firma imperii munimenta quam
numerum liberorum. Tacitus. 4. Hist:
thy children, hopeful Princes three.
Which thus I guess, shall with their outstre^cht arms,
In time o'respread Europa's continent,
parcere subiectis. etc.
To shield and shade, the innocent from harms,
But overtop the proud and insolent:
Remaining, reigning, in their glories green,
While man on earth, or Moon in heaven is seen.
Fatum subscribat Eliza. To the most excellent Princess ELIZABETH, only
Daughter to our Sovereign Lord King JAMES, King of great BRITAIN. ELISABETHA
Steuarta. Has Arts beata velit. Anagramma.

FAIR Princess, great, religious, modest, wise,
By birth, by zeal, behavior, judgment sound,
By whose fair arm, my Muse did first arise,
That crept before full lowly on the ground,
And durst not yet from her dark shade aspire,
Till thou sweet Sun, did help to raise her higher.
Thus since by thee, she has her life and sap,
And finds her growth by thy dear cherishment,
In thy ^aire eye consistes her future hap:
Here write her fate, her date, her banishment,
Or may she that day-lasting Lilly be,
Or The flower of the Sun (some take it for the Marigold) continually
following the same.
SOLI-SEQVIVM e're to follow thee.
Auspice coelo. To the most Christian King LOVIS, XIII. King of FRANCE and
NAVARRE. Henricus IV Galliarum Rex. A^agram, Henr^ IIII. occisi a scolestissimo
illo Ravillac. G.F.
In Herum exurgis Ravillac.
MOST Christian King, if yet have turned away,
Those kindly rivers, from thy royal eyes
For Fathers loss, this little view I pray
Our Muse reserues from his late Exequies:
The least of littles, yea though less it be,
It Is thine, and sign, of her loves loyalty.
Which, wheresoever presented to thy view,
(For all things teach us) think a heavenly mind
Is meant unto thee, by that color Blew,
The Gold, the golden plenty thou do find;
The number of thy Tria lilia coelitus de^ata. S: Cli^hoveo.
Heaven-sent Lillies, three,
Is concord's ground, the sweetest harmony.
Vnitav^le^^^^. To the high and mighty PHILLIP King of Spain etc.
TO you great Prince, strong stay, and powerful prop
Of Christian state, who by thy feared might,
And restles care; the same supportest up;
From neighbor MAHOVNDS undermining spite;
From thy GADE'S pillars, to the west as far,
As THETIS leads us to the Southern star.
I offer up these Arrows, with the Tree
Of thy In the time of King HENRY the 7. in memory of which battle won by
Archerre, the ^he^fe of Arrows is yet given on the Spanish come
Grenade, the Symbol long ago
Of great FERNANDO'S famous In the time of King HENRY the 7. in memory of which
battle won by Archerre, the ^he^fe of Arrows is yet given on the Spanish
come
victory,
What Time he gave the MOORS their overthrow:
Though here it may impart, the fruit that springes
By Peace and concord of all Christian Kings.
TO THE MOST RENOWNED, AND Hopeful, HENRY Prince of WALES, etc. (...). An.
HENRICUS Walliae Princeps. Par Archillis, Puer vne vinces.
THVS, thus young HENRY, like Macedo's son,
Ought thou in arms before thy people shine.
A prodigy for foes to gaze upon,
But still a glorious Load-starre unto thine:
Or second PHOEBVS whose all piercing ray,
Shall cheer our hearts, and chase our fears away.
That (once as Plutarch in Alexandro.
PHILLIP) JAMES may say of thee,
Thy BRITAIN scarcely shall thy courage hold,
That whether TVRKE, SPAIN, FRANCE, or ITALY,
The RED-SHANKE, or the IRISH Rebel bold,
Shall rouse thee up, thy Trophies may be more,
Then all the HENRY'S ever lived before. Macte tua virtu^e d^cus, ^pe^a^ma
BRITANNVM
(...) ALEXANDER co^sp^c^e^de ^uis: Basil: Doro^.

(...), se^ Tur^a, rebelli H^be^^us
Heru^^^ a tergo five ia^^^^at ino^s.


E corpore palch^o Gr^^ior^ TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, AND MOST TOWA^DLY YOUNG PRINCE,
CHARLES DVKE OF YORK.
SWEET Duke, videtur mihi Venus quaepiam, a^ gratia concomitari principem.
Xenoph: in Hier^
that bear thy Fathers Image right
As Well in Et divitiarum, et formae gloria, fluxa atque fragilis est, virtus
^lara aeternaque habetur. Salust: Cat:
body, as thy towardly mind;
Within whose cheek Et divitiarum, et formae gloria, fluxa atque fragilis est,
virtus ^lara aeternaque habetur. Salust: Cat:
me thinks in Red and white
Appear the Roses yet again conioind;
Where, howsoever their wars appeased be,
Each, strives with each, for Soveraignitie.
Since Nature then in her faire-Angell mould,
Has framd thy body, showed her best of art:
Oh let thy mind the (...). Menander.
fairest virtues hold,
Which are the beauty of thy better part:
And which, (brave CHARLES) shall make us (...). Menander.
love thee more,
Then all thy state we outwardly adore.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT, EARL OF SALISBVRIE, AND LORD HIGH TREASORER
OF ENGLAND, etc. ROBERTUS CAE CIL^VS. Anagramma Authoris.
Is coelebs, Vrit cura.
THE Arabian PHOENIX here, of golden plumes.
And bicie breast, upon a sacred pile
Of sweetest odors, thus himself consumes;
By force of PHOEBVS fiery beams, the while,
From forth the ashes of the former dead,
A fair, or fairer, by and by is bred.
You, you (Great Lord) this wondrous PHOENIX are,
Who wast your self in Zeal, and whot desire,
Of Countries good, till in the end Alia ex aliis cura fatigat, vexat animos
nova tempestas. Sene^a.
your care
Shall work your end, as does this PHOENIX fire.
But while you are consuming in the same,
You breed a second, your immortal Fame.
His servire. To the Right Honorable and my singular good Lord HENRY HOWARD
Earl of Northhampton, Lord Privy Seal. etc. HENRICUS HOVVARDVS Comes
Northamptoniensis. Anagramma Authoris.
Pius, Castus huic mentis honor, mere honorandus.
A SNOW-WHITE Lion by an Altar sleeps,
(Whereon of Virtue are the Symboles placed,)
Which day and night, full carefully he keeps,
Least that so sacred thing might be defaced
By Time, or Envy, who not far away,
Do lurk to bring the same unto decay.
Great Lord, by the Altar Piety is meant,
Thus, whereupon is virtue seated sure:
Which thou protectest with dear cherishment;
And do thy best, their safety to procure
By howerly care, as does this Lion white
Tipe of thy mildnes, and thy feared might,
Gloria Principum. To the right truly Noble, and most Honorable Lord
WILLIAM, Earl of Penbrooke.
In med: Adriani Imp:
A LADY fair, who with Maiestique grace,
Supportes a huge, and stately Pyramid.
(Such as the old Monarchs long ago did place,
By NILVS banks, to keep their memories;)
Whose brow (with all the orient Pearls beset,)
Begirte's a rich and precious Coronet.
She Glory is of Princes, as I find
Described in Moneies, and in Meddailes old;
Those Gemmes are glorious proiectes of the mind,
Adorning more their Ro^all heads, then Gold.
The Pyramid the worlds great wonderment,
Is of their fame, some Ingenii praeclara facinora sic^t Anima Immortalia sunt.
Salust:
lasting Moniment. Facta Ducis vivent operosaque gloria rerum
Ovid: ad Liviam.
Haec manet haec avidos effugit vna rogos.


^agione di stato. To the right Honorable Sir JULIUS CAESAR, Knight.
WHO sits at stern of Common wealth, and state
Of's chardge and office here may take a view,
And see what dangers howerly must amate,
His ATLAS-burden, and what cares accrue
At once, so that he had Princeps su^ scientia non potest cuncta complecti.
Tacitus Annal: 3. Nec vn^us mentem molis tantae esse capacem. Annal: 1.
enough to bear,
Though HERCULES, or BRIAREVS he were.
He must be strongly armed against his foes
Without, within, with hidden Patience:
Be served with (...), Xenophon. in Paedia. Cyri.
eyes, and listening cares of those,
Who from all parts can give intelligence
To gall his foe, or timely to prevent
At home his malice, and intendiment.
That wand is sign of high Authority,
Rex velut deliberabundus in hortum aedium transit etc. Livi: lib: prim^ Decad:
1.
The Poppie heads, that wisdom would betime,
Ne patiatur h^bescere aciem suae authoritatis. Tacitus Annal: ^.
Cut of rank weeds, by might, or policy,
As might mol^st, or ov^r-proudly clime:
The Lion warnes, no thought to harbor base,
The Book, how laws must give his proiectes place.
His ornari aut mori. To the right Honorable, and most noble Lord, HENRY,
Earl of Southampton.
THREE Girlondes once, COLONNA did devize
For his Impresa, each in other ioin'd;
Caesar Ripa in Iconol:
The first of OLIVE, due unto the wise,
The learned brow, the LAVRELL green to bind:
The OKEN was his due above the rest,
Who had deserved in the Battle best.
His meaning was, his mind he would apply
By due d^sert, to challenge each, his prize:
And rather choose a thousand times to die,
Then not be learned, valiant, and wise.
How few alas, do now adays we find
(Great Lord) that bear, thy truly noble mind.

WHEN Trojan youth went out into the field,
With courage bold, against the Greeks to fight;
With Ense levis (...) parmaque inglorius alba. Vir^^ AEneid:
naked Sword they marched, and their Shield
Devoide of charge, save only painted white:
Herein the Captain with his hand did write,
(The Battle done,) some Ensign of his fame,
Who had by valor, best deserved the same.
Oh Age of Justice, yet unlike to this
Wherein we live, where MOME and MIDAS share
Virtutis Hono^ vberrimum alimentum. Valer^ Max: de institut^ antiquis.
In virtues merit, and th'inglorious is
Allowed the place sometimes in Honors chair,
Wherein Arms, ill, but worser, Arts do fare,
Times have, be gone, with all the speed ye may,
That thus we lived, no after Age may say.
(...) To my Honorable Lord OLIVER Lord Saint JOHN of Bletnesho.
Iulla Mammea.
FOELICITIE by IVLIA once devised
This shape does bear, a Lady lovely bright
With Mercuries Caduceus, enthroniz'd,
Her golden hair with flowery girlonds dight:
The horn of plenty, the other hand does hold
With all the fruits, and dainties may be told.
For why? content, she reigns like a Queen;
Richest in Quiet, and the Muses skill,
Without the which, we most unhappy been
The Quae (tamen) alia res civiles p^perit furores quam nimia foel^cita^. Flo:
3. Cap: 12.
plenty that her horned cup does fill;
Our labors fruit, the which when we possess
We have attaind our worldly happiness.
Doctrina.
HERE Learning sits, a comely Dame in years;
Upon whose head, a heavenly dew does fall:
Within her lap, an opened book appears:
Her right hand shows, a sun that shines to all;
Exempla omnia iacerent in tenebris nisi literarum lumen Historiae accederet.
Cicero. pro Archia Poeta.
Blind Ignorance, expelling with that Exempla omnia iacerent in tenebris nisi
literarum lumen Historiae accederet. Cicero. pro Archia Poeta.
light:
The Scepter shows, her power and sovereign might.
Her out Studiis ac literis res secundae ornantur adversae iuvantur: Cic: ad
Luceium Epist. 5 fa^il: vide plura in orat: pro Ar^hia poeta.
spread Arms, and book her readiness,
TO embrace all men, and entertain their love:
The shower, those sacred graces does express
By Science, that do flow from heaven above.
Her age declares the study, and the pain;
Of many years, ere we our knowledge gain.
Via ad Deum est Scientia quae ad institutionem recte et honest vivendi
pertinet. Hugo.

Sine refluxu. TO the honorable Lord, the L: Harrington.
D: Philippi Sydnaei.
THE CASPIAN Sea, as Histories do show,
(Whom Rocky Shores, on every side surround,)
Was never seen by man, to ebb and flow:
But still abides the same, within his bound;
That drought no whit, diminishes his store,
Nor neighbor streams, augment his greatness more.
Thus should we bear, one and the selfsame sail,
In what ere fortune, pleases God to send,
In midst of trouble, not of courage fail,
Nor be to proud, when fortune is our friend:
And in all honest acts, we take in hand,
Thus constant, in our resolutions stand.
Nec tamen hic mutata quies, probitasve secundis
Stat^us 5 filva^: 2.
Intumuit, tenor idem animo, moresque modesti
Fortuna crescente manent. --
(...). TO the honorable the Lord Wootton.
YE Noblest fprightes, that with the bird of JOVE,
Have learnt to leave, and loath, this baser earth,
And mount, by your inspired thoughts above,
Virtus recludens immeritis mori

Coelum, negata tentat iter via Coetu que vulgares, et vdam s^ernit humum
fugiente penna: Horat: 3 carm: ode. 2.


To heavenward, home-ward, whence you had your birth:
Take to you this, that Monarchs may envy,
Your hearts content, and high foelicitie.
You, you, that over-looke the clouds of care,
And smile to see a multitude of Antes,
Upon this circle, striving here and there,
For THINE and MINE, yet pine amid their wantes;
While ye your selves, sit as spectators free,
From action, in their follies trag^edie.
Sol alter, ver^^^^. To the Houourable Sir EDWARD COKE, Lord chief Justice of
the commen Pleas.
THE fiery Coals, that in the silent night,
(When veil of darkness, all had overspred)
With glowing heat, about did give their light,
Since glorious PHOEBVS has discovered
Do loose forthwith their splendour, at his sight:
And of themselves, do fall to Cinders quite.
So Iudices istis da^tor qui sacrilegis solent.
traitorous proiectes, while they lie obscure,
They closely feed the plotter, with their light,
Who thinks within, he has the matter sure,
Not dreaming how, the Truth that shines bright;
Will soon reveal the secret of his thought;
And bring his ripest practices to naught.
Nu^la ^sse potest in tantisceleri^ immanitate punienda crudelitas.
Cice^o. 4. in Catilin.
Rex medicus patria.
A DRAGON lo, Me^am: 25.
a Scepter grasping fast
Within his paw: does show a King should be
Like AEsculapius, ev'er watchful placed;
Amongst his subjects, and with skill to see,
To what ill humors, of the infectious mind.
The multitude, are most of all inclind.
And when he finds corruption to abound,
In that Huge body, of all vices ill,
To purge betimes, or else to Immedicab^^^ vulnus ense resecandum est ne pars
^incera t^a^atur. Ovid.
launch the wound,
Least more, and more, it ranckles inward still:
Or when he would, it bring to former state,
Past all recure, his physic comes to late.
Quae mala contraxit populus contagia morum,
Ne pigeat medica tot resecasse manu:
(Et Reges olim iuvit medicina) venenis,
Hinc citus occurras quae valuere mora.
Protegere Regium.
WHILE deadly foes, their engines have prepared,
with fury fierce, to batter down the walls,
My duty is the City gate to guard,
And to rebate their Rams, and fiery balls:
So that if firmly, I do stand without,
Within the other, need no danger doubt
Dread Sovereign JAMES, whose puissant name to hear,
The Turk may tremble, and the Traitor pine:
Beloved of all thy people, far and near:
Be thou, as this Port-cullies, unto thine,
Defend without, and thou within shall see,
A thousand thousand, live and die with thee.
Obsessis ut opem certo muni^ine pr^estem,
Qu^e non sustineo d^mna creata mihi.
Sis cataracta tuis (animos^ Monar^ha) Britannis,
In^us et invenies pectora firma tibi. Si status Imperii, aut salus provinciarum
in discrimen vertatur, debebit (Princeps) in acie stare. Tacit: 4. Hist.



(...). TO the wo^thie Lady the L: E: W.
THE feircest natures; whom in youthful prime,
Nor counsel good, nor reasons rule, could tame,
Are by their own experience, and in time;
To order brought, and Ingenia no^tra vt nobiles et generosi equi, melius
facili fr^en^ reguntur: Seneca de clementia^
taught themselves to frame,
To honest courses, and to loath the ways;
So well they liked, in their youthful days.
Why then despair ye Madame, of your son,
Whose wit, as in the sap, does but abound:
Velle^^ in ^dolescente quod amputem. Cicero ^ de oratore.
These branches pruned, that over rancklie run,
You Will find in time, the body inward sound:
When Dullard sprightes, like fenny flagges below,
Or fruictles been, or rot while they do grow.
Eximit ipsa dies omnes de corpore mendas, Ovid: 2. de art amandi.

Quodque fuit vitium, desinit esse, mora.
Labor (...). TO the most Honorable Lord, the L: Dingwell.
H^gonis Capeti Symbolum.
WHO thirsts after Honor, and renown,
By valiant act, or lasting work of wit:
In vain he does expect, her glorious crown,
Except by labor, he atcheiveth it;
And sweatie brow, for never merit may,
To drousie sloth, impart her living bay.
primus sumpsi le labores primus iter sumpsisse pedes. Sil: ^.
HAMILCARS son, hence shall thy glory live,
Who over the Alps, did foremost lead the way,
With Caesar's eeke, that would the onse^ give,
Ipse manu sua pila gere^s praecedit anheli militis o^apedes mostrat tolerare
laborem, non iubet. L^^an de Catone.
And first on foot, the deepest foor^ds assay:
Munditias mulieribus laborem vi^ris convenire. Marius apud Salustium.
Let Carpet Knights, of Ladies favors boast,
The manly heart, brave Action-loveth most.
Disce puer virtutem ex me verumque laborem
Fo^tunam ex aliis: nunc te mea dextera bello
Virgil AEneid: 2
Defensum dabit, et magna inter praemia ducet,
Ex malis moribus bonae leges. To the most judicious, and learned, Sir FRANCIS
BACON, Knight.
THE Viper here, that stung the shepherd swain,
(While careless of himself asleep he lay,)
With Hysope caught, is cut by him in twain,
Her fat might take, the poison quite away,
And heal his wound, that wonder it is to see,
Such sovereign help, should in a Serpent be.
By this same Leach, is meant the virtuous King,
Who can with cunning, out of manners ill,
Make wholesome laws, vitiorum emendatricem legem esse oportet Cic: 1. de
legibus.
and take away the sting,
Wherewith foul vice, does grieve the virtuous still:
Or can prevent, by quick and wise foresight, Salus Civ^tatis in legibus.
Arist:

Infection ere, it g^thers further might.
Afra venenato pupugit quem vipera morsu,
Dux Gregis antidotum l^esus ab host petit:
Vipereis itidem leges ex moribus aptas
Doctus Apollinea conficit art SOLON. vitiis quae plurima m^nti
Foemineae natu^a ^e^it humana mal^gnas
Cura dedit leges, Ovid Metamor^ lib 10.
et quod natura remittit
Invida ^u^a ^egant etc.


To the right worshipful Sir Thomas Chaloner, Knight. Est hac almus honor.
Anagramma Authoris.
Thomas Chalonerus.
HERE Virtue stands, and does impart a scroule,
To living fame, to publish far and near:
The man whose name, she did within enroule,
And kept to view, unseen this many year,
That erst me thought, she seemed to envy,
The world his worth, his fame, and memory.
But since she sees, the Muse is left forlorn,
And fortune fawning, on the worthles wight,
And eke her self, not cherisht as beforne.
She bringes Moecenas once again to light:
The man (if any else) a friend to Arts,
And good rewarder, of all best desertes^.
Virtus Romanaet antiqua. To the right worshipful Sir DAVID MVRRAY Knight.
THVS HERCULES, the Romans did devise, Virtus hominis proprium bonum Tacitus
lib: 4.

And in their Temples, him a place assignd:
To represent unto the peoples eyes,
The image of, th'Heroique virtuous mind:
Who like ALCIDES, to her lasting praise,
In action still, delights to spend her days. Moderation of anger.

Within whose hand, three apples are of gold, Contempt of pleasure.

The same which from the Hesperides he fetched, Abstinence from covet^^ousnes.

These are the three Heroique virtues old,
The Lions skin, about his shoulders stretched,
Notes fortitude, his Clubbe the crabbed pain,
To brave atcheiuements, ere we can attain.
Mecum honor et lauds, et laeto gloria vultu,
Et decus, et niveis Victoria concolor alis: Silius Ita^: lib 1. Virtus loquitur

Me cinctus Lauro perducit ad astra triumphus,
Casta mihi domus, et celso stant c^ll^ penates.
Sic vtile dulci. Ad generosissimum et opt: spei invenem Nobilem D.C.M. in
Italiane nuperrime profectum.
THE Spartan virgins, ere they had composed;
Their Girlonds, of the fairest flowers to sight:
The wholesom'st herbs, they here withal enclosed,
And so their heads, full iollily they dight,
In memory of that same leach they wright:
Who first brought simples, and their use to light.
So ye brave Lord, who like the heavenly Sphaere,
Delight in motion, and about to roame:
Must learn to mix in travail far and near,
With pleasure profit, that returning home;
Your skill, and Judgment, more may make you knowen^
Then your French suite, or lock so largly grown.
(...) in Epist: ad (...).
For who is he, that is not ravished with delight,
Far Countries, Courts, and Cities, straung to see;
To have old Rome, presented to his sight:
Troy-walls, or Virgils sweet Parthenope.
Congressus ^ay ^^^tum confert ^rudentiam non montes aut maria. Era^mu^
Yet nothing worth, unless ye herewith find,
The fruits of skill, and bettering of your mind. Omnis peregrinotio obscura
et sordida est iis, quorum industria in patria potest esse celebris. Cicero ad
caelium. Epist.

Tandem divulganda.
THE weighty counsels, and affairs of state,
The wiser mannadge, with such cunning skill,
Omnia facta (...) ^^que Principis rumor excipit, me magis ei q^^^ soli latere
contigit. Seneca de Clemen^ia.
Though long locked up, at last abide the fate,
Of common censure, either good or ill:
And greatest secrets, though they hidden lie,
Abroad at last, with swiftest wing they fly.
Open mutua. To the right worshipful and my singular good friend Mr: ADAM NEWTON
Secretary to Prince Henry.
THE Laurel joined to the fruitful vine,
In friendly league perpetually do grow,
The Laurel dedicate to wits divine,
The fruit of Bacchus that in clusters grow,
Are such as do enjoy the world at will,
And swim in wealth, yet want the muses skill.
This friendship should inviolate remain,
The Studia recipiant spiritum et sanguinem sub t^ Plin: in panegy^.
rich with Bounty should reward the Arts,
(ita) temporibus tuis dicendis nou deerunt ingenia Tacitus 1 Annal:
The living muse should gratefully again,
Adorn Moecenas with her learned parts:
Omnis ratio et i^stitutio vit^ adiu^enta hominum desi^^^at. Cicero in (...):
And when his branch is dry, and withered seen,
By her support, preserve him always green.
Salomonis prudentia. To the right worshipful Sir DAVID FOVLIS Knight.
THE means of wisdom, here a book is seen,
Sometime the glory of great Solomon,
A Cedar branch, with Hysope knotted green,
The heart and eye withal, placed hereupon:
For from the Cedar says the Text he knew,
Unto the Hysope, all that ever grew.
The eye and heart, do show that Princes must,
In weightiest matters, and affairs of state,
Not unto others over rashly trust,
Least with repentance they incur their hate,
But with sound judgment, and Qualis Poeta^um ille Cyclops amisso oculo, ta^is
Princeps cui defit hic oculus Prudentiae. Lipsius in politic:
impartial eye,
Discern themselves twixt wrong and equity.
Vis consilij expers mole ruit sua. Hora^: ode 3^

Vicinorum amicitia.
SVCH friendly league, by nature is they say;
Betwixt the Myrtle, and Pomegranate tree,
Who, if not planted over-farre away,
They seek each others mutual amity:
By open signs of Friendship, till at last,
They one another have with arms embraced.
Which does declare, how Melior est vicinus iuxta^ quam fr^ter procul. Proverb^
neighbors should unite
Themselves together, in all friendly love;
And not like Tyrants, exercise their spite,
On one another, when no cause does move:
But letting quarrels, and old grudges cease,
Be reconcild, to live, and die, in peace.
Ovid 3. Tri^t: 4.
Vive sine Invidia, mollesque inglorius annos
Exige, amicitias et tibi iunge pares.
To the right worshipful Sir Edmund Ashfeild Knight. Edmund Ashfeild.
Anagramma Authoris.
I fledd vnshamed.
THE clouded Sun, that westward left our sight,
And for a night, in THETIS lap had slept,
Againe's returned, with far more glorious light,
"To cheer the world, that for his absence wept: Noctes rorulentas volo.

His beams retaining, vncorrupt and pure,
Although he lay imprisoned and obscure.
Adversus virtutem hoc possunt calamitates, et damna, et iniuriae quo^ advers^s
Solemn Nebula potest: Seneca Epist: 113.
So, Si^, although the clouds of troubles, had
A while conceald you, from your loving friends;
You do appear at length to make them glad,
And so much higher still your name ascendes,
By how much Envy, seeks to oppress,
And dim the splendour of your Worthiness.
Proemio et poena.
THE vernant Bay, with living fame shall crown,
Victorious Caesar, or sweet Maro's brow,
As due reward of Learning, and renown:
To Justice hand, we do the Sword allow:
For by these two, all commonwealths do stand,
And virtue is Nec Domus, nec Respublica, stare potest, si in ea nec recte
factis proemia extent vlla, nec supplicia peccatis Cicer: de natura Deorum.
vpheld in every land.
For Honor, Valor draws her sword to fight,
illi aes triplex circa pectus erat Qui fragilem primus pelago commisit ratem.
Horatius.
Devoide of fear, or cuts the foamy surge:
The Muse for glory labors day and night,
To brave attempts, yea this does cowards urge:
When Justice sword, the inglorious and the base,
Unworthy life, pursues with all disgrace.
Quae pondere mayor.
BEHOLD a hand, extended from the sky; Incerti Autho^is.

Does steddilie a peized balance hold,
The dreadful Cannon, in one scale does ly,
The Bay ith'other, with a pen of Gold;
Due to the Muse, and such as learned are,
The Other Symbol, of thou art Militar.
Though MARS defendes the kingdom with his might,
And braues abroad his foe, in glorious arms,
Yet wiser PALLAS guides his arm aright,
And best at home preventes all future harms:
Then pardon Regina El^zabetha. N^m ^oc cum paucu^is aliis ex illis
Hastiludiorum troph^ is in regia pe^gula adhuc ^erv^tis descr^pu^^us. vt
Minerva nostra non vnd^que non conci^na foret.
Sovereign, if the pen and bay,
My better part, the other down do wey.
Hibernica Respub: ad Iacobum Regem.
WHILE I lay bathed in my native blood,
And yielded naught save harsh, and hellish soundes:
And save from Heaven, I had no hope of good,
Thou pittiedst (Dread Sovereign) my wounds,
Repair'dst my ruin, and with Ivorie key,
Did tune my stringes, that slackt or broken lay.
Now since I breathed by thy Royal hand,
And found my concord, by so smooth a tuch,
I give the world abroad to understand,
Never was the music of old Orpheus such,
As that I make, by mean (Dear Lord) of thee,
From discord drawn, to sweetest unity.
Cum m^a nativo squallerent sceptra cruore,
Basil: Doro^.
Edoque lugubres vndique fracta modos:
Ipse redux nervos distendis (Phoebe) rebels,
Et stupet ad nostros Orpheus ipse sonos.
Poenitentia.
HERE sits Repentance, solitary, sad;
Her self beholding in a fountain clear,
As greeuing for the life, that she has lad: Septies in die cadet iustus et
resurget: impii a^tem corruent in malum. Proverb: 24.

One hand a fish, the other birch does bear,
Wherewith her body, she does often chastize;
Or fastes, to curb her fleshly enemies.
Her solemn cheer, and gazing in the fount,
Denote her anguish, and her grief of soul,
As often as her life, she does recount,
Which Conscience does, with howerly care enroule,
The cullor green, she most delights to wear,
Tells how her hope, shall overcome despair.
Poenitentia aboleri peccata indubitanter credimus, Augustine: de Eccles: dog:
48.
et in vltimo vitae spiritu si admissorum poeniteat.
In tribunal mentis tu^e ascend contra te, et reum te constitue ante te, Idem
in libro de vtilitate agendi poenitentiam.
noli te ponere post te, ne Deus te ponat ante te.
Vtile propositum est saevas extinguere flammas, Ovid: 1 de remedio amoris.

Nec servum vitiis pectus habere suum.
Dolu^.
OF simple look, with countenance demure,
In golden coat, lo here DECEIT does stand,
With eyes to heaven vpcast, as he were pure,
Or never yet, in knau'ry had a hand,
Whose nether parts, resemble to our sight,
The figure of a fearef^ll Serpent right.
And by his side, a Panther close you see,
Who when he cannot easily catch his pray,
Does hide his head, and face, with either knee,
And show his back, with spots bespeckled gay
To other Beasts: which while they gaze upon,
Are unawares, surprised every one.
Job. 30.
Simulatores ^t callidi provocant Iram Dei
Neque clamabunt cum vincti fuerint, morietur in tempestate anima ^orum, et
vita eorum in^er effoeminatos.
Proverb: 4.
Abhominatio Domino est omnis illusor.
Crimina gravissima.
UPON a Cock, here Ganimede does sit,
Who erst rode mounted on JOVE'S Eagles back,
One hand holds Circes wand, and ioind with it,
A cup top-fil'd with poison, deadly black:
The other Meddals, of base metals wrought,
With sundry moneys, counterfeit and naught.
These be those crimes, abhorred of God and man,
Which Justice should correct, with laws severe,
In O fuge te tenerae puerorum credere turbae, Nam causam i^iusti semper amoris
habent.

Tibullus.


Ganimed, the foul Sodomitan:
Within the Cock, vile incest does appear:
Witchcraft, and murder, by that cup and wand,
And by the rest, false coin you understand.
Ista a te puniantur (o Rex) ne tu pro illis puniaris. Ciprian. de vtilitate
Poenitentiae.
Virtutem aut vitium sequi Genus.
D: Bright in his treatise of melancholy.
A FAMILY in Libia's said to be,
For prowess, far renowned above the rest:
With whom no wholesome diet can agree,
But easily, all poison they digest:
The Aspe, the Adder, and the vipers brood,
Are said to yield their ordinary food.
To these infected races, I resemble,
Of Traitors vile, as Gourie and the rest,
To tell whose legend, each good heart may tremble,
While Psilli-like, they suck from Mothers breast,
The poison of the sires infected mind,
Transmissing it, to theirs that come behind.
Fort^s creantur fortibus et bonis,
Horatius lib: 4 ode 4.
Est in iuvencis, est in Equis patrum
Virtus: nec imbecillem feroces
Progenerant Aquilae columbam.
Vos vobis.
THE painful Be, when many a bitter shower,
And storm had felt, far from his hiue away,
To seek the sweetest Hunny-bearing flower,
That might be found and was the pride of May:
Here lighting on the fairest he might epsy,
Is beat by Drones, the waspe and butterfly.
So men there are sometimes of good desert,
Who painfully have labored for the hiue,
Yet must they with their merit stand apart,
And give a far inferior leave to thrive:
Or be perhaps, (if gotten into grace)
By waspish Envy, beaten out of place.
Sic opibus mentes.
THE Hyosciame, that about the plains
Of Italy, does in abundance grow,
Does bear a flower, wherein a seed remains,
Of Birds the most desired, (as Herballs show:)
Which tasted by them, giddie down they fall,
And have no power, to fly away at all.
To this same fruit, I riches do compare,
Which though at first, with sweetness they bewitch:
Within a while, they breed our bane of care,
Or else we surfeit, cloid with overmuch:
Sed plures nim^a congesta pecunia cura (...) -- I^ven^^ Sa^yr. 1^.
Or with their poison, Magnae opes possessori fastum et supercilium conciliant.
Erasmus.
breed out frantique fits:
Or with their loss, Foelix qui simul opes et mentem habet. Demosthen: in
Olynth.
bereave us of our wits.
Divitiae inflant animos, superbiam et arrogantiam pariunt,
^
i^vidiam trabunt, et eousque mentem alienant, vt fama
p^cuniae, nos ^ti^m nocitura del^^tet.
Vndique flamma.
WHO ever do a Royal Scepter sway,
Or fit'st at stern of public government,
So bear thy self, that all Inferiors may, Magnum est personam in Repub:
tueri Principis, qui non animis solum debet, sed oculis servire civium. Cic:
Philip: 8.

Behold thee as, a bright example sent;
From God above, and clearest light to show,
The virtuous paths, wherein they ought to go.
For people, are like busy Apes inclined,
To imitate the Sovereigns manners still,
And to his Actions, frame their varieng mind:
So that he stands, as Torch upon a hill,
In open view, and ever shining bright,
In good or ill, to thousands giving light.
Quo fugis imperii, quisquis moderaris habenas?
Ceu procul illucens flamma benigna tuis, Ba^i^: D^ron.

Lumina quae reddas hinc inde imitamina morum
Regis ad exemplum plebs numerosa rapit.
Regia liberalitas.
OF all the virtues, that do best beseem;
Heroique valor, and high Majesty,
Which sooner love, and Honor win, I deem,
None may compare, with Liberality:
Which well the mighty ALEXANDER knew,
As by this Impre'se following here I show.
Melius beneficiis Imperium custoditu^ quam armi^ Seneca de brevi^ate vitae.
Ere to the charge, he did himself advance,
His purse by giving he would empty quite;
And cause the same be borne upon a lance,
Throughout the camp, in all the armies sight:
And heerewithall proclaim, see, all is gone,
Spes supere^t: dictu^ Alexandri
We live in hope, to purchase more anon.
Cic^ ^ de (...)
Liberalitate qui vtuntur, benevolentiam sibi conciliant, et quo
apt^ssimum (...) ad quiet vivendum caritatem.
In action consistit.
THE Dread-nought Argo, cuts the foaming surge,
Through dangers great, to get the golden prize,
So when our selves, Necessity does urge,
We should avoid ignoble Cowardice,
And undertake with pleasure, any pain,
Whereby we might our wealth, or honor gain.
For all in vain, our parts we keep within, Ipsemet plerunque in opere, in
agmine gregario militi mixtus incorrupto Ducis honor: Tacitus 5. Histor:

Unless we act, or put the same in ure:
Or hope hereafter, Fame our friend to win,
If can no labor, constantly endure:
Which from above, is with abundance blessed,
When slothful wightes, by nature we detest.
Facta, non dicta mea vos milites sequi volo. ^^ Livius lib: 7.

Quibus sudor, pulvis, et alia talia, ^pu^is iucundiora sunt. Salust: I^gurth^

Humilibus dat gratiam.
THE Mountains huge, that seem to check the sky,
And all the world, with greatness overpeere,
With Heath, or Moss, for most part barren lie:
When valleis low, does kindly Phoebus cheer,
And with his heat, in hedge and grove begets,
The virgin-Primrose, or sweet Violets.
So God, often times denies unto the great,
The gifts of Nature, or his heavenly grace,
And those that high, in Honor's chair are set,
Do feel their wantes, when men of meaner place,
Although they lack, the others golden spring,
Perhaps are blessed, above the richest King, Humilitas meretur vt homo virtut^s
occup^t, Qui^ (...).
Bernar^^^ (...) ad Socru^.
Servat accepta, quia non req(...).


Ca^dor immun^s e^it.
THE burning gl^sse, that most does gather fire,
While Sirian Dog does parch the meddowes green,
Does never burn (a thing we much admire)
The cloth, or stuff, that perfect white is seen:
But soon enflames, all colors else beside,
The black, the blew, the red, and motley pide.
To this same glass, I slander still compare,
That by degrees, does subtly gather heat,
And does not with malicious envy spare,
The good, the bad, the little or the great,
Who though she has, over other virtues power,
The conscience clear, she never shall devour.
Scripta non temere edenda.
BY work of wit, who thirsts after Fame:
And by the Muse, would live a longer day,
What ere thou writ'st, see carefully the same,
^
Thou often peruse, and after pause, and stay;
Mend what is amiss, with ARGVS hundred eyes,
-- nonumque premantur in annum Horatius.
I mean advice, and Judgment of the wise.
For as in Children, easily we behold,
Some near resemblance of the mouth, or eye:
Of Parents likeness: so our works unfold,
Our minds true Image, to posterity.
Beside, lewd lines, our loves, and leasinges vain
Do die: when wise words ever do remain.
Pulchritudo foeminea.
A VIRGIN naked, on a Dragon sits,
One hand out-stretch'd, a crystal glass does show:
The other bears a dart, that deadly hits;
Upon her head, a garland white as snow,
Of A^ba ligu^^r^ cadunt --
print and Lillies. Beauty most desired,
Were I her painter, should be thus attired.
Her nakedness us tells, she needs no art:
Her glass, how we by sight are mooud to love,
The wounds unfelt, that is given by the Dart
At first, (though deadly we it after prove)
The Dragon notes loves poison: and the flowers,
The frailty (Ladies) of that pride of yours.
Cumque aliquis dicet, fuit haec formosa, dolebis; Ovid: 2. de A^te amandi.

Et speculum mendax, esse querere tuum.
Nec s^mper violae, nec semper Lilia florent: Idem.

E^^^ge^ amissa spina relicta rosa.
Nil inde insipidum.
A SILVER Salt, here on the Table stands,
On which the peace-full Turtle Dove does sit,
Who at the board, a Nec magnae res sustineri possunt ab eo, cui silere grave
est. Curtius lib: 4.
silent tongue commaundes:
The Salt, that we should season still with it
Discourses honest, not with idle tongue,
Arist: 4. Ethic.
Speak what we list, to do another wrong.
Imminuunt Dicteria Maiestatem.
Some men there are, whose glorie's to deprave,
With ill report, a man behind his back,
And then suppose, their credits best they save,
Ad vinum diserti. Cicero pro M: Caelio.
With slanders vile, when they another crack:
When wi^edome staid, will let such leasinges rest,
And speak even of, her enemy the best.
Ni vndas ni vientos.
WHO would dispend in Happiness thy days,
And lead a life, from cares exempt and free,
See that thy mind, stand irremoou'd always,
Through reason grounded on firm constancy,
For whom opinion does Maximum indicium malae men^is fluctuatio. Se^eca in
proverb:
vnstaiedly sway,
To fortune soonest, such become a pray.
Ye lofty Pines, that do support the state
Of common wealths, and mighty government,
Why stoop ye soon'st, unto the blast of fate,
And fawn on Envy, to your ruin bent:
Be taught by me, to scorn your worser hap,
The wave by Sea, or land the Thunderclap.
In alijs tempestive consulentes non sibi.
THEY tell me Tusser, when thou were alive,
And had for profit, turned every stone,
Where ere thou cammest, thou could never thrive,
Though heereto best, could counsel every one,
As it may in thy Husbundry appear,
Wherein a fresh, thou live amongst us here.
So like thy self, a number more are wont,
To sharpen others, with advice of wit,
When they themselves, are like the whetstone blunt,
And little care, to keep or follow it:
Eeke here I must, the careless Pastor blame,
That teaches well, but follows not the same.
Quicquid delirant Reges -- Horatius.

IT was the Custom of the Thracians once, Plutarc^:

Ere they would ore a frozen river pass,
To take a Fox, and turn him for the Nonce,
Upon the Ice, to try how thick it was,
Who to the stream, by laieng down his ear,
Could hear the noise, and know the thicknes there.
Which if he found to tender for his weight,
He back returned, and thankt them, he would none,
Which shows us of some, the subtle slight,
Who hazard first, the poor, and weaker one
To serve their turns, whom God preserves often,
When they themselves, within the pit are caught.
In timidos et iactantes.
THE Fenny Bitter, that delights to breed
In thickest sedge, by moore, and river side,
By thrusting low his bill into a reed,
All summer long, at morn and even tide:
Though near, yet makes far seeming such a sound
That often it does, the Passenger astound.
This Figure fits, two sorts of people base,
The Coward one, that will with words affright,
When dares not look, true Valor in the face:
The other is, the proud vainglorious wight,
Who where he comes, will make a goodly show
Of wit, or wealth, when it is nothing so.
Deos inprimis placandos.
THE Roman Ladies, yearly did present
Their Jewels, Plutarch in Sy^^pos: sap:
and the best attire they wore
To Delphos, which were by commandment
Into a Goblet turned, and placed before
The Pythian God, as offering for the sin
Of loathed pride, they feared they lived in.
A mirror for such wightes, as will allow
Religion, or the church, the least of all,
Nay, from the same purloine they care not how,
Till Church perforce, has stripped them out of all:
This also tells our gallant Dames beside,
No vice offendes the Lord, so much as pride.
Quod in divinis rebus sumas sumptus sapienti lucro est. Plautus in Mili^e Glor:

Deus vltimum refugium. To the right worshipful, Mr: D: Laifeild, sometimes my
Tutor in Trinity College in Cambridge.
WHEN Priam saw his City set on fire,
At once and drowned, in his Peoples blood,
To pacify the heavens enkindled ire,
(Since humane help, does fail to do him good:)
Creusa warnes him to the Altar fly,
Although he were assured there to die.
The ^ase is every christians in distress,
Who to the Lord, himself should recommend,
As who can best the wrongful cause redress,
And patiently to abide, what he shall send:
Fallen into hands of foes, onr freedom thence,
Or glorious death, to crown our innocence.
Augustine: supe^ Psalm: 74.
Non est quo fugias a Deo irato, nisi ad Deum placatum.
Allah vere. i. Deus dabit.
PROVDE Empress, of the prouder Tyrant mind,
Of Soliman's high boundles-swelling thought:
When like the Ocean, boiling with the wind, Q^i tot armatorum millibus viennam
Austriae patrum memoria obsideba^, fo^iter tamen vi ^t virtute Carol^ (...) et
Gen^a^^^^um, re i^fe^ta ^^^cedere coa^^^s.

Of vain Ambition, all in vain he wrought,
To undermine our Christian happy state,
And drown her in, a deluge of his hate.
But as our God, has given the Sea his bound:
So ( Pagan) scatterd he, thy froathy Ire:
And while thou dream'st, of compassing this round,
Thy Snuff went out, and yet thou want no fire:
Not that same which, thy fat Ambition fed,
But that of Hell, that eats thee, liuing-dead.
Persius.
-- Nec te quaesiveris extra.
ALTHOUGH the staff, within the river clear,
Be straight as Arrow, in the Persian bow:
Yet to the view, it crooked does appear,
And one would swear, that it indeed were so:
So soon the Sense deceived, does judge amiss,
And fools will blame, whereas none error is.
This staff does show, how often the honest mind,
1 Cor: 11. 31.
That means well, and is of life upright,
Is rashly censured, by the vulgar blind,
Through vain Opinion: or vile envious spite:
But if thou know, thy Bona conscientia quo^i lie virescit, laboribus non
affligitur, afficit gaudio vivence^n, aeternumque durat B^r^ard: in lib: de
^o^^ci^n^ia.
conscience clear within,
What others say, it matters not a pin.
O^id: 1. F^s^o:
Conscia men's vt cuique sua est, ita concipit intra
Pectora, pro facto spemque metumque suo.
Fit purior haustu.
IF that the Well we draw, and empty often:
The water there remains sweet and good:
But standing long, it grows corrupt and naught,
And serves no more, by reason of the mudde,
In Summer hot, to cool our inward heat,
To wash, to water, or to dress our meat.
So, if we do not exercise our wit,
By daily labor, and invention still:
In little time, our sloth corrupts it,
With in bred vices, foul and stinking ill:
That both the glories of our life deface,
And stop the source, and head of heavenly grace.
Tutissima comes.
LO Pallas here, with heedefull eye does lead;
Homer: Odyss: lib:
Ulysses in his travail far and near:
That he aright, might in his Journey tread,
And shun the train of Error, every where:
N' ought had Ulysses, ever brought to pass,
But this great Goddess, his directresse was.
Though Homer did invent it long ago,
And we esteem it as a fable vain:
While here we wander, it does wisely show,
With all our actions, Wisdom should remain; Wisdom is only the Princes
virtue. Arist: 3. politic:

And where we go, take Pallas still along
To guide our feet, our ears, and lavish tongue.
Euripides.
Men's vna sapiens plures vincit manus.
Valerius Flaecu^ 3. Argonaut:
-- Non solis viribus aequum
Credere, saepe acri potior prudentia dextra.
In dilapidantes sibi credita aliena.
THE Hounds, sometimes the Fox had put in trust,
From Town, to Town, to beg for their releife:
Who was a while in's office very just,
But shortly after, proou'd an errant theife:
By eating, or embezling, of the best,
And casting to, the sterued Hounds the rest.
Of Regnards kind, there is a crafty crew,
Who when at death of friends, are put in trust,
Do rob the Church, or Infantes of their dew,
Disposing of another as they lust:
Whom being bound, in Conscience to preserve,
They suffer often, in open street to sterue.
Patientia laesa furorem.
WHO lightly sets his enemy at naught,
And fears him not because he is too weak:
Or that he is thy pray, already caught,
Within such net, he cannot easily break:
Repents him often, and does prove too late,
No so so dangerous, as the desperate.
Wherefore says one, give passage to his Ire,
Abuse him not with too much insolence:
Least hopeles back, he does again retire,
With Fury armed, in stead of Patience:
And proves the Victor, when with cunning skill,
Thou might before, have ruled him at thy will.
Te aspicit vnam. Ad Sidoniam virginem nobilem.
THOU greeu'st Sidonia, that I thus divide,
My Love so largely, to a several friend:
While thou, thou think, remainedst vnespi'de:
Or take thy fortune, at the latter end:
And certes who his love, impartes to all,
Affectes but coldly, nay loves not at all.
With wonder rapt, though much I do admire
Some Stars for luster, and their glories best:
You are that Arctick; most I do desire,
Whereon my hope, has wholly set her rest:
And who (sweet Maid,) when others down do slide,
To unknown Fate, must be my surest guide.
Mayor Hercule.
TWO Columns strong, here little Love does bear,
Upon his shoulders bare: though Lilly white,
Vis magna mentis. Seneca.
As if another Hercules he were:
And would erect them, in a deep despite,
Of that Colosse, or Pharos fiery bright
The Egyptian Piles, proud Mausolaeus toombe
Spaines Pillars, or great Traians, yet in Room.
Nor may you less imagine Cupids might:
Though (Ladies) he, but seem a child in show,
Since hand to hand, himself in single fight,
Has given the great'st Hero'es their overthrow:
Ne could the wisest man avoid his bow:
Who^e Trophies, and brave triumphs, were they^sh
Thy Son Al^mena, never had bee^e known. C^ecus est ignis, stimul^tu^ ira
Seneca in Me^^a
Ne^ regi curat, patiturve ^^nos
Haud timet ^o^tem, cupit ire m^ip^os
Obvius enses.


Erit altera merces. Ad amicum suum Iohannem Doulandum Musices peritissimum.
Johannes Doulandus. Anagramma Authoris.
Annos l^dendo hausi.
HERE Philomel, in silence sits alone,
In depth of winter, on the bared brier,
Whereas the Rose, had once her beauty showen;
Which Lords, and Ladies, did so much desire:
But fruitles now, in winters frost, and snow,
It does despised, and unregarded grow,
So since (old friend), thy years have made thee white,
And thou for others, have consumed thy spring,
How few regard thee, whom thou did delight,
And far, and near, came once to hear thee sing:
Ungrateful times, and worthles age of ours,
That let us us pine, when it has cropped our flowers.
Cui candor morte redemptus.
THE Ermin here, whom eager hounds do chase,
And hunters have, around environed in,
(As some do write) will not come near the place,
That may with dirt, defile his dainty skin:
But rather chooses, then the same should soil,
Be torn with dogs, or taken with the toil.
Me thinks even now, I see a number blush,
To hear a beast, by nature should have care,
To keep his skin, themselves not care a rush,
With how much filth, their minds bespotted are:
Great Lords, and Ladies, turn your cost and art,
From bodies pride, to enritch your better part.
Status humanus.
FOUR Captive Kings, proud Sesostris did tie,
And them compeld his chariot to draw, Fortunam tuam (Prince^s) pressi^
man^bus te^e lubrica est nec invita teneri potest Curt: lib: 7.

Whereof the one, did ever cast his eye
Unto the wheel: which when the Tirant saw,
And asked the cause, the chained King repli'de,
Beca^se herein, my state I have espi'de. Vidi cruentos carcere includi D^ces,
et impotentis terga plebeia manu scindi T^ranni -- Seneca in Her^:

For like our selves, the spoke that was on high,
Is to the bottom, in a moment cast,
As fast the lowest, rises by and by,
All humane things, thus find a change at last:
The Tyrant fearing, what his hap might be,
Released their bands forthwith, and set them free.
AEstuat ambiguis vita hae^ agitata procellis, Ba^^^: Doro^.

Fertque refertque vices sors male fida suas;
Hunc de plebe creat, regnantem deprimit illum:
Vel rota tot casus vna SESOSTRIS habet.
In tranquilissimis rebus interdum existit periculum quod nemo expectat.
Erasmus.

Vita Fortuna regitur, non Sapientia. Cic: in Tuscula^^

Cum severitate lenitas.
OF orient hew, a Rainebow does contain,
An hideous shower, within her Circlet round,
Resembling that great punishment of rain,
The Lord inflicted when the world was drowned:
The Rainebow, of his Mercy, here a sign,
Which with his Justice, he does ever join.
For though we howerly, do the Lord provoke,
By crieng Sins, to bring his vengeance down,
The salve he tempers, while he strikes the stroke,
And ioines his favor, with a bitter frown:
To let us know, that wrath he keeps in store,
And grace for such, as will offend no more.
Quintil: declam: 1^.
Oh quam difficile hominibus misereri et sapere.
-- P^r^git tran(...)
Claudian:
Quod viol^nta n^quit, manda^a^ (...) vrget
I^p^ri^^^ qui^s --
Sine pluma.
THIS warlick Helm, that naked does appear,
Not gold-enchased, or with Gemmes beset,
Yet does the marks, of many a battle bear,
With dintes of bullets, there imprinted yet,
No featherie creast, or dreassing does desire,
Which at the Tilts, the vulgar most admire.
For best desert, still lives out of view,
Or soon by Envy, is commanded down,
-- Emitur so^^ virtute potestas. Claudian:
Nor can her heauen-bred spirit lowly sue,
Though it were to gain, a kingdom, and a crown:
Beside it tells us, that the valiant heart,
Can live content, though wants his desert.
Vmbra tantum.
THE Pl^tane Tree, that by the banks of PO,
With gentle shade refreshes man and beast,
Of other Trees, does bear the goodliest show,
And yet of all, it is the barrenest:
But Nature though, this tree of fruit bereaues,
It makes amends, in cooling with the leaves.
This Platane Tree, are such as grow aloft,
Contemptor animus et superbia commune nobilitatis malum. Salust: I^gurth:
Ore-dropping others, with their wealth or might,
And yet, they of themselves, are barren often,
Wanting the endowments, of the meaner wight:
Who many times, in virtue does excel,
When these but have, the shadow, or the shell.
Vita tota dies vnus.
OF all our life, behold the very sum,
Which as this flower, continues but a day:
Our youth is morn, our middle age is come
By noone, at night as fast we do decay,
As does this Lilly flowring with the Sun,
But withered ere, his race be fully run.
Wherefore our life's resembled to a ship, Chrysostom.

Which passes on, though we do what we please,
A shade, a flower, that every frost does nippe,
A dream, a froath, a wave upon the Seas,
Which has a while his being, till anon,
Some else intrude, and he is forgot and gone.
Cuncta mortalium incerta, quantoque plus adeptus sis, tanto te magis Ta^itus 1
Annal.
in lub^ico censcas.
Br^vi^ est vita, ^t brevitas ipsa semper incerta. Augu^t: de ve^bis Domini.

Divitiae.
THE country Swains, at footeball here are seen,
Which each gapes after, for to get a blow,
The while some one, away runs with it clean,
It meets another, at the goal below
Who never stirrd, one catches here a fall,
And there one's maimd, who never saw the ball.
This worldly wealth, Caduca haec fragilia, puerilibu^que consentanea
crepundiis, quae vires atque opes humanae vocantur: Vale^ius lib 6. cap vltimo.
is tossed too and fro,
At which like Brutes, each strives with might and maine,
To get a kick, by others overthrow,
Here one's fetched up, and there another slain,
With eager have, and then it does affront
Some stander by, who never thought upon it.
Arb^^^^ ^^se mei.
UNTO his life, who looks with heedie eye,
And labors most to keep a conscience pure,
And doubts to tread, in errors paths awrie:
That man is blessed, and deemed happy sure:
When vicious persons, even unto their graves,
Are lewd affections, and their vices slaves.
For as the Lion, that has slipped his band,
Or shear'd the chain, that did his courage hold,
Does not in awe, of churlish keeper stand,
But since is waxen, more courageous bold:
The righteous man, so from hells bondage free,
Has hearts content, Basil: Doron.
ioind with his liberty. Ardua res Caesar gentes domuisse rebels,
^errea Sauromatum et colla de^isse iugo:
Verius at vincis tua cum vindicta lacessit,
Duo adversis^imarectae ^^nti Cele^^ta^ et ^^a. Thucidides.
Pectora, et hanc poteris sumere nolle tamen.


Latius regnes avidum domando
Spiritum; quam si Lybiam remotis
Gadibus iungas et vterque Poenus
Serviat vni. (...) c^^m: lib^ 2. Ode 2.

Vulnerat i^^e medem^r.
THIS Sword, a Symbol of the Law, does threate
Perpetual death, to all of Adams race:
But yet the Almighty, of his mercy great,
Sendes, after sentence, pardon of his grace:
For when he found us, maimed on the ground,
With wine, and oil of grace, he heald the wound.
Our parts it is, since by the Law we see,
The fearful state, and danger we are in,
To do our best, then to his mercy flee,
And new again, our sinful lives begin:
Not trusting to our deeds, and merits vain,
Since naught but death, does due to these remain. Basil: Doron.
Just a licet seros Adae sub lege nepotes
Impetat a tergo vindicis Ira Dei,
Vnius haec praestat medicamina gratia Chri^ti^
Vulnere ne pereas quam redivivus habes.
August: de verbis Apost:
Si levis mo^bus esset, medicus non quaereretur, si medicus non quaereretur,
morbus non fi^iretur: ideo vbi abundavit peccatum, superabundavit et gratia:
D^ B^rnard^ sermon super Cant: ^4.
Gratia balsamum purissimum est, et ideo purum, solidum et profundum vas
requirit:


In prodigos.
THE watery willow, growing by the shore,
Of trees the foremost, forth her fruit does send,
But laden with her bee-desired store,
Ere ten days fully come unto an end,
Her Palme's so sweet, we loved and looked upon,
With Boreas breath, are blown away and gone.
To this same tree, did Homer once compare, Frugi perd^.

Such heirs as straight, their Patrimony wast,
In ri 'tous wise: and such as Artistes are,
Who getting much, do let it fly as fast:
Eeke such of wit, or wealth, that make a show,
In substance when, we find it nothing so.
Dilapidare cave nummos ceu n^sciu^ vti
Pelle tamen sordes, modus op^ima r^gula r^rum. Vrsinus velus.

Te Duce.
Perdices foeminae vocem sequntur. Xenophon.
THE Partrich young, in Foulers net y caught,
Too late the error of their damme repent,
Nunquam deceptus est princeps nisi qui prius ipse decepent. Livi: lib: 4 in
panegyr:
For why? her call them into danger brought,
And taught at first, the heedeles way they went:
Hereby are kings our common nurses meant,
When to their lusts, themselves become a pray,
And by vnius invidia et culpa ab omnibus peccatur. Tacitus Annal 3.
example, thousands cast away.
Not heerevpon, as may of most be thought,
We should our Prince, like Rebels disobey,
When they be Tyrants, or with Haec conditio principu^ vt quicqu^d faciant
praecipere videantur. Q^intilia: declamat: 4.
vices naught,
Do hasten others, and their own decay:
But to the Lord, like Christians rather pray
For mercy, who has in his anger sent
T^ranni Dei voluntate praesut. Ierem: 27. 8.
Such wretches vile, to be our punishment. Dum tua qua ducis legimus vestigia
passim
Basil: Doron.
Alma parens, capimur praeda misella plagis,
Proh dolor, innocuos qua^ multos perdis, ab vno
Te, modo diductum principe crimen erit.


In salo sine sale. To the Hon: and most worthy Lady, E: L:
THE friendly Dolphin, while within the maine,
At liberty delights, to sport and play,
Himself is fresh, and does no whit retain
The brinish saltnes of the boundles Sea
Wherein he lives. Such is the secret skill,
Of Nature working, all things at her will.
So you great Lady, who your time have spent,
Within that place, where dangers often abound,
Remain untainted of your Element,
And to your praise^ yet keep your honor sound
Diana-like, whose brightness did excel,
When many stars, within your climate fell.
Vna dolo Divum. To the most Honorable and worthy Lady the Lady Alicia D:
AND ye great Lady, that are left alone,
To merc'les mercy, of the worlds wide sea,
Behold your fair, though counterfeited stone,
So much you ioi'd in, on your wedding day,
And took for true, how after it did prove,
Unworthy Jewel, of so worthy love.
Ah how can man, your sex (fair Ladies) blame,
Whose breasts, are virtues precious Carcanets,
When he himself, first breaks the bounds of shame,
And dearest love, and loialtie forgets:
Yet herein happy, ye above the rest,
Beloved of Heaven, and in your children blessed.
Paulatim.
BY violence who tries to turn away,
Strong natures current, from the proper course,
To move the Earth, he better were assay,
Or wrest from Jove, his thunderbolts perforce,
Bid the Sphaeres stay, or join by art in one,
Our Thames with Tyber, Pinde with Pelion.
For naught at all herein prevails our might,
With greater force she does our strength withstand,
The River stopped, Et ab obices^evior ibat Ovidis Metamor:
his bank downe-beareth quite,
And seldom boughs, are bent with stubborn hand:
When gentle usage, feircenes does allay,
And bringes in time, the Lion to obey.
Sic vos non vobis. To my worshipful and kind friend Mr. William Stallenge,
searcher of the Port of London, and first Author of making Silk in our Land.
THESE little creatures here, as white as milk,
That shame to sloth, are busy at their loome.
All summer long in weauing of their their Silk,
Do make their webs, both winding sheet and toombe,
Thus to the ungrateful world, bequeathing all
Their lives have gotten, at their funeral.
Even so the webs, our wits for others weaue,
Even from the highest to the meanest, worn,
But Siren-like in the end, our selves deceive,
Who spend our time, to serve another turn:
Or painte a fool, with coat, or colors gay,
To give good words, or thanks, so go his way.
Tyranni morbus suspicio.
WHEN valiant Richmond, gave the overthrow
T'vsurping Richard, at that fatal field
Of Bosworth, as our Histories do show,
This Passim in fenes^ris vere reg^j illius operis apud Westmon: in venitur.
Emblem he devised for his shield,
(For when the battle, wholly was his own,
He found his crown, within a Hawthorne thrown.)
Whereat he sighed they say, and uttered this,
A Multae illi manus tibi vna cervix. Ex dicto Caligulae.
Kingdom eases not, the guilty mind,
Nor Crown contents, where inward horror is,
Withal it shows, how I am like to find,
With Honor, and this dignity I bear,
My part of grief, and thorns of heavy care.
Innocentia muninem tutissimum.
THE Lion once, whom all the Beasts did dread,
Does in a thicket deadly wounded lie,
Plutarch: in libello ^e vtilitate capie^da ab inimicis.
About whose carkas, yet not fully dead,
Do flock the Vultur, Puttock, and the Pie,
And where the wounds are green, and freshly bleed,
They light thereon, and most of all do feed.
Such carrion Crow, think thou thine enemy,
Who seldom dare assault thee being sound,
But where he does thy guiltines epsy,
With eager hate, he praeies upon thy wound:
But wisely if thou lead'st thy life upright,
He leaves thee then with sterued appetite.
^^^ero in o^^^e:
Innocentia est puritas animi omnem iniuriae illationem abhorrens.
Amor coniugalis aeternus. To my Loving and most kind friends, Mr Christopher
Collarde, and Mrs Mabell Collarde his wife, of St Martines in the feildes.
Mabella Colarde. Anagramma Authoris.
Bella, alma cord.
DEAREST of friends, accept this small device,
Wherewith I would your courtesies requite,
But that your loves invaluable price,
Must hold me debtor, while I view this light,
Nor can my heirs, these papers dead and gone,
Repay the favors for me, you have done.
A Exemple iunctae tibi sint in amore Columbae: Proport: 2. 15.
Turtle here, upon an Olive sits,
Upon whose branch, depends a Ring of gold,
As best the love of Matrimony fits,
Thus ever endless, never waxing old, Aurum rubigine non corrumpitur quocirca in
maximo pretio semper habebatur.

The branch and bows, the fruit that from you spring,
The Dove your self, your wife that golden RING.
Temperantia.
HERE Temperance I stand, of virtues, Queen,
Who moderate all humane vain desires,
Wherefore a bridle in my hand is seen,
To curb affection, that too far aspires:
In The other hand, that golden cup does show,
Unto excess I am a deadly foe.
For when to lusts, I loosely let the rain,
And yield to each suggesting appetite,
Man to his ruin, headlong runs amain,
To friends great grief, and enemies delight:
No conquest doubtless, may with that compare,
Of our affectes, when we the victors are.
Quae rego virtutes placido moderamine cunctas
^asil: D^r^^.
Affectusque potens sum Dea SOPHROSYN^^
Effraenes animi doceo cohibere furores,
Sustineo, abstineo, displicet omne nimis.
Nihil est tam praeclarum, tamque magnificum, quod non moderatione temperari
debea^. Max: (...) ^.

Servire nescit.
THE Princely Faulcon, that has long been manned,
And taught to stoop, unto the tossed lure,
Is now escaped from his Masters hand,
And will no more such servitude endure,
But better likes the feilde, and forrestes spray,
And for himself, in elder age to pray.
The virtuous mind, and truly noble spright, Species ipsa g^^tiosi liberti,
a^t servi dignitate^ nullam habere potest.

^ic: ad Q: fratre^^ ^pist: 1. lib: ^.



Can seldom brook, in bondage base to serve,
But most does in his liberty delight,
Still rather choosing, by himself to sterue,
Then eat some caterpillar's envied bread,
Or at another courtesy be fed.
Durum, invisum, et grave est, Servitia far. Sene^a ^^ Tro^de Act: 4.

Vis Amoris.
ALCIDES here, has thrown his Clubbe away,
And wears a Mantle, for his Lions skin,
Thus better liking for to pass the day,
With Omphale, and with her maids to spinne,
To card, to reele, and do such daily task,
What ere it pleased, Omphale to ask.
Si temperata accesserit Venus no^ alia Dea est adeo gratiosa. Euripides in
Mede^.
That all his conquests won him not such Fame,
For which as God, the world did him adore,
As Loves affection, did disgrace and shame
His virtues parts. How many are there more,
Who having Honor, and a worthy name,
By actions base, and lewdnes loose the same.
Proper^.
Quicquid amor iussit, non est contemnere tutum,
Regnat et in superos ius habet ille Deos.
Vini vis.
HERE Bacchus winged, midst his cups does sit,
With Mercuries Caduceus in his hand,
As God of wine no more, but God of wit,
And Eloquence, which he has at command,
(Since he has drawn, his bowls and bottles dry,)
Wherewith he seems, to mount above the sky.
For when his liquor has possessed the brain,
The fool himself, the Ad vinsi diserti. ^ic: pro M: Coeli^
wisest thinks to be,
And then so gives his lavish tongue the rain,
You Would swear ye heard another F^ecundi cali^^^ etc.
Mercury,
For lies of Ladies loves, or travailes far,
His birth, his wounds, or service in the war.
Honos venalis.
WHO seekst Promotion through just desert,
And think by gift, of body, or of mind,
To raise thy fortune, whosoere thou art,
This new Impresa take to thee assignd,
To warn thee often, such labor is in vain,
If hereby think, thy merit to obtain.
F^s vbi maxima merces. Lucan:
For now the golden time's returned back,
And all is kept under, by the Athenian Cat,
Nu^morum Felis Emb: apud Plutarch^ Graeci enim (eode^ ^este) huius effigy sua
^umismata ^^debant.
Whose help, and favor, whosoere does lack,
May cool his heels, with Homer at the gate:
Such is our age, where virtue's scarce regarded,
And arts with arms, must wander unrewarded.
Divinitus. To the thrice famous and far renowned University of Oxford.
DEAR Sister of my ever-loued Cambridge and herein Trinity College.
Mother,
From whom this little that I have I drew,
Ingratefully great light I cannot smother,
Some lesser sparks, which I derived from you,
Which first enflamed to this, my duller spright,
And lent in dark, my Muse her candle light.
Fair Academe, whom Fame and Arts conspire,
To make thee mirror to all mortal eine,
Within our Sphaere, that Europe may admire,
The gracious Lamp that on thy brow does shine:
And shows the TRVTH around by land and sea,
Directing thousands erring, in their way.
Atheon exitus.
THE Atheist vile, that Giant-like attemptes,
To bandie faction with Almighty JOVE,
And thinks this frail worlds privilege exemptes,
All Faith, and Fear, due unto heaven above:
Unto his terror, let him here behold,
What Histories of IVLIAN have told.
For after that he had his Lord defi'de,
And wounded deadly lay in deep despair,
Thou, GALILAEAN now or'ecom'st, he cri'de,
Wherewith he cast his blood into the Air:
A fit example, for the faithles wight,
And such as in prophanenes do delight.
Sic et Ingenium.
THE Roses sweet, that in the Garden grow,
If that not often dressed where they abide,
Become as wild as those, we see do blow
In every field, and hedge-row as we ride:
And though for beauty, once they did excel,
They now have lost, both cullor and the smell.
So many men, whom Nature has endu'de,
With rarest parts, of body, or the mind,
Do in themselves by Sloth, grow rank and rude,
Not leaving any memory behind,
Save that they lived here, and sometime were,
Telluris inutile pondus.
A needeles burden which the Earth did bear. Cernis vt ignavum corrumpant
otia corpus
Vt capiant vitium ni moveantur aquae,
Et mihi siquis erat, dicendi cauminis vsus O^idius.

De ficit, estque minor factus inerte sitis.


Ite nunc fortes vbi celsa magni Boethius. 4^7.

Ducit exemplis via, cur inertes
Terga nudatis? Superata tellus
Sidera donat.
MINERVA BRITANNA: THE SECOND PART OR A GARDEN OF HEROYCAL Devices: furnished,
and adorned with Emblemes, and Impresa's of sundry natures. Newly devised,
moralized, and published, BY HENRY PEACHAM, Mr, of Arts.



The Author to his Muse.
NOW strike we Sail, and throw aside our oar,
My weary Muse, the worst is well nie past:
And take a while, our pleasure on the shore,
Recounting what we overcame at last:
To what deep danger were our fortunes cast:
What Rocks, the greatest, and unknown shelues,
We dared to touch, and yet did save our selves.
HENRY, who art both Lodestone, and the star,
Of Hearts and Eyes, our wished Love and Light:
By thee conducted, we arrive thus far;
That now OPINIONS uttermost despite,
Nor ENVY, that the iustest one does bite,
We doubt at all; but forth into the maine,
With doubled courage, put our selves again.
And you great PRINCESS, through whose Crystal breast,
ELIZAS Zeal, and Piety do shine,
Heir of her Name, and Virtues, that invest
You in our Hearts, and Loves immortal shrine:
Oh send from that pure Majesty of thine,
Those beams again, from whence (as PHOEBVS bright)
Our feeble Muse, deriues her life and light.
Eeke pardon (PEERS,) that here my ruder verse,
Unto your worthes, and greatness dares aspire;
Or out of course, if I your ranks rehearse:
But as in the Presence, twixt the Lord and Squire,
(He near the state, the other by the fire,)
Small difference seems; so here most Honored train,
Ye take your lots about your Sovereign.
And whatsoever EYE shall else peruse,
These ruder lines, devoid of skill and Art;
Reserve thy good opinion of our Muse,
That may hereafter wor^e of worth impart:
And though she t^stes of Country and the Cart, ^IN^INATVS a no^^e Ro^ane,
called from his plough, t^ the Dicta^orship.

(As that DICTATOR) all in time she may,
Within the City bear a greater swey.
Presidium et dulce decus. Illustrissimo et potentissimo Principi ac Domino, D:
Mauritio Hessiae Lantgravio, Comiti in Catzenellen bogen Dietz, Zigenhain, et
Nidda etc
This most noble Prince beside his admirable knowledge in all learning, and the
languages, has exellent skill in music. Mr Douland has many times showed me
10 or 12 several sets of Songs for his Chapel of his own composing.
TO you great Prince, who little need be known,
By me or by my worthles Poesy,
Since those admired virtues of your own,
Have made you object of the worlds wide eye,
Your bounteous mind, your matchles Piety,
Your languages, and learning in all arts,
That gain you millions of remotest hearts.
I consecrate in gentle Muses name
This Monument, and to your memory,
Which shall outweare the utmost date of Fame,
And wrestle with the worlds Eternity:
For as Arts glory is your GERMANY,
For rar'st invention, and design of wit,
So ye brave Maurice are the pride of it.
Distantia iungo. To the thrice Noble, and exellent Prince: Ludowick Duke of
Lennox^
NOR may my Muse great Duke, with prouder sail,
Ore-passe your name, your birth, and best deserts:
But lowly strike, and to these colors veil,
That make ye yet beloved in foreign parts,
In memory of those disioined hearts:
Of two great kingdoms, whom your grandsire wrought,
Till Buckle-like, them both in one he brought.
-- Pax optima rerum Quas homini novisse darum est, pax vna triu^phis Immeriti^
potior Silius lib: 11.
Mild Peace herein, to make amends again,
Ordaines your days ye shall dispend in rest,
While Horror bound, in hundred-double chain,
At her fair feet, shall tear her snakie crest,
And Mars in vain, with Trumpet stern molest
Our Muse, that shall her los^iest numbers frame,
To eternize your STEVVARTS Royal name. Q^^d p^oavum vir^^^ disco^d^a i^nxit
in v^^um
Regna d^o, haec facto praem^a ^^gna tu^t:
C^i LVDOVICE VIC^S iterum PAX alma rependens,
Tem^ora dat reb^s DIVA quieta tuis. Basilic: D^ron.



Nostro elucescis damno.
THE Steel and Flint, do here with hardy strokes,
And mutual hewing, each the other wast:
While underneath the open Tinderboxe,
Unto his gain, consumes them both at last:
And to the backs, when they are spent and worn,
He throws them by, for he has served his turn.
So, when the Paisant with his neighbor wars,
They wear away themselves, in golden sparks;
The Box, are Pettifoggers from their Iarres,
Who walk with Torches, vsher'd by their Clearkes:
While blind by Owle-light, Hoidon stumbling goes,
To seek his Inn, the Windmill, or the Rose.
Ex Avaritia Bellum.
THE hand that gripes, so greedily and hard,
What it has got by long unlawful gain;
Withal for Battle ready is prepared,
Still to defend, what it does fast retain:
(For wretches some, will sooner spend their bloods,
Then spare we see, one penworth of their goods.)
Of Avarice, such is the nature still,
Who hardly can endure, to live in Peace;
But alwaie pressed, to qu^rrell, or to kill,
When sober minds, from such contention cease:
And seek no more, then quiet and content,
With those good blessings, which the Lord has sent.
(...).
THE glorious Sun, that cheeres us with his light,
And gives life, and growth to every thing:
Arduu^ semper eodem loci, potentiam et concordiam esse: Tacitus lib: 4 Annal:
Can brook no peer, to check his sovereign right,
But only will remain, the Heavens sole king:
When lesser stars, that borrow from his light,
Do keep their course, in numbers infinite.
So fares it with the vulgar that do go,
In love, and mutual concord most secure,
When Paritie procures the overthrow,
Of Monarchies, that else might well endure:
(...) etc Si duo Soles velint esse, periculum ^e ince^dio omnia per dantur.
S^rm^s.
And like more Suns in sky, portendeth still,
The Princes ruin, or a worser ill.
T^c^tus 1. Hist:
Et Pac^^ interest, p^t^st^t^m omnem ad vnum c^^fe^^^
^^sili^: Doron.
^
^
^
^
Non invicta recedo. To my Scholar Mr. HANNIBAL BASKERVILE. This Emblem^ was
devised as first by Paul^s Iovius.

THIS Indian beast, by Nature armed so,
That scarce the Steel can pierce his scaly side: A Rhinoceros was sent to
Rome by Emanuel king of Portingal who fought with it coming on land tho rough
Provence: but by the way, by hard fortune it was drowned near Porto Venere:
seeking a long time to save it self among the Rocks. Paulus Iovius.

Assaulteth often the Elephant his foe,
And either does the conqueror abide,
Or by his mighty combatant is slain,
For never vanquished, he returns again.
So you that must encounter Want, and Care,
To overcome your hard, and crabbed skill,
Take courage, and tread under foot despair,
For better hap, attendes the venurous still:
And sooner leave, your body in the place,
Then back return, vnletter'd with disgrace.
Non Honos, sed Onus.
VAIN man who think, that happiness consistes,
In great command, and Royal dignity;
And Kings with Scepters hold within their fistes,
The perfect sum of all Foelicitie:
No no, their Crowns are lined with pricking thorn,
And sable cares, with crimson Robes are worn.
Who list describe the motion of the Sphaere,
Another, some rare, beauteous model draw;
With Eloquence, let him go charm the ear,
Thy only art, must be to keep in aw,
And curb with Justice, the unruly crew,
To favor skill, and give the good their due.
Virgil^ AEneid: 6.
Excudant alii spirantia mollius era
Credo equidem et vivos ducent de marmore vultus
Orabunt causas melius etc.
Quem timuisti, timet. Ad BRITANNIAM.
WITH hair disheveled, and in mournful wise, Inter Claudijnumismata.

Who spurns a ship, with Scepter in her hand:
Thus BRITAINE's drawn in old Antiquities,
What time the Romans, overran her land:
Who first devised her, sitting in this plight,
As then their captive, and abandoned quite.
But what can long continue at a stay,
To all things being, Fates a change decree:
Thrice-famous I Will, whom erst thou did obey,
Usurping Room, stands now in aw of thee:
Qui Sceptra d^ro ^aevus imperio regit Timet cimentes, ^^^us in auctorem redi^
Sene^a Trag:
And tre^bles more, to hear thy Sovereigns name,
Then thou her Drums, when valiant Caesar came.
Eo magis caligat.
WHY does vain man, with Compescat se Humana temeritas et id quod est non
quaerat, ne illud quod est non inveniat: Augustine: de Gent: contra Manic: lib:
1.
rash attempt desire,
To search the depth, of Mysteries divine:
Which like the Sun upon his earthy fire,
With glory inaccessible do shine:
And with the radiant splendour of their ray,
Chase all conceipted Ignorance away.
Multo facilius invenit syderum conditorem humilis pietas, qua^ syderum ordinem
superba curiositas Idem de Ecclips: Solis.
What mortal man might ever comprehend,
Gods sacred essence, and his secret will,
Or his souls substance, or could but intend,
Least while to view, this glorious creature still:
Imo, Deus melius nesciendo scitur: Augusti - lib: 11 de ord:
Be wise in what the word does plainly teach,
But meddle not, with things above thy reach.
Quid volucri tentas humana scientia penna
Quaerere inaccessi Mystica sacra Dei:
Caligans oculis, obtusae et acumine men^is,
B^silic: Doron.
Dum petis igniculis alta negata tuis.
Piorum vita luctuosa. To the modest and virtuous minded, Mrs. Elizabeth
Apsley, attending upon the most exellent Princess, the Lady Elizabeth her
grace.
WHILE that the Mavis, and the morning Lark,
Do cheerely warble their delicious strains,
The Turtle likes the shade, and thickets dark,
And solitary by herself remains,
Recording in most doleful wise her woe,
Letting the pleasures, of the season go.
The godly wight, whom no delight of Sin,
Does with vain pleasure draw: or worldly care,
Esteems not, these fleeting Ioies a pin:
But to the Lord, in private does repair,
With quiet Conscience; when the wicked often,
Are in the midst, of all their pleasures caught.
Deus vitam annuntiavi tibi, posuisti lachrymas meas in conspectu tuo. Psalm:
55.

Coniugij Symbolum.
BEHOLD a Storke, between two Torches placed,
Of milkie hew, with wings abroad displaide;
In ancient time, the mark of wedlock chaste,
Because this Bird, a deadly foe is said
TO Adultery, and foulest foul Incest,
The Vestal maid, the fire beseems best.
Chaste Love, the band of everlasting Peace,
The best content we have, while here we live,
That blessest Marriage, with thy sweet increase,
And do a pledge, of that conjunction give
Twixt Soul, and Body, eke the mutual Love,
Between the Church, and her sweet Spouse above.
Foelices ter, et amplius,
Ho^at: ^ carm^ 13
Quos irrupta tenet copula: nec malis
Divulsis quaerimoniis
Suprema citius solvet amor die.
In eos qui cum amicis fruantur, vti nesciant.
THIS simple Fool, that here bestrides the bow,
And knowing well, the danger underneath,
Yet busily does saw the same in two,
Like idle Ape, though to his present death:
Which if he had forborne, and let it grow,
He free from harm, had escaped the pikes below.
To this same Idiot, such we liken may,
Of trusty Friends as do not know the use,
But while they are their props, and only stay,
Will cut them off, by this, or that abuse;
Or loose their favor, by behavior ill,
Who otherwise, might have vpheld them still.
Sic nos Dij.
THE Tennis-ball, when stricken to the ground,
With Racket, or the gentle Schoole-boies hand,
Caroli Vrsini Symbolum Gnome vero mutata.
With greater force, does back again rebound,
His Fate, (though senceles) seeming to withstand:
Yea, at the instant of his forced fall,
With might redoubled, mountes the highest of all.
So when the Dijnos homines quasi pilas haben^. Plautus. So the Philosophers
have heretofore said.
Gods above, have struck us low,
(For men as balls, within the^^ hands are said,)
We chiefly then, should manly courage show,
And not for every trifle be afraid:
For when of Fortune, most we stand in fear,
Then Tyrant-like, she most will domineere.
Par nulla figura dolori. The device of the late Honorable, Earl of Essex.
WE easily limme, some louely-Virgin face,
And can to life, a Lantscip represent,
Afford to Antiques, each his proper grace,
Or trick out this, or that compartement:
But with the Pencill, who could ere express,
The face of grief, and hearty pensiuenes.
For where the minde's with deadly sorrow wounded,
There no proportion, can effect delight,
For like a Chaos, all within's confounded,
Resembling nothing, save the face of night,
Which in his shield, this noble Earl did bear,
The last Impresa', of his grief, and care.
I^repetundos, et adulatores.
OF Virgins face, with wings, and tallants strong,
Upon thy table, PHINEVS here behold,
Ovid: Metam: lib: 6.
A monstrous Harpie, that has praeied long,
Upon thy meats, while thou art blind, and old,
And at all times, his appetite does serve,
While unregarded, thou thy self do sterue.
The Courts of Kings, are said to keep a crew
Of these Hirudines aerarii. Cic: ad Atticum 1.
still hungry for their private gain:
The first is he, that carries tales untrue,
The second, whom base Nihil in penatibus eius sit vaenale, aut ambitioni
pervium. Tacitus Annal: 13.
bribing does maintain,
The third and last, the Parasite I find,
Who bites the worst, if Princes will be blind. Insidit dapibus volueris
foedissima Phineu
(Harpyiam vocitant) vngu^ rapace tuis:
Crimina qui d^fert, repetundus, Gnato (...)
Vile genus fucos, quos alit Aula su^s.


Basilic: ^or^^.
Est et apud Reges rudis, invida, rustica turba,
Histrio, scurra, quibus virtus odiosa, Po^t^s
B: Mantu^^: (...) AEglog:
Mill modis abigunt, vt quando cadavera corvi
Invenere, fugant alias volucreique ferasque.
Salomone pulchrius.
LET courtly Dames, their costly Jewels boast, Math: 6. 24.

And Rhodopis, in silks and sattens shine;
Behold the Lilly, thus devoid of cost, Albedo obiectum visus. Arist:

In flowery feildes, is clothd by power divine,
In purest white, fairest object of the eye,
Religions weed, and badge of Chastity.
Why should ye then as slaves to loathed pride,
And frantique fools, think ye are half undone,
When that ye go not in your colors pide,
Or want the grace, of newest fashion:
When even the Lilly, in glory does surpass,
The rich, and roiallst King, that ever was.
Splendida fluctivagos quid iactitat Aula lapillos?
Intumet et Rhodopis bombycis art levis?
Regibus anteferor, mediis quod vestit in agris
Vita oculi candor, virgineumque decus.
Soboles damnosa parenti.
Ex AEsopi fabu:
THE Husbandman, in depth of winter feld,
An aged Willow, fuel for to burn,
But wanting wedges, Grandsire was compeld,
To rend with bows, the body for his turn:
And while the Willow, now was rent in twain,
It gave a groan, and thus seemed to complain.
Oh grief, of greifes! that thus I should be torn,
And have my heart, by those asunder rent,
That are my fruit, and of my body borne,
Who for my stay, and comfort, should be sent:
You Parents good, your selves behold in me,
Whose Children wicked, and ungracious be.
Parents charissimos debemus habere, quod ab his vita.
Cicero post re^it: ^e Senatis^
patrimonium, libertas, civitas data est.
Innocentiam iniurijs maxim obnoxiam esse.
THE Cat, the Cock held prisoner in her paw,
And said of Birds, he most deserved to die,
For that contrary unto Natures Law,
Hi^ kindred he abused incestuously:
His Mother, Sisters, and a noise did keep,
With crowing still, when others feign would sleep.
In his defense, heereto repli'de the Cock,
My fault of lust, is for my masters gain,
I am for crowing, called the Plowmans clock,
Whom I awake betime, to daily pain:
No doubt (quoth Pusse,) of reasons thou have store,
But I am fasting, and can hear no more.
Humanae miseriae.
SEE here our humane miseries in breife,
That do our life, unto the last amate,
And sauce the sweet, with fear, and howerly grief,
Diseasing often, the high, and happiest state:
A Rod, the world, a Woman, Ages grief,
Which four, the wisest do account the chief.
His childish years, the Quid prodest manum ferulae minantis Tot pati poenas
teneris sub annis Et met^ sequi Samium b^cerni Tramite call^m. Camp:
Rod keeps under still,
His youth with Love, and strong affectes is vexed,
That headlong force him, Cereus in vitium flecti: Hor^^:
pliable to ill,
A retchles wife, and worldly cares are next:
And when both youth, and middle age be past,
Diseases strange, do end him at the last.
Vireo tamen.
THE Some would have it the ^^pine.
Semper-vivum, though from earth remoou'd,
His leaf with flower, are fresh and growing seen,
And many times, as by experience proou'd,
It will abide, in sharpest winter green,
As fair, and full of life, unto the view,
As if abroad, in fertil'st soil it grew.
So many men, of rarest parts there are,
Who though the world afford them not a foot,
Yet do they thrive, within the empty air,
As well as they, that have the richest root:
Yea, when as some, that are vpheld like Hops, In murum cad^^um inclinante^

Do droope, and die, even underneath their props.
Dij laboribus vendunt.
THE slothful man, that loves in idle seat,
And wanton pleasures, to dispend his days:
The Scripture plain denies for to eat,
And laws severe, do punish many ways:
And never Heavens, with their bounty bless,
The hand addicted unto Idleness.
On the other side, when for our sweatie pain,
To sale they set us, all the precious things,
The Earth within her bosom, does contain,
Gemmes, Herbs of virtue, Diadems of Kings,
All sorts of Girlondes, and the Quill of Fame,
To keep alive, the honor of our name.
Gloriae lata via.
THOUGH life be short, and man does as the Sun,
His journey finish, in a little space,
The way is wide, an honest course to run,
And great the glories of a virtuous race,
That at the last, do our just labors crown,
With threefold wreath, Love, Honor, and Renown.
Nor can Nights shadow, or the Stygian deep,
Conceal fair Virtue, from the worlds wide eye,
The more oppressed, the more she strives to peep,
And raise her Rose-bound golden head on high:
When Epicures, the wretch, and worldly slave,
Shall rot in shame, alive, and in the grave.
Tu contra audentior.
THE valiant heart, that feels the utmost spite,
Of envious Fortune, who with Sword and fire,
Awaites his ruin, with redoubled might,
Takes courage to him, and abates her ire,
By resolution, and a constant mind,
To deed of virtue, evermore inclined.
Whose sp'rite, a spark of heavens immortal fire,
Inglorious Sloth, may not in embers keep,
But spite of hell, it will at length aspire,
And even by strawes, for want of fuel creep:
When fearful natures, and the mind unsound,
At every blast, is beaten to the ground.
Huic ne credere tutissimum.
SWEET Bird, who taught thee here to build thy nest?
(In greater saf'tie then MEDEA's shrine,)
Did Hap, or that thou knew'sta Crown the best,
From injury to shelter thee and thine?
How much I did thy happiness envy,
When first I saw thee singing, hither fly.
Your glories Type, even so ye sacred Kings,
In highest place, the weaker one to shield,
Thus under that sweet shadow of your wings,
Best loves the Arts, and Innocence to build:
And thus my Muse, that never saf'tie knew,
With weary wing, great HENRY flies to you.
To the Honorable, Sir Thomas Ridgewaie, Knight, and Baronet: Treasurer at
wars in Ireland, and one of his Majesty's Privy Counsel there etc. Thomas
Ridgewaie. A^agramma.
Mihi gravato Deus.
THE Camel strong, with burden great oppressed,
Is forced to yield unto his load at last,
And while he toiles, himself enioies the least,
Of all the wealth, that on his back is cast:
For why? he must the same, to those impart,
Whose due it is, by Fortune, or desert.
So honored Sir, you, as your Camel, bear
A Treasures charge, that pulls you on your knee,
And though that thousands, ask it here, and there,
To those that ought, and best deserving be,
You only give, their wages, and their due,
The while the care, and peril lies on you.
Melancholia.
HERE Melancholy musing in his fits,
Pale visag'd, of complexion cold and dry,
All solitary, at his study sits,
Within a wood, devoid of company:
Save Madge the Owl, and melancholy Pusse,
Light-loathing Creatures, hateful, ominous.
His mouth, in sign of silence, up is bound,
For Melancholy loves not many words:
One foot on Cube is fixed upon the ground,
The which him plodding Constancy affordes:
A sealed Purse he bears, to show no vice,
So proper is to him, as Avarice.
Sanguis.
THE Aierie Sanguine, in whose youthful cheek,
The Pestane Rose, and Lilly do contend:
By nature is benign, and gently meek,
To Music, and all merriment a friend;
As seems by his flowers, and girlondes gay,
Wherewith he dightes him, all the merry May.
And by him browzing, of the climbing vine,
The lustful Goat is seen, which may import,
His pronenes both to women, and to wine,
Bold, bounteous, friend unto the learned sort;
For studies fit, best loving, and beloved,
Faire-spoken, bashful, seld in anger moved.
Cholera.
NEXT Choler stands, resembling most the fire,
Of swarthie yeallow, and a meager face;
With Sword a late, unsheathed in his Ire:
Near whom, there lies, within a little space,
A stern ei'de Lion, and by him a shield,
Charged with a slame, upon a crimson field.
We paint him young, to show that passions reign,
The most in heedles, and unstaid youth:
That Lion shows, he seldom can refrain,
From cruel deed, devoide of gentle ruth:
Or has perhaps, this beast to him assigned,
As bearing most, the brave and bounteous mind.
Phlegma.
HERE Phlegm sits coughing on a Marble seat,
As Citie-vsurers before their door:
Of Body gross, not through excess of meat,
But of a Dropsy, he had got of yore:
His slothful hand, in's bosom still he keeps,
Drinks, spits, or nodding, in the Chimney sleeps.
Beneath his feet, there does a Tortoise crall,
For slowest pace, Sloth's Hieroglyphick here,
For Phlegmatique, hates Labor most of all,
As by his course araiment, may appear:
Nor is he better furnished I find,
With Science, or the virtues of the mind.
Ad Iesum Christum opt: Max: (...). Thou art that sheep. An^gramma G: Camdeni
aut inc^iti cuiuspiam.

THE silly Lamb, on Altar lies bound,
Prepared ready, for the Sacrifice,
Who willingly awaites his mortal wound,
Without resistance, or help calling cries,
To move the tender hearted to relent,
Or heavens to hear a dieng Innocent.
Thou art (dear Lord) this Lamb, who for our guilt, Esai: 53.7.

Forsook'st the Throne, of highest Majesty, Acts 8. 32.

And gave thy blood, for sinners to be spilt,
Friend to thy foes, high in humility:
And is this creature innocent, and dumb,
Till Lion-like, thou shall to Judgment come.
Redemptor noster homo nascendo, agnus moriendo, Leo resurgendo,
et ad coelos ascendendo, aquila facta est.
Nec amicis, nec cognatis fidendum.
THE Partrich building in the ripened wheat,
Did charge her young, (while she abroad did fly,
With tender care, to search about for meat,)
To mark the talk, of those that passed by:
Ere long there came, the owner of the corn,
Who said by friends, next day it should be shorn.
There is no danger, quoth the old one yet,
Be still a while, I once abroad again,
Then heard they, he his kinsmen would entreat,
Without delay, to fell that field of grain:
Some fear there is, quoth Damme, but if he says,
He Will come himself, then time to go our ways.
Matrimonium:
WHO loves best, to live in Hymen's bands,
And better likes, the careful married state,
May here behold, how Matrimony stands,
In wooden stocks, repenting him too late:
The servile yoke, his neck, and shoulder wears,
And in his hand, the fruitful Quince he bears.
The stocks do show, his want of liberty,
Not as he wont, to wander where he list:
The yoke's an ensign of servilitie:
The fruitefullnes, the Quince within his fist,
Of wedlock tells, which Plutarch.
SOLON did present,
TO Athenian Brides, the day to Church they went.
Sed frigida pulchra. Ad Lesbiam.
LESBIA, that do the Elysian Rose excel,
Or Cyprian Goddess, for a beauteous grace;
Forgive me, here that I so plainly tell,
Dum licet iniusto subtrahe colla iug^ Propert: 2. 5.
My loves long errors, wandering in thy face:
Thy face that takes, like that Daedalian maze,
All eyes thereon, that shall with wonder gaze.
Though fairest fair, thou be yet like the Snow,
Or shamefast Rose, thou inwardly art cold,
Nor can the beams, that gentle Love does throw,
Exhale the sweet, thy bosom does enfold:
As thou art fair, so were thou Lesbia kind,
My wrongs had di 'de, and none had known thy mind.
Ovid Epist: 1^.
Sive latet Phoebus, seu terris altior extet,
Tu mihi luce dolor, tu mihi nocte venis.
Veritas.
A BEAVTEOVS maid, in comely wise does stand:
Who on the Suns bright globe, does cast her eye:
An opened book, she holds in her hand,
withal the Palm, in sign of victory;
Her right foot treads down the world below:
Her name is TRVTH, of old depainted so.
Her nakedness beseemes simplicity:
The Sun, how she is greatest friend to light:
Her book, the strength she holds by Historia custo^ illustrium virorum
virtutis, testis malorum sceleris, benefica in omne humanum Genus: Diodorus
Siculus. 1. Biblothec:
history:
The Palm, her triumphs over Tyrants spite:
The world she treads on, how in heaven she dwells,
And here beneath all earthly thing excells.
Etiam hosti servanda. Inter Augusti Numismata.

Vide historiam M: Artilii Reguli in Cie: officiis.
OF CONCORD firm, the Romans in their coin,
This symbol gave, their peace about to make,
That as their hands, in one their hearts should join,
Fides etiam perfidis praestanda, Ambros:
And sooner first, they would their lives forsake,
Then treachr'ously, their vow and promise break,
Though to their foe, if they the word did speak.
Card: Iulianus: vide Bohemoru^ Annals. et Fox ium in suo Martyrolog:
For lo, the Lord who secrets all does know,
With vengeance most, does plague the faithles wight:
Nec regnis post ferte fidem. Silius lib: 11. -- optimus ille Militiae cui
postremum est primumque tueri Inter bella fidem Idem lib: 14.
As that same " Card'nall, proved not long ago,
Who in the field against his faith would fight:
With God and man, the truth accepted is;
Oh! let not heathen, us excel in this.
Nam illis promssiis standum quis non videt? quae coactus quis metu, au^
decep^us dolo promiserit. Cicero in offic:
Publica Romulides pacturi foedera iungunt
Concordes geminas oreque cord manus.
Ingens creed nefas hostiles fallere dextras,
Ex Bas: nos^^o.
Quod poenas meruit vindice saepe Deo.
Iustitia militaris.
WHEN SCAVRVS forth the Roman youth did lead, Memoriae tradiderit Scau^^s
pomiferam arbore^ quam in pede castrorum fuerat co^plexa metatio postero die
abeu^te exercitu intactis fructibus relictam. Front, Sratagem: cap 3.

To prove their valor on the common foe:
Within his Camp, in authors as I read,
A pear tree laden with the fruit did grow,
Which at's departure, kept the wonted store,
As full remaining as it did before.
A mirror for commanders in our age,
Who deem it honor, and a soldiers guise,
To use on foes all In omne fas nefasque avidi aut vaenales, non sacro non
prophano abstinentes. Taci^us. 2. hist:
villainous outrage:
Rapes, murders, rapines, burnings robberies:
And greatest part of valor to consist,
Like savage bruites, in spoiling what they list. Nemo pullum rapiat, ovem nemo
contingat, segete^ nemo detera^, oleum, sal, lignum nemo exigat, annona sua
contentus sit.

Vopise. in Au^:



Regum Maiestatem non imminuendam.
THE ancient Romans by their Temples used,
To paint a serpent, or such hideous thing:
That holy places, might not be abused
By children, whom they told, that these would sting:
And made believe they lived, to that intent,
To Sacred things they should be reverent.
^ingo meos angues: Pers^
Vile Traitor, of some Hyrcane Tiger bred,
Such Serpents still, thy Sovereigns crown do guard:
But think not as the other, these are dead,
Iovi eura est veneranda principis Theocritus.
Like child or fool: but that they are prepared,
With mortal stings, to be revenged on them,
That shall abuse, tha'nointed Diadem.
T^citu^. 1. An^^^:
Proditores etiam iis quos ante ponunt invisi sunt.
Dolis minime fidendum.
THE Cat and Fox, while that a lone they sat Ex AEsop fab.

Consulting, Regnard thus began to boast,
And soberlie to tell unto the Cat,
His shifts, when danger did assail him most:
The Cat said, one is proper unto me
If worst should come, that is to take a tree.
Mean time of hounds, there came a yolping crew,
Who found the Fox: Pusse trusting to her claws,
And seeing him torn in pieces, in her view,
Said to her self, after a little pause;
One honest shift is better now I see,
Then all thy cunning in extremity.
Vigil vtrinque.
A BEACON standing on the Rocky shore,
Upon whose top, a cock to sit you see:
Gods Ministers does show, should evermore,
Super speculam Domini ego ^um s^ans iugiter per Diem. Ezech^ 3
Stand Sentinel; and howerly watchful be,
Upon their flock, defending every port,
Whereto the foe, is likeliest to resort.
Speculatore^ dedi te. Esai 21.
For many are the stratagems of sin,
And Satan labors still with might and maine,
Within our souls, a landing place to win:
It is your parts, with fervent prayer again;
And faith the spirits sword, and all ye may,
To keep his malice, from your flocks away.
Ex ^as^l: (...) P^^^ci^^m.
Peccatis totos ne vos sopor opprimat altus,
Excubias perago nocte dieque pias:
Cumque gregi Demon Mart insidietur aperto,
Littore ab aequoreo taeda cavere iubet.
Gr^g^r. Hom. 19. (...) E^^ch:
Quisquis populi speculator ponitur, in alto debet stare per vitam, vt possit
prodesse per providentiam.
Vindicta Divina.
WHILE sinful Sodom dreades the heavenly fire, Zachar: 3.

And Nero trembles at his shadows sight:
This book, the Herald of Periurii p^ena divina exitium, humana dedecus
Cicero. 2 de legibus.
The Almighty's Ire,
Does on the house, of every swearer light:
To Punish justly, so profane a sin,
With all the plagues, that are containd therein.
A warning good for swearers, and for those,
That think such sin, their actions only grace:
And him the man, that can with fearful oaths,
Blaspheme the Lord of heaven unto his face:
But know profane, ere many years be past, In prolem dilata ruunt periuria
patris.

Et poenam merito filius ore luit: Claudian:



A plague will come, with winged speed at last.
Dum Sodoma immissos horret sibi coelitus ignes,
Terga sua et Nemesi dat paricida Nero: Ex Basilico nostro.

Advolitans coelo liber hic requievit in illum,
Numina periuro qui vocat ore Dei.
Eternitas.
A VIRGIN fair, purtraicted as you see,
With hair dispred, in comely wise behind:
Within whose hands, two golden balls there be:
But from the breast, the nether parts are twined
Within a starrie circle, do express,
Eternity, or Everlastingnes.
ETERNITY is young, and never old:
The circle wantes In aeterno nihil praeteritum est, neque venturum.
beginning and the end:
And vncorrupt for ever lies the gold:
Philo Iudaeus.
The heaven her lights for evermore did lend,
The Heathen thought, though heaven and earth must pass,
And all in time decay that ever was.
C^c: 1. d^ Natura D^orum.
Fuit quaedam ab infinito tempore aeternitas, quam nulla circumscriptio temporum
metiebatur, spatio tamen qualis ea fuerit intelligi non potest.
Hei mihi quod vidi.
LOOK how the Limbeck gently down distil's, Incerti. Ex pergula Regia:

In pearlie drops, his hearts dear quintescence:
So I, poor Eye, while coldest sorrow fills,
My breast by flames, enforce this moisture thence
In Crystal floods, that thus their limits break,
Drowning the heart, before the tongue can speak.
Great Lady, Tears have moved the savage feirce,
And wrested Pity, from a Tyrants ire:
And drops in time, do hardest Marble pierce,
But ah I fear me, I too high aspire,
Then wish those beams, so bright had never shined,
Or that thou had, been from thy cradle blind.
Sic audaces fortuna.
LYSIMACHVS adjudged once to die,
By sentence just, for that he poisoned,
CALISTHENES his master privilie,
And lieng long in dungeon fettered
To end his days, did in the end request,
He might be thrown^, unto a savadge beast.
The which was straight of ALEXANDER granted,
And naked he unto a Lion cast,
But having one arm closely armed, undaunted,
By th'vpper Iaw, he holds his foe so fast,
That down his throat, that armed arm he sendes,
And even the heart-stringes, from the body rendes.
Which bold attempt, when ALEXANDER knew,
Thy life is thine, LYSIMACHVS quoth he,
Besides I give, (as to thy valor due,)
My friendship here, my Scepter after me:
For thus the virtuous, and the valiant spright,
Triumphs over Fate, and Fortunes deadliest spite.
Et minimi vindictam.
WE do adore by nature, Princes good,
And gladly as our Parents, them obey,
But loath the Leo rugiens e^ Vrsus e^uriens, princeps impius super populum
pauperem: Pro: 25.
Monsters, that delight in blood,
And think their People sent them for a prey:
To whom the Lord, does in his Judgment send,
A loathed life, or else a fearful end.
Once NERO'S name, the world did quake to hear, Nihil tam firmu^ est, cui non
sit periculum etiam ab invalido. Curtius lib. 7.

And ROME did tremble, at DOMITIAN'S sight:
But now the Tyrant, cause of all this fear,
Is laid full low, upon whose toombe do light,
To take revenge, the Be, and summer Otiosus enim Muscas necare solet: hinc
illud: Ne Musca quide^ cum Imperatore.
Fly,
Who not escaped sometime his cruelty. Sponte pios Reges reveremur, at art
Tyra^nos,
Art regunt itidem, funere et art cadunt:
Vellicat extinctum cum turba togata NERONEM, Basilic: Doron.

Muscula ^t illudit, DOMITIANE tibi.
De Tyranno JOB loquens, sonitum ait terroris semper esse in auribus illius.
Job. 15.



-- sollicito bibunt
Auro superbi; quam iuvat nuda manu Seneca.

Captasse fontem
Ad generum Cereris sine caede et sanguine pauci Iuvena: Satyr: 10

Descendun^ Reges, et sicca morte Tyranni.
Ex vtroque Immortalitas. Ad pijssimum Iacobum magnae Britanniae Regem.
BUT thou whose goodness, Piety, and Zeal,
Have caused thee so, to be beloved of thine,
(When envious Fates, shall rob the Common weal,
Of such a Bonus Princeps nihilo differt a bono patre.
Father,) shall for ever shine:
Not turned as Ha^c animam interea caeso de corpore raptam Fac iubar vt semper
Capitolia nostra forumque Divus ab exelsa prospectet Julius aede. Ovid:
Metamor: 15.
Caesar, to a fained star,
But placed a Pietate, et Iustitia, Principes Dij fiunt. Augusti dictum. apud
Senecam in Lu d^.
Saint, in greater glory far.
With whom mild Peace, the most of all desired;
And learned Muse shall end their happy days;
While thou to all eternity admired,
Shall live a fresh, in after ages praise:
Or be the Loade-starre, of thy glorious North,
Drawing all eyes, to wonder at thy worth.
Ex ^asil: nostro:
Te tua sed Pietas omni memorabilis aevo,
Sidus ad aeterni Caesaris vsque feret:
Iustitia occumbet tecum, quia Musa, Fidesque
In patriam, raris pax et habenda locis.
Icon Peccati.
A YOUNG man blind, black, naked here is seen,
Ore Mountain steep, and Thornie Rock to pass,
Whose heart a Serpent gnawes with fury teene,
Another's wound about his wast; alas,
Since ADAM'S fall, such our estate has bin,
The lively picture of our guilt and sin.
His age denotes youths follies and amiss,
His blindness shows, our want of wisdoms sight;
Sins deadly ways, those dangerous stepps of his, Heu quan^u^ misero poenae
men^ conscia donat Lucan:

His nakedness, of grace deprived quite:
Hell's power the Serpent, which his loins does girt,
A Grave pondus Conscientia. Cicero lib: 3. de natura Deorum.
Conscience bad, the other eats his heart.
Inconstantia.
INCONSTANCY with fickle foot does stand,
Upon a Crab, in gown of palie green,
A shining Cressaunt showing in her hand,
Which as her self, is changing ever seen:
That color light, she borrowes from the Sea,
Whose waves continue, never at a stay.
Forward, and backward, Cancer keeps his pace,
The inconstant man, so doubtful in his ways,
The private life, one while will most embrace,
In travail then, he listes to spend his days:
Which was the Kitchen, that he makes a Tower,
Then down goes all togeither in an hour.
In Amicos falsos.
TWO friends there were that did their Journey take, Ex AEsopifabu:

And by the way, they made a vow to either,
What ere befell, they never would forsake,
But as sworn brethren, live and die togeither:
Thus wandering thorough des^rts, here and there,
By chance they met, a great and ugly Bear.
At whom, amazed with a deadly fear,
One leaves his friend, and climbeth up a tree:
The other, falls down flat before the Bear,
And keeps his breath, that seeming dead to be,
The Bear forsook him, (for his nature's such,
A breathles body never once to touch.)
The beast departing, and the danger past,
The dead arose, and kept along his way:
His fellow l^aping from the tree at last,
Asked what the Bear, in's care did whispring say,
Quoth he, he bad me, evermore take heed,
Of such as thou, that failst in time of need.
Levitas.
A YOVTH arraid, in sundry colors light,
And painted plumes that overspred his crest:
Describes the varieng and fantastique wight,
( ^c^l^siast:
For like our minds, we commonly are dressed:)
His right hand holds, the bellows to his ear,
His left, the quick, and speedy spur does bear.
Such is Capriccio, or th'vnstaied mind,
Whom thousand fancies howerly do possess,
For riding post, with every blast of wind,
In naught he is steddie, save unstableness:
Musicians, Painters, and Poetique crew,
Caes: Ripa perugino.
Accept what RIPA, dedicates to you.
Adhuc mea messis in herba. Ad D. M. L. nobilem quandam Italam Mediolanensem
quinquagenariam, quae puero vix 15. annos nato non ita pridem nupsit. Iocosum.
Pasquini.
ADMIRED Lady, I have mused often,
In silent night, when you have been in bed,
With your young husband, whereupon you thought,
Or what conceit possessed your careful head,
Since he we know, as yet had never seen,
His tendrest years, amounted to fifteen:
No question but you grieved inward much,
As does the Miser, in a backward year:
When others reap, to see your harvest such,
And all your hopes, but in their blade appear:
Lady, let henceforth naught disease your rest,
For after-crops do sometime prove the best.
Somniorum Dea.
WHAT lovely Goddess do mine eyes behold?
That powers such plenty with her bounteous hand:
Frischlinus in Persium:
Her name is BRYSVS, whom the Greeks of old,
As Queen of dreams adored within their land:
Whom if they served, devoutly as they should,
They made no doubt, of having what they would.
And well may BRYSVS, be a Goddess thought,
So many who with fancies vain deceiues:
Whom when she to fools Paradise has brought,
For golden Apples, scarce she gives them leaves:
Non aug^rabimi^^, non ob^ervabitis somnia. Levitic: 19.
To visions vain, and dreams then take no heed,
Which had in Christ, their ending as you read.
Somnia fallaci ludunt temeraria nocte,
Et pavid^s men^es falsa timere iubet.
T^^u^lus 34.
Cerno Deae ^ffigiem, cuius sed dicito? ^RYSVS,
Quam numen credunt somnia vana suum:
Ba^^^i^: Do^^n.
Fundit opes varias. stultos spe lactat inani,
Quos bullis ditat crastina lusa dies.
Libidinis effecta.
THE Viper when he does engender, lo,
Thus down the females throat, does put his head, Thriver: in Apotheg:

Which of she bites, as learned Authors show,
And never conceiues, before the male be dead:
Eke when s^e forth, her poisonous brood does send,
Her young ones likewise, bring her to her end.
Of Beastly lust, the effects herein perceive,
How deadly, and how dangerous they be,
Of life and soul, that do at once bereave,
Turning abundance into beggary:
Daughter of Sloth, vile cancker of the mind,
Leaving repentance, and foul shame behind.
Saevus criminum stimulus libido est, quae nunquam manner
quie^um patitur affectum, nocte fervet, die anhelat. Bernard de Abel et Cain.

Sors.
Ex Epigrammate graeco vetusto:
A WOFVLL wretch, that languisht in despair,
Withouten friends, and means of living here,
A halter took, to make an end of care,
The while beneath hid treasure does appear:
Which to his lot assigned, by fortunes doom,
He takes, and leaves his halter in the room.
The owner after missing of his pelf,
For deadly grief, his heaps and hopes were gone,
The others halter takes, and hanges himself:
Fortuna vitrea est, cum splendet frangitur: Pub^^us
Fortune thus dallies ever, and anon
O're-swaieng all, with Scepter in her fist,
And bandieth us, like balls which way she list.
Inani impetu.
THE Crocodile along the AEgiptian NILE,
That lurkes to make the passenger his pray,
The most of all delights, to rob and spoil
The Hunny-hiues, were he not kept away
By Saffron planted, round on every side,
Which this sly theife, could never yet abide. Vnde Crocodili ^omen habet
(...) i. quod Crocum maxim timeat, Nam Apiarij in AEgypto (test Plinio,)
circum alvearia Crocum conserunt ne a praedone isto di^ipia^tur:

This Crocodile, I count the Ghostly foe,
Who evermore lies watching, to devour
Our Hopes increase, that in the soul does grow,
Did not the grace divine, this Saffron flower
(Most wholesome herb) prevent his deadly spite,
And guard the Garden, safely day and night.
Secundus deteriora dies.
WHEN as TIBERIUS CAESAR past along
The streets of Rome, by chance he did epsy
A Lazar poor, who there amid the throng,
Did full of sores, and loathsome ulcers lie,
About the which, so busy was the fly:
That moved with pity, CAESAR willed some,
Stand by to kill them, as they saw them come.
Whereat the wretch, did suddenly reply,
These flies are full, pray let them yet alone,
For being killed, a fresher company,
More hunger pincht, would bite me to the bone:
So when the wealthy Judge, is dead and gone:
Some starue^ one succeedes, who Caninum legis stu^ium dixit. (...): 1.
biteth more,
Q^ema^ nodum vis mo^b^rum pretia (...) An^^^. 11.
A thousand times, then did the full before.
Silentij dignitas.
LO SOLON here the Athenian sage does stand, Angerona Dea praeses silentij
apud Romanos, obsignato ore a^tiquitus efficta est

The glory of all GRECIA to this day,
With courage bold who takes knife in hand,
And with the same, does cut his tongue away:
But being asked of some, the reason why,
By writing thus he answered by and by.
Often have I heard, that many have sustained, Res omnium difficillima silere ^t
audire: Gellius lib: 1.

Much loss by talk, and lavishnes of tongue,
Of silence never any yet complained,
Or could say justly, it had done him wrong:
Who knows to speak, and when to hold his peace, Quingennium filentium in
Pythagorae schola qua^ (...) vocabant, test Laertio indicebatur. L^ertius lib:
22.

Finds fewest dangers, and lives best at ease.
Vini Energia.
THE husbandman, laid sometime to his vine,
To make it bear, the donge of sundry beasts,
Whose virtue since, has quite possessed the wine,
As may appear, at many drunken feasts:
One Vina dabant animos -- Ovid: Met^m: 12.
Lion-like, does quarrel with his host,
Stares, swears, breaks windows, or behacks the post.
Ape-like you see, the second merry still,
-- geminata libidine surgit ibidem.
Or whot with lust, he never thinks of sleep:
Another -- Affigit humo divinae particula^ aurae. Horat: lib: Sermon: 2. Sa^yr: 2
swinish, feels his stomach ill:
The fourth is soft, and simple as the sheep:
A Roman sage, did sometime thus express,
In brief the effects, of loathsome Drunkenes.
Nec igne, nec vnda.
AMID the waves, a mighty Rock does stand,
Whose ruggie brow, had bidden many a shower,
And bitter storm; which neither sea, nor land,
Nor JOVE'S sharpe-lightening ever could devour:
This same is MANLY CONSTANCY of mind,
Not easly moved, with every blast of wind.
Near which you see, a goodly ship to drown,
Herewith bright flaming in a pitteous fire: Vide Lipsium de Constantia.

This is OPINION, tossed up and down,
Whose Pilot's PRIDE, and Steeresman VAIN DESIRE,
Those flames HOT PASSIONS, and the WORLD the sea,
God bless the man, that is carried thus away.
Praecocia non diut^rna.
WHILE gentle Zephire, warmes the tender spring,
And Flora glads all creatures at her sight:
The Almond-trees, ere any leaves they bring,
Unfold their pride, their blossoms red and white:
But withered soon, unto the ground they fall,
Or yield their fruit, the least and last of all.
So many children in their tender years,
Do promise much by towardlines of wit,
From such, yet seldom any fruit appeares^
When as some plodder, that below does sit,
Of whom both friends, and master did despair,
As hindmost hound does soonest catch the Hare.
Ira Principum: Quocunque ferar.
BY rash attempt, who iniures mighty men,
Or by base deed, incurres the Princes Ire, Principes non irrita^dos. Proverb^
^5.15.

Does often wish, it were to do again,
And that his hand, perhaps were in the fire,
That fought against him, or with Libell base,
Sedition sowed, or slander in disgrace.
For as this Engine, where the same does light,
Like JOVE'S swift-thunder, merciles it strikes,
And by the root, rends up rebellion quite:
The wiser man, will then aware the pikes,
And frame himself, to live without offense,
First Let the first ^are, be of God, and divine things. Arist: pol^tic: 7.
Cap: 8.
God to serve, and afterward his Prince.
Vlterius durabit.
THE Monuments that mighty Monarchs rear,
COLOSSO'S statues, and Pyramids high,
In tract of time, do moulder down and wear,
Ne leave they any little memory,
The Passenger may warned be to say,
They had their being here, another day.
Scinde^tur vestes, geminae frangentur et aurum, Carmina quem tribuent fama
perennis erit: Ovi^: Amor: Eleg: 10.
But wise words taught, in numbers sweet to run,
Preserved by the living Muse for aie,
Shall still abide, when date of these is done,
Nor ever shall by Time be worn away:
Time, Tyrants, Envy, World assay thy worst,
Ere HOMER die, thou shall be Exitio terras cum dabit vna dies. Ovi^:
fired first.
Ergo cum silices, cum dens patiatur aratri
Depereant aevo, carmina morte carent.
Ovid: E^^g^ vlt^^
Cedant carminibus Reges, Regumque Triumphi,
Cedat et auriferi ripa beata Tagi.
Pro Regno, et Religione. Henrici. 4. Angliae Regis, Symbolum.

THE Monarchs good, that do deserve the name
Of Patres Pat^^^
Country Parents, by their love and care
Of commonwealth, and to defend the same
From publicque harms, by wise foresight, prepare:
Non sic excubiae, nec circumstantia ^ela, quam tutatur amor.

Claudian: ad h^^^r.


By loving hearts, are guarded surer far,
Then some unwieldy SWIZZE, or IANIZAR.
HENRY this once, thy Royal Imprese stood,
To show, thy foe should find thee ready pressed,
For Church, and Country, to dispend thy blood,
When danger, or occasion did request,
And further, though the Trumpet stern did cease,
Thus evermore, to go prepared in PEACE.
Non Nubila tangant.
THE godly mind, that has so often assaid,
The perils that our frailty here amate,
Through heavenly wisdom, is no more afraid
Of Fortunes frown, and bitter blastes of Fate:
For though in vale of woes, her dwelling be,
Her nobler part's above untouched and free.
For mortal things do find their change below,
And naught can here defend us from the shower,
Now greatest winds do threate our overthrow,
Our golden morn anon begins to lowre:
And while our hopes, are yet but in their sap,
Their buds are blasted by the Thunderclap.
Ordo.
THE Commonwealth, whose Base is firmly laid
On evenest ground, of Justice and the right,
By time or change, in vain we see assaide,
But where affection overswaies with might:
Confusion there, all unto havoc bringes,
And undermines, the thrones of mightiest Kings. The Imprese of King Stephen.

Our English STEPHEN, did take unto him this
Fair falling Plume, resembling best of all,
The new establsh't government of his,
Whereas each feather keeps his rank and fall:
So should that state, (let Fortune do her worst,)
As fair, and firm, as ever at the first.
His graviora.
THE valiant mind, whom nothing can dismay,
The loss of friends, of goods, or long exile
From native country, perils on the Sea,
Night-watchings, hunger, thirst, and howerly toil,
Takes courage, and the same abides fast,
With resolution, even unto the last.
Such showed himself, AENEAS unto those
Of his poor remnant, on the Tyrrhene Seas;
When even despair, their eyes began to close,
O pas^^ graviora Deus dabit his quoque finem.

^i^gil^ AEn^id: 2.


We greater bruntes, have borne (quoth he) then these:
And God, (my Mates,) when he shall please will send,
Unto our greatest miseries an end.
In vos hic valet. Anagramma Authoris.
Nicolas White.
WHO strives to keep a heart and conscience pure,
Devoide of vice, and inward guilt of Sin:
Is guarded by his Innocence more sure,
And witness of an honest mind within,
Then if he were in complete armor clad,
Integer vitae scelerisque purus Horatius.
Or Bow and quiver of the Moore he had.
For Innocence resembled by the WHITE,
And manly courage by the constant heart,
Way not a straw the force of SLAVNDERS might,
DEATHS Ebone shaft, or CVPIDS golden dart:
When, whom Affection, or their guilt do wound,
Even at the first, are stricken to the ground.
Nitor in adversum.
THE Cipresse tree, the more with weight oppressed,
The more (they say) the branch will upward shoot,
Plini: in Histor: natural^
And since the body does resemble best,
A Column strong and stately from the root:
The Auntients would, it should the Imprese be,
Of Resolution, and true Constancy.
Though Fortune frown, and do her worst to bend,
The undaunted spirit with her weary weight,
His virtue yet, does ever upward tend,
Excelsus animus non movetur minis, aut Fortunae saevientis procellis. Seneca.
And he himself, stands irremooued straight,
Laughing to scorn, the paper blastes of Fate,
That would remove, or undermine his state.
Vanae merces. In Naupalum. Epigramma.

RICH NAVPALVS, has secretly convaid,
Our English fleece so long beyond the sea,
That not for wit, but for his wealth it is said,
He Is thence returned a worthy Knight away,
And brought us back, beads, Hobbie-horses, boxes,
Fannes, Windmills, Ratles, Apes, and tails of Foxes.
And now like JASON, up and down he goes,
As if he had the Hesperian Dragon slain,
And equaliz'd in worth, those old Hero's,
That in the ARGO cut the Grecian maine:
Honor thou did, but do his valor right,
When of the fleece, thou dubbest him a Knight.
Vellera divendit Belgis laudata Britannum,
S^d nugas referens NAVPLVS inde domum: Basilic: Doron.

Vellere factus eques, volitat novus alter JASON
Vilescit (rides) velleris ordo nimis.
Haud convenient.
Ovid: Metam t 10
I MVCH did muse, why Venus could not brook,
The savadge Boar, and Lion cruel feirce,
Since Kings and Princes, have such pleasure took
In hunting: happily cause a Boar did pierce
Her Adon fair, who better liked the sport,
Then spend his days, in wanton pleasures court.
Which fiction though devisd by Poets brain,
It signifies unto the Reader this;
Such exercise Love will not entertain,
Who likes best, to live in Idleness:
The foe to virtue, Cancker of the wit,
That bringes a thousand miseries with it.
Exosos Veneri lepores mirare fugaces,
Siluestres ceruos, setigerumque genus^
Ex animis cecidit vel quod Adonis.
Cynareius Heroes,
Aut his quod non sit lusibus aptus amor.
Zelus in Deum. To my Father, Mr. Henry Peacham, of Leverton in Holland, in the
County of Linc:
WITH Breast enflamed, and longing hearts desire,
Thus winged Zeal, to heauen-ward castes her eye:
And loathing what the world does most admire,
Vpborne by Faith, ascendes above the sky:
Whereby Oh God, thy mysteries we learn,
And all beyond, our reasons sight discern.
And as the Heart embos't, does long to taste
The pearly-trickling stream, or Crystal fount,
Even so the soul, by Sin pursu'de and chased,
Thee, thee, (oh Lord) desires, who do surmount
All treasures, pleasures, which we here possess,
The sum and substance, of our happiness.
Nullum omnipotenti Deo tale est sacrificium, quale est zelus animarum. Gregor:
Homil^ 12 in Ezechi^l:

Animi acrimonia cum ad Pietatem accesserit, zelum parit, zelus autem fidei
praesidium est. Nazianzen: ora^ 23.

Sanctitas simulata.
There is more pride, under one of their black Bonnets, the^ under Alexanders
Diadem. King James in his Bisilicon Doron:
UPON a Crown with precious Iemmes beset,
Earl Gourie one of the greatest Puritanes of his time in Scotland, in his
travailes thorough France and It^lie, used with his Diamond, (for the most
part) to draw in his Chamber window, a man in armor, with a Sword in his
right hand, pointing toward a Crown, adding this or the like word, Te solum,
which yet re^aines in many places to be seen, what he meant hereby it might
easily (...) have b^n g^^^sed.
Say what is the reason thus a hat we see,
Since Diadem's of Princes ever yet,
From base control, have been exempt and free:
There is a sect, whom PVRITANS they call,
Whose pride this Figure fitteth best of all.
Not such I mean, as are of Faith sincere,
And to do good endeavor all they can,
Would all the world of their religion were,
We tax the aspiring factious Puritan:
Whose Paritas confusionis matter. August.
Paritie, does worst confusion bring,
And Pride presumes to overlooke his King.
De Morte, et Cupidine.
DEATH meeting once, with CUPID in an Inn, Hoe idem habet Whitnaeus in ^ Embl:
quod bona cum illius venia ab Authore etiam mutuatus sum.

Where room was scant, togeither both they lay.
Both weary, (for they roving both had been,)
Now on the morrow when they should away,
CUPID Death's quiver at his back had thrown,
And DEATH took CVPIDS, thinking it his own.
By this o're-sight, it shortly came to pass,
That young men died, who ready were to wed:
And age did revell with his bonny-lasse,
Composing girlonds for his hoarie head:
Invert not Nature, oh ye Powers twain,
Give CVPID'S darts, and DEATH take thine again.
-- V^IANIVS armis Herculis ad poste^ fixis late^ abdit^s agro. Horat:
-- Latet abditus agro.
THE valiant mind that once had most delight,
By sea and land to make his prowess known,
And in defense of King, and countries right,
So much his valor, and his virtue shown,
Some wished port, does at the last desire,
And home whereto in age he may retire.
For infinite's the sum of world affairs,
Nihil novu^ sub Sole. Solomon in Ecclesiaste.
Nor new, nor strange, that do afflict the mind,
And show before the day our silver hairs,
Yea even before we can experience find:
That frailest man, by course of nature dies,
(...). Solon.
Even at his first beginning to be wise.
Sine Cerere et Baccho.
SAY Cytharaean maid, why with thy son,
Both hands and feet thon warmest at the fire?
Who wont your selves, t'enkindle many a one,
With gentle flames, of kindly loves desire:
I guess cause BACCHVS is not present here,
With mirthfull wine, nor CERES with her cheer.
Where Temperance and Sobriety do reign,
There lustful vice, and pleasure frozen are:
And virtue best, there likes to remain;
When often times the effects of dainty fare,
And drunken healthes, are quarrelles and debate,
Blaspheming, whoredom, oaths and deadly hate.
Laboris effecta. To the no less virtuous then fair, Mrs. Anne Dudleie. e l'
nuda DIANA. Anna Dudleia. A^agramma.

DIANA chaste, does eagerly pursue
With swiftest hounds, the aiery-footed Stagge:
And while they keep, the merry chase in view,
The woods with Eccho's thundering, Love does lagge
Behind the thickets, and with arrow keen,
Does lie in wait, to wound this maiden Queen.
But all in vain he does his shaftes bestow,
For Labor did this Goddess fair defend,
And saved her harmless from his deadly bow,
And poisonous darts: so if thou do intend,
To overcome the force of Cupids might,
Fly Idleness, and then he leaves thee straight.
Gratis servire libertas.
THE gentle Merlion, wearied long with flight,
While on the spray in shadie grove she sleeps,
With tender foot, a Lark she holds light,
Which till the morning carefully she keeps,
Then lets it go, and least she should that day
Praeie on the same, she flies another way.
Such than^kfullnes in bird and beast we find,
By Natures first instinct observed still,
When worser, man in benefits is blind,
Nay oftentimes, for good will render ill:
And rather seek ingratefully his blood,
That saved his life, or daily gave him food.
Fallitur egregio quisquis sub principe credit
Servitium, nunquam libertas gratior extat, Claudia^ ^. S^i^ic^^

Quam sub Rege pio --
A^agra^ma No^i^is A^thori^.
Hin^ super haec, Musa. Henricus Peachamus.
BID now my Muse, thy lighter task adieu,
As shaken blossom of a better fruit,
And with URANIA thy Creator view,
To sing of him, or evermore be mute:
Let muddy Lake, delight the sensual thought,
Loath thou the earth, and lift thy self aloft.
Repent not (though) thy time so idly spent,
The cunning'st Artist ere he can, (we see)
Some rarest Model bring to his Intent,
Much heweth off in Superfluity:
And many a precious hour, I know is lost,
Ere ought is wrought to countervaile the cost.
Mov^re levis^ima sensum.
SO quick of sense as has experience taught,
The Tortoise lives within her armed shell,
That if we lay the lightest straw aloft,
Or touch that Castle wherein she does dwell,
She feels the same and quickly does retire,
A work of Nature we do most admire,
So many men are in their Nature prone,
To make the worst of matters vain and light,
And for a straw will take occasion,
In choler moved to quarrel and to fight,
Then meddle thou the least for fear of wrong,
But most of all beware a lavish tongue.
Negatur vtrumque.
WHAT shall we do? now tell me gentle Muse,
For we welnigh have finished our task,
Thy tender hand could never Mattock use,
Full well I wot, nor can thou humbly ask
At greatness gate, or for reversions sue,
As beggars, and the basely minded do.
Desire of God but this, when thou art old,
To have a home, and somewhat of thine own,
To keep thy self from hunger and the cold,
And where thou may in quiet sing alone:
For think it hell, Alterius non si^ qui suus esse potest: frequens Parac^^so
dictum.
to live as bird in cage,
At others curt'sie, in thy latter age.
^
Been paupertas humili tecto contecta latet,
Quatiunt altae saepe procellae,
Aut evertit fortuna Domos.
Sort, aut Labor.
IF neither art, by birth, nor fortune blessed,
With means to live, or answer thy desire,
With cheerful heart, on labor set thy rest,
To bring to pass the thing thou do require,
For lot, or labor, must our calling give,
And find the word, that all do seek, TO LIVE.
Though thousands have been raised by their friends,
By death, by dowries, even when least they thought,
The Lord a blessing, still to labor sendes,
When lightly come, does lightly go as often:
And goods ill got, by use, and wicked gain,
Do seldom to the second heir remain.
Amicitiae effigies.
THERE was in Rome a goodly statue framed
Of youthful hew, arraied all in green,
Which of the people was TRVE-FRENDSHIP named:
Winter and S^mmer, on his brow were seen:
Within his breast, his heart did plain appear,
Whereon these words were written, FAR, and NEAR.
Upon his skirt, stood LIFE and DEATH below,
To testify in life and death his love,
That far and near, with open heart do show,
Nor place, nor space, true friendship should remove:
Delicata est Amicitia quae amicorum foe^icitate^ seq^itur: Hieron: super Mi^h:
Pr^p^etam.
Winter and summer, whatsoever came,
In fair or foul, we should be still the same.
Hesiod:
(...)
Obsecro te ne amicum qui diu quaeritur, vix invenitur, difficile servatur.
(...) Epis^: ad (...).
pariter cum oculis, mente amittas.
Nulli penetrabilis.
A SHADIE Wood, pourtraicted to the sight,
With uncouth paths, and hidden ways unknown:
Resembling CHAOS, or the hideous night,
Or those sad Groves, by bank of ACHERON
With banefull Ewe, and Ebon overgrowne:
Whose thickest boughs, and inmost entries are
Not peirceable, to power of any star.
Thy Imprese SILVIVS, late I did devise,
To warn the what (if not) thou oughtst to be,
Thus inward close, vnsearch'd with outward eyes,
With thousand angles, light should never see:
For fools that most are open-hearted free,
Unto the world, their weakness do bewray,
And to the net, the first themselves betray.
Vnum, et semel.
A GARDEN think this spacious world to be,
Where thou by God the owners leave do walk,
And art allowed in all variety,
One only flower to crop from tender stalk,
(As thou think good) for beauty or the smell,
Or some one else, whose beauty does exell.
This only flower, is some one calling fit,
And honest course wherein to lead thy life,
Thy self applieng carefully to it,
Or else the heedie choosing of thy wife:
Wherein thou wisely do thy self prefer,
Or to thy ruin ever after, err.
In R^quie, Labor.
EXESSE we loath, of want we most complain,
The golden mean we prove to be the best,
Let idle fits refresh thy daily pain,
And with some Labor exercise thy rest,
For overmuch of either, duls the spright,
And robs our life, of comfort and delight.
If that thou would acquaint thee with the Muse,
Withdraw thy self, and be thou least alone,
Even when alone, as SOLON often did use,
For no such friend to Contemplation,
And our sweet studies, as the private life,
Remote from City, and the vulgar strife.
Rura mihi et silentium.
WERE thou thy life at liberty to choose,
And as thy birth, so had thy being free,
The City thou should bid adieu, my Muse,
And from her streets, as her infection flee:
Where CHAOS and CONFVSION we see,
As Well of language, as of differing hearts,
A body severed in a thousand parts.
Thy solitaire A wood near Athens, wherein the Philosophers used to study.
Academe should be
Some shadie grove, upon the THAMES fair side,
Such as we may near princely RICHMOND see,
Or where a long does silver SEVERNE slide,
Or AVON courts, fair FLORA in her pride:
There should thou sit at long desired rest,
And think thy self, above a Monarch blessed,
There moughtst thou sing thy sweet Creators praise,
And turn at quiet ore some holy book;
Or tune the Accent of thy harmless lays
Unto the murmur of the gentle brook:
Whiles round about thy greedy eye does look,
Observing (...) in re minima esse pulchre dixit. Aristo^eles.
wonders in some flower by,
This bent, that leaf, this worm, that butterfly.
Where might thou view at full the Hemisphaere
On some fair Mountain, in a Summers night,
In spangles there embraudered is the Vrsa mayor au^ minor.
BEAR,
And here the FISH, there THESEUS Ariadne.
lover bright,
The watery HYADS, here deceive our sight,
ERIDANOS, and there ORION bound,
Another way the silver SWANNE is found.
Or would thou Music to delight thine ear,
Step but aside into the neighbor spring,
Thou shall a thousand winged Musicians hear,
Each praising in his kind the heavenly King:
Here PHILOMEL, does her shrill TREBLE sing,
The THRVSH a TENOR, off a little space,
Some matelesse DOVE, does murmur out the BASE.
Geometry or wishest thou to learn,
Observe the Mill, the Crane, or Country Cart,
Wherein with pleasure, soon thou shall discern
The grounds, and use of this admired Art,
The rules of NVMBRING, for the greatest part,
As they were first devised by Country Swains,
So still the Art with them entire remains.
If love thy health, prefer the Country Air,
Thy Garden fore the Pothecaries shop,
Where wholesome herbs, shall it at full repair,
Before a Quint'sence, or an oily drop:
There grows the Balm, there shoots Endive up:
Here Paeonte for the Epilepsie good,
There Dill, and Hysope, best to ^^nch the blood.
The cooling Sorrel, and the Perslie whot,
The Smallage, for a bruise, or swelling best,
The Mercury, the foremost in the Pot,
The Lavander, beloved for the Chest,
The Costmarie, to entertain the guest,
The Rosemarie, and Fenel, seldom set,
The lowly Daisie, and sweet Violet.
Nor Princes richest Arras may compare
With some small plot, where Natures skill is showen,
Perfuming sweetly all the neighbor air,
While thousand colors in a night are blown:
Here Is a light Crimson, there a deeper one,
A Maidens blush, here Purples, there a white,
Then all commingled for our more delight.
Withal (as in some rare limn'd book) we find,
Here, painted Lectures of Gods sacred will,
The D^isie, teaches lowlines of mind,
The Camomill, we should be patient still,
The Rue, our hate of vices poison ill,
The Woodbine, that we should our friendship hold,
Our Hope, the Sav'rie, in the bitterst cold.
Yet love the City, as the kindly Nurse
Of all good Arts, and fair Civillitie:
Where though wi^^ good, be intermix't the worse,
That most disturb our sweet Tranquillity:
Content thy self, till thine Abillitie,
And better hap, shall answer thy desire,
Vive tibi, et long nomina magna fuge: Ovid: 1 Trist 4.
But Muse beware, least we too high aspire.
Omnis a Deo Sapientia.
THE Poets faigne, JOVE to have been with child,
But very strange, conceived within his head,
And knowing not, his burden how to yield,
Lo! MVLCIBER does bring the God abed,
By cutting with an Axe, his skull in two,
When issues PALLAS forth, with much ado.
By PALLAS, is all heavenly wisdom meant,
Which not from Nature, and our selves proceeds,
But is from God, immediately sent,
(For in our selves, how little goodness breeds)
That threefold power of the Soul again
Resembling God, resideth in our brain.
Some wits of men, so dull and barren are,
That without help of Art, no fruit they bring,
Whose Midwife must be toil, and endless care,
And Constancy, effecting every thing:
And those who wanting Eloquence, are mute,
Some other way like JOVE, must (...)d their fruit.
Divina misericordia.
THE greedy Eagle here, upon the tree,
PROMETHEVS heart with teene does praey upon,
when the Oake's down, ever^ one gathers sticks. Schol: Theocrit:
But this example does admonish thee
On wretches poor to have compassion:
To pity those, on whom does fortune frown,
Minimum debet libere, cui nimium libet. Seneca in T^oad:
And Tyrant-like, not more to crush them down.
This pleases God, this Piety commaundes,
Nature, and Reason, Ignoscendo auxit magnitudinem pop: Romanus. Salust:
bids us do the like,
Yea though our foes, do fall into our hands,
We should Severitas amittit assiduitate authoritatein. Seneca 1 de Clementia.
have mercy, not in malice strike:
Who helps the sick, and pities the oppressed,
He lives to God, and doubtless dies blessed.
Pulchrum est eminere inter illustres viros,
Consulere patriae, parcere afflictis,
Senec^ in Octavio.
Fera caede abstulere, tempus atque irae dare;
Orbi quietem, Saeculo pacem suo,
Haec summa vi^^^, petitur hac Coelum via.
Homo Microcosmus.
HEAR what is the reason why a man we call
A little world? and what the wiser meant
By this new name? two lights Celestial
Are in his head, as in the Element:
Eke as the wearied Sun at night is spent,
So seems but the life of man a day,
At morn h^e's borne, at night he flits away.
Of heat and cold as is the Air composed,
So likewise man we see breath's whot and cold,
His body's earthy: in his lunges enclosed,
Remains the Air: his brain does moisture hold,
His heart and liver, do the heat infold:
Of Earth, Fire, Water, Man thus framed is,
Of Elements the threefold Qualities.
And as we fitly INFANCY compare
Unto the SPRING, so YOVTH we liken may
To lazy SVMMER, whot devoid of care:
His middle Age to AVTVMNE, his decay
To WINTER, snowie white, and frostie gray,
For then his vigor fails, his heat is cold,
And like the saplesse Oak he dies old.
Vini natura.
BEST BACCHVS Ivy thy fair brow befits,
Thy wings withal, that proud Gorgonean horse:
Because thou addest vigor to our wits,
Heat to our blood, unto our body force:
Mirth to our hearts, unto the dullard spright
A quick Invention, to the Sense delight.
Vnum alam.
THE Husband good, that by experience knows,
With cunning skill, to prune, and when to plant,
Must lop the Tree where rank abundance grows,
As Well as help the barren in her want:
Else happily, when Summer season's past,
With leaves he may go satisfy his taste.
Even so the wit, that ranckly does abound,
With many fancies but it self deceiues:
And while it seems in sundry Arts profound,
In no one good it is fruitful, but in leaves:
Then some one calling choose, whence good may grow,
And let the rest, as Vellem in Adolescente quod ^putem. Cicer^ (...).
needelesse branches go.
Terminus.
Symbolu^ fuit Erasmi Roterodami quod licet Crambe a Poetis nostris toties
repetitum, illius postremo memoriae dedico consecroque.
A PILLAR high, erected was of stone,
In former times, which TERMINVS they named:
And was esteemed, a God of every one:
The upper part, was like a woman framed,
Of comely feature down unto the breast,
Of Marble hard a Pillar was the rest.
Which when JOVE passed by, with stern aspect,
He bad this God remove, and get him gone,
But TERMINVS as stoutly did neglect
His heste, and answered, I give place to none:
Varro.
I am the bound of things, which God above
Has fixed, and none is able to remove.
Fortuna mayor.
HERE Poverty, does conquered Fortune bind,
And under keeps, like HERCULES in aw,
The meaning is, the wise and valiant mind,
In Poverty esteems not Fate a straw:
Non est fortu^^ saepius tentanda. Iul: Caesar Comen^ lib: 4.
And though a while this angry Goddess frown,
She utterly shall never cast him down.
If Wisdom have but what the corpse does crave,
Convenient food and raiment for the back:
And liberty to live, not like a slave
Here in this world, she little else does lack:
But can contented in her cottage sing,
In greater safety, then the greatest King.
Nec in vna sede morantur.
THE awful Scepter though it can compel
By powerful might, great'st Monarchs to obey:
Love, where he lists, likes best to dwell,
And take abroad his fortune as he may:
Ne might, or gold, can win him thence away,
Whereto he is through strong affection led,
Be it a Palace, or the simplest shed.
But VENUS Infant, dred of all beneath,
Imperious fear from my sweet Saint remove,
And with thy soft Ambrosial kisses, breath
Into her bosom meek, and mildest Love
With melting Pity, from thy Queen above:
That she may read, and often remember this,
And learn to love, who most beloved is.
Super terram peregrinans.
NOR house, nor home, has wretched man on earth,
Ne ought he claims justly as his own:
But as a 1 Pet: Cap: 2 11
Pilgrim wandering from his birth
In Countries strange, and Deserts wild unknown,
Like Ieremiae 35.7.
RECHABITE, or those Tartarian Companies of Ta^tars, and subjects of the great
CHAM, living in Tents in the wilderness, without Civilitie, togeither with
their wives, children, and cattle, never abiding in one place, but ranging and
robbing up and down where they list.
HORDES,
Whose vastest Region but a Tent affordes.
Betime hence learn we wisely to supply
Our inward wantes, ere hence we flit away:
And hide in Heaven, that treasure carefully,
Which neither Moth, nor Canker shall decaie:
In Sequor nil consequor. dictum Ariosti.
following state, eke not to spend our stock,
Where often for merit, we but gain a mock.
Sapientia^, Avaritia, et Dolus, decipiunt.
AH pity PALLAS, who has thee enwrapt?
And in a snare, thus brought thee to distress:
The wisest now I see may be entrapt,
And Virtue stoop to Fortunes fickleness:
Nor Scholler-ship, or wit, at all times can
From sad disaster, keep a mortal man.
The love of Money, and Dissimulation,
Hold thee MINERVA tangled in their snare:
For now the world, is grown to such a fashion,
That those the wisest, that the richest are,
And such by whom the simpler should be taught,
Are in the net, like PALLAS soonest caught.
Personam non animum.
THE Hypocrite, that does pretend in show,
A feigned Zeal of Sanctity within,
Eschew betime, nor have with such to do,
Whose hoodes are but the harbor of their Sin,
And humblest habits, but a false disguise,
To cloak their hate, or hidden villainies.
No HIRCAN Tiger, ERYMANTHIAN Bear,
So armed with malice, thirsty after blood,
To high estate aspiring, as they are,
The worst of men, nay man it is too good.
Where LVCIFER did openly rebel
To God, these Traitors even within the Cell.
Honores isti ^liunde.
THE chiefest good, (ah would so good it were)
That most imagine Honors bring with them,
We pick from others praises here and there,
So patch herewith an Indian Diadem
Of Parrats feathers, vocal favors light,
And Plumes indeed, whereto we have no right.
He is not honored that Discents can show,
Nor he that can command a numerous train,
Nor he to whom the vulgar lout so low,
Nor he that follows Fashion light and vain,
Saluting windows, and around does wheel,
Like VRSA MAYOR, stars from head to heel.
We honor him, whose Actions not deface,
The Glories which his Ancestors have won,
By Cowardice, or vicious living base,
Ne wrong for Passion, or Affect has done:
In whom at once, Arts, Bounty, Valor, dwell.
Contending each which other should excel.
Non alit, ene^at.
THE Laurel green, that long in safety stood
By PENEVS stream, the Muses chaste delight,
Often watered by the NAIAD'S of the flood,
And often reviued by her PHOEBVS, whom the Poets feign to have loved ^he Bay^
under the name of DAPHNE.
Lover bright,
The Wave assaileth with her swelling might,
And overthrowes in time, (but who does know
Their misery, that near to Greatness grow.)
This sacred Bay, is Learning and the Arts,
In former times that flourished at will,
Now washed and worn by some, even to the hearts,
Who should have succored and vpheld them still,
Who eat the Corn, but throw the Chafe to Skill:
And what the Church had once to holy uses,
Serves them to pride, and all profane abuses.
Minimus in summo.
IF that thy Fortunes have their height attained,
And bid thee not on greatness BASE to fear,
Let not with that preferment thou have gained,
Unwonted Pride, or Insolence appear:
But how much higher thou art placed in sight,
So much the less affect thy state and might.
For Honors, know, but lend Ambition winge,
And like false mirrours, make us seem too great,
Vpborne by vulgar breath, (the vainest thing,)
Till all be melted by the Sovereign heat:
That left abandoned, in a trustlesse air,
We drown within an Ocean of despair.
Nil viribus impar.
FIRST try thy strength, and ponder well the end,
Ere thou attempt'st a buisines of weight,
By trial made of wit, thy wealth, or friend,
Who can advise, or judge of thy conceit:
Thou else but hastest, to thy loss and shame,
While abler Judgments, bear away the game.
Hence noblest houses, their decay have known,
And greatest Clerks in vain opinions erred,
And wits too heavy-rancke been overthrown,
Who else in time, might well have been preferred:
Withal we tax, the glorious fool that crakes,
Yet good at nothing, that he undertakes.
Sic bellica virtus.
THE valiant minds, that do delight a far,
By virtuous deed to make their prowess known,
Who not of Nam genus et proavos etc. Ovid: Metamorph: 13.
Fathers Acts ambitious are,
But of the brave Atcheiuements of their own,
Thus as their Ensigns folded up vnshowne,
In Peace rejected, or forgotten lie:
Till new Alarmes, advance them out on high.
But Wisdom ever armed with Foresight,
Then rateth Valor at her weight in gold,
For though the ease-full world her merit slight,
She seees aloof the storm. How Malice old
Plays loose a while to get the better hold,
And bids us arm, when least we think of knocks,
For A Proverb well known in ^^e low Countries
Foes asleep, (they say) the Devil rocks,
Tanto dulcius.
THE mortal strifes that often do befall,
Twixt loving Brethren, or the private friend,
Do prove (we say) the deadliest of all:
Yet if The first Discord here taken is from the eleve^th to the tenth, that is
from b fa b ini, unto alamire, a tenth to f fa vt in the Base, The second from
the ninth, or second to the 8. or unison.
composed by concord, in the end
They relish sweeter, by how much the more,
The Iarres were harsh, and discordant before.
How often hereof the Image I admire,
In thee sweet MUSIC, (...)
(...)
Natures chaste delight,
The (...)
Banquets friend, and (...).
Lady of the Quire;
Physician to the melancholy spright: Homer: in Hymnis, Musicam alloquens.

Mild Nurse of Piety, ill vices foe;
Our Passions Queen, and According to the opinion of Pythagoras.
Soul of ALL below.
Per far denari.
THE worldly wretch, that day and night does toil,
And tire himself in body and in mind,
To gather that by all devises vile,
He must be feign ere long to leave behind:
All shapes like PROTEVS gladly entertaines,
No matter what, so that they bring the gains.
Abroad Religion, Flattery at the Court,
Plain dealing in the Country where he dwells,
Then Gravitie among the wiser sort,
Where Fools are rife, his Folly most excells:
Thus every way transform himself he can
Save one, in time to turn an honest man.
Aula.
WITH mighty men, who likes to spend his prime,
And loves that life, which few account the best,
In hope at length unto his height to clime,
By good desert, or thorough Fortune blessed,
May here behold the Model of his bliss,
And what his life, in sum and substance is.
A Lady fair, is FAVOR feigned to be,
Whose youthful Cheek, does bear a lovely blush, C^sa^e Ripa^^ Iconologia.

And as no niggard of her courtesy,
She bears about a Holy Water brush:
Where with her bounty round about she throws,
Fair promises, Byssina verba. Plutarch: in Ap^theg:
good words, and gallant shows.
Herewith a knot of gilded hooks she bears,
With the other hand, a pair of Aureae compedes. Al^iatus.
Stocks she opes,
To show her bondage: on her feet she wears
Lead-shoes, as waiting long upon her Hopes:
And by her does the fawning Spaniel lie,
The Princes bane, the mark of Cui omnia principum honesta atque inhonesta
laudare mos est. Tacitus A^^al: 3.
Flattery.
Stet quicunque volet potens
Aulae culmine lubrico
Se^eca in T^y^st^.
Me dulcis saturet quies;
Obscurus positus loco
Leni perfruar otio.
The Authors Conclusion.
AS then the Sky, was calm and fair,
The Winds did cease, and Clouds were fled,
AVRORA scattered PHOEBVS hair,
New risen from her Rosy bed:
At whose appoach the FLORA sometimes a famous Harlot in Rome, and after
Goddess of flowers, in whose honor they kept their feasts called FLORALIA.
Harlot strew,
Both meade, and mountain, with her flowers:
While ZEPHYRE, sweetest odours threw,
About the feildes, and leavie bowers.
The Woods and Waters, left their sound,
No tenderest twigge, was seen to move,
The Beast lay couched on the ground,
The winged People perched above,
Save PHILOMEL, who did renew,
Her wonted plaintes unto the Morn,
That seemed indeed, her state to rue,
By shedding tears upon the Thorn.
When I as other taking rest,
Was showed (me thought) a goodly plain,
With all the store of Nature blessed,
And situate within the Maine,
With Rocks about environed quite,
But inward round, in rows there stood,
As Well for profit, as delight,
The Trees of Orchard, and the Wood.
The builder Akorne long ago,
To DODONAEAN lOVE adioin'd,
And there the lofty Pine did grow,
That winged flies before the Wind:
LEVCOTHOE that wounded bleedes,
Nor wanting was, nor that same Tree,
That bears the stain, in fruit and seeds, The Mulberie.

Of THISBES woeful Tragoedie.
The Elm embracing BACCHVS stood,
And there the Beech was also placed,
That gave the golden Age her food:
Though we esteem it, but as mast;
The Walnut, praised for her hew,
The Ash, the best for helue, and sta^es,
The Eugh, unto the bender true,
The Sallow soft, that water craves.
Th'vnblasted Bay, to conquests due,
The Persian Peach, and fruitful Quince:
And there the forward Almond grew,
With Erasmus in his Commentaries upon St. Hierom affirms Cherries to have
been known to these parts of Europe little above two or three hundred years,
being first brought from CERASV^TIS a City of PONTVS^ whence they have their
name.
Cherries known no long time since:
The VVinter-Warden, Orchards pride,
The The Filbert so named of PHILIBERT a king of FRANCE, who caused by Art,
sundry kinds to be brought forth, as did a Gardener of OTRANTO, in Italy by
cloue Gilliflowers, and Carnations, of such colors as we now see them
PHILIBERT, that loves the vale,
And red Queene-Apple, so envi'de,
Of Schooleboies, passing by the pale.
With many more, of me forgot,
Upon the which the Aerie crew,
Each in his kind, and order sat,
And did his wonted note renew;
The long-liu'd Eagle, JOVE forsook,
And hither in a moment flew,
Who to the Oak, himself betook,
As King, his multitude to view.
And IVNOS Bird, not far away,
Displaid her ARGVS hundred eyes;
By him sat perched on a spray,
The Swanne, that sweetly singing dies:
The Crane, who Centinell has stood,
The Herne, highest soarer in our sight,
The Pheasaunt fetched from PHASIS flood,
With Faulcon for the Kings delight.
The Turtle here to each did tell,
The loss of his beloved mate,
And so did Thracia pellex Seneca in Herc: sur:
THRACIAN Philomel,
In sweetest tunes, her bitter Fate:
Ne wanted there the envious Stare,
The theevish Chough, and prating Iay,
The Rail, and frostie Feldefare,
And Lark abroad by break of day.
Within there was a Circlet round,
That raised it self, of softest grass,
No Velvet smoother spread on ground,
Or Em'rald greener ever was:
In midst there sat a beauteous Dame,
(Not PAPHOS Queen, so fair a wight)
For Roses by, did blush for shame,
To see a pure^, red and white.
In Robe of woven Silver fine,
And deepest Crimson she was clad:
Then diaper'd with golden twine,
Aloft a Mantle green she had,
Whereon were wrought, with rarest skill
Fair Cities, Castles, Rivers, Woods;
And here, and there, embo^s'd a hill
With Fountains, and the Nymphs of Floods.
A massy Collar set with stones,
Did over all, it self ext^nd,
Whereon in sparkling Diamonds,
SAINT GEORGE, her Patron did depend;
A Crown Imperial on her head,
One hand a bright drawn Sword did hold,
The other (most that made her dredd,)
Three Scepters of the finest gold.
While proudly underfoot she trod,
Rich Trophaeies, and victorious spoils,
Achieved by her might abroad:
Her name is EMPRESS OF THE ISLES:
There Charriots were, that once she wanne,
From CAESAR, ere she was betrayed,
With standards gat from Pagans, when
She lent the Holy Land her aid.
Here saw I many a shivered lance,
Swords, Battle-axes, Cannons Slinges,
With the Arms of PORTVGAL, and FRANCE,
And Crownets of her petty Kings:
High-feathered Helmets for the Tilt,
Bows, Steely Targets cleft in twain:
Coats, Cornets, Armours richly guilt,
With tatterd Ensigns out of SPAIN.
About her now on every Tree,
(Whereon full often she cast her eye,)
Hung silver Sheildes, by three and three,
With Pencill limned curiously:
Wherein were drawn with skillful ^uch,
Impresa's, and Devises rare,
Of all her gallant Knights, and such
As Actors in her Conquestes were.
Eke some of Queens, and Ladies too,
As pleased their Invention best,
(For wit o^ woman, much can do,)
Were fastened up among the r^st,
In sundry tongues, whose Motto's old,
And names, though scarcely could be read,
She wishd their Glories might be told,
To after times, though they were dead.
Great EDWARD third, you might see there,
With that victorious Prince his son:
Next valiant JOHN of LANCASTER,
That SPAIN, with English overran:
And those brave spirits Marshalled,
The first that of the Garter were,
All Soldiers, none to Carpet bred,
Whose names to tell I must forbear.
Fourth HENRY'S Sunbeames on the Cloud,
Fifth HENRY'S Beacon flaming bright,
YORKES Lock, that did the Falcon shroude,
Was here, so were his Roses white:
The Marshal MOVBRAIE NORFOLKES Duke,
Yet living in great HOVVARDS blood,
With valiant BEDFORD, Symboles took
As pleased them, to adorn the Wood.
By whom the BEAVCHAMPES worn away,
And noblest TALBOT, scourge of FRANCE,
With NEVILLS whom could naught dismay,
Left Relics of their Puissance:
The loyal VERE, and CLIFFORD stout,
Great STRONGBOVVES heir, with BOVRCHIER, GRAY,
Brave FALCONBRIDGE, and MONTACVTE:
Courageous ORMOND, LISLE, and SAY.
With other numberless beside,
That to have seen each one's devise,
How lively limn'd, how well appli'de,
You were the while in Paradise:
Another side she did ordain, Charles E: of No^t^ngham L: Admiral. Thomas E:
of Suffolk, and L: Chamberlain. George E: of Cumberland. L: Willowghby. Sir
Philip Sydney Sir Ihon Nor^is. etc.

To some late dead, some living yet,
Who served ELIZA in her reign,
And worthily had honored it.
Where turning, first I spide above,
Her own dear PHOENIX hovering,
Whereat, me thought, in melting Love,
Apace with tears mine eyes did spring;
But Fool, while I aloft did look,
For her that was to Heaven flowne,
This goodly place, my sight forsook,
And on the sudden all was gone.
With grief awaked, I gazed around,
And casting up to Heaven mine eye,
Oh GOD I said! where may be found,
These Patrones now of Chivalry,
But Virtue present and secure,
We hate, when from our knowledge hid,
By all the means we her allure,
To take her dwelling where she did.
Now what they were, on every Tree,
Devises new, as well as old,
Of those brave worthies, faithfully,
Shall in another Book be told.
FINIS. 1612.

