FIVE GODLY, AND PROfitable Sermons concerning 1 The slaverie of sin. 2 The
mischief of ignorance. 3 The root of Apostasy. 4 The benefit of Gods
service. 5 The Christians love.
Preached in his life time in sundry places. By that late faithful Minister of
Christ Mr WILLIAM PEMBLE of Magdalen Hall in the University of Oxford.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD, Printer to the famous University, and
are to be sold by EDWARD FOREST. ANNO DOM. 1628.

TO THE READER.
CHRISTIAN Reader: These sermons were by the godly, and learned Author of them
fitted for the congregations to which he was to speak, and no doubt intended
only for the benefit of hearers, not of readers. Nevertheless it was the
desire of many that they might be published upon hope of good that might be
done to the Church of God by them. There is need of plain instructions to
incite men to holiness of life, as well as accurate treatises to discern truth
from error. For which end I dare promise these Sermons will make much, where
they find an honest, and humble reader. It was the Authors greatest care to
handle the word of God by manifestation of the truth commending himself to
every man's conscience in the sight of God; as once S. Paul pleaded for
himself. Gell. noct. Attic. lib. 1. cap. 15.
2. Cor. 4. 2. And if that be the property (which they say) of an eloquent, and
good speaker non ex ore, sed ex pectore, to speak from his heart rather tha^ his
tongue, then surely this Author was an excellent orator, one that spoke out of
sound understanding with true affection. Many excellencies there were in him
for which his memory remains: but this above all was his crown that he
unfeignedly sought Gods glory, and the good of men's souls. It remains, that
these sermons be read by thee with a care to profit, and thanksgiving to God
for the benefit thou have by them, since they are such talents, as in the use of
which he requires, and expects to be glorified: Farewell.

Thine in the Lord Jesus JOHN TOMBS.

IOH. 8. 34. Jesus answered them: verily, verily I say unto you, that whosoever
commits sin is the servant of sin.
TO acquaint you briefly with the occasion of these words: their coherence with
the foregoing and following verses stands thus. Upon some conference and
arguments between our Savior Christ and the Pharisees with other of the Jews
about the quality of his person, who and what manner of man he should be;
Christ having plainly testified who he was, even the light of the world, that
Messiah whom they had so long expected: it so comes to pass, that many of the
people that were present hearing Christ defend his authority against the
cavils of the Pharisees, were thereby moved to believe in him, ver. 30. Unto
these believers Christ directs his speech, telling them that it was not enough
for the present to seem forward in embracing and yielding assent unto his
doctrine. There is more in it then so, if they will prove themselves to be true
beleivers and his Disciples they must persevere in the profession and practice
of his Doctrine (if ye Continue in my word ye are verily my Disciples) verse.
31. Now whereas many things might discourage these young beginners from going
on further, especially their ignorance of this heavenly Doctrine, and with all
those manifold sinful Corruptions from which they could not quickly shift
themselves, Christ for their encouragement adds by way of promise, that if they
will hold on they both (shall know the truth) vz: The Gospel and all the ways
of Gods grace in man's redemption by Christ, and further (the truth shall make
them free) verse. 32. from the bondage of such inconveniences as might keep
them back from the resolute profession of the Gospel, as fear of the
displeasure of the Pharisees and rulers, fear of loss, disgrace and reproach
in the world, love of those sins and pleasures wherein they lived heretofore
and which now they might be unwilling to leave. Those encumbrances, which
caused many a one to withdraw himself from following of Christ, our Savior
promises these beleivers, that if they will be Constant they shall have no
power nor Command over them: But that the grace of God in the clear knowledge
of the Gospel should make them Freemen and set them at liberty from the fear
or love of all such things, as might pull them aside from an holy profession of
the name of Christ verse. 32. This loving admonition of Christ is very ill taken
by the Jews. Christ had touched upon that string that jarred, and they might
not endure to be thus closely though justly taxed for hypocrites and
Counterfeites, such as were so far from being true beleiuing Disciples unto
him, as that they still continued in bondage unto their Corruption and would be
ready upon every occasion to fly of from Christ's service. Wherefore when
Christ tells them that the truth should make them freemen, out of a perverse
mistake they turn this clause into occasion of quarrel and take great
exceptions at Christ for calling them slaves and bondmen (we be say they, in
great stomach, Abraham's seed and were never in bondage to any man; Why say
thou then ye shall be made free verse. 33.) Those Commonly brag most that may
do least, and ye have few that stand more stiflie upon terms of reputation,
then those that have least true worth in them selves. So it is with these
worthless Jews, who stand punctually upon points of honor to clear
themselves from that imputation of bodily slavery, which Christ laid on them
(as they thought) when yet in the mean time they are of all slaves the basest,
vz servants of sin and Corruption. They said something that was true that
they were Abraham's Children borne of Sarah the Freewoman, and this Christ
denied not. But whereas they had said they were never in bondage to any man
that was false even in regard of their Corporal bondage. For their bondage in
Egypt of old, their Captivity for 70. years in Assiria of latter times, and
the present subjection of their whole state under the yoke of the Roman
government was witness sufficient that it was no such strange matter for a Jew
to be a bondsman. But say they had been always free from such bodily slavery,
this was not that which Christ aimed at in that speech of his (the truth shall
make you free) tw'as spiritual se^vitude under the power of sin which he
meant, and seeing they will not otherwise understand him he declares himself
in plain terms in this 34. verse. verily verily I say unto you whosoever
Commits sin is the servant of sin) There are servants of sin as well
as servants of men, and the Conditions of those is as bad as of these yea
worse* Christ makes the Comparison in two paticulars.

1 Servants must have no inheritance with the free borne Children they may for
a while enjoy the common benefit of the family: but at last they must be
turned out and the children only divide the inheritance: so wicked men for a
while live together in Gods house the Church: but when the reward of
inheritance shall be bestowed on the children of God these are utterly thrown
out of all, and no part falls to their share. This is expressed, ver. 35. [And
the servant abides not in the house for ever but the son abides for ever.]

2 Servants must have their freedom from a free man that has power to set
them at liberty. So must sinners from Christ the only son of God, who has
this power and authority given unto him of bondslaues to Satan and sin to
make them Gods freemen. He alone brings deliverance to captives and prisoners,
translating miserable sinners, from under the command of the power of
darkness into the liberty of Gods adopted sons; who being himself made
heir of all things as Gods natural son admits us the adopted sons into
the fellowship of a glorious inheritance. This is set down, verse. 36. [If the
son therefore shall make you free ye shall be free indeed.] Thus the servants
of sin are in an ill case sure to be turned out of house and home, except the
son of God Jesus Christ shall purchase their freedom and bestow an
inheritance upon them. But what? were these Jews here such kind of bondmen?
Yea that they were: and Christ makes it good in the two verses following by
undeniable arguments. Their ungodly practice showed plainly what master they
served, and by whose co^mande they were ruled, [I know, says Christ, ye are
Abraham's seed] viz. according to the flesh, and so borne of free parents: but
yet ye are not freemen so long as malice, contempt of the gospel, love of the
world, bloody desires of an innocent man's death with such like corruptions,
tyrannize and bear rule over your hearts as they do. For why? [but ye seek
to kill me.] A cruel master it must be that will command, and very slaves
they are that will be obedient to do so ill an office as to murder Christ. But
the reason follows ye do it (because my words have no place in you.) That
most holy, pure, meek and peaceable Doctrine of the Gospel, which Christ
published unto them could have no command over their hearts to win them to
subjection and obedience thereunto: they were engaged to another master and to
his word they would obey, not Christ's, not Gods, ve. 37. which in the next
verse. 38. appears yet more plainly.) I says Christ speak unto you that which
I have seen with my Father: and ye do that which you have seen with your
Father) (1) I speak unto you the will of God and you obey the will of the
Devil. Whence it is easy to judge unto whom ye belong, and whether ye be the
Children of God free subjects under his gracious government, or the children of
the Devil and slavish vassalls under his merciless tyrainie. You see now the
occasion and Coherence of these words I have read unto you. The scope whereof
in brief is this: To give these Jews right information of their present
condition what it was. They in great error boasted themselves much upon their
outward liberty while yet they were the servants of unrighteousness. Wherefor
our Savior for their instruction and ours lets them understand that they be
slaves that serve sin as well as those that serve men: And for this purpose
he pronounces to them and us this most certain and undeniable truth (Verily
verily I say unto you whosoever Commits sin is the servant of sin. The
meaning of the words is plain if you observe.

1 What it is to Commit sin 2 what to be a servant of sin. To commit sin
is not simply to do any act contrary to the law and will of God: for even the
regenerate and most sanctified men in many thing^s sin often, who nevertheless
are not the servants of sin but are free from sin and made the servants of
God as it is Romans 6. 22. In this place therefore to commit sin [(...)] is to
do evil willingly and ordinarily: When men make as it were a trade and common
practice of breaking the law of God holding on in an unusual course of
ungodly living without remorse and reformation, of such Christ tells us that
they be the servants or slaves [(...)] of sin (i) they live in subjection to
the power of their sinnfull Corruption, as slaves do to the Command of their
masters. Sin rules over them as masters do over their servants. The maine
point of Doctrine then that these words do afford is this.

A sinner is a bondslaue, and to live in sin is to live in thraldom. For the
more distinct explication of this point touching man's spiritual bondage under
sin I desire you to observe three particulars.

1 The nature of this bondage wherein it consistes.

2 The diverse degrees and kinds of it.

3 The greatness and grievousnes of it.

For the first: the bondage of sin stands Chiefly in two things 1 In
subjection to the power of sin.

2 In subjection to the punishment of sin.

The power and authority that sin has over man is seen in two particulars.

1 In restraining his liberty from doing of good.

2 In Commanding his service in all bad emploiments. As a master over his
servants can both bid and forbid them: So the sin that rules in men's
mortal bodies has power both to restrain them from good and to employ them
in evil practices: you shall see both true in their order.

1. Sin has power of restraint and hindering from the doing of good. A
slave is not in his own power but his masters, he cannot go whither he will
nor do what he lifts nor dispose of himself as he pleases, his service, his
goods, his life are all ordered by his masters discretion. So is it with a
sinner who is holden in the fetters and chains of his corruption, he is not
his own man nor can he do what many times he would. In men that are
regenerate and sanctified in part experience yet witnesses how much they are
pestered and cumbred with this sin that hangs on so fast about them. How
ever the spirit be willing and feign they would do much in the service of God;
yet the flesh is weak and they are so shackled with it, that for their lives
they can make but slow have in the ways of godliness, much a do they have to
keep jogging on, dullness, distraction, hypocrisy, formality and a world of
other corruptions set upon them in every spiritual duty, in every good
resolution; so that when they do best, their work is yet done but to halues.
Grace is yoked with Corruption, when that puts us forward, this pulls us
backward, in so much that a regenerate man is but half a freeman, being
always in some sort molested by his Corruption in the whole course of his
religious Conversation, according as the Apostle Paul in the person of every
regenerate man complains very pitifully. Romans 7. 19. 20. 21. But now in those
that are unregenerate this power of sin is much more predominant, whose hearts,
affections, understandings, and all in them are fast locked and barred up under
impenitencie, rebellion and blindness, so that they are holden prisoners of
Satan at his pleasure, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Tim. 2. 26. Sin has
dealt with those men as we do with wild foul, clipping their wings that
they may not fly away; or as enemies do with captives disarme them of their
weapons that they shall be able to make no shift for their rescue. So has sin
utterly disabled man to every good work by putting out the eyes of his
knowledge, and stripping him naked of all those graces and strength which he
had by creation. Beside this sin has taken away all desire of doing good,
haueing affected the soul of m^n with the love of all unrighteousness, where by
it comes to pass that man is well contented to be the servant of sin taking
great delight in his own shame and misery: Unregenerate men are kept fast in
durance, being neither able nor willing to come out of their bondage. In this
respect is sin compared to snares, and netts, and bonds wherein men are
caught, and kept fast for escaping, [I find says Solomon, Eccles. 7. 28.]
more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is as netts and snares, and her
hands as bounds. Thereby signifing the most intangling and inthralling nature
of the sin of adultery, whereinto few men fall that ever get out again [I
see that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity]
says Peter to Simon Magus Acts. 8. 23. Why because for all his seeming
profession, he was still tied to his covetousness and other vile affections,
like a slave bound to a post with a chain. So Paul exhorts Timothy that he
instruct his hearers to the end they might [Come to amendment and recover out
of the snare of the Devil, of whom they were taken prisoners at his will. 2.
Tim. 2. 26.] And for this cause are sinners in the state of unregeneration,
compared to captives and prisoners kept up in restraint, Isaiah. 61. 1. Isai.
42. 7.

But here you are to note that Satan and sin do not deal alike rigorously
with all: they carry a straighter hand over some then over others. Some they
keep in arcta custodi^ in close imprisonment. And that is when men by Satan and
corruption are made so sure and so fast chained, that they cannot go one step
beyond profaneness and impiety. Thus is it with men, that are kepr close
prisoners in the dark dungeon of ignorance, or who stick fast in the dirt or
mire of beastly, coveteous, and voluptuous affections: in a word those that are
given over to all ungodly and lewd courses. Others there are who are indeed
prisoners, but yet they are kept in libera custodia in a larger kind of
restraint, or as we say, in free prison. And this is when Satan sporting
himself in the sin and misery of man holds him in a longer chain, and lets
him go a good way onward in Christianity; but yet at last fetches him back
again when he pleases like birds in a larger Cage they flutter about, or like
birds in a string they make a fair flight up toward heaven; but Satan when he
spies his advantage, that by their fall he may give some notable foil to Gods
glory, and the credit of his Gospel, then he twitcheth the string and down
they tumble unto hell. Such are those of which Peter speaks 2. Peter 2. 18. 19.
20. who had escaped far from the filthiness of the world, but yet were
entangled again therein. Such a one was Demas whose coveteousnesse hookt him
back from his profession of the Gospel to the world. And such was the young
man in the Gospel, who was come near to the kingdom of heaven, but he had
one leg chained fast to the love of riches, and that fett him quite back
again. All these have a kind of liberty, but it is only of the prison: They
walk abroad but it is in fetters, or as prisoners in Rome used to be dealt
with, chained to a soldier their keeper that does accompany them to see them
safe returned to their jayle. Now you know that a slave who walks abroad to
do his masters business, is yet a slave as well as he that i^ chained in the
Gallie. And so are these still servants and bondmen to their corruptions, how
ever they seem for the present to be more favorablie used. Thus of the first
point wherein the masterlie power of sin stands, viz. the restraint from
doing the good we should, and sometimes would. Now in the next place, Sin
has also.

2 A power of commanding all bad services whatsoever: A slave you know must
ride and run, drudg and trudg, carry and draw, hew in quarries, digg in the
mines, tugge at the oar, labor like horses in a mill, and be put to all the
base offices that are to be done. Honorable services* there be that a freeman,
a son may be employed in: but servants and slaves endure the basest and
painfullest drudgeries. So is it with a sinner; he is at the command of his
sin, as the Ass of his driuer, or as the Centurions servants were at their
masters beck. Look how Satan inspires him and his corruption suggests unto
him, so he studies and plotts, so he invents and practices. Be it but one sin
that reigns over him, you shall see him ever attendant on that master, as be
it lust, pleasures, coveteousnesse, ambition, he is wholly taken up in their
employments. He has nothing to spare from them: no thoughts, no words, no
time: week day and Sabbath day, their business still goes on; nay the day is
not enough for the doing of its command. He devises mischief upon his bed,
and he cannot sleep till he have laid a plott how he may compass one of his
ungodly desires. He will be profound, crafty, and diligent in contriving and
dispatching the affairs, which the Devil and his corrupt heart have given him
in command. For this cause is sin compared unto a law, Romans 7. 23. because it
commands and rules over men by powerful suggestions, provoking them to evil. A
lawless law it is, but fit for lawless men, it prohibiteth all that good is,
and enioynes the practice of every evil thing. And hence also is Satan styled
the prince of this world, because he has noe mean company at his devotion
over whom he rules as vassals and slaves, most ready to obey his will and
pleasure. But will you see what employment sin and Satan set men about. Are
they honorable services? no: the most vile, base, absurd, and unreasonable
offices that can be devised, what will not they command, or what will not one
of their servants do against religion, conscience, justice, common honesty, yea
and nature it self? Let coveteousnes tyrannize over him: how basely,
niggardly, scraping, pinching and sparing will he be? How most unconscionably
and unmercifully will he oppress, exact, cozen and deceive all the world,
strangers, acquaintance, rich, poor, friends or foes, Brother, Father and all
that may challenge fair and honest dealing? If lust rule him he will damn his
soul, destroy his body, disgrace his name, overthrow his estate, undo all his
posterity for the love of some base whore. The like may be said of Pride,
Gluttony and Voluptuousnes or any such like swaggering lust. Yea to go
farther, the godly many times are here besotted, who to satifie some one
vnmasterly desire, will hazard the peace and comfort of their souls* disgrace
themselves and their profession, vex the spirit and cast themselves upon Gods
sore displeasure. So violent and tyrannical are these commands of sin and
Satan, and so base and servile are we grown in our obedience to them, that we
will not stick to do that which in the practice or event of it tends to our
own utter undoing. Now who would not be ashamed of such a master, and such a
service? Nay who is not ashamed of it? But here is the power of darkness and
the invisible tyranny of Satan, that whom we hate yet we fear, and serve:
of whom we are ashamed, to him yet we show our selves obedient. Thus much
touching a sinners subjection unto the power of sin.

Next follows his subjection unto the punishment of it, which is the sorest
part of this bondage which yet a sinner must surely bear. He is in this
respect of al slaves the most miserable: for let him look which way he will he
can see nothing but scourges and Scorpions provided for his back; the whip,
the Cross, the forke and such like punishments of slaves in old time are
nothing to the torments he stands in fear of. No sober hour passes over a
sinners head wherein his heart is not full of slavish and dreadful terrors,
arising from a threefold cause.

1 From Conscience, the horrible clamors whereof terrify his very soul and
gripe him to the heart with insufferable panges, while it still cries in his
ear in this ruefull voice [yet know that for this God shall bring thee to
Iudgment] oh this makes him quake and grow pale he is afraid to look God or
men in the face, he shifts and feign would if he could hide his sins from the
knowledge of his Conscience, and both from Gods eye.

2 From Satan, who though he now seem as his Master yet he knows and
trembles to think of it that hereafter he must be his everlasting tormentor.

3 From God himself, whose most furious wrath and vnavoideable vengeance he
knows is prepared for him and ready every moment to swallow him for his
rebellion. Now who could eat his meat merrily that must pay such a shot?
What comforts of this life, what pleasures of sin can be sweet which are every
moment imbittered with so many woes? It helps not a jot that they be for a
time deferred: for he is no freeman who though he be not clapped up in prison,
yet cannot walk abroad without fear of the Sargeant, the prison, the
gallows, when the country is laid for him, and executions out for him in
every place. Certainly it is a hell to live in fear of hell, and as bad as
death to live in bondage for fear thereof all the days of a man's life. Heb.
2. 13.

Yet such is the miserable thraldom of a wicked man, he is every way in the
briars, being on the one side fast chained to his sinful and ungodly
courses; on the other as surely and certainly bound to his everlasting
punishment. And so much for the first part of the nature of this spiritual
bondage wherein it stands.

2 I go forward to the next point which I proposed to your consideration,
viz. The diverse degrees of this bondage: where you are to note that there are
two kinds of it. 1. wilful. 2, vnwilfull slaverie.

1 Wilful bondage, is when a free man is content to be made a slave, or being
by force or fraud made one, is willing to continue one still. Such a one was
Ahab who sold himself for a slave to do wickedly. 1. King. 21. 20. I will
give the worth of it, said he to Naboth when he sought after his vine yard;
true, he gave the full worth of it, that sold himself for a few acres of land.
Such are all those that commit sin with greediness, who take pleasure in all
unrighteousness, who love the wages of iniquity, who obey sin in the lust
thereof, who take thought to fulfill the desires of the flesh, with full
consent and hearty good will, giving up themselves to be ruled by the counsels
of Satan, and their wicked hearts. In which condition of a wretched sinner, you
may observe two things remarkable.

1 How strangely base and degenerat man's nature is grown, who being a most
noble Creature, made for the most honorable purposes and services in the
world, is now grown so vile and extremely base, so far forgetful of his
duty and the dignity of his creation, as to be willing instead of the free and
happy service of God and goodness, to put himself into a most ignominious
slaverie unto Devils and vile affections. Naturally we all love liberty and
choose rather the loss of life, then of it, and only violence and fraud can
bring us or keep us in bondage: But sin has prevailed with us against
nature and so taken off from us the edge of all virtuous and manly resolution,
that of our own accord we offer our selves unto it, being put in fetters and
manicles by our own corruptions, yea this slaverie men count their only
liberty in so much that when they be called unto freedom, have their ransom
offered them, and all means of escape laid before them, yet they choose to be
slaves still.

2 How Difficult a matter it is for a man to come out of this bondage, surely he
that loves the prison better then his enlargement its pity there should be any
means of his delivery, and it is hazard if they be sought he will not accept of
them. That servant who in the seventh year of his bondage did so love his
master that he would not go out free, he was by the law to serve his master
for ever afterward Exodus 21. 5. He that would not be free when he might
should not afterward when happily he would. And so it is with the servants of
sin when once they bear a good affection to their Master and are so far
bewitched as to hold themselves well apayd with his service. Then are their
ears nailed fast to the posts and gates of Hell, or rather with Siser^ a
nail is stricken through their temples and at one stroke they loose both life
and liberty for ever. So that unless that strong man make a forecible rescue
of them out of the hands of these tyrants they do never escape from this
miserable thraldom.

2 Unwilling bondage: as when a man is taken prisoner by the sword in battle,
or circumvented by some stratagem or fraudulent guile. Such is the Condition of
Godly men many times who by some furious, and vehement assault of temptation
are wounded, overthrown, taken, led away captive and clapped up in irons under
the guard of some strong unruly lust, or other, or else by some subtle slight
and snare privily laid for their souls have their heels intrapped in the
ginne, and for a while are caught as a prey for Satan. But now during this
straightness, what sighs and sorrows do possese the Godly heart? How
tedious and irksom is this bondage? How does he long till his heart be again
enlarged, that he may run the race of Gods Commandments? Life it self is
unpleasant till this liberty be obtained again. Wherefore many a hearty prayer
is sent up to Heaven daily to entreat God for his enlargement, willingly does
he embrace all means of freedom, gladly does he run and rest in him that
only brings deliverance unto captive prisoners, with the Israelites in
Aegipt he is even weary of his life for the oppression and cruel tyranny
under which he is holden, which makes him in the bitterness of his soul cry out
unto God for deliverance from his heavy bondage. Often taking up that Complaint
of the Apostle Romans 7. 24. [O Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death] These are the several degrees of this bondage which
was the second part proposed to be handled.

3 I come in the third place to consider the greatness and grieuousnes of this
spiritual bondage: which will appear by comparing it with outward bodily
slavery. Now spiritual slavery is worse then corporal in three respects.

1 In regard of multitude of masters: In corporal servitude 1 master may have
many servants, but for 1 servant to have two or more masters is a thing
unreasonable and impossible* suppose they were both good; much more if they be
bad. Miserable therefore is the estate of a sinful man, who when he serves
fewest serves three at once, 1 his lusts, 2 Satan working powerfully in his
sinful corruption, 3 God himself. For the first: it may be some one wicked
affection is his master, and yet there is work enough to please that, but when
many lusts at once bear sway over a man like many tyrants in one City, Lord
what combats, broils, and tumults be there in that man's heart: when pride
commands one thing, covetousnes another: when unclean lusts draw one way,
ambition another, voluptuousness a third, a man had need then to study and
take thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, and all little enough
to please these hard and cruel taskmasters. Again he has another master, and
that is Satan, who inspires these corrupt affections of man's heart, with much
rage and hellish fierceness, and is that grand Pharaoh who sets al those
inferior officers a work, who therefore is called the [spirit that works in
the Children of disobedience] Ephe. 2. 2. Over whom although he alone may seem
to challenge all power and authority as over the only subjects of his kingdom,
yet we know that besides both these they have another supreme and sovereign
Lord (1) God himself, against whose government although they do rebel, yet
can they not withdraw themselves from under his power and jurisdiction. God is
king let the earth be never so unquiet, and the haters of the Lord shall be
subject unto him. He will have to do with them in spite of their hearts. They
fear him as slaves against their wills, both to do his will whilst he uses
them to effect by them his own most holy purposes, and also to suffer his will
in their justly deserved punishment. Thus wicked men are mastered on all hands,
and no way free either from sin or punishment.

2 In regard of the means of escape: a servant hardly used may find means to
shift himself of his master; It is not so with a sinner; run away from his
master he cannot: for he bears him always about with him in his bosom, his
sin still keeps him company, and go he whither he will Satan dogs him,
stands at his right hand, nay possesses his very heart, so plying him with
temptations and ill suggestions, that he cannot go a foot from his service.
It Is true the case is so sometimes with a wicked man that he changes his
master, but seldom comes a better. If he escape the tyranny of one sinful
affection, he falls under the command and power of another as bad. So you shall
have a very spend-thrift turn a miserable niggard: but this is only like a
prisoner that remoues his bolt from one leg to another, and such exchange is
only done upon compact: He leaves one vice that he may the more freely give
himself to another; so that he changes his master but not his servile
condition. Some reigning sin or other will always cleave to his soul, lie
down with him in his grave, and sink him down to Hell. And as for the eye of
Gods revenging justice he sees it open upon him, to take notice of his doings,
and his hand always lifted up to smite him, trembling always to think that
he has no means to hide his sin from Gods knowledge, no power to prevent,
no strength to bear the heavy stroke of his wrath when it shall light upon him.

3 In respect of the reward, the world has scarce afforded masters so without
all humanity, Tyrannical and cruel, as not to be pleased with the faithful
service of a slave, or not to reward him in some degree of courtesy for his
service. A sinner is miserable both ways as he cannot please his master, so he
cannot hope for a reward. For take a man that has quite spent himself in the
service of some one of these imperial and cruel Lords, who has done all that
he can in giving full content and satisfaction unto them, yet they rest not,
there are yet new commands and further injunctions, so that when it seemed,
villainy was come to the height, and that men's wits and strengths did fail
them for further plots and practices, there is yet a powder plott behind, some
new, strange, unthought of piece of bad service to be performed. Sin and
Satan are restless and mercylesse, tyrants never contented, still exacting,
crying, craving, compelling to new tributes and homages. And now when a man
has worn out himself in their service, spent his years and strength, his
wealth and good name, and body and soul, and al upon them, what is then his
reward for this his trusty and true service? A courtesy think you? Nay a very
Hell of unkindness, shame, reproach, misery, and many other punishments even
in this life, but for that other Hell damnation, fire, snares, and brimstone,
and stormy tempests of Gods furious indignation: this is their portion and the
guerdon of their obedience. Satan did for a while promise fair and perform
little, helping them to enjoy some pleasures of sin for a reason; but this
seeming kindness was but colored cruelty, all being nothing but a sweet sauce
to make him swallow down those morsels of poison, the fiery venom whereof
shall afterward drink up his spirit, and inflame his soul with everlasting
burning,

Foolish men and unwise that take such pains to be miserable; But how should
it be otherwise, when men are servants to Satan? But rebels against God. In
vain do they expect any other reward for their service, then the severest
punishment of their rebellion.

Thus I have opened unto you according as I have bin able, the nature, degrees,
and quality of this spiritual bondage of sin. It remains now to make some
use and application of that which has benne delivered.

first use shallbe for the discovery of a great error in the world committed by
men, in judging their own and other men's conditions. It is the common opinion
of most, that if a man live out of danger of law, and have wherewith to pay
every man and keep him out of debt and fear of the prison, if he can live
upon his own and be beholding to no man, if he can set his foot to the best
man's in the parish, and be able to make his part good in any suit or quarrel,
caring as little for such a great man, as the great man cares for him, if he
can ouer-beare his enemies, and trample upon any that he takes against; If he
can go whether he lists and do what he pleases, living idly in pleasures
upon other men's labors; if he be able to sin boldly, to satisfy any
disordered affection without control, having power in his hand to overcome a
poor Minister, that he shall not dare to reprove him, or money enough in his
purse to out-bribe the authority, and severity of the law, such a man as this
that lives with out fear or care, he is esteemed the only man that leads a
free life, and lives at his own command. Thus men judge of others and of
themselves, whilst they look no farther then that which is outward, appearing
to sense: But they must know that every freeman in a civil estate, is not a
free subject of Gods kingdom; No: there be that feed dainty, lie soft, go
richly cladd, live lazily, and who take their fill of worldly pleasures in all
licentiousness, who yet are as arrant slaves as any that serve in a Gally. Do
but turn their inside outward, and you shall see ever whole legions of Devils
domineering over them, pride, covetousness, ambition, envy, malice, unclean
desires, with a number of such like black and hellish lusts reigning in their
souls, under the command whereof they are haled this way and that, in all
servile obedience even like slaves bought and sold in a market. A vain thing
it is for these men to bragg of their nobility, gentry, of the freedom and
ingeniousnesse of their education or living. For let them know that a man's
honor is his honesty and sanctity; his perfect freedom is the faithful,
service of his God. He is truly free, gentle, and noble, that's truly gracious.
Swearing, lying, gaming, whoring, coveteousnesse, gaping after a few pounds of
gold and silver, foolish love of gay apparel, restless pursuit after two or
three words and titles of honor, with the like are these the employments of a
brave, free, generous, and noble spirit? Far be it from any man to think so,
servile and base disposition, they be that subject themselves, to such wicked
and unworthy affections, nor can any be honest, or honorable who has such
masters. This the Apostle concludes, Romans 6. 20. [When ye were the servants of
sin, ye were free from righteousness.] And it must needs be a base and
dishonest service wherein it is free to be, and to do any thing saving that
which is honest and righteous. Wherefore let no man fall into the error of the
Jews here noted in this text, boasting much of their freedom and dignity,
because they were borne of Abraham, and lived not in bodily servitude, lest
they hear also that which Christ here replied upon these Jews [who so
commits sin is the servant of sinne] and again [if ye were Abraham's
Children, ye would do the works of Abraham] verse. 39. But now [yee are of
your Father the Devil because the lusts of your Father ye will doe] verse. 42.

Romans 6. 16. [knowe ye not that to whomsoever ye give your selves as servants
to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto
death, or of obedience unto righteousness.] It Is not the Liverie or Cognizance
of Baptism, it is not the name of Christian, it is not the outward profession of
religion that makes a distinction between the servants of God, and of sin.
We have a fairer mark to know them by, and that is Obedience. This tells us
certainly to whom they belong. He that obeys God he is Gods servant, he that
obeys sin, let him protest or profess never so much devotion to Gods
service, yet he is for all that the servant of sin and no better. Well then
the trial is now easy, and requires no more but this, that you bring your
thoughts home to your selves, duly considering whom you do usually service
unto, whether God in obeying his holy commandments, or your own sinful flesh
and Satan in following their counsels.

Do thou in thy heart serve the law of God, consenting to all the commands
thereof as most good and holy, endeavoring as much as possibly thou art able
to do whatsoever it bids thee, holding a constant resolution to please God
in all things whatsoever. If thy conscience can truly say yea, then may thou
rejoice in the honorable title of being the servant of God. On the other side
do thou committ sin as our savior speaks here, that is, do thou
willingly and ordinarily, make a practice of breaking Gods holy law, following
every lewd course that Satan leads thee to, and giving scope to thy ungodly
desires? yea is there any one particular sin that reigns over thee, wherein
thou live wittingly and wilfully howeuer thou forsake others? If thy
conscience say yea, then know that as yet thou art a miserable bondsman and
servant unto corruption, hearken therefore in the last place to

viz. 1. the 'euill of the present estate in which they are. 2 The good of
another whereto they may come: both are seriously to be thought on in this
business, forasmuch as there is no estate worse then the slavery of sin and
punishment: nor any better then the liberty of grace and glory. Wherefore let
me earnestly entreat you to bend your meditations upon these two points. First
think with your selves how miserable a thing it is, for a man to live all
days of his life, like a slave and die like a villain, how woeful is the case
of that poor creature, which is at the command of every base affection led and
driven hither and thither, according as every wicked desire and hellish
inspiration shall provoke it, wearying it self in the ways of wickedness, and
taking a great deal of pains to work out its own everlasting misery.
Think what strange folly it is for a man to content himself with a few poor
commodities and pleasures, that sin can afford for a day or two, the very
enjoining whereof do but make him more unhappy: No man that is wise would buy
the greatest of such contenments, for one of the panges of an ill conscience,
which accompany them. The time comes on when he must part with all his
delights, and be turned out of the world naked of all comfort, grace and
favor. This is it that cutts him to the heart, and one serious thought of it
quite dasheth all his jollity and contentment, Fears are upon him on every
side, making him to live uncomfortable because he knows he shall die
unhappily. But now turn our thoughts on the other side, and consider how
happy and glorious the condition of the Saints is, whom God by his grace has
set at liberty, from the service of sin. Whether you look upon them here in
this life in the estate of grace, or hereafter in the estate of glory, their
freedom is every way blessed and desirable. Free they are from the commanding
power of sin, being now led by the spirit of Christ, and not by the spirit of
the Devil: free from the terrors of an evil conscience: free from the terrors
of death, hell, and judgment: free unto every noble employment in Gods service,
apt to pray much, ready to here much, able to meditate much, delighting in
sanctifying the Sabbath, cheerful, forward and willing hearted to every good
work. A blessed estate if we have either grace or wit to judge aright of it.
I confess graceless fools have another esteem of it: Tell them of praying,
reading the word of God, singing of Psalms, hearing and repeating of Sermons,
and keeping of the Sabbath ye kill them dead, and rather they had, you should
set the^ to any the painfullest drudgerie in the world: Counsel them to
refrain gaming, drinking and ill company, to bridle their ungodly and naughty
affections, to converse with such and such men of godly and religious lives,
and to be coutent to be ruled by reason and Gods word. All this is even as much
as if you should put them in the stocks, or clap a pair of fetters on their
heels. Let them live in a family where all exercises of religion are
stricklie observed, and no liberty given to any lewd practice, they are as
weary of it as a prisoner of the Iayle, or one that is in little ease, and
they think it seven years till they be gone to some other place, where they
may live as they list. Thus men of perverse minds, and corrupt judgments
censure Gods service to be no better then a sad, dull, wearisome, and slavish
drudgerie. Ungodly men, that think theirs no mirth but in madness; no sport
but in doing mischife; no contentment but in pleasing the Devil and wicked
lusts, no liberty at all but in licentiousness of living. Be (I beseech you)
better informed, and know that a subject is a free man though he serves his
Prince and obey his laws: A Son is a freeman although he live in fear and
awe of his Parents: A servant is a freeman though he live in conformity to the
laws of a Christian master, and the orders of a Christian family. And so a
Christian man is then free, yea most free when he submits himself to the
laws of God, as an obedient subject of his kingdom. This freedom he enjoyes
in part in this life, but fully in the world to come, when he shall be
perfectly freed from all sin and misery, when there shall be no fear of
being unhappy, because no possibility of being sinful. Certainly my Brethren,
if there be in us any sense of our present misery, or expectation of the
future happiness of the Saints, we cannot choose but sigh within our selves
with many prayers, wishes, and longing desires, that we also may be delivered
from the bondage of corruption, into this glorious liberty of the sons of God.

If now (for conclusion of all) you ask me by what means this freedom may be
obtained: I answer briefly, there is no means but one, and that is Jesus
Christ. All the liberty we have is his purchase and from his gift, for as you
have heard, we are bondslaues unto sin, partly in regard of the punishment of
it, partly in regard of the ouer-ruling power thereof. Now it is Christ that
sets us at liberty from both. Christ by his blood purges us from all our
sins, by taking the guilt and punishment thereof from us. Christ by his
spirit delivers us from the power and dominion of sin, that it raigns not in
our mortal bodies, having sanctified us by sending the holy Ghost into our
hearts. For [where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty] as the Apostle
speaks, 2. Cor. 3. 17. So that every way Christ is he that bestows on us our
manu-mission, according as he himself here speaks [if that son shall make
you free, then are you free indeed] wherefore this only remains that we should
go unto Christ, seek and sue unto him for our enlargment, entreat him to here
the cry of a prisoner and captive, and in compassion of thee to afford his
helping hand for thy delivery. Pray him to put himself between Gods wrath and
thy soul, making peace for thee in heaven, by his bloody and meritorious
sacrifice, pray him to send forth into thine heart, the spirit of
sanctification, to regenerate and renew all the powers of soul and body,
freeing them from that law of sin which naturally is in thy members, that by
the power of that inward grace, thou may be able thenceforth to give up thy
soul and body unto God, as servants of righteousness and holiness. Confess
to him and say: O Lord other Lords besides thee have ruled over me, who have
robbed me of all grace, peace, comfort, happiness, honor and liberty, long
have I lived in greuious thraldom, miserably oppressed and straightened on
every side, Satan, the world, the affections of sin have played the unmercifully
tyrants over me, I have binwholy at their command, thinking speaking and doing
every wicked thing they have suggested unto me, when I would do any good,
evil is present with me and above me, and I am hedged with such a world of
encumbrances, that I cannot tell which way to get out. Now Lord help me,
break these my bonds, unloose these cords wherewith I am tied, free me from
this straightness, and bring my soul out into a large place. Undo the works
of of the Devil, restrain his power, destroy his kingdom, and utterly
overthrow the dominion of sin within me, be thou my Lord and King, and do
thou rule over me: let thy word command me, thy Spirit lead me, thy power
incline me to all subjection unto thee. Bid me do what thou please, and make
me do it, forbid me what thou dislikest, and keep me from doing it, persuade
me by fair means, and if stubborn force me by foul, exercise over me all
the authority of a Father, of a Master, of a King, of a God. I submitt me to
all and am content by any means to be over ruled, so I may become a faithful
servant in thy house, and an obedient subject of thy kingdom. This my service
is my freedom, this freedom is my happiness, and for me to be thus free
and happy is thine honor. Now therefore take unto thee the glory of all,
and except of my service who have purchased my liberty: unto thee O Christ I
owe my soul, much more my obedience, I yield thee both and all that I have or
can do, take all, command all, protect, sanctify, and save all.

FINIS.
HOSEA. 4. 6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou have
rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to
me; seeing thou have forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy
children.
THese words contain a short declaration of the miserable estate of the Church
of Israel in the days of the holy Prophet, when the people they were ignorant,
the Priests they were negligent, both were grown monstrously wicked, and all
were l^kely to be out of hand most severely punished.

The parts of this verse are two.

1 The sin and punishment of the people; their sin is ignorance, want of
knowledge of God, his worship and service; their punishment is destruction, or
cutting off; partly by temporal judgments the Sword, Pestilence, Famine and
Captivity; which for their ignorance with other sins should come upon them;
partly by spiritual and eternal judgments in their certain comdemnation in
Hell fire.

[My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge.]

2 The sins and punishment of the Priests who are in the next place
particularly questioned as chief authors of that ignorance which was among the
people: their sin is, that: They rejected knowledge and forgot the law of
their God: The latter clause gives us the meaning of the former: The law that
was prescribed unto the Priests the sons of Levi is expressed Deuteronomy. 33. 10.
[They shall teach Jacob thy judgments and Israel thy Law] and yet more fully,
Man. 2. 7. [The Priests lips should preserve knowledge and they should seek
the law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts.] This then
was the covenant that God had made with the sons of Levi; that besides the
offering up of sacrifices for the people; he should provide for the instruction
of the people in matters of religion: for which purpose they are enjoined. 1.
To have the knowledge of Gods will for themselves, that the law of God might be
sought at their mouth and knowledge preserved in their lips. 2. To be ready
and careful to teach the same unto the people; so far as concerned their
duty to know and practice. Now at this time these Priests had forgotten* i. e.
broken the covenant of Levi; and transgressed the commandment which God of
old had given to the Priesthood: being guilty of a double fault.

1. Ignorance that they were not themselves men of knowledge, such as were
skilful and learned in the understanding of the law able to inform others: but
were as the Pharisees and Scribes in after times, Blind leaders of the blind.

2. Negligence that they took no care in teaching the poor ignorant people
according as they were bound by their office: Both these faults are signified
unto us when the Prophet says [That the Priests had rejected knowledge,]
meaning that they were ignorant themselves, and negligent toward others: They
had no knowledge for their own part, or if any, yet they despised to teach it
to others. A fault no way to be tolerated in such men: and therefore in the
next place you have their punishment; which is conformable to their sin: They
would not do their duty, God would discharge them of their office; they
rejected knowledge with scorn and loathing of it, (so the word is (...)) God
with as much disdain reiects them from being Priests unto him: They had
forgotten Gods law, God would likewise forget them and their posterity,
leaving them without relief when their deserved shame and misery should come
vponthem. Which fell out accordingly at the final destruction of the kingdom
of Israel, when Priests and people fared alike and were all carried away into
perpetual captivity; where they and their posterity remained ever.

The words being thus in brief opened to you, out of them I commend to your
observation this general point of instruction* viz.

Ignorance in matters of religion be it in whomsoever is a hateful and
dangerous sin.

If it be in people it is naught, if in ministers it is much worse, in
whomsoever it be it is a sin wherewith God is highly displeased and which he
will one day severely punish. That the truth of this may appear unto you I
shall endeavor to unfold unto you the Quality and Danger of this sin a
little more at large: because as ignorance is a common fault, so men have a
common opinion that it is a very small offense, scarce any at all, You will
judge otherwise, If you will duly consider of it in these three respects.

1. The nature of it. 2. The causes of it. 3. The effects of it.
1. For the nature of it you must know that ignorance is a foul blemish of
man's nature; a want of that perfection which should be in us, if matters were
now with us, as when God created us, we were made after gods Image, and a
singular part of that Image was our knowledge, and the most excellent part of
our knowledge was the understanding of all divine matters touching God and
goodness, so far forth as it was needful for us to understand them. Now
nature it self that has planted in every one an unmeasurable desire of knowing
much, leads us also to judge how incomparable an ornament it is, where it may
be attained.

When we think upon the infinite knowledge of God, or upon that excellent
measure of knowledge in the Angels and blessed Saints departed, or in Adam in
his innocence, none is so stupid, and dull as not to admire it in them and to
wish for the like in himself, so far as he might be capeable of it. In which
case when we look back from them to our selves, who can choose, but hang
down his head for very shame and grief to see God, and these blessed
creatures inhabiting in so glorious a brightness and light somnes whilst
himself dwells in darkness compassed about with a black night of ignorance,
error, and obscurity: He sees as much difference between himself and them,
as between him that travailes by the clear sunshine and one that walks by
a candle. Knowledge is like the sun in the world, or the eye in a man's face:
nothing would be more rufull, and dismal then the world without the light of
the sun, nor is any deformity in the face more notable then the want of an eye:
And certainly there is nothing more ugly to behold, then that soul which is
darkened in its understanding through blindness and ignorance, being destitute of
the knowledge of God, of Christ, of grace, of Religion; the knowledge whereof
is both light, and life unto the soul.

2 In the next place let us consider the causes of man's ignorance, and they are
two, both very bad according as the effect.

1 The first is Adams sin from whose fall this natural corruption and
weakness is derived unto us. He sinned, and we in him: both are punished among
other great losses; with the loss of those glorious abilities of our
understanding part. It had once a power and large capacity to comprehend all
things both natural and divine: but at this time a very great weakness and
dimnesse of sight is fallen upon it in discerning natural things: and for the
knowledge of God and spiritual things it is grown even stark blind. Hence
then is that first bond of ignorance which we may call natural and
invincible. Natural, because every son of Adam brings it with him into the
world by the course of his generation and birth: forasmuch as every one is
borne weake-sighted with this infirmity and disabilitie in his understanding.
Therefore in infants there is more then ignorantia purae negationis: for being
sinful, ignorance is a part of their original corruption, and so it is also,
pravae dispositionis, they not only know not by reason of age; but are ill
disposed to know by reason of the disability of their sinful nature. Again
this ignorance is termed invincible or unavoidable, because the natural man
always continues in it, and cannot by his own strength ever get out of it:
but only by the help of Gods spirit outwardly affording the the means of holy
knowledge and inwardly inlightning the mind to understand them aright as the
Apostle shows. 2. Cor. 3. 18.

2. Our own sin viz: wilful rebellion in neglecting and despising all holy
means of knowledge: when means are not they seek not after them, when they be
offered, they refuse them, or use them with all carelessness and disrespect:
when men wink against the light, closing up their eyes that it may not shine
id their hearts: when they will none of wisdoms instructions, Job. 21. 14.
but stubbornely say to God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways. Hence is that other kind of ignorance which we call, affected, a
fouler fault by far then the former: when men know nothing and yet scorn to
learn any thing: they will not hear, nor confer, nor read, nor pray, nor
use any means to get knowledge, but are content to sit still in darkness, as
the Egyptians were sometimes forced to do, not stirring one way or other. A
miserable condition, but I shall tell you the reason of it: they abide in
darkness, because they are loath to see and to be seen. Should they come abroad
in the light, their manifold deformities and abominable corruptions would be
discovered by the light of the word to their shame and grief: they should
meet with many reproves of their lewd courses, many persuasions to piety and
obedience: all which they can by no means endure, it is death to them to hear
of their faults, when they are resolved not to amend them: and they will be
wilfully ignorant of that, which being once known would often trouble their
consciences. This reason of man's wilful affected ignorance, Christ gives, Ioh.
3. 19. 20. [Light came into the world, and men loved darkness rather then light,
because their deeds were evil: for every man that evil does, hates the
light, neither comes to the light lest his deeds should be reproved.] These
are the causes of this ignorance, original corruption disabling us to know,
actual stubbornness and frowardness, making us unwilling to know: wherefore
ignorance must needs be ill, that has so ill causes, where the root is
rottenness, you can look for no fruit but corruption.

3. Come we in the third place to the effects of it and you shall see it is
evil and hurtful in that regard also. The fruits of ignorance are two. 1.
sin. 2. punishment. 1. sin. Ignorance is a sin it self and it is a cause
of many sins: There be mother sins and this is one of them, a fruitful
mother not of devotion, as blind Papists would have us believe, but of
iniquity and impiety. An ignorant man is a wicked man; an ignorant Priest is
a wicked Priest, an ignorant people a sinful people. It Is plain by this very
chapter. [There is no truth, nor mercy nor knowledge of God in the land] says
the prophet, ver. 1. What follows thence, why this [by swearing and lying, and
killing, and stealing and c^mmitting adultery they break out and blood
touches blood, verse. 2. Again, [Israell does not know, my peopled th not
consider,] says the Prophet Isaiah. Chapt. 1. v. 3. what of that they might
yet be devout, and holy might they not? No: read the complaint that follows
thereupon, ver. 3. [Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed
of evil doers, children that are corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord, they
have provoked the holy one of Israel, they are gone away backward) see the
fruits of ignorance whereby men become Apostates from God, wicked in
themselves, and corrupters of others: for so it is, they that know no good
themselves have yet knowledge enough to teach another to do evil* nor can
this be otherwise: for as much as where the heart is evil the life will be
wicked. Now an ignorant person is devoide of grace. So says the Apostle
touching the Gentiles, that they were [strangers from the life of God through
the ignorance that was in them, because of the blindness of their hearts, Ephesians.
4. ^8.) that is, they were destitute of all saving and quickening power of Gods
spirit, they had no grace, no faith, no fear; no love, no true affection to
God or any spiritual goodness; they had neither care nor desire of that they
knew not: whence ver. 19. follows immediately their lewd lives in that [being
without sense (of goodness) they gave themselves unto wantonness, to work all
uncleanness even with greedines.] For what will not a graceless ignorant man
do, who knows not, but he may do any thing? He is blind and cannot choose
but stumble at every block, dash himself against every post, tumble into
every ditch: he is a ship without a Master that runs at adventure with any
wind, upon any rock or shelfe. It is Christ's comparison, Ioh. 12. 35. [He
that walks, in the dark knows not whether he goeth] and so is an ignorant
man, he travels in the night: he cannot see his way before him, he misseth at
every turning, he must leap hedge and ditch, and yet still the farther he
goes, the more he wanders. No good work he takes in hand but he fails
strangely in the performance, in every course of his life he goes astraie
through his great folly, and before he is aware runs upon a thousand snares
and temptations, the Devil has set for to take him. You see then ignorance is
an occasion of many sins: but in particular let me give you warning of two
special faults that ignorant men usually run into. 1 Inconstancy in
religion whether it be in opinion or practice, for when men take upon them the
profession of religion believing; and practicing many things, but are not able
to give an account of their faith, nor tell any sound reason why, upon what
grounds, to what end they do such and such things: can it be expected, but that
if these be strongly set upon and put to it indeed, they will be drawn
without much ado to change their minds? We know what the Apostle speaks of
those silly women, who were always learning, and yet never came to the
knowledge of the truth: they were the fittest to become a prey unto false
teachers and deceavers* who creeping into their houses and hearts, by cunning
insinuations deluded them, and led them captive to any erroneous opinion or
practice. 2. Tim. 3. 6. 7. Among us, my brethren, in these times we have to
blame men as well as women for this fault. The intolerable ignorance of most is
sufficient witness to all the world, that there are not a few whose religion
is yet to choose, and for ought they know to the contrary, another may be as
good as that which they profess for the present, they be Protestants in show,
but they know as little what belongs to true religion as they do of Popery:
They be no more able to distinguish between true religion and false, then an
infant between the right hand and the left. And therefore if at any time a
Priest, or Jesuit, or other cunning Papist set upon them, they are straight way
puzzled and staggered: they have nothing to answer in defense of their
religion, but you shall see them presently fetched over with fine words, and
half persuaded to be of another opinion: yea did not civil respects and
temporal inco^veniences beat them off from popery more the^ the knowledge or
hatred of such errors as papists maintain, there is nothing could keep them
in that case from revolting unto their side.

It is a needful point, my brethren, to be thought on by us, and that
seriously, especially in these evil days, wherein Satan and his accomplices do
on all hands assault the Church of God, seeking to swallow her up. Our brethren
abroad are in sore affliction, yet they forsake not their God, lets pity them,
and pray for them, that they may continue faithful even to the death, for our
selves at home, God he knows we are as sinful a people and have deserved as
sharp a trial as our neighbor: let us pray still for the life and safety of
our King, the peace of our Church, the welfare of our state, and let each one
look to his own particular walking in the light, whilst we have the light
getting knowledge and wisdom, and faith, and zeal, that we may stand fast in
the profession of Gods true religion, whatsoever danger may betide us. This of
the first fault of ignorant men* The second follows.

2 Security or senslesnesse in regard of sin or punishment An ignorant
person knows not what it is to sin, and therefore dares commit it, he
apprehends not what punishments belong to sin, and therefore he makes no
scruple of them: he sees no danger before it comes: and so he fears it not:
when punishment comes upon him he knows not why or from whom it comes, it is
with him as with Ephraim, Hos. 7. 9. [Strangers have devoured his strength and
he knows it not: yea gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows
not] many marks of Gods anger are upon him, yet he knows and apprehends not
by whom, or wherefore he is smitten. You shall have many a man pine away in
his estate, unblessed and vnthriuing in all his businesses crossed with ungracious
and disobedient Children, vexed with evil servants and unfaithful, troubled
with an unquiet and discontented family, tormented with unjust suites in law,
slandered in his good name by false reports raised of him, yea disquieted in
his soul with griefs and fears: yet mark this man in all his vexations, and
you see him sensible of nothing; but present pains: he thinks of nothing
less then of Gods hand and his own sin in all this: God smites him for his
covetousness, uncleanness, profaneness, unbelief, Atheism; with the like
notorious sins he lives in: but the ignorant wretch never considers of this,
nor does he any jot the more either turn to God that punishes him, or from
his sins for which he is punished: he toiles and moiles, rides and runs up
and down, tries now this way, then that, entreates one, bribes another, after
all complaints of his hard fortune and ill success in all his affairs. And
yet see in the middle of all this trouble he sins as much as ever he did, he
swears, he drinks, and consens his neighbor as much as ever, he is as
irreligeous as he was before, not any duty of religion performed by himself
or with his family more then at another time? No; he keeps his old wont and
ventures on still in his evil courses, hoping that times may change and
matters amend one day. If he can but make any shift to escape the present
smart; that is all that he looks after. Thus is the condition of many souls,
who do evil, and are plagued yet do evil still: because they be besotted,
and have not the wisdom to see their sin, or fear their punishment.

Thus much of the first effect of ignorance viz sin, the second follows.

2. Punishment: [my people perish] which is partly in this life, partly in that
which is to come. In this life God often plagues them, and puts them to shame.
This was one cause of the captivity of the Jews as it is Esaias. 5. 13.
[therefore my people is gone into captiuiy, because they had no knowledge]

They seldom escape here: but hereafter they are sure to smart for it.
Ignorance is the highway to hell: and ignorant men, though they cannot choose
but wander, yet they cannot go so far wide as to miss hell. It is the
Apostles sentence 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. Christ shall show himself [in flaming fire,
rendering vengeance unto them who do not know God* etc.] God will be strange to
them in that day, who are now strangers unto him. He will not know them then,
who will none of his acquaintance now: they say to him, depart from us we will
not know thee, he shall then say to them, depart from me, I know you not, they
that know not Gods ways, shall never enter into his rest, they live and die
without his fear and out of his favor. Those that are blind will certainly
fall into the ditch, as it is Math. 15. 14. except God do in time open their
eyes, to see the danger and prevent it.

These things thus explained, before we come to make application of the point;
it will not be amiss in our passage, to touch briefly upon two questions
needful to be resolved. The first is.

1 Whether ignorance of a man's duty, do in any sort excuse his not doing of
it?

To this I answer in brief: Ignorance in those things we are bound to know
does not excuse a fault committed by reason of it. The reason is manifest,
because one sin cannot excuse another. Now in this case it is first a sin
not to know our duty, because we were bound to know it: and then it is a sin
not to do our duty, because we also ought to have done it. And though we are
so far from being excused, that we are in a double fault, and deserve double
blame, for being ignorant and disobedient; nevertheless this must be observed;
that a sin committed through simple ignorance is not so great a fault as that
which is committed through wilful ignorance or against knowledge. He that
sins against his knowledge is a notorious and presumptuous offender and
deserves severest punishment according to that of Christ. Luke 12. 47. [That
servant that knew his masters will and prepared not himself neither did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes] and also that of S.
James c. 4. 16. 17. [To him that knows how to do well, and does it not, to
him it is sinne] with a witness, a great sin greatly to be punished. Again
he that sins out of wilful ignorance, because carelessly and stubbornly he
neglects and contemnes all means of knowledge that are afforded him, this man's
fault is not a jot lessened but aggrauated by his ignorance, nor, has he any
excuse in the world for his ill doing, who might if it had pleased him have
known the way how to have done better. But now he that sins out of simple
ignorance, where there is no froward, scornful, careless neglect of means of
knowledge, this man's sin is somewhat less then the others, yet it is a sin
still. This is manifest by that of our savior Luke. 12. 48. [he that knew it
not, yet did commit things worthy of stripes, he shall be beaten with few
stripes] he shallbe beaten though he did it out of pure ignorance, yet but with
few stripes, and that because he did it ignorantly. So Paul some what excuses
his pesecution of the Church, because 'twas done out of an ignorant zeal: but
yet foral that he accou^ts of himself as he was, even at that time a very
great sinner. (I was says he a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and an oppressor:
but I was received to mercy because I did it ignora^tly through unbelief) 1.
Tim. 13. And in like sort does the Apostle Peter somewhat qualify that great
sin of crucifying Christ the Lord of life: whereunto the common people and
many of the rulers ignorantly consented, being misled and ill advised by the
priests, Pharisees, and other malicious enemies of Christ. [And now, brethren,
I know that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your gouernours] says
Peter to the Jews. Acts. 3. 17. So much also our Savior implies in that
speech of his to the Pharisees, who proudly arrogated to themselves all knowledge
(If ye were blind ye should not have sin) had they indeed been simple and
ignorant, their sin in persecuting Christ, and opposing the Gospel, had been
much less heinous. (But now ye say, we see, therefore your sin remains)
inexcusable, unpardonable whilst against their knowledge, they maliciously
despise and his doctrine. John. 9. 41. This of the first question; the opening
whereof confutes the silliness of many ignorant me^ who think verily because
they have no knowledge, that God will hold them excused for their good meaning
sake.

The second question is.

2 What measure of holy knowledge is required of each one?

For answer hereunto, you must put a difference between men's Abilities, and
gifts of nature or grace: and also between men's callings and diverse
employments. For the first, al men are not alike qualified with inward
abilities; There is not the same fastness of memory, quickness of
apprehension, soundness of judgment in one, that is in another, nor have all
the like benefit of outward helps in their education, for the perfecting of
such good parts, as nature has lent the^. Now God deals equally, where he
bestows much there he looks for much again; where he gives little, there he
requires but little. He that naturally is slow of wit, dull of conceipte,
short of memory, weak in judgment, such a one would be pitied and lovingly
helped forward so far in knowledge as his weakness will give leave. And men
shall do ill to lay heavy burdens on those, to whom God has given but weak
shoulders to bear them. But when men can show wit enough in other matters,
and have all abilities of mind to serve their turn in inferior employments,
to apprehend, discourse, plott and contrriue matters as they list, and yet the
same men, be dunses in all religious knowledge, they are inexcu^able, and must
answer for their unthankfulness, and misimployment of that talent, he has
given unto them. Thus there is a difference in regard of men's abilities: there
is also a difference in respect of men's diverse callings. God does not require
the same measure of honor or knowledge of a lay man, which he does of a
minister, of a plain man, and of a scholar, of a private person* and of a
public governor. Here the rule is That God requires of every one so much
knowledge, that he may know how in his place to carry himself in all wisdom
and vnblameablenesse. He may not come short, nor yet go beyond his bounds, but
duly considering what belonges to his place, he must study to be thoroughly
informed thereof, moreover this must be observed in general touching all men,
of whatsoever calling or gift: that no man can attain to any such degree of
knowledge, that he should therewith rest himself contented, and seek no
farther; the wisest know but in part, and they may know more perfection is to
be sought for, but it will never be had in this life, and therefore me^ must be
still striving in the knowledge of God: scholars must study still, Ministers
preach, people must hear still, all must grow richer in this treasure of
spiritual wisdom. In a word no man must cease learning, till God give over
teaching. And know this that the man, who bewailes his ignorance, and daily
searches after knowledge, in the use of good means, he shall gain this
advantage, first the little knowledge which he has shall do him much good, and
then in due time, his stock shall increase according to that promise [to him
that has (and uses it well) shall be given (more) and he shall have
abundance] Let thus much suffice to be spoken for the unfolding of the nature
of this sin, Come we in the last place to make application of all unto our
own use.

1 The first use shall be for reprehension of ignorant persons, whose fault is
here declared to be great, and their condition miserable: which
notwithstanding, there are in the world many patrons of this sin, who both in
opinion and practice defend this sin and approve it. I shall name unto you
two sorts of them.

1 Papists, who make a direct profession of this shameful sin: with them the
best way for a man to do his duty is not to know it at all: and no devotion is
comparable to that which is blind, nor any service like that which is beastly,
and unreasonable. Let an ignorant Catholic that can read never a letter,
nor understand scarce a fillable in the Creed, Lords prayer, Ten
commandments, or other part of his catechism, let him yet hold fast by his
ghostly fathers sleaue, do as he bids him, come to Church, and hear Latin
service, read latin prayers, do he knows not what, yea any thing the Priest
commands him, and then they will warrant him cocksure, from falling into the
ditch, be he never so blind. Let Paul find fault with zeal without knowledge.
Romans 10* 2. 3. It Is no matter what he says, the'ile contradict him to his
teeth, and tell us as they teach their people, that ignorance is the best
mother of true Catholic devotion. In which impudency some have gone so far
of late days, as to erect a new order of Friars, whose very rule, and
profession was ignorance of all things except Christ, and the virgin Mary. It
is not possible that all things, should have come to this pass amongst them,
were there not knaverie in the business. But the truth is this, Popery is one
great part of the kingdom of darkness, and for the support hereof, it was
needful to shut out the light, for fear of discovering their secret
abominatio^s. If their deeds were good why do they hate the light? If their
opinions were sound, why are they afraid of Scripture? It Is self guiltiness
breeds those fears and iealousies, and that Atheistical slander of Gods word,
that the Scriptures are obscure, that the reading of the bible will make men
heretics. In short, the best construction we can make of their practices in
this kind is, that they mistrust Popery would down, if people had but
knowledge to see their villainies and errors: they see the credit of Priests
and Fr^ers would down, who now be the only admired oracles of knowledge among
their ignorant people, and which is more, those slow bellies, and evil beasts,
see 'twould cost them much pains, and toil to bring their people to
knowledge, after so long neglect of that course, wherefore they sit still, grow
lazy and fat, whilst their people is well enough content to be untaught, and
so to perish in their Ignorance, Idolatry, and Superstition.

2 Protestants amongst whom we have a number which are papists in their
practices, what ever they be in their opinions. Among us many there be that
have left off to understand and do good as it is psalm, 36. 3. men of ill
lives, of ignorant minds, that out of carelessness or contempt profit not one
jot, either in knowledge or obedience of the Gospel. This is a reigning sin
that spreads far and wide over all quarters of the land, a killing sin that
^laies thousands of souls, which fall daily into the pit and snare, before
they are aware that evil is toward them. It Is the grand factor for hell and
that, wherein the divil has ever labored by deepest polices to keep men from
knowledge; either that they might not have the means, or not profit by the^,
when they had them. What shall we say, my brethren, to the lamentable ignorance
amongst people: shall we excuse it? it is not possible. For I demand in the
Apostles wo^ds. Romans 10. 18. [haue they not all heard the Gospel? noe doubt
the sound thereof has gone through all the land^, and the words thereof unto
the end of the earth] All means of knowledge have been plentiful amongst us,
Preaching, Catechizing, Printing, and all these for a long time, sixty years
and upward, so that one would think now all might know the Lord from the
greatest to the meanest: and if ever in any, now in our country mightbe
fulfilled that of Habakkuk c. 2. 14 (the earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea) If in any
particular place means have been scant, and the people have had but little
instruction, ill may they thrive with their idleness, by whose negligence Gods
people have perished for lack of knowledge. And if any such hear me, let them
be entreated in the bowels of Christ Jesus, to have more pity and compassion
on the poor souls, which go astray, as sheep which have no shepherd. But,
my brethren, you must know, that this excuse will not serve the turn, neither
if ministers will not teach, we need not learn; No* if they will not, seek
where thou may, and do not thou throw away thy self, because another is
careless of thy safety. But of all what excuse will they have, who have been
borne and bread up in parishes that have had preaching almost time out of mind.
Here one would think in regard of time and means, men might be teachers
rather then learners: but it is nothing so. Here also shall you meet with
hundreds that had need be taught their very A. B. C. in matters of religion:
it is no marvel to see children or young me^ ignorant, when you shall have old
men 50. 60. yea 80 years old, whose gray hairs show that they have had time
enough to learn more wit, yet in case to be set to school again for their
admirable simplcitie in the knowledge of religion. They Will scorn to be
questioned, but do but get them in a good mood and talk with them about
religion, ask them the meaning of the articles of faith, of the petitions in
the Lords prayer, or of other common points in Catechism, and mark their
answers, you shall see them so shuffle and fumble, speak half words, and
half sentences, so hack and hew at it, that you may almost swear they speak
they know not what of matters out of their eleme^t: though they be the wisest
and craftiest headed men in a parish, take them in other matters; yet in these
things, you would think verily they were borne stark naturals and Idiots:
they will sometimes shape you such strange, absurd, and unexpected answers to
your questions that when a man cannot choose but pity them, he has much a do
to forbear laughing at them. Let me tell a story that I have heard from a
reverend man out of the pulpit, a place where none should dare to tell a lie;
of an old man above sixty, who lived and died in a parish, where there had
been preaching almost all his time, and for the greatest part twice on the
Lords day, besides at extraordinary times. This man was a constant hearer as
any might be, and seemed forward in the love of the word; on his death bed
being questioned by a minister, touching his faith and hope in God: you will
wonder to hear what answer he made: being demanded, what he thought of God,
he answers that he was a good old man: and what of Christ, that he was a
towardly young youth: and of his soul, that it was a great bone in his body,
and what should become of his soul after he was dead, that if he had done well
he should be put into a pleasant green meddow. These answers astonished
those that were present to think how it were possible, for a man of good
understanding, and one that in his days, had heard by the least two or three
thousand sermons, yet on his death bed in serious manner thus to deliver his
opinion in such maine points of religion, which infants and sucklings should
not be ignorant of. But, my brethren, be assured this man is not alone, there
be many hundreds in his case, who come to Church and hear much, happily a
hundred sermons and a half in a year: yet at years end, are as much the
better for all, as the pillars of the Church against which they lean, or the
pewes wherein they sit. A matter greatly to be lamented, and sharply reproved,
that wise men, politic men, grave men, great men, rich men, men that carry
the name of Christians, should yet be such very children in all godly knowledge.
Wherefore in the next place let this be for exhortation.

[because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee.] The people
shall indeed perish in their sins, but their blood etc: whose office it was to
instruct, admonish, reprove, entreat, and by all means to turn the people
from their evil ways. Oh that such men would be pleased to consider, that the
best service they can do, the greatest honor they can attain unto, is to be
faithful laborers in Gods vineyard! What an honor and happiness is it to a
man, to be made a common blessing unto all men round about him, to be eyes to
the blind, legs to the lame, a mouth to the dumb, a staff to the feeble, a
physician to the sick, a counselor in hard cases, a watchma^ in danger, a
captain in conflicts, so much and much more is a minister unto his people, if
he do his duty as he ought. And unworthy they are of that office, who scorn
to take the pains that belongs to it, or think it an easy, or small matter
to save a soul from death. But happily I speak to them that hear me not:
wherefore the next exhortation is.

2 To people, that they would take notice in themselves of this foul sin to
amend it. Some men are ignorant of this like men in the dark, thinking
themselves fair, because they see not their own deformities; Come now then
into the light; look on thy self, see what an ignorant wretch thou art,
bewail it, repent of it, amend it. Be ashamed in your selves, of that which
you are ashamed of, when any man takes notice of it, blush at your ignorance,
and hear what the spirit of God says to you, Pro. ^. 22. (How long ye simple
ones will ye love simplicity etc.) If a man call you fools and simple persons,
you will be angry with him, now God calls you so, be angry with your selves, be
ashamed of your selves that God should still call you simple, scornful, foolish,
because ignorant, disobedient men. Say now in thine own heart, how foolish,
how brutish have I been? how like a beast, nay how much worse the^ a beast
have I lived? The ox knows his owner, the ass his masters crib, but I have
not known or considered ought; surely I have not in me the understanding of
man: what folly and simplicity is this in me, to know any thing, but what I
should know, God and his goodness, my self and my duty? How many sermons
have I heard in vain? how often have I discouraged my minister making him
weep and sigh in secret to see so little fruit of his ministry. Ignorant I
was when he first came to the parish, and now after many years am ignorant
still. I see young men yea little Children can give a better reason, yea answer
more soundly to points of Catechism the^ I can. Think thus with thy self, and
then grow into resolution to take a new course, begin to do that which is
never too late to be done, to know God, and which ways thou may worship and
obey him, resolve to take all opportunities, to spare as many hours as thou
can for the purchasing of this heavenly wisdom. And least that here also
thou should plead ignorance: that thou would get knowledge if thou knew
which way, hearken a little to some directions. The means whereby knowledge
will be gotten are these.

1 Hearing the word of God preached: this is the chief means whereunto you
must give all diligent heed, God has appointed it for this end, to the
instruction of the ignorant, and it goes accompanied with his special
blessings to that purpose. Wherefore sit not at home, lie not a bed, when thou
should be at Church: Come and come often, especially on the Lords day, and in
the week too when occasion serves; spare an hour for a sermon as well as two
for a play, or a feast, idle chatting, or doing nothing. When thou come to
Church, come with a mind to learn, set thy self in good earnest to heed the
Preacher, mark what doctrine he delivers, how he proves, how he applies it.
Keep the point he speaks of in thy memory as he goes along, and if thou be
short witted, help thy self with thy pen; gaze not, sleep not, talk not,
think not of this and that business, fix thy eyes upon the Preacher, and thy
thoughts upon his words, and be sure so to carry the matter that something may
be gotten by an hours discourse. But there is another thing to be thought on
in the second place and that is.

2 Meditation, a duty every way necessary after hearing: men think they have
done enough, if they sit out the sermon and hearken attentively whilst the
preacher is in speaking: but as soon as the preacher has done, they have done
too: they neither think, nor speak more of it, every man sorts himself with
his friend and companion, and then in Church or Churchyard, or as they go
home, an hundred idle questions be asked and answered about this man, and that,
this business, and that, this bargain, or that, but not a word touching any
thing they heard at Church: so that by the time they come home, the souls of
the air have picked up all the seed, that lay scattered, and carelessly
uncovered, the Sermon is quite fled and gone from their minds. Come to them and
clappe them on the shoulders, and say now for a wager where was the Preachers
text, what remember you of the points he discoursed of; they can tell you no
more what he said, then the man in the moon. My brethren, I beseech you take
notice of this fault, and think of it, as that maine cause, why there is so
much preaching and hearing, and yet People do still remain as ignorant, as
wicked as ever. Here Is the cause, the Preacher does his part, they will not do
theirs, they hear the Sermon at Church and there they leave it, but never
carry home any thing to make it their own by often meditating on it. Wherefore
remember henceforth that a Sermon is but half heard, that is only heard from
the preachers mouth. The greatest part is yet behind to be performed by thy
self at home. Go home then, think of it as thou art in the way, think of it
when thou art in thine house: take time to recall things to mind, do it with
thy family, do it with thy self; in thy closet, upon thy bed, say such a sin
was reproved to day, am I, have I been guilty of it? Such a duty was urged
upon me, do I practice it or no? such a grace was commended unto me, have I
such a grace? such a rule was prescribed me, do I follow it or not? If men
would be persuaded to make trial of this course, thus to digest what they
hear, they should find (as others have done) a plentiful increase of saving
knowledge in a short time, whereas now they thrive not a jot, by their daily
hearing many years together.

3. Conference with those that are able to give us resolution in difficult
cases: or with those that desire it from us, A point wherein men are generally
defective. Observe all the discourse of men when they meet together, not the
hundred part is touching religion: you shall have a table sometimes furnished
with as choice men as meats, men of learning, judgment, and experience in all
kinds, able much to benefit others that are present, by seasonable and fitting
discourse. Yet it is strange to see two or three hours eaten up, and nothing
spoken to any purpose, for which a man may say when he is gone, that he has
been the better for their company. As for ordinary meetings, it is so that it
is scarce good manners, to move a question of divinity, for fear of marring
all the mirth, if you do, you are like to answer your self to your own
question, they are presently mute as fishes, and have not a word to say. A
great dinn there was before and much chat: but such a question is like a stone
hurld in among a company of frogs, that make a foul noise, but upon the fall
thereof they are straight as still as may be. This is a fault, but not the
greatest in this kind: we will not restrain conference to tables; there be
other places, that are happily more fit, the ministers house, the learned man's
study, hither people should resort to enquire and be resolved in points of
knowledge, and practices that do concern them. But how long shall a Minister
sit in his study, before any of his parish will trouble him about any such
matters. Lawyers and Physicians are thronged with clients and patients at all
hours, day and night, for advise about matters of body and estate: but who
knockes at the ministers doors calling for his help for their souls; Sr tell
me how shall I understand such a place of Scripture, make me to conceive such a
point of Divinity, advise me how shall I get such a grace, avoyde such a
sin; such a temptation; what were I best to do in such a case of conscience.
Ministers I am sure complain much of the backwardness of people in this
point, not that they love to be sought to, or look for a fee, but because they
seek their peoples good, and would gladly take all opportunities, to increase
knowledge in them, whose ignorance they cannot but pity and commiserate.
Wherefore my brethren, learn a point of wisdom, to take notice of all doubts,
and when in reading or hearing thou meetest with any thing thou vndersta^ lest
not, keep it in mind till thou may have a fit occasion to get a resolution.
Where ever thou come be not ashamed to minister occasion of good discourses,
that others may be the better for thee, and thou for them before ye part.

4 Private reading of the Scriptures, and other books tending to Godly
instructions. A course if duly observed that would bring a great deal of
knowledge, especially in this our age, where the press is as fruitful in good
books as the pulpit is of good Sermons. No book of Scripture but you have the
exposition of some learned man upon it, no point of divinity, but you shall
find it largely and plainly handled in some treatise or other. A great
blessing to this age, if men would be wise to make use of it, but the truth
is, men have as little regard of printing as they have of preaching. Look to
the ordinary sort of people; they do not read scarce one Chapter of the
bible in a week, I may say in a year, so ignorant, that they can hardly find
the book whence the preacher takes his text, or how to distinguish between
Apocrypha and Canonical Scripture. How many are there of good sort and fashion
that have read much, and many great volumes, which yet cannot say at eighty
years old, that in all their life they have read ov^r the Bible. A book that is
none of the biggest, but is of all the best. What can we pretend for this
monstrous negligence? can thou not read? blame thy friends and parents for
the time thou wast a Child; since that blame thy own folly. Any one may
learn to read, that has wit to learn any thing. But thou have no money to
buy books: what? have thou money to spend in a tavern, to play away at Cards
and Dice, to buy lace and needless superfluities of apparel, and have thou
not money to buy a Bible; or any other good Book? for shame say not so. But I
have no time to read; for any thing else time enough, to do nothing, to lie a
bed till noone, to sit two or three hours at dinner or supper, to go to such
a friend and there spend half a day, to such a friend and there spend another,
to do any chare that comes in extraordinarily. Away with those excuses; it is
certain, my brethren, there is no calling be it of never so much employment,
but of twenty four hours, they may if they list spare two at the least for
religious employments: yea more if they be wise and thriftie of their time.
But I cannot buy all books, nor read all; nor would any man have thee do so:
but buy some, read some, can thou not tell which are best and most
profitable? then ask counsel of the skillful, that are able to advise thee.
But learning is a hard matter, and it is not for plain folk to understand the
Bible. No; is it not? Then God is too blame that has written a word for the
instruction of all, which yet none but scholars should understand: but know
this is nothing but an excuse for thy slothfulnes, learning is hard, because
thou art unwilling to learn: otherwise the spirit of God has testified that
knowledge is plain, and easy to him that will understand. And do but try,
taking but that pains in the study of religion, which thou do in many
needless employments: and experience shall tell thee, that wisdom is to be
found of all that do seek her. And yet my brethren because the well is deep,
and you may plead, that you have not wherewith to draw: let me tell you in the
last place of one means more to get knowledge, which blesses all the
forenamed helps, and that is.

5 Prayers unto God, that he would give thee an understanding heart, to know
the mysteries of salvation, that he would open thine eyes, to see the wonders
of his law. That light which is in thee must come down from the father of
lights, and unless still thou mean to sit in darkness, thou must have
recourse unto God, praying him that he would shine into thy heart to give thee
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. And
remember this that he who seeks for the knowledge of matters of religion, by
the strength of his own wit and other natural parts, without humble and
faithful supplications for Gods assistance in this behalf; such a man is in
danger to be misled into many erroneous and heretical opinions: for if in any
thing, much more in the matters of religion is that most true: he that is a
scholar unto his own reason, has certainly a fool to his master.
Wherefore we are to put on an humble and sober mind, entreating his direction,
and submitting our reason to his wisdom.

Now my brethren do these things and prosper, have an ear open to hear the
word, a heart ready to meditate on it, a tongue seasonablie to talk of it, an
eye diligent to read it, and with all these join hearty prayer, that thou
may understand it aright; and then be thriving and succesfull in holy
knowledge: though thy tallent be as yet but small; yet follow this course, and
after a very little pains and patience, thou shall see for certain, that
this traffic will return thee ten for one, even a large increase of all
spiritual knowledge. The gain whereof shall bring much glory, to that thy
heavenly master that set thee on work, and to thee his good and faithful
servant, a bountiful reward for thy labor.

FINIS.
HEB. 3. 12. 13. Take heed least there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God, etc.
THE words contain in them a serious exhortation to perseverance in the
profession of the Gospel of Christ. The occasion is from the Comparison which
the Apostle makes between Moses and Christ, and between the Church of the
Jews, and of the Gentiles under Christ; Moses and Christ agreeing, in that
both are faithful to him that appointed them in the ex^cution of their office:
but they differ, in that Moses is but a servant in the house of God, Christ is
the son, Moses governed as a delegated officer, Christ rules as a sovereign
Lord of the Church, the house which himself has built, having purchased it
with his blood, reared it up with his spirit, preserving it by his power,
therefore he is justly Lord of it as of his own, and so he has the
pre-eminence above Moses. The Church under Moses and under Christ, what ever
difference there be in other matters, yet in this they are in one, and the same
condition, that as there reverence was required unto Moses, so now obedience is
required unto Christ. It was to no purpose for the Jews to plead they were
Moses disciples, the peculiar people of God, chosen of him, graced by him with
so many favors, if yet in the mean time they hardened their hearts, and
would not hear Gods voice; but provoked him by their Idolatries, murmurings,
and other disobediences, tempted him through Infidelity, and despised his
word, and marveilous wonders wrought among them. In this case no privilege
could help them, they shall surely smart for their disobedience, and if God
may be believed upon his oath they have displeased him so much, that they shall
never enter into his rest. The very same thing the Apostle applies unto
Christians, they are the Church of Christ, members of the body of Christ,
partakers of his benefits, and graces, but it is upon this condition that they
show themselves faithful in the obedience of the gospel of Christ, [His house
we are (says the Apostle, ver. 6.) if we hold fast the confidence of rejoicing
of the hope firm unto the end] perseverance and faithfulness is that which
makes men true members of the Church of Christ, whether Jewish, or Christian:
If the Jews be unbelieving and rebellious, they come short of the land of
Canaan in the type and substance too; If the Christians be like them in their
sin, their punishment is the same, and they are excluded also from the heavenly
rest of the people of God. Wherefore the Apostle in the next Chapter presses
this exhortation vehemently. That these Hebrews to whom he writes should
carefully look to themselves, that they were not as their Fathers of old,
unfaithful and disobedient in their profession thereof, least they become also
like to their Fathers deprived of all benefit from promise in Christ. Take
heed therefore Brethren (says he) that there be not, etc. This is the
occasion.

The parts of the words are two.

1 An Admonition, to take heed of Apostasy, or backesliding from religion,
which is here described. 1. by 'its nature, it is a departing from the living
God, the fountain of all goodness. 2. by 'its cause, that is, an evil heart
of unbelief, a wicked mind that believes not Gods word. This admonition is
directed in common to all the Hebrews that professed, the faith, because among
a multitude, many are Hypocrites, and those that are sound hearted had need to
be put in mind, and admonished of their frailty. Wherefore the Apostle says,
Take heed least there be in any of you an evil heart, etc.

2 A Remedy, to prevent Apostasy, that is expressed, ver. 13. viz. mutual
exhortation to constancy in Godliness. [But exhort one another] Ministers the
people, and the people him, and themselves mutually. This duty is amplified.
1. By the properties: it must be frequent, daily (...) even every day, upon
all set occasions, it must be constant, holding on till the end of this life,
[While it is called to day] i. e. so long as grace is offered and danger to be
feared, which is, till our lives be at an end, so long are often exhortations
needful to uphold men in their constancy in religion. 2. urged from the
danger that comes by the neglect of it, that is hardness of heart, [least any
of you be hardened,] the cause whereof is the beguiling nature of sin
[through the deceitfulness of sinne] which by degrees steals away the heart
from God, and settles it in the obstinate practice of impiety.

You have the words and the plain meaning: I come to some instructions for our
practice; the first is this. That, Infidelity is the cause of Apostasy from
Religion.

Infidelity is that which keeps men from entering into the Church of God, and
it is that which throws them out again when they are entered. The Jews to
whom the Apostle writes, some of them had resisted the Gospel, and put it from
them by unbelief, others had embraced it, whom the Apostle here calls
brethren, and before, ver. 1. Holy brethren partakers of the heavenly calling
in charity, so stiling them, who in visible profession had received and
followed the doctrine of the gospel. These the Apostle exhorts to sincerity
and faithfulness, warning them to take heed, that there be not a Canker at
the root, that would in time destroy the whole tree with his fruits, namely,
an unbelieving heart that would in time destroy the whole tree with his
fruits, that would in time make them Apostataes from the religion of Christ,
which for the present they professed.

The doctrine then is plainly afforded by the text; we shall endeavor to
make it plain unto you, 1. by expounding the terms of it. 2. by showing the
reason why one follows of another.

1 By Apostasy [(...)] for the word is meant a departing or going away from
that which we formerly stood to, and followed: for the matter, we understand
hereby in short, the forsaking of true religion in the doctrine of it, or in
the practice: for it must be noted that men become backsliders from religion
two ways.

1 By leaving the truth of doctrine and giving heed to lies, contrary to
what is revealed in the word: when men fall into Atheism, and make a jest of
religion: or run to Iudaisme from the Gospel to the Law; a point, wherein
the Hebrews were apt to be seduced by false teachers zealous of the Law, or
when men slip into any Heresy overthrowing the faith, or those that cannot
relish the water of life, but drink deep of the wine of fornication the
impoysoned doctrine of Antichrist, such forsake the fellowship of the Saints,
go from God and his Church, leap out of the Arc into perdition.

2 By leaving the practice of religion, and godliness, when men profess their
assent unto the truth of the Articles of Faith, and so retain the form of
godliness, but deny the power of it, being disobedient and wicked in their
lives, when men keep their faith and have lost their conscience; They could
sometimes have said and have done too, but now they can talk, hear and study
about religion: But while their ears, tongues, and brains are busied, their
hearts and their hands are idle. Both these are Apostates from God equally and
alike, there is not the dust of the balance to boot between the worth of a
true belieuer, and a false belieuer if both be wicked livers. An honest
Infidel will hold weight with a wicked Christian. And a sober Papist is as
good as a drunken Protestant; nay better, Inasmuch as it is better to glorify
God what way soever though in a false faith, then to dishonor his holy name
wherewith we are called by an unholy conversation, yea so foul a corruption of
so holy a profession must needs much more shame his life, making it ten times
more odious to others and damnable in it self. Wherefore Heresy in opinions
and wickedness in practice, both fall under this term of Apostasy from
religion. And as he has no religion at all that denies the verity of divine
Doctrine, so, he has no religion to any purpose that holds the truth, but
denies obedience to it. For what says St James [If any among you seems to
be religious and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart this
man's religion is in vain. Iam. 1. 26.] He reads us a lesson in the next
words, which men in his time, and likewise now will hardly learn, viz. That
true religion stands in the practice of a holy life, as well as profession of
divine trueths [pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this,
to visit the fatherless and widow in their afflictions, and to keep
himself unspotted of the world ver. 27.] Wherefore they are Apostates from
religion that relinquish either the doctrine or the practice of religion.

This of the first term, in the next place by Infidelity or unbelief, we
mean a withdrawing of our hearts from resting wholly upon the truth of Gods
word; now in the word two things are proposed unto us to be believed.

1 All manner of doctrines or Articles of religion to be firmly believed and
mainetained, against all Heresies and false doctrines.

2 All sorts of Commandments, threatenings, and promises tending to the
direction of our practice, which we are to believe and embrace against all
counsels, terrors, or allurementes whatsoever, tending to draw us from
obedience in our lives. Both these are the objects of true faith whereby men
yield assent unto all doctrines, commandments, threatenings, promises of God,
not only as true and good in themselves, but as better and truer then any thing
in the world that can be set against them, whence in all persuasion unto
error, in all temptation unto vice, true faith resting it self on the word of
God winnes the victory, and overcomes the world: But where this is wanting, an
easy way is left to all Heresies, and impiety, etc. Thus for the explication
of the terms of this proposition: let us see

2 The connection of them together, how Apostasy springs from Infidelity: The
reason is, because there is no other grace, that has the proper office and
power, to uphold a man in the constant embracing of all holy duties, and
constant practice of all good works, but only faith; and therefore where that
is not, men must needs fall away from both.

That such is the force and use of true faith, you shall see by considering the
objects of it.

1 All divine trueths to be held and professed in matter of Religion, which are
above our natural and corrupt reason; and therefore unless our understanding
be by a true faith captivated unto the obedience of Christ, that we can
resign up our own wits to be ruled by Gods wisdom, and rest our selves only
upon the true word of God, it is not possible, that ever we should find sure
footing, where, and in what certain truth to rest our selves, but shall
always be as those Children spoken of, Ephesians. 4. 14. of weak and unsettled
minds, easily persuaded to believe any thing, being like small barks without
sufficient balance, (...) tossed up and down upon the waves like a feather,
and driven this way and that way with every wind of false Doctrine, raised up
by our own foolish fancies, or by the device and craftiness of men lying in
wait to delude us.

2 All commandments of God touching our holy practices, together with all the
threatenings, if we do not obey, and promises if we do. Now these things are
partly contrary to our corrupt nature and vile affections, which cannot subject
themselves to Gods law, partly they are beyond the reach and desire of our
sensual and worldly minds which see no great matter to be loved and feared, in
whatsoever God threatens or promises. Gods law is holy but we are not so,
Gods promises are spiritual, but we are carnal, led by sensuality, placing
our affections on things that are in present view, and therefore naturally
every man from the womb is adverse, and backward from doing that which God
commands, or believing what he promises or threatens. Now then what can
uphold a man in his obedience to Gods law, and dependence upon Gods promises?
It is only a true faith, which apprehending truly the authority and high
soveraignety which God has in commanding us, and together therewith beholding
the excellent holiness and goodness of his commandments, makes the heart
stoop unto obedience, be it never so irksome unto it self. Again when faith
apprehendes the immutablenesse of God in his word, when it sees the
pretiousnesse of the promises of mercy with their certainety, when it sees
the terriblenesse of its threats together with the vnavoideable accomplishment
of them upon obstinate men. Here now the heart rests it self as on an anchor
sure and steadfast: it is filled with a constant fear to offend, because it
knows punishment is not to be escaped, it is filled with continual joy in
its obedience, because it abides assured of the reward. But where this support
of faith is wanting, all obedience presently falls to pieces, then if God
command or forbid us any thing, we begin to take advise whether it be good to
obey yea, or no, we fall to ask council of Satan, of our selves, of other
men as bad as our selves. If they say no, there is our resolution too, God must
look him out other servants; we are not for his turn. If Satan tempt us
strongly, if our affections rage when they are crossed, if men frown or fawn
upon us, we are quickly turned out of the way, and our purposes of obedience,
are all dashed in a moment. Let God and his Ministers threaten never so much, we
then think within our selves that threatened men live longest, and such angry
words break no bones, let God promise never so fair, we can begin to smile
secretly in our hearts, and think they are but fair words, that make none but
fools feign. Indeed if the world threaten or promise, we think there is
something in an arm of flesh that may do us hurt or good; but when faith is
fled certain close Atheistical imaginations begin to fasten upon the mind
concerning God and religion, as if religion were but a pretty politic
complement, and that God is one who will do neither good nor evil, and that
we have no great cause to fear or trust him. We see then my brethren, how
plain a downfall there is from Infidelity to Apostasy, from God and all
goodness: when men want faith by the light whereof their blind reason might be
guided, by the power whereof their disordered hearts might be kept in
compass, they straight run madly into all wicked opinions and mischievous
practices. Most true is that of Saint James, Chap. 1. ver. 8. [A double minded
man is unstable in all his ways.] A double minded man, that is, an unbelieving
person, whose faith and opinion stands upon terms of indifferency and
probability, he is in vtramque partem on both sides, or between both, in
neither; his opinions in matters of religion are variable according to seasons
and occasions, he holds much of his religion by the copy of m^ns countenances,
much of it by permission of his lusts with manifold reservations and provisoes,
that it shall be lawful for him in such and such cases to do or believe
otherwise then for the present he does, when men are thus of double minds who
resolve upon both sides, and so resolve upon neither; who cast about in their
thoughts and say, I believe this but it may be it is otherwise, I do this, but
what if I do it not; what if I do the contrary: when men's minds look thus a
squint on two things at once they must needs be unstable in their ways: If
saving faith in the truth of God do not establish the heart in a full
relyance upon God only, it is impossible but that a man should be of a wavering
and moveable temper, unstable in his opinions, unsettled in his practices
((...)) like a man that stands upon one leg, easily overturned, like a bowl
on a smooth table, that is pushed aside with the least touch of a finger;
whereas the true believer founded and stablished in the faith is one of those
living stones, which St Peter speaks of, 1. Pet. 2. 5. which are squared and
surely placed upon the foundation, thereupon resting immovable.

Thus much for the opening of this point sufficiently for our use, as that
which needs practice more then proof. The uses I shall commend unto you
shall be no other then those which are made already to our hand in the text.

Beloved, Take he^d brethren lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God. Be well advised, look well about
you, it is a matter of greatest moment, hereupon depends your constancy in
religion, and upon that dependes your happiness in heaven. My trust is this
exhortation will not be slighted by you, if you will a little consider
seriously of these motives, that may stir you up to this diligent caution. I
will name but two things, which the Apostle also in this place gives us notice
of.

1 The easiness to fall into this evil of unbelief and Apostasy: the
Apostle in this and the next chapter is very vehement, in admonishing the
hebrews of this danger. And good reason, seeing it is a matter not easily
heeded without good forewarning. We easily deceive our selves in this matter
through the wickedness and guile of our own hearts, many times vainly
imagining our hearts to be good and faithful, when indeed they be evil
hearts of unbelief. This is a piece of cunning which they are not to learn:
viz. to beguile us with counterfeit graces insteede of current. But that which
deceiues men chiefly in this business, is this; that because we live in one
common society of the church, therefore we dream of a community of faith
and salvation. What mean else those careless thoughts and speeches of many? I
thank God I have a strong faith and have had ever; I am a Christian, a
Protestant baptized, and bred up in the true faith of Christ Jesus, I frequent
good exercises, I live as most men do, etc: whence they think this is
sufficient, and that now there is no danger of miscarrying. Men take up their
religion as they do fashions, what most men have they must have also; most men
speak well of religion, great men countenance it, a religious King loves and
defends it, and it is the fashion to be a Protestant, and therefore they will
be so, lest they be singular: As virtues be not disliked when they grow common
(which is seldom) men will seem at least to love them. My Brethren, we
abhor Popery, and yet can be content to do as Papists do; viz: to take up
our religion upon trust. If it be not so, whence then is the ignorance, the
ungodliness of so many in our Churches; multitudes there be of men, who know
not but that another religion may be as good as that which they profess, and
for ought themselves or any body else can tell, be as ready to leave as to
keep what they have. Our adversaryes see this, and stick not to triumph at
this our weakness, that we may have Churches full of people, but empty of
sound Protestants: They will tell us in their books, that a great part that
are on our sides, have no other motives to hold them here, but only because
they have bin so borne and b^edd, and received their religion as they do their
inheritance, by descent and custom of the Country; men whom decrees of
Parliament and fear of laws keep with us rather then any certain knowledge
of the truth of our religion by the Scripture. It is a shame that we are not
able to confute such shameful imputations. To say it is worse, with our
adversaries, whose chief policy to keep simple souls within the pale of
their Church is ignorance, and fear of the Inquisition, this may stop their
mouths, but it helps not us, we may see and pity the miserable estate of
most, who if they be examined by a Minister touching their faith, will make him
blush and bless himself to see their ignorance; But if such fall into the
hand of a Priest or Jesuit to try them a little, they will soon streine at
their religion. Is it not strange that they should be men that profess it, and
that forwardly too sometimes, who yet are not able to maintain i^? How soon
think you will such blasts as these be shaken, with every blast and torn up
out of our Church, when they have taken no deeper root in the faith;
especially if temporal respects should meet together with Sophistical
arguments, and turn them aside from the purity of the Gospel. But these are
not all that deceive themselves: not only ignorant persons, but those that
have knowledge and live ungodly, run into the same errors, and danger, men
that are liars, swearers, adulterers, oppressors, voluptuous persons, yea
scoffers at true piety will be accounted men that love religion, and such as
will stand to defend it if need be. But they are not aware that there is in
them an evil heart that will deceive them: may we think that such men whose
end is to live loosely will much deliberate in what religion to do it? un
less they think the name of a Protestant will be enough to save a libertine,
what availes it whether they believe well or ill, when they are resolved to
live wickedly. Such ignorant and vicious persons as these (and these take up a
great part of our Companyes) such as these they be that ^unne upon religion at
all adventures taking that which is next before the^, never laboring after
that faith and knowledge which should be able to endure the trial. So easy a
matter is it for me^ that live in a true Church to fall into the errors of the
Jews Luk 3. 8. (we have Abraham to our father) and therefore we must needs
do well, and God must even do miracles, and make men of stones if any be
saved but they; so now we live in a reformed Church, purged with doctrine and
discipline, blessed with religious Princes, with faithful Ministers, with peace
in the days of others troubles, and with miraculous deliverances: And be these
privileges enough to win our love to religion, and our constancy in the
defending of it? Ye^ truly they be, if well used, and let them perish for ever
that would seek to rob us of so great blessings by any malicious forces or
crafts.

But my Brethren, external privileges must not deceive us, we must look
every one to himself that we be not unreformed persons in a reformed Church,
ignorant in so great light of doctrine, disordered under goodness of discipline,
men disobedient to Prince and Priest, luxurious in our peace, secure and
unthankful after our deliverances. If we be so, all is not well with us,
whatsoever we may boast and imagine: there is a root of bitterness within our
vnbeleiuing hearts, which in time will spring up into the gall and wormwood of
Apostasy from God and his Gospel.

This is the first motive.

The 2 motive to make us heedfull, is the great evil and danger of Apostasy
and infidelity. An vnbeleiuing heart is an evil heart, a sinful and wicked
heart, a heart unteachable and intractable, the word works not on it, mercy
cannot persuade it, judgments cannot break it, all means of favor are in
vain applied to make it yield: as we have a sufficient example of the Jews
alleged in this Chapter, with whom Gods word, and great works prevayled
nothing, because of their unbelief. Thus it is evil in it self, it is evil
also in its effects, because it breeds a forsaking of God, the very worst of
all evils in the world which the Apost^e amplifies calling it Apostasy, a
departing from the living God. This attribute compriseth all the rest, and more
to us the^ all the rest, not only what God is in himself, but what he is unto
the creatures, namely the author of their life and being, and so the fountain
of their happiness and welfare. He therefore that forsakes God, leaves the
wellspring of living waters to drink puddle out of a broken Cisterne, he
leaves the Sun to warm himself at a candle, and departs from life, to go
into death: God is truth and light, and they that go from him run into
darkness and error, in him only is peace and happiness, without him there is
nothing but woe and misery: [They forsake their own mercy, that trust in lying
vanities] Jonah. 3. 8. being taught by his own experience; he that flies away
from Gods presence to go to Tharsis, thinking there to be in safety he shall be
deceived in his expectation, the winds will not blow favorably upon such a
runagate, the seas will not brook the ship that bears him, safety he finds
none, but when we least looked for it in the belly of a fish, and that neither
until he had returned unto God, whom he had forsaken, by prayer and promise of
obedience. Men and Angels and all creatures are but lying vanities deceiving
the hope of them that seek unto them for help, when their aid is only sought
after and God forsaken, they then lead us into sin and misery, and there
leave us. Wherefore miserable is the case of Apostates, who turn their backs
to religion and sanctity of life, in as much as these things cannot be left,
but God must be forsaken too. There is indeed an imagination amongst them,
that God will be a friend unto them in all religions, and in all practices
whatsoever. But this is but a Turkish dream; No, he that departs from faith
and obedience, departs also from the living God. And whosoever so forsakes God,
let him also be sure God will forsake him, then which no greater misery can
betide a creature.

You see, Beloved, what just cause we have to enforce this exhortation upon our
selves. Take heed etc. It is easy yet most dangerous to be deceived herein,
wherefore now bethink your selves, try your hearts in an impartial
examination of them, whether they be sound in the faith yea, or no; now that
ye may not wander in this search, fasten your meditations upon these two
particulars. 1. Look to thy knowledge, see upon what grounds thy faith in God
and profession in religion is built. Stands thy faith in the wisdom of men,
and beleiuest thou because of their saying? is it founded upon the custom of
the country, and of thine own education, upon the authority of laws and
good liking of men that establish and maintain the religion thou professest:
if this be the ground work of thy faith, thou buildest upon the sand. Have
thou no sound knowledge of religion thy self? Art thou unable to justify thy
faith by the Scriptures? Is not thy conscience convinced by sure proof that
the religion which thou professest is the very truth of God? If so, know then
for a certain that there is an evil heart within thee, that will betray thee
to Apostasy in the time of trouble. Shall a man think thou will stand to that
which thou know not thoroughly: when arguments, threatenings, persuasions, and
fair promises shall assault thee? Will such slight imaginations as these
endure the stake when all that thou can say for thy self is, I think so,
men say so, I have been taught so, by such and such Ministers, other men are
of that opinion, I never heard to the contrary? And will such slender, and ill
grounded conceits as these in matter of religion uphold thy heart in a
constant resolution to stand for the maintenance of the faith? will these arm
thee with courage against the point of the sword, the heat of the fire, the
teeth of the beast, the force of torments, loss of friends, of country, of
life for Christ's sake? Be assured that if thy religion rest upon such propps as
these, that it will fall upon the dust, when peace, credit, and other temporal
respects which are now the maine vndersetters of it, shall be removed, and the
whole weight of it shall lean upon such a broken reed.

2 Look to thy practice, whereby thou shall best discover what thy heart is.
Is the practice of thy religion entire, fair, universal, equally respecting
all the commandments, so that thou studiest to thy power to walk before God
in uprightness, and to please him in all things? Art thou the same man in
private, that thou art in public, in thy closet and in thy parlour, in the
Church, and in the market, in thy life and in the pulpit? Is thy carriage even
and smooth, do thy holiness toward God, thy righteousness toward men, thy
sobriety toward thy self keep pace together, and go hand in hand? Art thou
a faithful Minister, a just Magistrate, an honest tradesman as well as thou
pretendest to be a Christian? If thou can say yea, and that truly, there is
hope of such a one, that what ever may befall him, he will not start back nor
deal unfaithfully in the covenant he has made with God, but that his
faithfulness and uprightness shall preserve him from backsliding. But,
Beloved, if ye serve God with reservations and secret dispensations, picking
and choosing according as it fits your own humonrs, doing this thing,
disobeying that; If ye trust God in some promises, mistrust him in others,
fear him in some threatenings, despise him in others, then know, all is not
well within; for there is within an evil heart of unbelief, and religion will
gain but little credit, by your co^sta^cie in the professing of it. He that
shuffles and cutts and choakes his conscience by shifts of wit, stifles in him
the good motions of grace, nourishes in him some wicked affection or other,
and lives in the practice of some secret abomination: He that can stumble at a
straw, and leap over a block, strain at a ceremony and neglect the substance
of righteousness, and judgment, and the fear of God, he that is forward in
such matters as gain applause, making the show of his religion his reputation,
but in the mean time where there is no notice taken of him, he lives loosely,
intemperatly, and unconscionably: Let not such a one deceive himself, it is
certain his heart is naught and unfaithful, and when God and his religion
have most need of him such a false friend will fail them both. He that has
already denied the power of Godliness, will it be any wonder if afterward he
deny the form of it? one sin lived in without repentance is enough to pull a
man to hell, and will it not be enough to popery, or any other heresy? He
that will not leave his sin for his religions sake, will easily be persuaded to
leave his religion for his sins sake; he that will not at Gods command or
entreaty be brought in any hand to put to death the body of sin, to
relinquish any of his pleasing and profitable lusts, and lewd practices, is
this man in case to put to death himself in the defense of Gods truth, for
love thereof to forsake the world and himself too, to part with so much that
could not part with so little? He that is already a secret enemy to religion
and devotion, will in time prove an open pesecutor of both. He that can despise
and in heart deride a protestant minister is in fair forwardness to like well
of a Popish Priest. In a word he that has bid farewell to piety to day, it is
an even lay but he may be driven to take leave of his religion to morrow. When
once the conscience can swallow down wicked practices, it will soon digest
wicked opinions: when once the ship leakes, the lading is in danger both to
sink or swim together, neither is it possible that a pure faith can be
preserved in an impure conscience.

Now (my Brethren) let every one of us cause our hearts to pass under this
trial and censure, and so we shall see what we have to trust to, and what
religion has to trust to us. Let us go upon sure grounds, care we that our
knowledge of religion be distinct, and certain, that our practice of it be
sincere, free from Hypocrisy, and so we shall give good proof of our
faithfulness for the present, and our perseverance for the time to come. Be
not slack to go about this search, and be sure to do it thoroughly, delays
are dangerous when the the disease is mortal, and to cure by halfes is not to
cure at al. Secret infidelity is like hereditary diseases, or like bruises
taken in youth if they be not looked to in time, and thoroughly cured they will
certainly kill at last.

A gangrene kills when it gets to the heart, and what will that do that is bred
in the heart? Inward diseases are ever dangerous; but when they have seized
upon the heart the fountain of life they prove deadly.

Take then heed of an evil heart poisoned with unbelief; and as you love the
credit of religion, the favor of God, the happiness of your souls, look to
it betimes to purge forth of you such a venomous humor.

And now for an Antidote against this infection hearken in the next place to
the second use.

[Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day.]

FINIS.
EXODUS 34. 23. 24. 23 Thrice in the year shall all your men Children appear
before the Lord God, the God of Israel.

24 For I will cast out the Nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders:
neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shall go up to appear before
the Lord thy God thrice in the year.


IN these words we have two parts to be observed. 1. A Precept. 2. A Promise.
The precept is a Leviticall injunction touching certain times of Solemn
worship to be performed to God by the Israelitish nation, in the 23. ve.
More distinctly we have in it three circumstances to be observed.

1 The time when this service was to be performed, that was [thrice in the
yeare] namely at 3. very solemn Feasts, which were these.

1 The Feast of the Passover or vnleavenedbread, because during the Feast for
seven days they might have no leavenedbread in all their dwellings. This Feast
the whole Nation was to keep at the Tabernacle where ever it should be set up:
where after they had Sacrificed the Paschall Lamb in the Evening, they were to
return on the morrow to their habitations as it is Deuteronomy. 16. 7. This Feast was
kept on the 4th day of the first month, in memory of their deliverance out of
Egypt, and in Egypt from the slaying Angel, and in type of Christ that saues
us from the wrath to come.

2 The Feast of Pentecost, or of weeks, which was kept seven complete weeks
after the Passover; or beginning the account at ripe Harvest when they put the
sickle to the Corn; fifty days after they were to appear before God with an
oblation of the first fruits, as it is Deuteronomy. 16. 9. Lev. 23. 15. etc. This
Feast was kept in memory of the Law given at Mount Sinai, fifty days after the
departure of the Children of Israel out of Egypt.

3 The Feast of the Tabernacles, kept on the fifteenth day of the seventh
Month, for seven days together after the gathering in of Harvest and Vintage,
Lev. 23. 33. etc. At which time the Children of Israel that were Israelites
borne were to dwell in Boothes made of the boughs of thick and broad leaved
trees, leaving their houses; In memory that they dwelt in Tents or Boothes for
many years in the wilderness, as it is verse 42. 43. of that place. These
were the three solemn Feasts of the year wherein all the Males were to
appear before the Lord, as we have this precept explained by another precept,
Deuteronomy. 16. 16. Exodus 23. 14. etc. wherein these Feasts are mentioned. This is
the first Circumstance of the time.

2 The second is the persons that were at those times to perform this worship
unto God: these are [All your men Children] all the Males among the Israelites.

3 The third Circumstance is, the person before whom they were to make their
appearance, that is God who is here called the [Lord Iehouah] and the [God of
Israel,] both titles implying that he had just authority to command the
Israelites such solemn Services, both in regard of his absolute Sovereignty
over all, and also of his gracious mercy toward them his People.

Now under this Circumstance of the person is implied the Place, where they
should appear, which was in that place which God should choose, wherein to
rear up the Tabernacle, or Sanctuary, for his solemn and standing worship.
This was first at Shiloh, and after that was destroyed, at Jerusalem, in the
Temple built by Solomon; which place God chose to put his name there, that is
to establish his worship and to manifest his Glorious presence in special
manner in that place. In which respect those that appeared in those places
dedicated to Gods worship, are said to appear before God himself, there
present to require and reward their faithful Services.

This then is the precept, that at three Solemn Feasts in the year, the
Passover, Pentecost and Tabernacles all the males of the Israelitish Nation,
should repair unto the chief place of Gods Public worship, there to offer
Sacrifice and perform such Services as were required of them.

Next follows verse. 24.

2 The Promise which is added to the Precept by way of prevention, to take away
such an objection as the People might make against the equity and
Reasonablenes of the before named Precept; God had commanded three times in a
year all should come up to the Tabernacle or Temple. What will become of us
then might the people say? If all the men must go up and leave their Houses,
who shall in their absence defend their Wives, Children, Goods, Cattle, etc.
from spoil? we dwell amid'st Enemies round about us, the Ammonites, Moabites,
Syrians, Phenicians, Philistines, Amalekites, Edomites etc. who bear us
mortal hatred for the wrong they think we have done them invading their
Territories; these will be mindful of us, they have Policy enough to know the
Custom of our Country, and they will be malicious enough, to watch their best
opportunity to do us mischief; the season fit for Invasion being the Harvest
time. If the Land be thus as is were dispeopled thrice in the year they will
soon provide Forces in a readiness to set upon us, and when men are absent,
walls and women are but weak defenses, when al shall be at Jerusalem an hundred
or more miles from home and that for many days in their going and coming and
abode there, what a spoil may there be committed upon the borders in the mean
time? Wherefore this Service of God cannot be performed but with apparent
peril to the whole State.

This is the objection which the Israelits might make both in the wilderness,
and after that from time to time when they dwelt in the promised Land.

By way of answer unto this doubt, God promises that no Danger should befall
them for observing of this commandment in this particular. Our Enemies will
invade our Country if we do it say they: nay, says God, not so. I will so
order matters that they shall do you no hurt [neither shall any desire thy
Land when thou shall go up thrice in a year to appear before the Lord thy
God] wherein God promises that by an especial providence he would so govern
the Hearts of the Enemies of his People, that they should not as much as intend
them any mischief when they went about the Service of God. Though a fair
opportunity should be offered them, yet they should have no Heart or desire to
meddle with their Country. But because they might yet cast a farther doubt and
be scarce willing to take God upon his word in a matter so unlikely; therefore
God to put them out of all fear strengthens this his promise by two other
promises which should soon be effectually performed; that by seeing his truth
in the one, they may learn to trust to his truth in the other. These promises
are 1. That God would drive out the inhabitants of the land of Canaan, and give
them a dwelling there, [for I will cast out the Nations before thee:] therefore
he could easily keep out their enemies from reentring that could throw them
out, when they were in possession.

2 That he would make their territories larger from time to time [and I will
enlarge thy Coasts] their Territories assigned them should grow wider, not
narrower; and they should gain upon their enemies, who were more like to win
upon them. Now then he that could give them a Country when they had none,
but wandered in the wilderness without house or home; he that could enlarge
their borders when at the first they were but little (according as experience
anon after this time did prove to be most true:) he also could preserve them
from loosing any thing they had, especially when they hazzarded it for his own
service sake.

This is the plain resolution of this scripture. From hence now we have two
instructions for our practice here to be learned. The first is,

That no man shall be a looser by his obedience to God. The inference is plain.
The Israelits might plead that they could not obey this commandment, because
of apparent inconveniences that would follow thereupon: God remoues this
scruple by promising that no such danger should happen on them as they
imagined; if they would obey they should not be damaged by it. Now forasmuch as
the like objections are made by unbelievers against every part of Gods Service,
to the end to shift of from themselves a necessity ^o Obedience; and also
because God deals a like at all times toward his Faithful Servants; which
setting a side all by-respects readily obey his will, By the rule of
Proportion, from this particular we deduce this General.

That God suffers not men to sustain hurt and losse^ in regard of their
Obedient Performance of such things as he commands them. The second is this.

Experience of the Truth in some of Gods Promises, should confirm our faith
in the belief of others.

The deduction is also manifest, God commands the Israelites to believe that
he will overruled the hearts of their enemies, and keep them from annoying of
their country when they are busied about Gods worship: why? because he would
cast out their enemies, because he would enlarge the bounds of their country
after their enjoying it* now these promises they should see manifestly
accomplished shortly after they came into the land of Canaan; for now they
were in the wilderness when this precept was given them, and therefore they
had reason to believe that God would be as good as his word in this promise
for their defense, as he would be for their Plantation in that country. Hence
the point is,

Trial in one thing, should cause trust in God for all other matters. Of these
in order.

1 That none shall be a looser by his obedience to God. For confirmation of this
truth observe these reasons.

R. 1 The first reason is drawn from the truth and faithfulness of God in as
many promises as he has made in the Scriptures, setting forth his abundant
reward of faithful obedience. It were an endless thing to name unto you all,
or the most of these promises. I shall therefore only direct you to the serious
meditation upon these Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 28. Psalm. 37, and 128. wherein
whatsoever is good for the Soul, the Body, the Estate, the Name, the
Posterity of Man, all is promised to them that fear God and obey his
commandments; in all which God is faithful and true to perform what he
promises, if we be careful to obey.

R. 2. The second is from his Mercy and Bounty, wherein he is rich unto all,
and above all to such as fear and obey him. By which means God provides as
for his own glory, so for our singular inconragement in his service. He will
not have his servants to complain that they serve a hard Master, one that does
ill provide for the advancement and welfare of his servants: that his service
is of much hazard, full of trouble, molestation, and painfulness, but of
little profit and comfort. This were a dishonor to God: wherefore God will make
it appear that he commaundes not over us for our hurt, nor makes use of our
service without a bountiful reward for our labor. If he bid us do any
thing it is that we may gain by it, as well as himself. His glory and our
happiness go both together: nay, was there ever any who sought to glorify
God by his obedience, but God made him happy in the reward of it?

R. 3. Thirdly, the last shall be from the power of God, whereby he is able to
give every good thing to his feruants; and to shield them from all evil
things. Whatsoever is worth the having, that God has in his gift as Sovereign
Lord to distribute all the goodness which is in himself or in his Creatures,
where and in what manner he himself pleases. Again, he has under his
command the forces of all Creatures in Heaven and in Earth, which he rules
as he pleases to his own purposes. He can at ease frustrate the harmefull
intentions, and noisome qualities of the worst of them. He can at any time
turn their malice into mercy, yea he is able to bring forth glory to
himself, and profit to his servants not only against, but even out of their
mischievous designements. This shall suffice for proof of this point, which
needs not so much confirmation to convince us of the truth of it, as
persuasion to move us to apply it to our practice. I will therefore come to
the application of it after I have in few words cleared a doubt or twain, the
solution whereof will farther illustrate the point it self*

Q. 1 The first question is, what is to be thought of those that suffer evil
for the service of God? We see it is generally the condition and lot of the
godly to have very hard measure in this world, if any sit down by the loss
it is commonly they. He that refraineth himself from evil makes himself a
prey; it was and will be true to the worlds end: a godly man is a fair mark
whereupon to discharge all the malice and mischief of the world; and a goodly
pleasant matter it is to the Devil, and men to heap all injuries that may be
upon the head of so hateful a person as is in their account a faithful servant
of God: how then is it true that Gods service brings us no damage? I answer
briefly to this doubt three things.

A. 1 That such evils as befall the good and godly come upon them ordinarily,
not for their diligence, but negligence in the service of God. Even they have
their faults, their pride, their security, their unbelief, their profaneness
in Gods worship, their covetousnes; and then no marvel if they smart for it.
God lets loose the tongues of railers to scourge their name; he vnbindes the
hands of robbers to spoil their goods; he gives Satan liberty to afflict
their souls; he himself hides his face from them, and in woeful plight they
are, till in their affliction they turn to the Lord, and repent of their evil
doings. Servants when they grow lazy, and wicked need. Correction more then
Protection; and so it is between God and us; if once we grow unfaithful he
has a hand to smite us, as well as to defend us, a rod as well as a crook, and
he loves us so well that he will not spare our iniquities, but lay it on us,
that being chastened by him we might not be condemned with the world^. 1. Cor.
11. 3^.

2 God does dispose of things thus in great wisdom when even the best fare
many times worst, to try the soundnes of their zeal, their faith, their
patience, etc. God will know whether men that profess much love of him will be
contented to bear a little loss for his sake, or whether they will forsake
his service, when peace, wealth, and credit in the world forsake them. God will
also make the world know that he has servants in the world which serve him not
for full baggs, high titles, large possessions, welfurnished tables, bodily ease
and a whole skin. (As Satan most maliciously accused holy Job. chapter 1.) but
men that serve him out of love and faithfulness, men that are resolved to follow
him through poverty, disgrace, hunger, nakedness and perils, yea to open
their breasts to the sword of the murderers and to give their bodies to the
flames, if it may be to do God or his gospel credit. Now other things be but
small losses, my brethren, when God and his grace in us gains so much honor.

3 Those losses which at any time happen for Gods cause, God at another time
makes them good: they are not losses so much as layings out, which after a
patient for bearing a while come home with interest, commonly in the same kind,
or which is much better with abundance of grace here, and a greater weight of
glory in the life to come. This is plain in that answer our Savior makes to
his Disciples, Math. 19. 28. 29. [Behold, says Peter in the name of all the
rest, we have forsaken all and followed thee; what therefore shall we have?
ver. 27.] Christ answers, neither they nor any others should be loosers by
him, he would make them also sufficient amends, whosoever should sustain
damage and trouble for his sake, [verily I say unto you (says Christ) that
when the son of man shall sit on the Throne of his majesty, ye which follow
me in the regeneration, shall sit also upon twelve Thrones and judge the twelve
Tribes of Israel.] A large recompense if we mark it. Poor Fishermen that had
forsaken a few Boats, and Nets, and Cabbins, and other such mean tackling of
their trade and liuelyhood, to attend upon Christ in his business, to be thus
rewarded with Thrones and Iudgement-Seats, when Christ shall come in his
glory. But this is the disciples privilege; there follows a promise for
alother. [And whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren, or Sisters, or
father or mother, or wife or children, or lands, for my names sake and the
gospel, he shall receive a hundred fold more, now at this present; houses, and
brethren, and sisters, and Mothers, and children, and lands with persecution
(mark that condition) with perseeution:) and in the world to come shall
inherit everlasting life. Mark. 10. 20.] Lo then nothing is lost, that is
neglected for Gods cause: he will be accomptable to satisfy for all troubles,
losses, inconveniences whatsoever that we shall run into by reason of our
faithful obedience unto his commandments. Thus much of the first question; the
next is,

Q. 2 Whether we may neglect the business of our calling to employ our selves in
the service of God?

For if Gods service be so full of gain and advantage it seems we have a
fair warrant to leave much of the imploiments of our several vocations, that
so we might spend the more time in Gods service.

A. Whereto I answer, that we may not do so, because that our general
callings to be Christians, and our particular callings in a civil life do not
cross one another, but are subordinate and serviceable one to another.

Religion is that which brings a blessing upon our civil vocation, and this
again is the ordinary means of obtaining that blessing. Our civil vocation
is the standing where in we are to show forth the fruits of our Religion and to
approve our selves to be indeed good Christians, by being honest Tradesmen,
just Magistrates, painful Ministers, etc. so that we may not neglect one
calling for another, seeing God is served and glorified by our faithful
discharge of both alike, and therefore we must abide, as the Apostle commaundes
us, in that vocation wherein we are called, 1. Cor. 7. 20.
not shifting from one to another, not taking liberty to be idle in our
particular lawful employments, that so we may be diligent in Gods service.
Wherefore they are justly to be reproved not only, who utterly forsake all
employments of this life, to the end they may wholly consecrate themselves to
spiritual devotion, but such also who though they forsake not utterly, yet
neglect more then is fit, their civil vocations. It is either way a misguided
zeal either to withdraw ones self from humane society, neglecting al service
to our neighbor under a pretense of more devout service to God, as Popish
Votaries use to do, or as many do, who grow careless of their lawful
affairs, whiles they busy themselves about exercises of religion. I would be
loath to discourage any man for his forwardnes in matters of religion; I know
well we shall find every where ten monstrouslie profane, to one
indiscreetlie zealous: yea a hundred that neglect Gods service to follow their
own business, for one that does otherwise. Yet give me leave to tell you that
there is a fault among some in the world, who suffer damage not so much by
Gods service, as by their own indiscretion, whiles by unnecessary iournies.
conferences, entertainements, and such like occasions touching matters of
religion, they put al their necessary business out of order. If such men
suffer decaie in their estates, they must blame themselves. Religion is not in
the fault, which where it is truly taught teaches man prudence, how to order
his estate with judgment. The want whereof gives occasion to most to imagine
that the greatest part of such men's religion lies in their ears, because they
love to hear much but not to do. This fault should be amended where it is to
be found, to the end that religion be not scandalized as a profession that does
impoverish men. I confess it is not an easy matter to give general rules
that may befit all callings and conditions of life, to proportion out the times
of Gods service, and our own employments, yet these things I shall commend to
your considerations.

1 That in parting our time between religious and civil affairs, we shall
do best to follow Gods own directions, who has allotted a larger proportion
to our own temporal businesses then to his spiritual service; six days for
those; one day for this. Not but that he must have the glory of some time, and
all the businesses of every day; but on the seventh day he requires we
should more immediately and wholly intend his service. And know this for a
truth, that could reason or Gods command persuade people to harken to Gods
counsel, diligently and seriously to attend all the duties of Gods worship
upon the Lords day, they should find a larger increase of grace and better
success in their affairs by that one means well used, then now by many
neglected.

2 You may observe a diversity in men's callings: some afford more leisure,
some less. Where more may be spared it cannot be better bestowed then upon God
to glorify him, and upon a man's own soul to save it; but where less may be
spared, something yet may be set apart for religion. This is certain, there is
no calling of never so busy employment, but enough time may be spared for some
good duties without hindering the world, and enough preserved for the world
without robbing of God, were we wise to do well, did not covetousnes,
voluptuousnes and other vilde affections befoole us, and make us unthankful
unthrifts of this shortness of life and grace, were our eyes cleared up, that
we could look perfectly into the end of all things, reason and religion would
teach us, that much of our time would be spent better then it is. Surely men
will say hereafter how much better had it been, had I spent such an hour in
prayer which I wasted in idleness; such a night in examining my heart upon my
bed, and watering my couch with my tears of repentance, which I spent in
revelling, gaming, and other ungodly practices; how much better had it been
if I had gone to the house of God, when at such a time I went about needless
disports; that such a day had been spent in prayer and fasting, which was
passed away in complements of visitation, and entertainements. But we trifle
away our time, and then complain we want time for Gods service; and service
of our callings. The service of our lusts have eaten up that which was to be
bestowen upon God, and the remainder the world must have that. Wherefore let us
learn wisdom, and seeing we can almost at any time find an hour, half a
day, a whole day, or more to spare from our businesses for by matters. Let us
do as much for God as we will do for the world, and besides the seventh day
which is his own let us give him somewhat of the six other, an hour to hear
a Sermon as well as twain to our selves to sit idle lie or ill employed; to
spend half an hour in prayer, reading, meditation, as well as three hours at
a feast; to spare once a quarter a day for the humiliation of thy soul in
fasting prayer and examination of thy sinful heart as well as thou sparest
odd days enough for thy pleasure. This were wisdom and spiritual
thriftines; and be bold on it, my brethren, that things being thus ordered with
moderation and godly discretion, much time will be gained for Gods service
without crossing or hindering of our worldly affairs. Thus much of these
questions; now let us come to make some application of the point to our
practice.

Mat. 25. 24. [Master I knew thou wast a hard man] in most men's estimation God
is a hard Master, that looks for much labor and paies but small wages. This
corrupt opinion of God and his worship is an old festered sore in the heart of
man deeply settled in his thoughts, and not seldom blistering out upon his
tongue. [Your words have been stout against me] says the Lord to the Jews in
Malachie his time. Mal. 3. 13. 14. [and wherein had they spoken stubbornly
against him? Ye have said (says God) it is in vain to serve God, and what
profit is it that we have kept his commandments and walked humbly before the
Lord of Hosts. Therefore we count the proud blessed, even they that work
wickedness are set up; and they that tempt God yea they are delivered.] See
the rancor of a corrupt heart venting it self in foul accusations against God
and his goodness, as if he were one that had no respect at all to his faithful
Servants, but one that favored his Foes more then his friends. Such is still
the sottish judgment of the world, that it is a thankeles office to obey God
almighty: they count no time so unprofitably spent as that which is bestowed
upon his service, even the godly in a fit of discontent are apt to think so.
David, Ps. 73. 13. [verily I have cleansed my heart in vain.] Baruch. Ier. 45.
3. no course so unlikely to thrive by, to live happily or honorably in the
world as that which God counsels them to: no men so despicable, and miserable
as those who desire to be what they are named, Christians. Men's practices
easily discover, that in their hearts they are come to desperate resolutions,
as that impious fellow, 2. King. 6. 33. [should I attend on God any longer:]
persuade men all that you can to a religious observation of reading the word,
instructing their servants and children as is to be done in Christian
families; show them Gods commandments, tell them of his promises that in
doing these things God will bless both soul and body, goods and good name:
and mark their answers. Alas they are but poor men, it is one day in a week
loss to them, they must work, or else wife and children will be ill provided
for: they cannot live by hearing of sermons; religion will not buy food or
raiment, they have their hands full of business, and should they spend half
an hour in a morning and so much at evening for prayer and devotion, all would
run to wrack, their work would want their servants, and their servants
would want their sleep; they have some special business which cannot be
compassed in the week, wherefore they must make bold with God, and borrow
what they never mean to pay, it must and shall be done on the Lords day, else
they should wrong themselves and set all out of square. Tell men that God
abhorres falsehood, that a little with equity is better then bags full of
cosenage and deceit; they will answer you, that is not the way to thrive, they
wot well that plain dealing is a jewel and God likes well of it, but they do
give you to understand that he that uses it shall die a beggar. Wherefore
they must lie and cosen, and do as the world does or else they are sure wealth
will come in but slowly. Persuade men to be merciful to the poor, to feed the
hungry, cloth the naked, help the decayed that their hearts may bless them,
and that God may bless them in themselves and their posterity: you shall have
from them such speeches as these; I know the ^ore part of my life, but not the
end, the world is hard, trade decaies, I grow old, I may come to want where now
I give, a bird in the hand is worth two in the Bush, I am sure of what I have,
I cannot tell what I shall have; I have many to provide for, we must live every
man upon his own; with a great Deal of such cold water, which men use to
cast upon those few sparkles of Charity that is left in them, utterly to quench
it. Thus God may promise or command what he will, but most of us are at a
point with him, we will do but what we list, thinking with our selves it is no
booty to believe what he promises, or obey what he commands. The ground of
this perverseness of men's opinions and practices touching our obedience to God
is, that infidelity which is rooted in our Natures and grown up with us even
from the womb; that poison which the Serpent powered forth into the minds of
our first Parents, viz: that God did not mean fairly toward them has ever
since deeply infected our natures making us still to have God in a jealousy and
suspicion, that he will not do what he says; when he bids us obey and makes
promise upon promise that al shall be well with the^ that fear him, much a do we
have to take God upon his word, we forecast a thousand perils: if we do so
there is danger, if so yet there we are not safe neither: we begin to argue how
this or that can be, when and which way I shall be blessed as God says I shall.
And after a great deal of quarrelling and disputing in the end we fall to this
conclusion, that it is good to trust God no farther the^ we see him. We may
every one read his own thoughts in the practices of men recorded for our
observation in the Scriptures. Take a few Examples, 2. Chro. 25. we read that
Amaziah having hired 100000 men of Israel to go with him against the Edomits he
was forbiden by the Prophet of God to let the Army of Israel go with him to
battle, for if he did he should surely loose the victory; if he obeyed he
should conquer. Here now Amaziah is in a straight whether he should follow the
counsel of the man of God or his own; [but what shall we do (says he) for
the hundred Talents which I have given to the Army of Israel? ver. 9.] yea
this stuck in his stomach, he could willingly do as God bids him, but he
shall loose an hundred Talents by the bargain, and that is a great matter;
wherefore the King could find in heart to add obstinacy to his folly, and
as at first he had hired them against Gods good liking, so now to retain them
contrary to his express command, and to hazard and loose Gods favor and
aid in that journey rather then the loss of one hundred Talents; and
doubtless so he had done, had not the Prophet been earnest with him, and
confirmed him by persuading him to trust to Gods power and rest himself
contented; [the Lord, says he, shall give to thee much more then this] in the
same verse. Again in the 25. of Levit. we read that God gave this law to the
Israelits, that six years they should sow their land and dress their
vinyards, but every seventh year the land should rest; they should not sow
their corn, nor reap that which growed of it self, they should not cut their
vines, nor gather their grapes that grew that year, as it is from ver. 2. to
the 8. of that Cha. Doubt ye not but this seems a strange command to this
distrustful people, and that they were very hardly brought to obey it, even as
many of us would do in the like case. What? must all Tillage cease? must no
regard be had for the fruit of the Earth for every 7 year? why this is the
direct way to starve us all? what if harvest and vintage prove bad in the six
years what shall we have to live upon in the 2 years after? what if the 8th
year prove naught then by like we must live 3 years upon one years
Provision; thus a famine shall be brought upon the Land in all likelihood; it is
not to be doubted but many of them, notwithstanding Gods Commandment, would
have the Plough in the ground, and their pruning hooks at their vines, we
know what they did in the like case. Exo. 16. God bad them keep none of the
manna they gathered one day till the next, but yet they did keep it doubting
whether there would be any on the next morning to be had verse. 19. 20. God bad
them gather none upon the Sabbath day but that which they gathered on the 6 day
should suffice for two days, yet for all that they will try; and though God
say expresslie ye shall find none, yet perhaps it is otherwise, they must
abroad to see if any thing be to be had v. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. so extremely
hard it is to persuade me^ to Obedience when there is any hope of gain, or
fear of loss that may move them to the contray. Wherefore to prevent such
cavils as the Israelites might make against the aforenamed Commandment
touching the rest of the 7 year God himself in the aforesaid Chapter v. 18. 19.
20. 21. 22. Answers the matter (therefore ye shall do my statutes and keep my
Commandments and do them and ye shall dwell in the land in safty, etc.) Take
yet one example more, namely the Leviticall worship of God injoined to these
Jews standing in much expense of in time regard of so many Sabboths, new
moons, and other solemn times to be observed, also requiring no small charge
in the performance of it, in regard of so many Sacrifices and oblations to be
made. Could now these coveteous and unbelieving people spare so much time or
cost upon God Almighty? Hear what God says of them concerning the one Amos,
8. 5. (when will the new moon be gone that we may sell Corn? and the Sabbath
that we may set forth wheat, making the Ephah small and the shekel great, and
falsifying the balances by deceit) These were their Thoughts if not their
words touching the time allotted to Gods Service. Just as men now-adayes. These
Sundays think they, is time clearly lost; we might have gained thus many
pence or pounds had it not that Sunday came in and hindered our business, we
wish it gone that we were at our Trading again. Likewise for the other to wit
the Charges they were put to in Sacrifice and offerings; hear what God reports
of their Practtices in that matter Mal. 1. 13. See the covetousnes and
Infidelity of that wretched People who think any thing is good enough for God:
fair and far Lambs, and sheep and Oxen, and Calves without spot, and blemish
(as was required in Sacrifices) oh this was too much Charges; was it not pity
to burn such good Cattle, and part with them for nothing? Sell them rather and
make money of them; as for the Altar and the Priest; any lean, starueling,
that is naught worth shall serve the turn well enough. Just as many men do in
setting their Children to several Professions, choose out the fairest and most
hopeful, and bestow one upon the Law, another upon Physic, another upon
Merchandise, or some other course whereby they may speedily rise to wealth and
greatness in the world. But now if there be ever a deformed Impe in body, mind,
and manners plant him in the Ministry; and why? they think God deserves the
worst Servants, because they deem him the worst master; in whose Service there
is least credit and hope of Preferment to be found.

For to end this use, let us a little observe the instance here in our Text
touching their repairing to the place of his worship three times a year: It is
evident that the Precept in this kind was very ill observed at all times by the
Jews. Happily at their first plantarion in Canaanwhen the great works of God
were yet fresh in their memories, their Faith in the Promises kept them some
what from the neglect of the Precept: How be it after the setting up of the
Tadernacle in Shiloh, when all Israel met together for that purpose Josh. 8. 1.
we do not find express mention made of the general keeping of the
Passover, till the days of Hezekiah and Ioshuah. That these yearly
Assemblyes were observed by the Godly Israel^es appears by the Example of
Elkanah. 1. Sam. 1. 3. and likewise that they were not le^t utterly
unfrequented by the ordinary multitude appears by that counsel which Jeroboam
took. 1. King. 12. 26. 27. 28. fearing lest if the people should yearly go
up to Jerusalem they would at one time or other remember their duty toward
the house of David, and so revolt from him. For preventing of which mischief
that wicked king (not trusting Gods word) who by Ahiiah had promised if he
would be obedient as was David, God would build him a sure house like unto
David's. 1. King. 11. 38. [Perswaded the people that it was too much labor to
resort from all quarters so far as to Jerusalem;] they should take a shorter
cut to the golden calves at Dan, at Bethel.] Whereby it appears that as these
solemnities were observed by many, though not by the universal multitude of
all the males, so were they never observed before, or after, the division of
the kingdom. Which is plain by that which is recorded touching the Passover
kept in Hezekiahs time. 2. Chro. 30. where the Passover was proclaimed
throughout all Israel to be kept at Jerusalem, for says the Text, v^r. 5.
[they had not done it a long time in such sort as it was written^.] At which
time though much people, a very great congregation from all parts met together,
as it is, ver. 13. yet it was not observed of all: the Idolatrous Israelites
scorning and mocking at the messenger that published Hezekiahs decrees, ver.
10. Moreover touching the Passover kept after this in Josiah his time, the
Scripture says expreslie. 1. King. 23. 22. [surely there was not such a
Passover holden since the days of the Judges that judged Israel, nor in all
the days of the kings of Judah, nor of the kings of Israel.] See also 1.
Chron. 35. 18. This is a thing very remarkable that notwithstanding so
express a promise in this place, that yet so great negligence should creep
into so principal a part of the worship of God as the observation of the
Passover. But, my brethren, in this and those other examples we see that which
daily experience shows to be true, that it is a matter passing difficult to
obey God when carnal reason suggests that there is apparent likelihood of
gain by not doing, or of loss by doing what he commaundes us.

[Who is there even among you that would shut the doors for naught, or kindle
a fire at my Altar for naught. Mal. 1. 10.] Nay he gives a pound for a
pennyworth, and if thou will duly reckon all thy service, thy adventures, thy
losses on the one side, and thy gains on the other: at the foot of thy score
thou may write it down for a summa totalis (Godlynes is to me great gain.
1. Tim. 6. 6.) Be persuaded then to fit your selves resolutely to the Obedience
of Gods Commandments, hear much, pray much, live holily, deal justly, be
constant in Religion, fear no hazard, venture all, Credit, Goods, Life for
Gods cause; venture all, care not for the worlds Censure, what they think of
thee and thy estate fear thou God, and think of his name, and remember that
God promised that one day shall come [In which men shall discern between the
Righteous and the Wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves
him not Mal. 3. 18.] then they that think God now has forgotten his Servants
shall know that these is no unfaithfulness in the Almighty, but that he is as
he has ever promised to be a sure God, a bountiful rewarder of his Obedient
Servants.

viz: the maintenance of his worship and Service, but by a trick of his own
devising. Jeroboam will set up Idolles, and what gets he by that but the shame
and destruction of himself and his Posterity? The Coveteous Jews would not
spare the fat Cattle for Sacrifices; what save they by that? not much; they
have Sheep, and get Gods curse upon it and themselves to Mal. 1. 14. (Cursed
be the deceiver, etc.)

In a word get what thou can get, if thou gain not Gods favor, it is not a
saving bargain, I will not be thy halver. He makes an ill match that winnes
the world and loses God and his own Soul. Wherefore to end, let us reform
our Judgments touching our Service to God and our Service of sin: know we
henceforth that no course is so thriving as that; none so unprosperous as this.
Pray we for the Public, that the Peace of our State may be always as it is,
founded upon the Purity of Religion: endeavor for our private, to provide for
the Peace of our Consciences, the happiness of our lives, the salvation of our
souls by our faithful and constant Obedience unto the Gosple. Let us live by
Faith, and let our eyes be fixed upon the Crown of Glory prepared for us, and
then we shall see that there is no service to be compared to the service of
this great King, who of Servants will one day make us Kings to reign, with him
for evermore.

FINIS
Canticles, or Solomon's song. 2. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his: he
feeds among the Lillies.
IN the former part of this Chapter as in the whole song throughout, the Holy
Ghost has described unto us under most excellent similitudes the great love
that is between Christ and his Church, that is, every faithful soul. This
love appears, 1. in the mutual commendations one of another, 2. in the mutual
desire of one unto the fellowship of the other. The praises which Christ gives
unto the Church are, that the church (the company of the faithful) has a
wonderful excellency above all other societies in the world. [Like a Lilly
amongst the thorns, so is my love amongst the daughters.] All the states and
societies of men upon the earth being compared to the Church they are but like
thorns unto Lillies and Roses without al beauty and delight, unpleasant and
harmeful Plants. The praise which the church gives to Christ is answerable to
the former: namely that among al persons of the world he only it is that
brings comfort and help unto her. [Like the apple tree among the trees of the
forest, so is my welbeloved among the sons of men.] Men and Angels withal
their glory, and greatness are but barren trees compared to Christ: they bring
no grace, no glory, no peace, no protection to the Church, only Christ is that
apletree whose boughs are full lade^, with that spiritual fruit which is that
which the Apostle speaks in other terms [Neither is there salvation in any
other: Act. 4. 12.
for among men there is no other name given whereby we must be saved.] Thus
mutuallie Christ prefers the Church, the Church Christ before all. The great
Joy which is between them, one to enjoy the other follows at large in the next
verses. The Church desires always to enjoy Christ's favor and protection, his
graces to be bestowed upon her, his power and Spirit to comfort her and support
her, in the fellowship of Christ she professes to be true Joy and contentment
[I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet unto
my taste.] [Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance pleasant.] Lastly be testifies his care of her
safety, that she be not spoiled by foxes, Heritiques, or other enemies, that
would lay her wast. All which is larglie expressed from the 8th verse to the
16th verse. After the declaration of so great affection of the faithful toward
Christ, and of Christ toward them again follow by way of conclusion* the words
of my text giving us a short sum of all together, My beloved is mine and I am
his he feeds, etc.

In these words the Church briefly comprehends the whole Mystery of that
spiritual communion which she has with Christ, the gloriousness of it, the
desire she has to enjoy it more fully. More distinctlie observe these
particulars. First the title which the Church gives unto Christ calling him her
Well-beloved, my Well-beloved. Secondly the communion or the fellowship, that is
between Christ, and the Church. What is in Christ serves for the comfort of
the Church; what in the Church, all is for the glory and honor of Christ (he
is mine and I am his) This communion and mutual intercourse of all good things
between Christ, and the faithful is amplified by two particulars. First the
excellency of it, in that it is full of all heavenly comfort, and sweetness
[he feeds amongst the Lillies] not in barren, and unpleasant places, [Vntill
the day break and the shadows flee away, turn my beloved, and be like the
Roe or the young Heart upon the topps of the mountains of Bether.] Under which
Alegorie the Church desires, that which she elsewhere in plain terms prays
for [Come Lord Jesus, Rev. 22. 20.
come quickly] that like a Roe or an Heart, (that is) swiftly he would afford
his assiistance and presence, to releive her in the time of her Warfare in this
world [till the night be past, and the shadows thereof be gone, (that is) all
such imperfections, afflictions, sin, temptations, and misery that be upon
her in this life be taken away [when the day shall breake] The day of Christ's
glorious coming which the Church shall enjoy in all fulness of Happiness in the
presence of God and Christ for ever. This is the plain relation and meaning of
this Scripture, nor will I trouble this place with any further scruple about
the words. I come rather to give you some Instruction for your practice. The
first lesson is from the tittle of (Well-beloved) it is this.

That Christ is the only well Beloved of a Faithful Christian. This is that
which the Church so often repeats in this whole song, stiling Christ her fair
one, her Beloved, her well-beloved, him whom her soul loves, him who^ she only
admires, of him she talks, is never well but when she enioies his presence.
What is thy beloved more then another beloved? she can soon answer and tell
us wherefore it is, that all her affection is placed upon Christ, such
excellencies there be in him, ^o much happiness is there in her fellowship
with him that none but he deserves her entire true love, and Affection. Good
reason then a faithful soul should love Christ.

1. Chapter 5. 10.
he is the fairest of ten thousand, nay he is fairer then all the children of
men. Psalm. 45. 2.
Consider him in his graces, consider him in his glory never any person more
lovely and amiable. 1 For his graces, he is enriched with all the beauty of
holiness, Ioh. 3. 34.
he has received the Spirit without measure, he is anointed with the oil of
gladness (that is) the holy Ghost, Heb. 1. 9.
and with power above his brethren. When he was upon the earth how sweet, and
lovely was his carriage, how innocent (...) unblameable, what Man or Devil
could charge him with the least offense? Obedient he was in all things, to his
Parents, Rulers, to Caesar, to God. In every point he fulfilled all
Righteousness to the least Title, and Jot of the Law. Grace was powered into
his lips, and from them into his heart, and the hearts of all them with whom he
conversed in most divine and heavenly discourses. Charity filled his heart and
from thence flowed forth on all that had need of help: he did good where it was
not expected: he did good where it was refused. What kindness was done unto him,
but it returned upon the head of the doer with abundant recompense? What
injuries did he not pass by, and pardon? He endured a world of indignities,
persecutious, revilings, reproaches, and in the midst of all is so far from
minding revenge, that he prays and weeps for his enemies, admonishes them
with all meekness, heaps kindnesses on them, and seeks by all means to
overcome their evil by his goodness. Goodness is his whole nature, his whole life
is nothing but a trade of doing well, and suffering evil. Such was the
sweetness of his nature and so affectionatelie charitable was his heart, that no
froward, and crooked perversenes of scornful, proud, gainesaying,
disobedient men could turn away his desires from doing them good. In all this
he was amiable as man, even a man in abasement and infirmity, yet then was he
glorious full of grace and truth. But now look on him in his person, Ioh. 1.
14.
and in his glory, and these excellencies are redoubled, nay multiplied a
thousand fold. Consider him in his person, Coloss. 2. 9
and so they are infinite: because in him all the fullness of the godhead
dwells bodyly, and the graces of God are his graces, because he is God.

As for his glory, it is not for mortal eye to behold it, or tongue to tell
it: he was abased, but God has highly exalted him above all names and
dignities: Phil. 2. 9.
he has made him head of the Angels, who adore him; of the Church to rule it
by his spirit, Ruler of the world to govern it by the scepter of his power; he
is now sat down at the right hand of Majesty and Glory, the father having
put into his hands all power in heaven and earth, and committed unto him all
power over Men and Angels. To which greatness of his power is equal the glory
of his person invested with the robes of Majesty, brightness, imp^ssibility,
and all other excellencies that can be imagined most excellent. When we read
the description of his transfiguration on the Mount, Mat. 17.
of his appearance to Saint Paul, Act 9.
to St John, we may conceive a little what they saw, Revel. 1.
but it is heareafter that we shall see him as he is. Now unto all these graces;
1. Ioh. 3. 2.
these glories of Christ join that which is the fountain of all, from whence
ye shall see the parts of his complete excellencies. That now is the infinite
love of God the Father toward him his only Son. He is his delight, Prove. 8.
3.
his elect in whom his soul delights, his beloved son in whom he is well
pleased; Esa. 42. 1.
so that if we would seek for a pattern of all excellencies, Mat. 3. 17.
they were no where to be found, but only in him. No marvel if the Church,
the faithful (whose eyes are opened to behold those things in Christ) do love
him, a person so beloved of god, so lovely in himself, so gracious, so
glorious. But this is not all, they love him also.



1 First in this life she has grace and protection, grace from his spirit,
protection from his power, both from his Love. The Church is sanctified by his
spirit, he baptizeth it with his Spirit, washing the faithful with clean
water from the filthynes both of the flesh and spirit: he has freed them from
that loathsome uncleanness of corrupted Nature, wherein the ungodly remain,
polluted with all unclean lusts, he sets them all at liberty from the bondage
of sin, of servants to sin making them servants to God in righteousness: he
lives in our hearts by faith, and changes our sinful natures into the
likeness of his most glorious nature by the powerful works of his spirit,
sending life into us who were wild, and withered branches, that being quickened
thereby, we might bring forth fruit according to God in all holiness.

2 Secondly the Church is protected by the power of Christ from the malice of
Satan whether he act; plot, contriue destruction against whole Churches, or by
temptations feeke to undo the souls, Rev. 1. 20.
and salvation of private men. Christ walks in the midst of the
Candlestickes, Revel. 1. 20. he only that has placed them can remove them: he
has his stars his Ministers in his right hand, where they shall be sa^e: he
has all those that God has given him in his keeping and none shall pluck
them from him, all are kept safe to that everlasting kingdom. In peace he is
the glory of his Church, in trouble the safety of it: if she be in the
wilderness, he is the Angel that goes before her to give her rest, if she be
persecuted he has a wilderness whereto she may flee, there be cleft; and
holes in the rock wherein she shall be hid, and if the Dragon cast forth
whole flowds of malice to overwhelme her, the earth shall open her mouth, and
swallow up the flowds, if she be invaded with Armadoes he can blow with his
breath, and they shall sink into the bottom of the deep like lead; if
vnder-mined by a Powder Plot, he can bring to light the deeds of darkness,
and save his anointed and his people, by a deliverance as wonderful as the act
intended. In a word his heart is upon his Church, and faithful people, their
sorrows he thinks upon, their afflictions, his afflictions, he is pained when
they are persecuted, in every distress he is near at hand to afforde succor:
in health to save them from sickness; in sickness to save the^ from death: in
trouble of estate and pain of body, to preserve them from a disquiet mind, in
anguish of soul to uphold from fainting by despair. In life to save them from
a thousand deaths, in death it self to deliver them from that death, which is
to come. Thus is Christ beneficial to us in this life.

But in the life to come he bestows glory on the Church: the Saints shall be
made perfectly righteous, perfectly glorious like unto himself: where he is,
there they shall be for ever to behold his glory, to be partakers of his joy.

You see then that Christ every way deserves all our love, seeing he is not
only most excellent in himself, to it as a bundle of Myrrh, a cluster of
Camphire, that he is fair and pleasant and wholly delectable. Let us now make
some use to our selves of this point.

[They made me keeper of the vines but I kept not mine own vine,] she
attended on the fancies and pleasures of others, but not on her own welfare,
this we may apply unto the profaneness of most men, who have Vines, enough to
keep and dress where about Satan and their own lusts have set them on
work, but for that true Vine which is Christ Jesus, they take no pleasure at
all, in resting themselves under his shadow, or tasting his pleasant fruit. Men
have many things to busy their affections about, but while they tend other
things they are utterly careless of this one thing that is the chiefest. One
man has set up preferment and greatness in the World for the idol which he
worships, and all his time, means and thoughts are taken up in prosecution of
some plot whereupon he has contrived his farther advancement. Another wallowes
in all base pleasure, and so long as he can content the beastly part of
himself, his sensual desires; he thinks himself well-apaid, he enioies
what he loves, and what needs he more. Another loves nothing but money and
cattle, and trees, and earth, it is his happynes to say all this is mine, and
when he is amidst those things he is amidst all his contentments. In short,
every man has his welbeloved in some kind or other; but it is not the beloved
here spoken of. No (my brethren) these men love not Christ say they what they
will, they make little reckoning of him. Come to the trial of it and you shall
see it so. The old saying's true, Vbi Amor, ibi Oculus, where we like, there we
look; or as Christ says, where our treasure is there will our hearts be also,
Mat. 6. 21.
Mat. 6. 21. Consider then your selves, in your thoughts what is it you most
think of? Is it of Christ, of his excellencies, of his benefits? Can you take
pleasure in describing to your souls the glorious and gracious qualities of
his person, musing attentively upon such admirable excellencies, so far
surpassing all that in this world can be called either gracious or glorious?
Are our hearts often warmed with heavenly joy, when in our private meditations
we recount with our selves what great things he has done and will do for our
souls? To think how mightelie he has wrought in us by his spirit, to make us
alive, and keep us alive, when we were once dead in sins; how sweetly he
persuades our will and stubborn affections to yield obedience, how forcible
he assists us against most powerful temptations? Can we rejoice to think
what happynes we have in his favor, that he is a faithful friend to us in all
our necessities, to whom we may repair for counsel and comfort? Do his
consolations refresh our spirits, that when sin wounds us, his stripes heal
us, When Satan accuses us, he is our advocate to plead for us; when sorrows
and pains are upon us, he speaks peace unto our Souls, that in all wants and
troubles we can surely pray unto him, and pour out our souls into his bosom
who only gives them rest? Do we often meditate on that happynes he will one
day bring us unto, when he shall make us like himself, most glorious in our
bodies, most righteous in our souls, most blisfull in all, and that for ever?
Be our thoughts (my brethren) on these things? Run our desires and wishes this
way? Oh what strangers are such meditations from most men's hearts! they think
what they shall eat, what they shall put on, how they shall bring the year
about* how they shall pay this debt, purchase that field, that house, provide
to raise such a son, to marry such a daughter, to grow rich, to get high
places, titles, and offices, how to follow their pleasures and live at hearts
ease, how they may effect their wicked designs, oppress a man, and his
inheritance, revenge such wrongs as have been done them by their neighbors,
and watch them an ill turn to be even with them, yea these be the great and
mighty employments of men's thoughts, where about they busy themselves, and
often break their sleep, day and night, the whole week, the whole year,
their minds run upon these things, when they be at Church at prayer, in
hearing, at any good exercise the heart still wanders about such matters, even
at this present. Is it not even so my brethren, which of us can excuse our
selves, and say my heart is innocent? Consider we again the practices of men,
whether they will stand with the love they profess to Christ: we will do much
for one that we love, especially if it be one that can do much for us. Now
what says our Savior. 14. Ioh. 15.
If you love me keep my commandments. Ioh. 14. 15. If Christ be our beloved,
his commandment; must be so too. Whosoever hates the law hats the Lawgiver
also. Take a view then of men's practices, and we shall see, they make a very
scorn of Christ, and of his commandments. Look upon them in their families,
and you cannot find any footsteps of religion, no constant prayer morning and
evening: no reading of the word, no instruction of children and servant, no
duties of devotion whereby you shall know them from Papists, Atheists, or
Infidels. See them in the public worship of God, and there is nothing but
negligence and profaneness, seldom at church if any business else be to be
done, and when they are there, they are careless in prayer, in hearing of the
word read, or preached, nothing is remembered for which they are a ^ote the
better. Look upon them in their private conversation, and they are full of all
ungodliness, unrighteousness, and vnsobernesse, horrible swearers, that cannot
speak but they must blaspheme, profane despisers of Gods word, and worship,
deriders of preaching and preachers, in a word, enemies to all godliness and
piety of life, which by reproaches, and unchristian revilings, they seek to
blast in who^soeuer they see it grow, extremely ignorant, knowing nothing
distinctly in matters of Religion, not able with any understanding to give you
a reasonable account in any point of their faith. In civil dealing me^ that
are unfaithful, untrusty, unmerciful. In their carriage proud, disdainefull,
luxurious, wanton and unclean persons. May we believe such men when they say
Christ is their beloved? Surely we cannot though they should swear it. What?
love Christ, yet not know him, except it be by his name; love him? And yet
despise his servants, his service, his Ministers, make a jest at his word, and
put off with a scoff the counsels and rebukes which out of it are brought to
them. Love Christ? Yet set thy mouth against heaven, and in thy rage and
hellish surie discharge thy blasphemies upon his soul, his body, his blood,
his wounds, his name, upon all that is precious in him, and not to be named but
with devotion. Will thou say thou love Christ, when thou have no heart to
think on him, to talk of him, to be in his presence, in the assemblies of
Gods people in public, at sermon, at sacraments, at private prayers? Is he thy
friend? And yet art though loath to have any thing to do with him, in such
places, in such exercises? In fine where is thy love to Christ, whilst I see thy
ungodly life, whereby thou dishonourest Christ* and shamest the name of a
Christian? If by these practices we shall know thy love of him, whereby I
mervaile shall we know thy hatred of him. But, brethren* be not deceived, God
will not so be mocked, delude thy self thou may, but Christ thou can not
with such fair glosses: it is not him whom thou love, it is some thing else,
thy pleasures, thy wealth, thy lusts, the world, the Devil. These be the
things whereon thy affections dote, whereto thy desires are fastened, these
things thou can serve, let the^ command any thing, thou art at a beck to
do it, it is thy felicity to be employed by them. If any will cross thee in
these thy courses, admonish thee, rebuke thee, persuade thee, thou can not
brook them, thou countest them thine enemies, that thus trouble thee; when
thou art entreated by thy love to God, thy love to Christ, thy love to his
word, by thy love to his Ministers, by thy love to thine own soul, by all
things that are lovely, and by all loves to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and to live righteously, soberly, and godly. Would thou not be persuaded to
reason; did thou indeed love any of these, as in word thou professest to do:
but when all admonitions, reprehensions, exhortations, or whatsoever good
counsel given in the name of Christ shall not yet be entertained for the love
of Christ, but fall upon the heart like the hammer on the anvill, that strikes
but enters not, or like a ball from a wall be smitten back into the face of
him that sent it, with scorn and contempt of him, his message, and his
Minister too, say what thou will, thy tongue belyes thine heart, Christ is not
he whom thy soul loves, when thou will do nothing for his sake, take it for
a conclusion, he hates Christ that hates Christianity.

with our eyes, things that are a far off though of greater and bigger
circuit, yet seem far less then those things that are nearer at hand. The
earth, and earthly pleasures they are hard by, we taste see and handle them, we
find the sweetness of them by their present possession, their natures agree
with ours, they are carnal, and so are we, and therefore they will sort with
our sensual desires: But now for Heaven and it is Joy; for Christ, and his
graces, and glories, they are matters a far off, out of our kenne, we hear
much talk of them in word, but our fleshly minds cannot raise up themselves
so high, as to conceive the true worth of them, by that which we hear spoken
of them; such spiritual things, fit not with our earthly dispositions, and
therefore when we hear of them (take away a few faint desires, that dye of
themselves) we have otherwise indeed no great liking of them, we ful^^ll every
of us more or less the Prophecy of Esaias, foretelling how corruptly men would
judge touching Christ and his conditions, even we think that He has no form
nor comeliness, Esaias. 3. 3.
and when we shall see him there is no such beauty that we should desire him.
Look how meanly the Jews esteemed of Christ in his abasement upon Earth, so
do Christians now judge of him though in his glory, they see no such great
excellency as men speak of in Christ, in his graces, his word, his ministers
his service, that they should be so much carried away with the love of him, or
his. How often do men ask that question in their hearts, Which the daughters
of Jerusalem asked the Church, What is thy beloved more then another beloved,
Cant. 5. 9.
O thou fairest among women, what is thy beloved more then another beloved that
thou do so charge us? What need such ado, such calling and seeking and
enquiring of the Watchmen of the city; such charging of us to tell him to
thee, if we find him is there any such singular dignity in this thy beloved
above others? so men in their hearts and tongues do enquire strangely touching
Christ and religion, they wonder what great matters we find in Christ, and his
service, what good they get by so much prayers, preaching, running to Sermons,
and hearing; by such strictness in their lives, and all this for the love of
Christ, and conscience of his commandments: they see not where the benefit is,
and it even angers them that others should admire what they see not, for any
thing they perceive grace desires not so mmch law as God; the communion of
Christ has not so much delight in it, as that wi^h they call goodfellowship;
filthy pleasures relish sweeter, then the joys of the spirit, and peace of a
good conscience; they can love the world and the things in the world, be it an
impure strumpet, the very image of the devil as well, nay rather then Jesus
Christ. The brightness of Gods glory, Heb. 1. 3.
and expesse image as he is called of his person, This doctrine of loving
Christ soundes strangely in the ears of carnal men; Wherefore that we may
make a right use of this instruction two things are to be obtained before we
shall love Christ.

1 Knowledge of Christ, what are his excellencies in himself and benefits
toward us. This knowlede is the mother of affection, What the eye sees not the
heart rues not; and it is true on the other side, what the eye sees not the heart
joys not. Wherefore all means must be used to get a distinct knowledge of
Christ, in all the forenamed particulars. e Perfectly we shall not know him in
this life, neither shall we perfectly love him, but so far as the word has
described him to us we may and must know him.

2 Holiness of heart: for Christ, and all things in him are holy, heavenly,
and spiritual, and our affections will never take to them, till they be made
like to them heavenly and spiritual, it is indeed natural to love some things,
but to love God that's from grace, this affection is found only in the church,
it is the soul calls Christ wellbeloued, those that are regenera^e, whose
hearts are sanctified, those virgins are spoken of in the third verse of the
first chapter, who have smelt the odor of the sweet perfumes, and ointments of
the Grace of Christ shed abroad in their hearts: these love Christ, and none
else. When thus the eyes of our minds are enlightened, and our sinful hearts
changed, then shall we begin unfeignedly to love and admire those treasures of
knowledge and Wisdom those exceeding riches of grace and glory which are
stored in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ: we shall then look upon all
that good is the world which before we loved and magnified, now comparing it
with Christ we shall conclude with the Apostle, Phil. 3. ^.
The things which were advantage to me, the same I cannot loose for Christ's
sake, and judge them to be dung that I may win Christ. It will be with us as
it was with the daughters of Jerusalem before spoken of, who at first
ignorantly and somewhat scornefully asked the spouse what was her beloved, that
she sought so much after him, but when she had at large described him in all
his excellencies, and told them: This is my beloved, this is my love O
Daughters of Jerusalem, Now their eyes are opened, and their hearts touched,
Cant. 5. 16
they are as desirous to go seek him as the spouse her self and now they
begin to enquire of her O thou fairest among women, whether is thy beloved
gone, whether is he turned asiae, that we may go and seek him with thee chap.
6. 1. Now the lord open our eyes by his spirit, that we may clearly see and
ardently love Christ, to whom with the father, etc.

FINIS

