VINDICIAE FIDEI, OR A TREATISE OF JUSTIFICATION BY Faith, wherein that point
is fully cleared, and vindicated from the cauils of it is adversaries. Delivered
in certain Lectures at Magdalen Hall in Oxford, By William Pemble, Master of
Arts of the same house: And now published since his death for the public
benefit.

PHILIP. 3. 9. -- And he found in him not having mine own righteousness, which
is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith. OXFORD Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD and
WILLIAM TVRNER, for Edward Forest. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL MASTER DOCTOR WILKINSON Principal of Magdalen Hall:
The Masters, Batchelours, and other Students of that flourishing Society.
SIRS
Custom has made dedication of books almost as common, as Printing of them:
and Wisdom directs there to dedicate, where we owe either respect, or thanks:
this work therefore is yours by right, the Author thereof (who is now with
God) undertaking it at your request, and performing it amongst you for your
good, so that now to bestow it upon you is not a gift, but retribution: and I
hope, it will both stir you up to be careful to continue fit men to stand up
in his place, and remain to his successors as a pattern of imitation, if it
be too high for aemulation. To commend this Author to you, were to bring Owls
to Athens, and for me to commend the work, would not add much worth to it: I
know nothing can disparage it, unless it be a naked Margent: but you and all
that will be pleased to take notice of his years, and great abilities in all
humane learning, will confess he could not have time to read many Fathers, and
so that defect may be easily pardoned. For he had fully finished six lusters
of years, yet had he thoroughly traced the circle of the Arts, and attained to
an eminency, not only in those ordinary Sciences, wherein all Scholars have
some smattering, but even in those sublimer speculations of which all are not
capable, few search after: For he was export in the Mathematickes both mixed,
and pure: his skill in Histories was also praiseworthy: sometime he spent (and
not without success) in travailing to learn (...) and much travail in the
study of our home-taught tongues, that he had worth to lai^e been Professor
(...), or H^brew: all which indowments, as they (...) afterward have enabled
him to read with much profit, so could they not choose but prevent younger
years from reading at all the ancient Fathers, so it was not want, but
abundance of learning, that took up his time, and prevented his Margent, and
therefore I hope shall not disparage this work. The first weapon young Fencers
learn to use is single sword, when they are masters of that, they enlarge
their skill; our Author was but young, let it not prejudice him, that he first
uses only the sword of the Spirit, the word of God; especially since that is so
dexterously weelded, that by it alone he has deadly wounded the Romish
Leuiathan: Therefore (as in my knowledge* these Lectures were heard with much
applause, so do I persuade my self, they will be read with great approbation,
and occasion the publishing of other Lectures, and private labors, wherein he
took no less pains, nor deserved less praise, then in his public
endeavors. So hoping that you will accept this small pains of mine, I take my
leave, and rest

From Tewkeisbury this 9th of July. 1625. Yours: willing to do you greater,
though not more acceptable service, JOHN GEREE.

To the Christian Reader.
GEntle Reader, this Treatise was neither finished nor polished by the Author:
He left it with me when he died, to be dealt with as cause should require;
upon perusal, I found it fit for the time, so full of lif^ so sound and clear
in proof, that in my conceit it will do much good: and here thou have it, as
he left it. The argument is of all, indifference betwixt us and Papists the
chiefest, no controversy more disputed, and less agreed upon then this.
Christ and his blood is the maine cause of our spiritual peace; Papists and
others divide with him, and take something to themselves: the spiritual pride
that is in the heart of man, would feign have a finger in the work of
salvation, of other controversies betwixt us and the other party: some before
the Popes Kitchen, some for the Popes crown, but this of our Justification,
touches the life of Grace to the quick, breeds more in our flesh then any,
and th^se sicknesses are most dangerous, that come from within. It is a
fundamental case, wherein to fail, takes away the essence of a Christian:
Wherefore since there is now such need to have the world confirmed in this truth
of God, I thought good to send this book abroad, wherein this is put out of
question to any man of a single eye; that we are not justified by any thing we
any thing we can do or suffer.

Many write books, and confute them themselves when they have done; but this
our Author what he wrote, he believed; for being to die, he confirmed this
Truth, in a discoursefull of life and power, and professed to take his last
upon it, that it was the very truth of God. We read that some learned
Papists, when they are to give up the ghost, disclaim their own merits, and
would feign find all in Christ alone: but this our Author did it before
sundry, with that life, and feeling, (...) clear apprehension of the love of
God in his Son, that such is heard him, and loved him well and long, could
not well tell, whether they should weep, or rejoice; weep, to see a friend
die, rejoice to see him die so. Good Reader, learn this holy instruction out
of this book: that we are not to be found in our own righteousness at all, and
believe it; thou shall have as he had, peace passing all understanding, in
life, and in death, for being justified by says (not by works) we have peace
with God says Saint Paul. If any ingenuous learned Papist would undertake to
answer this book, me thinks I might prophecy that as Vergezius (Bishop of
Capo d' Istria, and Nuncio to Clement the seventh, and Paul the third) reading
Luther, to answer Luther, was converted, and had his soul saved. And as
Pighius, tho of a peevish Spirit enough, yet reading Calvin, to confute Calvin,
was in the very doctrine of Justification confuted himself, and wrote with us.
So I say, would a modest Papist read this book to reply unto it, he could not
but see the truth, and yield unto it. For tho many have done excellently in
this argument, yet to speak my opinion freely, at least for perspicuitie, this
surpasses them all. Farewell.

Thine in Christ, Rich. Capel.

A TREATISE OF JUSTIFICATION.
CHAP. I.
The explication of these terms. First, Justice, or Righteousness. Secondly,
Justification.
Having by Gods Assistance dispatched two of those general points at first
proposed (touching the Antecedents and Nature of true Faith) we are now by the
same help to go forward to the third general head; namely, Sect. l. ^. 1.
concerning the Consequents of Faith, which were two, our Justification in
regard of God, and our Obedience in regard of our selves. The former will show
us how to judge of the dignity and excellent worth of Faith; being so far
honored in Gods gracious acceptance, as to be made the blessed Instrument of
our spiritual peace and comfort flowing from our Justification. The later will
direct us how to make trial of the truth of our faith in the discovery of that
inseperable Union which there is between believing, and obeying.

Let us begin with the former, our Justification, the doctrine whereof I shall
endeavor to deliver unto you, as briefly and plainly: as so large and
difficult a subject will give leave. Wherein because the opening of the word
will give us some light for the understanding of the matter: we are in the
first place to see what is meant by these words, Justification, and Justice, or
Righteousness.

Justice, therefore, or Righteousness (that I mean which is created, for of
uncreated Righteousness, we have not to speak) is nothing but a perfect
conformity and agreement with the Law of God. For Gods will being originally,
essentially, and infinitely righteous; must needs be the pattern and ^ule of
all derivatiue and finite righteousness. Now this righteousness (though but
one, in its substance, never thelesse) admits a double consideration, being
called either,

1 Legal and of Works, which stands in that conformity unto Gods law, which
is inherent within our selves, when in our own persons and works we possess
and practice that righteousness which is required of the Law.

This Legal Justice is also double,

1 Of Obedience, when all such things are done, as the Law commands; or left
undone which it forbids. He that does so is a just man.

2 Of Punishment or Satisfaction, when the breach of the Law is satisfied by
enduring the utmost of such penalties, as the rigor of the Law required. For
not only he who does what the Law commands: but even he also that suffers
all such punishments, as the Lawgiver in Justice can inflict for the breach of
the Law, is to be accounted a lust man, and reckoned after such satisfaction
made, as no transgressor of the Law. The reason of this is plain from the name
of penal Laws.

For first, where the penalty is suffered, there the will of the Lawgiver is
satisfied; for as much as his will was, either that the Law should be observed,
or the punishment undergone. If therefore he, to whom the Law is given, do
either: he satisfies the will of the Lawgiver. Had his will been absolute, so
that nothing else could have contented him, but only obedience: then it had
been a vain thing to have prescribed a determinate penalty. But when as a
penalty is limited in case of disobedience, it is manifest that though the
intent of the Lawgiver was in the first place for Obedience; yet, in the next
place it should suffice, if there were satisfaction by bearing of the penalty.

Secondly, the good and benefit of the Lawgiver is hereby also satisfied. For
it is to be supposed in all penal laws, that the penalty limited is every way
proportionable and equivalent, unto that good which might accrue by the
observation of the Law. Else were the wisdom of the Lawmakers justly to be
taxed, as giving an apparent encouragement to offenders; when they should see
the penalty, not to be so much hurtful to them; as their disobedience were
gainful. He therefore that suffers the penalty is afterward to be reckoned as
if he had kept the Law: because by his suffering, he has advanced, the
Law-giuers honor, or benefit, as much as he could by his obeying.

2 Evangelical, and of Faith, which is such a conformity to Gods Law as is not
inherent in our own persons; but being in another is imputed unto us and
reckoned ours. The righteousness of the Law, and of the Gospel, are not two
several kinds of righteousness; but the same in regard of the matter and
substance thereof: only they differ in the Subject and Manner of application.
The righteousness of works is that holiness and obedience which is inherent
in our own persons and performed by our selves: the righteousness of Faith is
the same holiness and obedience inherent in the person of Christ and performed
by him; but embraced by our faith, and accepted by God, as done in our stead,
and for our benefit.

These are the diverse acceptions of this word Justice or Righteousness; so
far as it concerns the point in hand.

In the next we are to enquire of this word Justification; which being nothing
but the making of a person just or righteous, may be taken in a double sense.
For a person is made just either by Infusion, or Apology. We will take it in
these terms for want of better.

Justification by Infusion, is then, when the habitual quality of
Righteousness and Holiness is wrought in any person by any means whatsoever;
whether it be created and infused into him by the work of another; or
obtained by his own art and industry. Thus Adam was made just. Eccle. 7. 29.
God having given unto him in his creation the inherent qualities of Justice and
holiness. Thus also the regenerate are made Just, in as much as by the holy
Ghost, they are sanctified through the real infusion of grace into their
souls; in the which they increase also more and more, by the use and exercise
of all good means.

Justification, by Apology is, when a person accused as an offender is
iudicially or otherwise, acquitted and declared to be innocent of the fault:
and so free from the punishment. When the innocence of a party accused is thus
pleaded and declared; he is thereby said to be justified, or made just*
according as, on the contrary by Accusation and Condemnation, a party is said
to be made unjust. As it is plain by that of Isaiah, 5. 23. [ They justify the
wicked for a reward: and take away the righteousness of the righteous from
him] that is, they condemn the righteous, which is a making of them,
unrighteous in the sight and estimation of men. So in 1 Ioh. 5. 10. [ He that
believes not God, has made him a lyer] because unbelievers do in their hearts
call Gods truth into question: and accuse him to be false of his word. So
again, Psalm. 109. 7. [ When he is judged, let him be condemned.] (...). Let
him go out a wicked person. For so his condemnation makes him (that is)
declares him to be. But here further it must be observed, that this
Justification of a person, by pleading to, and absolution in Judgment, is of
two sorts; according as the Persons to be justified, are likewise of two
several conditions.

1 Some are truly and inherently just, being no Transgressors of the Law;
either at all; or not in that whereof they are accused. In this case if any
crime, or suspicion of crime, be laid to their charge; they are justified;
either by a plai^e denial of the fact, alleging that the fault whereof they
are accused, was never by them committed; or by denying the evil of the fact,
alleging that in so doing they have done well, because they have done what the
Law commanded; and that's their warrant. Thus Samuel iustifies his government
against all surmise of fraudulent and wrongful dealing, that the people might
imagine by him. In 1 Samuel 12. 3. etc. Thus David cleares himself before God,
from that crime of conspiracy against Saul his Master, and seeking of the
Kingdom (which Cush and other Courtiers accused him of) professing his
innocence; and desiring God to judge him according to his righteousness and
integrity in that behalf: as it is Psalm. 7. 3. 4. 8. There need not other
instances in so plain a matter. Those that are justified by this means are
justified by that Righteousness which is of the Law and of Works. By which
plea though man may be justified before man: yet in the sight of God no flesh
living shall be justified. As hereafter we shall see.

2. Some are not truly righteous in themselves: but are in their own persons
transgressors of the Law. These (when they are accused) have no other means
whereby they may be justified, but by confessing the crime, and pleading
satisfaction: that for their transgression against the Law, and offense thereby
against the Lawgiver, they have fully satisfied by doing or suffering some
such thing, as by way of just penalty has been required of them. Now he that
can plead such a full and perfect satisfaction, ought therefore to be accounted
innocent, and free from all desert of further punishment (for it is supposed he
has endured the utmost of evil the Law could inflict:) and so he is to be
esteemed of, as if he had not at all violated the Law. For plenary satisfaction
for a fault, and the non-Commission of such a fault, are of equal Justice: and
deserve alike Justification. In which point, it must be no^ed, that if the
party offended do pardon without any satisfaction taken, there the offender is
not justified at all. And again if the offense be such, as there can be no
satisfaction made: then it is utterly impossible that the offender should ever
be justified. Now this satisfaction which an offender may plead for his
Justification, is threefold.

1 That which is made by himself in his own person. He that can plead this
kind of satisfaction, is justified Legally by his own righteousness and
merits.

2 That which is made by another for him; When another by consent and
approbation of the party offended, interposeth himself as surety for the party
delinquent, in his stead and name to make that satisfaction, which is required
of the party himself. Whether this be done by doing or suffering the same
things which the delinquent should have done or suffered, or some other things
but of equivalent worth and dignity. He that pleades this kind of
satisfaction, is justified Euangelically by grace, through the righteousness
of another imputed to him, and accepted for as his.

3 That which is made partly by himself and partly by another. Which kind of
satisfaction may have place between Man and Man: but between God and Man it
has none at all. Neither by this, nor by that first kind of satisfaction
which is done in our own Persons, can any man be justified in the sight of
God, but only by the second sort, that satisfaction which is made by another
for us. As we shall see afterward.

CHAP II.
In what sense the word Justification ought to be taken in the present
controversy, and of the difference between us and our Adversaries therein.
Having thus distinguished of these words, it follows that in the first
place, we enquire in which of the forenamed senses we are to take this word
Justification. The difference between us and our adversaries of the Romish
Church, is in this point very great and irreconcilable. They affirm that
Justification is to be taken in the first acception, for making of a Man Just
by infusion of Real Holiness into him. So that with them to Justify bears
the same sense as to purify or sanctify. that is of a person unclean,
unholy, unjust, to make him formally or inherently Pure, Holy and Just, by
working in him the inherent Qualities of Purity, Sanctity and Righteousness.

We on the contrary teach according to the Scriptures; That Justification, is
to be taken in the second acception, for the pleading of a persons innocence
called into Question: whereby he is iudicially absolved and freed from fault and
punishment. So that with us to justify a person is in judicial proceeding to
acquit him of the crime whereof he is accused, and to declare him free from
desert of punishment. Whether of us twain be in the right is very material to
be determined of, considering that all ensuing disputation touching the
Justification of a Sinner is to be framed upon one of these grounds, rightly
taken; and an error here is like a thread misplaced at first, that runs awry
afterward through the whole piece. Our Adversaries plead for their Assertion:
the Etym^logy of the word iustificare is iustum facere, in that sense (say
they) as P^rificare, Mortificare, Vi^ificare, and many the like signify to
make pure, to make dead or alive, by the real induction of such and such
Qualities.

Again they allege Scriptures; as namely Dan: 12. 3. [They that turn many
to righteousness [Heb. that justify many) shall shine as the Stars for euer]
Apoc. 22. 11. [Hee that is righteous (iustificetur) Let him be righteous
still.] Tit. 3. 7. [He has saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the holy Ghost, -- That being justified by his grace we should be
made Heirs according to the hope of eternal life.] Again, 1 Cor. 6. 11. [And
such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.] Romans
8. 30. Heb. 9.
Out of these with some other places (but such as have scarce any show of good
proof) they would feign conclude, that by Justification nothing else is meant,
but the Infusion of the Habit of Justice unto him, that was before sinful and
unjust.

Etymology that the signification of words is to be ruled, not by Etymologies:
but by the common use: -- Quem penes arbitrium est et vis and norma loquendi --
as the Poet truly defines. Now its a thing notorious that in the custom of all
Languages, this word Iustificare imports nothing but the declaration of the
Innocence of a person* and lawfulness of any fact: against such accusations as
impleade either, of injustice and Wrong. I will justify such a Man or such a
Matter (say we in English) and what English Man understands thereby any thing
but this, I will make it appear such a Man is honest, such a fact lawful,
howeuer questioned to the contrary. In other Languages my skill serves me not,
nor is it needful to trouble you with Instances. Those that have written of
this subject of every Nation witness every one for their own Language. And
further this word Iustificare being of a latter^stampe, unknown to such Latin
Authors, as are of ancient and purer Language, fitted by Ecclesiastical
writers to express the meaning of those two words of the Original (...) and
(...); it is apparent the Copy must follow the Original, and the Latin word
bear the same sense as the Hebrew and Greek words do. And that this is that
Legal sense which we have spoken of is a point so manifest throughout the
whole Bible: that nothing but impudency can deny it. As we shall presently
perceive.

For in the next place. 2 As to the Scriptures which Infusion of habitual
Justice: yet have they gained little thereby, For where ten or more may be
alleged against one in which the contrary signification is used, reason tells
us, that an Article and Doctrine of Religion ought to be framed out of the
signification of words and phrases, which is usual, ordinary, and regular; and
not out of that which sometimes comes in by way of particular exception. Might
he not be judged destitute of sense or modesty, that would quarrel at the
signification of the word Ecclesia, that in the New Testament it is not taken
for the Company and Assembly of the faithful, because in a place or two (as
Act. 19.) it is taken for any ordinary civil meeting of people together?
Wherefore we may grant them (...) in that of Dan. 12. and ((...) in Apoc. 22.)
is to be made just, formaliter, by infusion of inherent Holiness in a Sinner.
For so Ministers may be said to justify many (as it is in Daniel) viz. by
Ministry turn many to righteousness, directing them to the means of
Holiness, and as Gods Instruments, working in them the graces of Conversion
and Regeneration. And so he that is just (in the Apoc.) may be justified still:
(that is) increase in the inward Habit and outward Exercise of Holiness, more
and more. thus we may yield them in these two places without seeking too, other
Interpretations further off. And yet will this be no prejudice to our Doctrine
grounded upon the other signification so generally used.

We answer, Lib. 1. de Just, cap. 1*
that of all those other places alleged by Bell, and Becanus, there is not
any one that do necessarily See luke 18. 14 This Man went down to his house
justified rather then the other.His prayer was for pardon. God be merciful,
etc. For he went home Justified ( i.e) pardoned and absolved rather then the
Pharisee.
as he and his fellows stand for. These above the rest have most appearance,
namely, 1 Cor: 6. and Tit. 3. Rom 8. 30. where Justification is, say they,
confounded as one and the same with Sanctification; and Regeneration. Whereunto
I answer that they do ill to confound those things that the Apostle has
distinguished very plainly. He tells the Corinthians; that the Unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, and that themselves had bin such, even
of the most notorious rank: but now they were washed, sanctified and
Justified. By three words the Apostle expresses the change of their former
condition. One Metaphorical ( yea are washed) The meaning whereof he
declares in two proper words following. [ ye are Sanctified] that's one degree
of washing or clensing from the corruption of Nature (in part) by the [ Spirit
of our God] of whom is the gift of inherent grace. And [ ye are iustified]
that's another sort of washing, from the guilt of Sin (in the whole) [ in the
name of the Lord Iesus] that is, by the Righteousness and Merits of Jesus
Christ. Nothing can be more perspicuous and elegant. That place to Tit. Chap. 3
is also as plain. God ( says the Apostle) speaking of the Heirs and sonns
of GOD in Christ) (has saved us [ not by any works of ours; but by his own
mercy. ver. 5. This salvation is set forth to us in the Means and in the End.
The means are two Regeneration and Justification. [ He has saved us by the
washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost] This is the first
Means ( viz.) Regeneration Washing or doing away of the filthy Qualities of
our corrupted Natures. 2. Renewing, the Investing of it with new Qualities of
Graces and Holiness.

Holy Ghost, [whome he has shed on us abundant^y] or richly, following the
Metaphore, Which is referred, ad gratiam Regenerationis.
comparing the Holy Ghost in this operation to water powered out. 2 The
Meritorious Cause of it [ Through Jesus Christ our Saviour] who has procured
the sending down of the [ Holy ghost] into the hearts of the elect. ver. 6.
This is one stepp to Heaven, our Regeneration, but it is imperfect and cannot
abide the severity of Gods Judgments: now we must be absolutely free from all
fault and guiltiness before we can have hope of obtaining eternal Life:
Therfo^e follows the other means of salvation ( viz.) our Justification, by
the free grace of God which utterly frees us from all blame whatsoever, both of
obedience to the law and satisfaction for Sins against the law; that thus being
Regenerate and Justified we might obtain the end of our salvation, eternal
Life.

The third place is that [ Romans 8. 30, Whom God has Praedestinated, Tom. 2.
tract. 4. Cap. 2. Parag. ^.
these he has called, whom called, justified; whom justified, glorified] In
this place Becanus triumphs. For (says he) The Apostle here describing the
order of Man's salvation, first in Gods decree; then in the Execution of it by
three degrees of Vocation Justification and Glorification: it follows
necessarily from thence; that either Sanctification is left out: or that it is
confounded with one of those three degrees named. It Is a desperate shift to say
that Sanctification is signified by Vocation or Glorification: therefore it
must be the same with Justification; And this cannot be avoided by any Elusion.
We leave shifts to the Jesuits, returning him to this place, this plain
direct answer. That Sanctification is here comprised in the word Vocation. For
whereas the linkes of this golden chain are inseparable, and all those that
are called must needs be justified and glorified: by vocation, must here be
meant that calling which is inward and effectual, not that alone which is
outward by the external Ministry of the Word. For all that are thus called,
be not justified, as is apparent; and again, some, as Infants, are justified
that are not capable of such a Calling. But now; wherein stands the inward
vocation of a sinner? Is it not in the Infusion of inherent sanctifying Grace,
enlightening his Eyes, opening his Ear, changing his Heart, turning him from
darkness to light, from the power of Satan, to the obedience of God; in a
word, in the Renovation of his Fac^lties? Which what is it else but
Sanctification? or Regeneration? or Conversion? Only styled by that term of
Vocation in regard of the means whereby it is ordinarily effected (that is)
the preaching of the word. He must needs coin us some new Mystery in Divinity:
who will persuade us that some other work of Grace is meant by Vocation; and
not that of Sanctification. Therefore we have neither one Link snapt out, nor
two shuffled together in this chain of our Salvation: But four, as distinct,
as vndivideable. Election, Sanctification, (whereto we are called by the
Gospel preached, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 14.) Justification by Faith, (which is a fruit of
Sanctification) and Glorification.

The fourth place is that in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 13. 14. [For if
the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling them that
are unclean, sanctifies as touching the purifying of the flesh: how much more
shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself
without fault to God, purge our consciences from dead works, to serve the
living God.]

Hence they argue; That as Leuiticall Sacrifices and Washings did sanctify the
flesh from outward Legal impurity: so the Sacrifice of Christ does purge the
Conscience from inward spiritual uncleanness of dead Works or Sins.

This purging of the conscience is nothing, but justification of a sinner.
Wherefore (...) and (...) be all of one meaning.

To which I answer, That the Apostle in that Chapter, and the next disputing
of the virtue and efficacy of Christ's death, far exceeding the force of all
Leuiticall Sacrifices (the shadows of it) ascribes unto it what could not be
effected by those, ( viz.) eternal Redemption [ verse 12.] purging of the
conscience from dead works [ verse 12.] the putting away of sin, [ verse
26.] The Sanctification of the Elect, [ Chap. 10. 7. 10.] made Heirs according
to the hope of eternal life. In neither then of those places is our
sanctification confounded with our Justification: but both distinctly declared,
as two several parts of graces and means of the Accomplishment of our
eternal Happiness. It Is scarce worth the labor to examine those other
Scriptures produced by our Adversaries, whereof some part do directly cross,
and the rest do but only in appearance confirm their assertion. In general
therefore for them, thus much we confidently affirm, that let the Concordance
be studied, and all those places examined wherein either [(...)] is used in the
Old or [(...)] in the New Testament: there will not one be found, no not one,
in which those words carry any other meaning, Rom 6. 7.
then that which we stand for ( viz.) the clearing of a parties innocence
questioned as faulty, [(...)] significat liberatur: sed sersus loci d^scrimen
indicat.
and blameworthy. Take a taste of some places.

1 Justification is sometimes applied to 1. God, when Man iustifies God. As
Psalm. 51. 4. Romans 3. 4. [That thou Can there be any other meaning of
Justification here^: but this only? That God is then justified, when his
works, his wisdom, his sacred ordinances, being accused by profane men, as
untrue, unequal, vn^ust, and foolish, are by the Godly acknowledged, or any
other means evidently cleared unto all men, to be full of all Truth, Equity,
Wisdom, and Holiness?

2 Man and that

1 Before Man in things between Man and Man. Deuteronomy. 25. 1. [If there be a
controversy between Men, and they come unto judgment, that the Judge may
judge them, then they shall justify [(...)] the righteous and condemn the
wicked,] Isaiah 5. 23. [Woe to them which justify the wicked for a reward, and
take away the righteousness of the righteous from him] Proverb. 17. 15. [He
that justifies the wicked, and condemns the just, even they both are an
abomination to the Lord.] 2 Samuel 15. 4. [Oh that I were made Judge in the Land,
that every man that has any suit or cause, might come to me, and I would do
him Iusti^e. [(...)] In these and many the like places, to Justify is in iud^
ciall proceeding to absolve a party from fault and blame: whether it be
rightfully or wrongfully done. Ezekiel. 16. 52. [Be thou confounded and bear thy
shame, in that thou have justified thy sisters] speaks God unto Jerusalem; in
comparison of whose abomination the sins of Sodom and Samaria, were scarce
to be accounted any faults. They were Saints to her. Of the Pharisees Christ
speaks, Luke 16. 15. [Yee are they that justify your selves before men: but
God knows your hearts.] That is, You stand upon the defense and ostentation
of outward Holiness, and deeming it sufficient to make it appear before Men
you are holy: without regard of acquitting the sincerity of your hearts before
God.

Before God, where God iustifies Man Exodus 23. 7. [The innocent and the
righteous slay thou not, for I will not justify the wicked.] by esteeming him
as innocent, and letting him go from punishment. Isaiah 50. 8. (He is near
that justifies me, who will contend with me?) says the Prophet in the person
of Christ, signifying God would make it appear that he was blameless, for the
rejection of his people the Jews who perished for their own and not his
fault. Romans 5. 18. (As by the offense of one judgment came on all Men to
condemnation: So by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men
to the Justification of life,) Rom* 8. 33. 34. [Who shall lay thing to the
charge of Gods Elect? It is God that iustifies; who shall condemn? 1 Cor. 4.
4. [I know nothing by my self: yet in this am I not justified. He that
judges me is God. q. d. I have kept a good conscience in my Ministry, but God
is my judge, though my conscience pronounce me innocent, yet God is my sole
Judge that judges me and my conscience. Acts 13. 38. 39. [Through this Man is
preached unto you the forgiveness of sins; and from all things from which
ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses; by him every one that believes
is justified.

By which places (not to name more) it appears pl^inly: that Justification is
opposed to Accusation and Condemnation: and therefore can signify nothing else
but the defense and absolution of a person accused for an offender. Which thing
is so clear and evident that it cannot be gaynsayed, except by those alone who
are wilfully blind, and obstinately resolved to co^tradict any truth, that
makes against their inveterate errors. For our selves, we may not, nor dare not
shut our eyes against so clear Light: nor ought we to be so bold when God has
acquainted us with his meaning; as to follow another of our own making. And
there fore according to the Scriptures we acknowledge and maintain, that as in
other places where mention is made of the Justification of a sinner before God:
so in the 2 and 4 Chapters of the Ep. to the Romans and third Chapter of the Gal.
(where the Doctrine there of is directly handled) by Justification nothing else
is meant; but the gracious Act of Almighty God whereby he absolues a beleiuing
sinner accused at the Tribunal of his Justice, pronouncing him just and
acquitting him of all punishment for Christ's sake.

CHAP III*
The Confutation of our Adversaries cauils against our acception of the word
Justification.
OUR Adversaries have little to reply against these so plain places. Something
they answer, namely.

1 That it cannot be denied but that Justification, (...)
does many times bear that sense we stand for. But Quotiescunque in Scripturis
Deus dicitur iustificare impium: semper intelligendum est ex impio facere
iustum. God cannot declare a man to be just: but of unjust he must make him
just.] And they give the Reason. Because the Judgment of God is according to
Truth Romans 2. 2. We embrace this Rule and the Reason of it, acknowledging that
where ever there is Justification, there must be Justice some way or other in
the party Justified. But the Question stands still in what manner God makes a
sinner just: whom he in Iudgemenr pronounces so to be. They say by bestowing
on him the grace of Sanctification and perfect Righteousness inherent in his
own Person. We affirm, that it is by imputing unto him the perfect
Righteousness of Christ, accepting Christ's obedience for his. In which
diversity let us come as near them as Truth will give leave. Thus ^arre we
go along with them.

Holy Ghost renewing Man in the spirit of his mind, restoring in him the Eph^.
4. 24. Col. 3. 9.
Image of God in Eph^. 4. 24. Col. 3. 9.
Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness. That the Holy Ghost dwelles in the
Elect, as in 1 Cor. 3. 16. 6. 19. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Romans 8.
Temples dedicated to his service, which he adornes by communicating unto them
his Heavenly graces. That he makes them Living Romans 12. 5. 1 Cor. 12. 11.
Members of Christ's Body: and fruitful Ioh. 15. 4.
Branches of that true Vine. That this grace infused is a fountain of Ioh. 4.
14.
Living water springing up to eternal Life. These things we believe and teach.

Wherefore whereas the Popish Doctors fall foul on our reformed writers,
charging Calvin and others for denying all Inherent Righteousness in
Believers, and maintaining only an Imputed Righteousness without them: We tell
them it is a gross Calumny forged by perverse. Minds, that list not to
understand Men's playnest writings. Nor Calvin Call. Iustit. lib. 3 cap. 1^.
nor any that ever maintained the truth with him, ever denied the Righteousness
o^ Sanctification. But this he denies and we also with the Scriptures that the
Righteousness which iustifies us in Gods Judgment is not in our selves: but
all in Christ.

That inherent Righteousness or sanctification allway Justification, in the
same Person. Severed they are never in their common Subject ( viz) a True
Believer. as appears Romans 8. 30. Romans 8. 30.
But that therefore they must be confounded for one and the same Grace and
work of God; may be affirmed with as good Reason: as that in the Sun Light
and Heat are all one: because always joined to geather.

That by this grace of Inherent Righteousness, a Man Job, David, Zachary and
other holy Men; who were good and did good in Gods sight. Yea in the Life to
come when (all corruptions being utterly done away*) the Saints shallbe
invested with perfection of Inherent Holiness: by the Righteousness of their
own, and not by any other shall they then appear just in Gods fight.

Thus far we agree with them. But herein now we Whomsoever God pronounces
to be perfectly just; he must needs be made perfectly just. For Gods Judgment
is according to truth. Now that no man in this life, is made perfectly just by
any such inherent Holiness in him as is able to outstand the severe and exact
trial of Gods Judgment: is a Truth witnessed by the Scripture and confessed
always by the most holy Saints of God. Our Adversaries indeed stiffly plead
the contrary: teaching that sin and Corruption in the Justified is utterly
abolished. The error and pride of which Imagination we shall shortly have
occasion more at Large to Discover unto you. Mean while let that much stand
for good: that Man being not made perfectly just in himself cannot thereby be
declared perfectly just before God: and therefore some other Righteousness,
and not that of Sanctification is to be sought for, whereby a sinner may be
Justified in Gods sight.

(...). Ibid. Parag. 9.
They answer. That this hinders nothing at all Both may agree to God who of
his mercy iustifies some; (that is) makes them inherently Just; of his Justice
condemns other (that is) punishes them. To which slight Answers we make this
short reply. That where words are opposite, (as they acknowledge these to be)
there according to the Laws of opposition, they must carry opposite Meaning.
But unto Accusation, Comdemnation, and punishment nothing is opposite but
defense, Absolution, and Pardon. Where therefore Iustificare is coupled with
these words; it must needs bear this and no other meaning: of a bad man to
make a good is not opposite to Accusation, Condemnation, or punishment of him:
Accused he may be, Condemned and punished justly, and after made good.

I should but trouble you to allege more of their Cavills. Let thus much
suffice for the clearing of this point: That Justification and Sanctification
are to be Distinguished and not confounded. The Righteousness of the one is in
us, in its Nature, true and good: but for its degree and measure, Imperfect;
and always yoaked with the remaynder of natural Corruption* And therefore if
a sinner should plead this before the Judgment seat of God, (offering himself
to be judged according to this Righteousness and Innocence) oh how soon his
mouth would be stopped; And this confession wrung out from out his Conscience;
All my Righteousness is as filthy Rags! And again Vilis sum; I am vile, what
shall I answer thee! But that other Righteousness of Justification is without
us in Christ's possession: but ours by Gods gracious gift and acceptance, and
this every way perfect and unreproved in the seuerest Judgment of God. And
therefore when a sinner is drawn before the Bar of Gods Judgment, accused by
the law, Satan, his Conscience; convicted by the evidence of the Fact, and to
be now sentenced and delivered to punishment by the impartial Justice of God:
In this case he has to allege for himself the all-sufficient righteousness
of a Mighty redeemer who only had Done and suffered for him that which he
could never do nor suffer for himself. This Plea alone and no other in the
world, can stop up the Mouth of hell, confute the accusations of Satan, chase
away the Terrors that haunt a guilty conscience, and appease the infinite
Indignation of an angry Judge. This alone will procure favor and absolution in
the presence of that Judge of the whole world. This alone brings down from
Heaven into our Consciences that blessed peace, which passes all
understanding; but of him that has it. Whereby we rest our selves secure from
fear of Condemnation; being provided of a defense that will not fail us, when
after death we shall come into Judgment.

SECT. 2.
CHAP. I.
The Orthodoxe opinion concerning the manner of Justification by Faith, and the
confutation of Popish errors in this point.
Having thus cleared the meaning of this word [ Iustification] and showed that
the Scriptures, Sect. 2. ^. ^.
when they speak of the Justification of a sinner before God, do thereby
understand the absolution of him in Judgment from sin and punishment. We
are now upon this ground to proceed unto the further explication of this
point, to enquire by what Means and in what Manner, this Justification of a
sinner is accomplished. That we may go on more distinctly: I will reduce all
our ensuing discourse of this point into three heads.

First, ^ Genesis Head^.
touching the condition required in them Secondly, the matter of our
Justification. ^ Cap. 7.
( viz.) What righteousness is it wherefore a sinner is Justified.
General head.
whereunto God has ordinarily annexed this great privilege; That by faith and
faith only, a sinner shall be justified: This the Scriptures witness in
terms as direct and express, as any can be. [ Rom 3. 28. We conclude a man
is justified by faith without the works of the Law.] and Romans 4. 9. [ For we
say that faith was imputed unto Abraham for righteousness.] and Romans 5. 1. [
Then being justified by faith we have peace toward God through Jesus Christ
our Lord.] With other the like places. Whence it is agreed upon on all sides,
that a sinner is justified by faith: but touching the manner, how he is said to
be justified by faith, there is much controversy and brawle, between the
Orthodoxe of the reformed Churches, and their Adversaries of Rome and Holland;
the Arminians, and the Papists. The sentence of the reformed Churches touching
this point, consists of two Branches.

First, that a sinner is justified by faith, not properly as it is a quality or
action; which by it is own dignity and merit, deserves at Gods hands Remission
of sins; or is by Gods favorable acceptance taken for the whole and perfect
righteousness of the Law, which is otherwise required of a sinner: but only
in relation unto the object of it, the righteousness of Christ; which it
imbraceth and rests upon.

Secondly, that a sinner is justified by faith in opposition

In this relative and inclusiue sense do the Reformed Churches take this
proposition [ A man is justified by faith.] They explain themselves thus:
There are two Covenants that God has made with man; By one of which and by no
other means in the world, salvation is to be obtained. The one is the Covenant
of works, The tenor whereof is [ Do this and thou shall live.] This Covenant
is now utterly void, in regard of us; who through the weakness of our sinful
flesh cannot possibly fulfill the condition of Obedience required thereby: and
therefore we cannot expect Justification and Life by this means. The other is
the Covenant of grace the Tenor whereof is, Believe in the Lord Jesus and thou
shall be saved. The condition of this covenant is Faith: the performance
whereof differs from the performance of the condition of that other Covenant.
Do this and Live is a compact of pure Justice wherein wages is given by debt,
so that he which does the work obeying the Law, may in strict Justice for the
work sake claim the wages, eternal life, upon just desert. Believe this and
live is a compact of freest and purest Mercy: wherein the reward of eternal
life is given us in favor for that which bears not the least proportion of
worth with it: so that he which persons the condition cannot yet demand the
wages, as due unto him in severity of Justice; but only by the grace of a
freer promise, the fulfilling of which he may humbly sue for. By which grand
difference between these two Covenants clearly expressed in Scriptures, it
appears manifestly that these two Propositions. [ A man is justified by
works,] [ A man is justified by Faith,] carry meanings utterly opposite one to
the other. The one is proper and formal: the other Metonymicall and Relative.
In this Proposition ( A Man is justified by works) we understand all in proper
and precise terms: That a righteous man who has kept the law exactly in all
points, is by and for the dignity and worth of that his obedience justified in
Gods sight from all blame and punishment whatsoever; because perfect obedience
to the moral Law in it self, for it own sake deserves the approbation of
Gods severe Justice and the reward of Heaven. But in that other Proposition ( A
man is justified by Faith.) We must understand all things relatiuely thus. A
sinner is justified in the sight of God from all sin and punishment by faith
(that is) by the obedience of Jesus Christ believed on; and embraced by a true
faith. Which Act of Justification of a sinner, although it be properly the
only work of God, for the only merit of Christ: yet is it rightly ascribed
unto faith, and it alone, for as much as faith is that main condition of that
new Covenant, which as we must perform if we will be justified: so by the
performance thereof we are said to obtain justification and life. For when God
by grace has enabled us to perform the condition of believing; then do we
begin to enjoy the benefit of the Covenant; then is the sentence of
absolution pronounced in our consciences; which shall be after confirmed in our
death; and published in the last judgment. Secondly, our faith and no other
grace directly respects the promises of the Gospel; accepting what God offers,
sealing unto the truth thereof by assenting thereto, and embracing the benefit
and fruit of it unto it self, by relying wholly upon it. This interpretation
of that proposition the Reformed Churches do admit, and none other: rejecting
as erroneous and contrary to the Scriptures such glosses as ascribe any thing
to the dignity of faith; or make any combination between Faith and Works, in
the point of our Justification. Amongst which there are three erroneous
assertions touching man's Justification by Faith; which we are briefly to
examine and refute.

1 That faith justifies us [ Per modum Causae efficientis and meritoriae] as a
proper efficient and meritorious cause. Which by it is own worth and dignity
deserves to obtain Justification, Remission of sins, and the grace of
well-doing.

This is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which Bellarmine labors to prove*
in his 17. Chap. lib. pr. de Iustificatione, where disputing against
Justification by faith alone, he tells us. If we could be persuaded that faith
does Justify [ impetrando, promerendo, and suo modo inchoando
Iustificationem,] then we would never deny that love, fear, hope, and other
virtues did justify us as well as faith. Whereupon he sets himself to prove
that there is in faith it self some efficacy and merit to obtain and deserve
Justification. His Arguments are chiely two.

Gal. 2. 16.
(...). Romans 5. 1.
(...), Romans 28.
(...). or absolutely without Article or Preposition. (...) per fidem, ex fide
(or) fide. Wherein these Prepositions, signify, says he, the true cause of
our Justification. Which he proves 1 By the contrary, when a man is said to be
justified [(...), Romans 4. 2. and 3. 20. Gal 2. 16. Iam. 2.
(...).] This notes the true efficient deserving cause of his Justification.
Secondly, By the like in other places where we are said to be redeemed, saved,
sanctified, Per Christum, per sanguinem, per mortem, per vulnera; and in the
whole 11. to the Heb. The Saints are said to do such and such things ((...))
by faith. All signifying the proper cause.

From those places of Scripture which (says he) plainly impetrare remissionem,
and suo quidem modo mereri. Such are those [ Thy Faith^ has saved thee] or
made thee whole. A speech that Christ used often; as to the Luke 7. 5^.
woman that washed his feet; To her Mat. 9. 22.
that had an issue of Blood; To the Man. 10. 52.
blind man recovered of his sight. And that to the Cananitish woman [ O woman
Mat. 15. 21.
great is thy Faith] now see what the merit of this Faith was, ( For this Mat.
7. 29.
saying go thy way the Devil is gone out of thy Daughter) Thus Abraham, being
Romans 4. 20.
strenghened in Faith glorified God.) who therefore justified him for the Merit
of his Faith. And again in the eleventh to the Heb. by many examples we are
taught that (by Heb. 21. 5* 6.
Faith (that is) by the merit and price of Faith Enoch and other men pleased
God.

For answer here unto.

1 Unto the Argument from the Proposition we reply; That if (...) and (...)must
be needs strictly taken in the same kind of Causality: then the Jesuits should
do well to stand to that and make the similitude between Faith and works
run thus. A Man is justified ( by) works that is for the proper and only
Merits of his obedience; so a Man is justified ( by) Faith that is for the only
merit of his Believing in Christ: and by that means both shallbe true and
effectual causes of Justification. But if Bellarmine dare not thus press the
similitude for fear of being found guilty of despising the blood of the New
Covenant, attributing that to the Merit of Faith which belongs only to the
Merit of Christ; he must then give us that leave to distinguish which he takes
to himself; and if he fall to his Qualifications and quodammodo's: he must
pardon if we also seek out such an Interpretation of those places; as may not
cross other Scriptures. Which for as much as they testify that ( We Romans 3. 24.
are Justified by his grace through the Redemption that is in Christ) that (
All Heb. 1. 3.
sin is purged by the blood of Christ) that ( By the sacrifice of himself he
has put away Sin) and ( With offering has consecrated for over them that
are sanctified.): we dare not without horrible sacrilege ascribe the grace of
our Justification unto the work and worth of any thing whatsoever in our
selves; but wholly and only to the Righteousness of Christ. And therefore when
the Scriptures say we are justified ( by) Faith; we take not the word ( By) in
this formal and legal sense; we are justified by the efficacy of our Faith,
or for the worth of our Faith, according as it is understood in Justification by
works: but we take it Relatiuely and Instrumentally: We are Justified by Faith
(that is) by the Righteousness of Christ, the benefit whereof unto our
Justification, we are made partakers of by Faith, as the only grace which
accepts of the promise, and gives us assurance of the performance. He that
looked to the Brazen serpent and was cured, might truly be said to be healed
(by) his looking on, though this Action was no proper cause working the cure by
any efficacy or dignity of it self; but was only a necessary condition
required of them that would be healed, upon the obedient observance whereof,
God would show them favor: so he that looks on Christ believing in him, may
truly be said to be saved and Justified by Faith, not as for the worth, and by
the ^fficacy of that act of his; but as it is the Condition of the promise of
grace, that must necessarily go before the performance of it to us: upon our
Obedience where unto God is pleased of his free grace to justify, Nor is this
Trope, any way harsh, or unusual to put Oppositum pro opposito, Relatum pro
Correlato, Habitum pro Obiecto. In Sacramental locutions it is a general
Custom, to put the sign for the thing signified: and the like is used in
other passages [(...). And the Act. 6. 7. and 6. 5.
word of God grew, etc. and (...), the 1 Timothy 3. 9. and 4. 6.
mystery of faith,) and (...), in the words of Faith) and Romans 8. 24. [(...).
Spe seruati sumus (id est) Christo in quem speramus. Hope that is seen is not
hope, that is, res visa non sperata est. That of Ignatius, [(...)] Like to that
( Christ our Joy) Anni spem credere Terrae) Georg. 1. Virg. Georg. 1.
And if we list not to be contentious, it is plain enough, that in those
places, where the Apostle treats of Justification by faith ( viz) the grace of
God in Christ; opposing works and faith, that is the Law and the Gospel, the
Righteousness of the Law, to the righteousness of the Gospel, which is no
other but the Righteousness of Christ. Thus faith is taken, Gal. 3. 23. Where
he expressly treats of Justification. But before Faith came, we were kept under
the Law, shut up unto the Faith, which should afterward be revealed.] Gal. 3.
23.
That is, Before Christ came, and the clear exhibition of the Gospel, and the
Righteousness thereof: the Church was kept under the Ceremonial Law, as under
a Schoolmasters, Act. 13. 38.
directing her unto Christ, that so [ We might be justified by Faith.] that
is, not by the Lesson of the Law, but by Christ, typified and figured unto us
therein.

2 Unto the other Argument prooving the merit of faith, we reply; That in those
places is no ground, at all for such a conceit. [ Thy Faith has saved thee,]
says Christ to some who^ he cured both in Body and Soul. But what? was it by
the efficacy and for the word of their faith that this was done? No: As 'twas
virtue went out of Christ that cured their bodily diseases; and his compassion
that moved him to it: so 'twas his grace and merits and free love that healed
their souls, and brought them pardon of their sins in the sight of GOD: Yet
he says; Their faith saved them, because by believing in the Son of God,
they received this favor, though for their believing they did not deserve it.
God bestows mercy where he finds faith, not because faith merits such favor
at his hands: but because he is pleased to disperse his favors in such an
order, as himself has appointed; and upon such conditions as he thinks
good. To that of the Canaanitish woman: Her great faith could not claim by
desert, that favor which Christ showed unto her daughter: only Christ was
pleased to honor her faith by his testimony of it; and to help the daughter
at the Mothers entreaty. Christ did it upon that request of hers so instant and
full of faith; But yet who can say she merited ought at CHRIST'S hands by that
her faithful and instant petition? Her self yet living would deny it; and
she does deny it there, counting her self a dog unworthy of the childrens
bread, when yet she believed strongly, and was a child of Abraham according to
the faith* To that of Abraham who gave glory to God, and of Henoch and others,
who pleased God by their faith: We answer: That it is one thing for a man to
glorify and please God by his Obedience; It Is another, by so doing to deserve
ought at his hands. If God in much grace and favor accept of the honor and
contentment we are able to do him by our Faith and Obedience: It follows not
that therefore we must in justice merit at his hands. Other Arguments for them
there are: but so weakly knit; they fall in sunder of themselves. Against them
we have to object the Scriptures, that so often say, [ We are iustified] gratia
and gratis; and the Council of Trent which they respect more then the
Scriptures, which has defined thus: Nihil eorum quae Iustificationem
praecedunt, sieve fides, sieve opera, ipsam Iustificationis gratiam promeretur,
Sess. 6. Cap. 8. How then can they say Faith merits Justification.

Here our Adversaries have two shifts to run unto, whereby they would avoid
the absurdity of this Assertion.

1 That this merit is not from us: but of God. Because Faith is the gift of
Gods grace; and therefore though we be justified by merit: yet we are justified
by grace, because merit is of grace. It Is of grace that our faith merits.

This you may be sure, is some of that smoke of the bottomless pit, wherein
hell vented out the Jesuits, and they their dark Imaginations; all to
confound whatsoever is clear and lightsome in Scripture. Scripture opposes
these paires; Grace, Romans 11. 6.
and Nature, Grace and Merit. As the Pelagians of old confounded Nature and
Grace, teaching that we were saved by Grace: yet affirming that we are also
saved by Nature, and the natural strength of free will. Which they salued
thus. To be saved by Nature, is to be saved by Grace: for Nature is of Gods
grace and giving. So these confound Grace and Merit, making a thing
Meritorious, because its of Grace. Faith merits because its Gods gracious gift.
Nothing more contradictory. If it be his gift, how does it merit, or of whom?
Of man it may, of God it cannot: unless we will senslesly affirm, that the
gift deserves something of the giver. That he that gives an hundred pound
freely, is thereby bound to give an hundred more. Had they said that faith is
good, because of Gods giving; that were true, and we may grant them that God is
honored and pleased with his own gifts: but that every good thing merits, and
that we can deserve of God by his own gifts, is affirmed without all Reason,
or Scriptures; and will never be proved by either.

But there is yet another shift.

Non de condigno] of the worthiness of it: but [ de Congruo] of the fitness:
(...)
that is, God in Justice is not bound to bestow Justification where there is
faith: but yet in fitness he ought to do it. So that if he do not justify
him that believes: he is likely to omit a thing very fit and agreeable. This
distinction is a mere Imposture and collusion. Bellarmine in dealing with it
seems to have a dog by the ears, he is loath to loose him: yet knows not
well how to hold him. If he be urged where Scriptures make any the least
Intimation of such a distinction: he referres you to Divines, that is, Popish
Schoolmen, who out of their own imagination have forged it, and in time made
it Authentical. But he sticks in the mire, when he is to show what merit of
Condignity and merit of Congruity is. Merits of Condignity are works, to which
wages is due of Justice. What then are merits of Congruity? Such works whereto
wages is not due by any Justice. As for example: He that labors the whole day
in the Vineyard, merits a penny of Condignity: because in Justice his labor is
worth his hire. But he that for an hours work, receives a penny, he deserves
it of Congruity: because though his labor be not worth it, yet he was promised
a penny by him that set him on work: Then which fond imagination nothing can
be more ridiculous, and contrary to common sense. For the merit of any work is
the proportionablenesse of it is worth with the Reward. Now in reason wherein
arises this proportion of any work with that reward? Stands it in the dignity
of the work it self; or in the compact made between him that works and him
that rewards? It is apparent that the work is deserving or not-deseruing
according to 'its own Nature, not according to a compact made. He that
promises unto one more for a little work, then to another for a great deal
in the same kind: does not by such a compact make the little labor of the one
more deserving then the others great pains. We must look to the work, what it
is in its own Nature: and as it is of some worth or no worth, so account it
deserving or not deserving* Wherefore when in the distinction they make some
merits of Condignity or worthiness, some of Congruity, or of fitness without
worthiness, they offend two ways, grossly against two rules of Reason. First
in opposing terms not opposite: Worthiness and fitness: being the same, if
you take them in regard of the work. For that which deserves a reward
worthily, deserves it fitly: (how else is it worthy of the reward, if the
reward be not fit for it?) and that which deserves it fitly (if it deserves) it
deserves it worthily.

2 In distinguishing upon terms that do not convenire t^ti. For Worthiness
agrees to merit only: but fitness belongs to Compact. So that in plainer
English, the distinction runs thus. Merits or deserts, are of two sorts.
Some, that are merits and do deserve because they are worthy of a reward:
others that are no merits and do not deserve because they are not worthy of
the Reward: but only obtain it, ex Congruo, in regard of Compact and Promise.
For this Rule is most certain, That a work which deserves nothing by its own
worthiness: can never deserve any thing by compact or promise. The Jesuits
are senseless in defending the contrary.

If (says Bellarmine) a King promise a Beggar 1000* pounds a year, upon no
condition, then indeed the Beggar does not deserve it. But if upon condition he
shall do some small matter, as that he shall come to the Court and fetch it, or
bring a Pos^e of flowers with him, now the Beggar deserves it: and he may come
to the King, and tell him, he has merited his 1000 pounds a year. Every man,
but a Jesuit, would say 'twere extreme impudency in a Beggar to make such a
demand, so derogatorily to the Kings gracious bounty. Now can it help them to
say, That a Promise binds unto performance, so that God should be unjust and
untrue, if he should not bestow the reward promised, although the works be
not equal to the reward. For Gods Justice and Truth in performing his promise,
do not imply our merit in performing the Condition. We do not deserve by our
well-doing; because God is just in his rewarding. And the reason is manifest;
Because God in making the promise, respected merely the freeness and bounty of
his own grace, not the worthiness of our works. And therefore that
obligation whereby he has tied himself to performance, is founded merely in
his own Truth: not a ^ot in our merit. Wherefore when they tell us, that faith
merits Justification [ de Congruo] they intrappe themselves in a gross
Contradiction; seeing to deserve [ de Congruo] is not to deserve at all; but
only to receive the reward by mere promise: God having promised to justify
believers. Thus much touching the first Assertion, that Faith is the proper
Cause of Justification, working it by it own efficacy and merits.

CHAP II*
The Confutation of the Arminian error, showing that faith does not justify,
sensu proprio, as it is an act of ours.
The second Error about this point is of the Arminians, with whom also the
Papists agree: It Is this.

2 That we are Justified by Faith sensu proprio, that is, the Act of believing,
in that (...) credere, is imputed to us for righteousness, being accepted of
God and accounted unto us for that whole Righteousness of the Law which we
were bound to perform. So that our very Faith is that Righteousness, for
which we are justified in the sight of God; no^ quidem merito suo: sed propter
gratuitam acceptilationem Dei.

The authors of this opinion are Faustus Socinus that unhappy Haereticke in his
most Blasphemous Book [ de Christo servatore:] and Michael Servetus a Spanyard
in his second Book [ de lege and Evangelio] which Errors are confuted by
Calvin in his opuscula. A stiff de^ender of this opinion was Christophorus
Ostorodius a Polonian in his disputations contra Georgium Tradelij, who for
this and other pestilent errors about the Article of Man's Redemption, was wi^h
his companion Andreas Vaidonitus banished the Low Countries where he had seated
himself and published his opinions; Arminius, and his followers have bin
chief promoters of it. Arminius himself, as in other his opinions: so in the
publishing of this used much closeness and cunning conveyance. In his private
disputations [ Tit. de Iustificatione] he seems plainly to condemn it, saying
that it is an abuse to say that Fides est causa formalis Iustificationis, and
an error to affirm [That Christ has deserved, vt fidei dignitate et merito
iustificemur.] In his public disputations he opens himself somewhat plainly:
These. 48. 2. 3.
yet darkely enough [ These. 19. de Iustificat. cat. These. 7. These are his
words. [ Fidei vero Iustificatio tribuitur, non quod illa sit Iustitia ipsa
quae rigido and seuero De^ iudicio oppont possit; quanquam Deo grata: sed quod
in iudicio mis^ri^ordiae triumphans supra iudicium absolutionem a peccatis
obtineat and gratiose in Iustitiam imputetur. Cuius rei causaest tum Deus
iustus and misericors, tum Christus obedient^^ oblatione et intercessione sua
secundum Deum in beneplacito et mandato ipsius.] Here Faith it self is imputed
for Righteousness. But it is not in Gods severe Judgment, but in his Judgment of
Mercy. Faith in it self is not worthy: but yet Christ by his merits has
deserved that God will graciously accept of it. This opinion published was
quickly contradicted: whereupon Arminius makes known his mind in playner
Terms, In declaratioue sententiae ad ordines Holland: and Westfrisiae he
confesses that in the forenamed Thesis his meaning was, page 6^.
that [ipsa fides tanquam actus iuxta Evangelij mandatum praestitus imputatur
coram Deo in sieve ad iustitiam, idque in gratia, cum non sit ipsamet iustitia
Legis. And in his Responsione ad 31. Artic. art. 4. he brancheth cut his
opinion in three distinct propositions.

1 Iustitia Christi imputatur nobis. 2 Iustitia Christi imputatur in iustitiam.
3 (...) credere imputatur in iustitiam.
The first of these Propositions, he grants: That Christ's Righteousness is
imputed to us. The second he denies, That Christ's Righteousness is imputed
for Righteousness. The third ^e grants, That the Act of believing is imputed
for Righteousness. Here by Mysteries in these Propositions, hereafter to be
unfolded. We now meddle with the last which yet is more roundly expressed by
Arminius in his Epistle ad Hyppolitum. [Lege princip. Pa.] [Ipsum Fidei actum
(...) credere, dico imputari in iustitiam, idque sensu proprio non metonymice]
The same is the opinion of his fellows the Remonstrants, of A^tibell. page 106.
Vorstius, of Collat. cu^ Sib. Lubber.
Peter Bertius, of Thesibu, de ^ustific.
Episcopius, and the R^monstr^nt. In Cell. Delphensi. Art. 2. Antith. 2.
[Statuimus Deum Fidem no^iram nobis imputare per obedientiam: ea^que (and nos
in illa) acceptos habere.
rest. With whom Bellarmine agrees pat [ Liber ^. de Just. cap. 17. When upon
that Rom: 4. ( His faith is imputed for righteousness.] he says thus. [
Vbiipsa fides censetur esse Iustitia, ac per hoc non apprehendit fides
iustitiam Christi: sed ipsa fides in Christum est iustitia.] In sum, their
opinion runs thus. God in the Legal Covenant required the exact obedience of
his Commandment: but now in the Covenant of grace, he requires faith, which in
his gracious estimation stands in stead of that obedience to the Moral Law,
which we ought to perform. Which comes to pass by the Merit of Christ; for
whose sake God accounts our imperfect says to be perfect obedience. This
Assertion we reject as erroneous, and in place thereof we defend this
Proposition. God does not justify a man by Faith properly, impuring unto him
faith in Christ for his perfect obedience to the Law, and therefore accounting
him just and innocent in his sight. Which we prove by these Reasons.

1 We are not Justified by any work of our own. But

The Mayor is most manifest by the Scriptures, which teach that we are saved by
grace Ephesians. 2. 5. [ and therefore not by the works of Righteousness which we
had wrought.] Tit. 3. 6. [ For if it be of Works, then were grace no more
grace] To. 11. 6.

The Minor is likewise evident. [ That Faith is a work of ours.] For though
John 6. 29. it be said, [ This is the work of God that ye believe in him whom
he has sent] yet will not our adversaries conclude thence, that Faith is Gods
work within us, and not our work by his help. For so should they run into
that absurdity which they would fasten upon us. ( viz.) That when a Man
believes, it is not man believes: but God believes in him. To believe, though it
be done by Gods aid: yet it is we that do it; and the Act is properly ours.
And being so, we conclude, that by it we are not justified in Gods sight.

Here two Exceptions may be made.

1 First that we are not justified by any work of our viz*) which we our
selves do by our own strength without the help of grace: But yet we may be
justified by some work which we do ( viz) by the aid of Grace; and such a
work is Faith. We answer. This Distinction of works done without Grace and
works done by Grace, was devised by one that had neither Wit nor Grace; being
a T^icke to elude the force of such Scriptures as exclude indefinitely all
works from our Justification, without distinguishing either of Time when they
are done, before or after; or of the aid and help whereby they are done,
whether by Nature or by Grace. Wherefore it is without all ground in Scripture
thus to interpret these Propositions: A man is not justified by works (that
is) by works done by worth of Nature before and without Grace. A Man is
justified by Grace (that is) by works done by aid of Grace. These
Interpretations are mere forged inventions of froward Minds, affirmed but not
proved: as we shall more hereafter declare,

Male res agitur vbi opus est tot Remedijs (says Erasmus in another case.) It Is
a certain sign of an untrue opinion when it must be bolstered up with so many
distinctions. Nor yet has this distinction any ground in Scripture, or in
Reason: for both tell us that the works commamded in the Law, and works
commanded in the Gospel are one and the same for the substance of the^, What
work can be named, that is enjoined us in the New Testament, which is not also
commanded us in that summary precept of the Moral Law [ Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul and with all they
strength, and with all thy mind: and thy neighbor as thy self.] Luc. 5. 27.
Deuteronomy. 6. 5 What sin is there against the Gospel, that is not a transgression
of the Law? If the Gospel command Charity, is it any other then that which the
Law commands: If the Gospel command Faith, does not the Law enioine the same?
you will say No. It does not command Faith in Christ. I answer, yea, it does:
For that which commands us in general to Believe what ever God shall propose
unto us: commands us also to believe in Christ, as soon as God shall make
known that it is his will we should believe in him. The Gospel discouers unto
us the Object; the Law commands us the obedience of believing it. Wherefore
Faith, for the Substance of the Grace and works done by us, is a work of the
Law; and so to be Justified by the Action of believing, is to be Justified by
works and by our own Righteousness, contrary to the Scriptures; and that
Phil: 5. 9. ( That I may be found not, etc. This of the first Reason.

2 God accounts that only for perfect Righteousn^sse

The Minor is granted by our adversaries; That Faith is not the exact Justice
of the Law; such as can stand before the severity of Gods Judgments. The Mayor
must be proved: That God accounts not that for perf^ct Justice which is not
perfect indeed. This appears by that Romans 2. 2. [ The judgment of God is
according to truth.] Where therefore any thing is not truly good and perfect:
there God esteems it not so. Here also twilbe excepted.

That God some time Judges Iudicio iustitiae, according to exact Justice; and
then he ^udgeth nothing perfectly just, but that which has true perfection of
Justice in it. Sometimes he judges iudicio misericord^ae; according to mercy:
and so he may esteem a Man perfectly righteous for that which is not perfect
righteousness in it self; namely for his Faith.

Surely, this is a trim distinction thus applied, that sets Gods Mercy and
Truth together by the Ears. As who would say, When God judges out of Mercy:
he then does not judge according to truth. The Scriptures do not acquaint us
with any such merciful judgment of God. This they do acquaint us with, That
God judges according to mercy, not when he does pronounce and clear a Sinner
to be perfectly righteous for that righteousness which is truly imperfect:
but when he judges a Sinner to be righteous for that righteousness which is
perfect; but is not his own. In this Judgment there is both Truth and Mercy.
Truth, in that he esteems me perfectly righteous, for that righteousness sake
which is every way perfect: and mercy, that he accepts for sin, that
righteousness which is performed for me by Christ my surety; but is not mine
own. Other merciful Judgment of God besides this, we acknowledge none.

viz.) of Faith: partly by the righteousness of Christ without us.

Ergo we are not justified by Faith properly.

The Minor is apparent. The Righteousness of Faith is ^nherent in us. and by
it we are justified (say our Adversaries.) The righteousness of Christ is
inherent in him: and by it are we justified, say the Scriptures. [ Being now
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.] To. 5 9. and
v. 19. [ By the obedience of one, many shall be made just.] Wherefore either we
are properly justified by both, or there is an error, and one part must stand
out* We cannot be properly justified by both, for our own faith and Christ's
obedience too: for if we be perfectly just in Gods sight for our own Faith,
what need the Imputation of Christ's obedience to make us just? If for Christ's
righteousness we be perfectly justified: how can God account us perfectly just
for our faith? Arminius and his friends, seeing these things cannot stand
together; have (according to the good will which they bear toward the
righteousness of Christ) kept in our faith, and thrust out Christ's obedience,
denying utterly that it is imputed unto us for righteousness. But my Brethren
(which I hope make a better choice) seeing it cannot part with ours: part with
our own righteousness, leaning wholly upon the righteousness of Christ; and
seeking for the comfort of our Justification in his perfect obedience, and not
in our weak and imperfect says. These Reasons may suffice to show the error
of that Assertion. We are justified by Fa^^h, sensu prop^rio, God accepting the
Act of believing for the perfect obedience of the Law. And therefore that in
those places, We are saved by grace thorough faith. Ephesians. 2. 8.
where it is said, [ Faith is imputed for righteousness,] the Phrase is to be
expounded metonymice, (that is) Christ's righteousness believed on by Faith, is
imputed to the believer for righteousness.

Whereas our Adversaries say that faith of its own dignity and desert, does
not obtain this favor of God, to be esteemed for the perfect righteousness
of the Moral Law: but this comes to pass only by the Merits of Christ, who
has procured this grace unto us, that God should thus accept of our Faith: we
answer, that this is affirmed, but it is not proved. They speak a little more
favorably then the Romanists, who make faith of it self to merit
Justification: these will have it not to merit it; but to be graciously
accepted for righteousness. But we find not in Scripture any such Doctrine as
this, [ Christ has merited that we should be justified for our faith,] or [
Christ has merited for our faith, that faith should be esteemed by God for
that perfect Justice of the Law; whereby we are justified in Gods sight.] These
things the Scriptures teach not: they teach, that Christ is our righteousness,
and that we are justified by his blood and obedience. But that he has merited
by his obedience, that we should be justified by our own obedience and
righteousness, is a perverse assertion of men that love to run about the
bush, and leaving the straight, to run in crooked and froward ways. And it
differs little from the like shift of the Disciples of Rome, who to maintain
Merit of our works and of Christ too; salve it with this trick. Christ has
merited that we might merit. But we acknowledge, as no other merit, but that
of Christ; so no other righteousness to Justification, but his alone. Thus
much of the second Assertion.

CHAP. III.
The confutation of Popish Doctrine, that other graces do justify us, and not
faith alone.
THe third and last follows, wherein the Controversy is between us and those
of Rome; whose Assertion is: that

3 A sinner is not justified by faith alone, but also by other virtues and
graces; as Hope, Love, Repentance, Fear of God, etc.

This we also reject as an error, contrary to the Scriptures, whereby we are
taught, That a man is justified by faith alone. For opening the truth of which
point: you must call to mind the different acception of the word Justify:
wherein it is taken by us, and by our Adversaries. With them to Justify is all
one, as to Sanctify: of unjust and unholy, to make inherently just and holy.
With us to Justify is to absolve an offender, quitting him from blame and
punishment. According to these different Acceptions, this proposition [A man is
justified by faith alone] has a double meaning; one thus [A man by faith alone
is inherently sanctified] another thus: [A man by faith alone obtaines
absolution in Gods Judgment, from all faultiness and punishment. This latter
meaning only is true, and it is that only which is defended by us of the
Reformed Churches; Namely, that faith only is the grace of God whereby a
sinner believing the promise, and resting himself upon the righteousness of
Christ, receives mercy from God in absoluing him from the fault and punishment
of all his Transgressions: and to be accounted Righteous for Christ's sake.
Which gracious privilege God has annexed unto faith, as unto the Condition of
the New Covenant, and not unto Love, Hope, Fear, Repentance, or any other
grace; For not these, but Faith only, respects the promise of the Gospel.
The former sense of that Proposition, is false and absurd, viz. [A Man by
faith alone is inherently sanctified] nor do any of the Reformed deteine such
a Construction thereof. Wherefore when Bellarmine and his Accomplices dispute
eagerly against Justification by faith alone, those Arguments wherewith they
suppose to smite through the Truth of our Assertion, are let fly at a wrong
Mark; being all aimed at this Butte, ( viz) to prove; That a man is sanctified
by other inherent Graces as well as faith. Which point we easily yield them,
confessing that inherent righteousness, consists not of one, but of the (...).
manifold graces of Gods Spirit, wrought in the heart of such as are
Regenerate. Nevertheless for the showing of some points which may be doubted
of; Let us briefly take a view of the chief passages of Bellarmines long
discourse; which he maintains from the twelfth Chapter of his first book de
Iustificatione, to the end. For to prove that a Man is justified not by faith
alone. Of his Arguments which are few, I shall name three only, which are
material.

1 If other virtues Justify as well as Faith, 1 Arg. Bell.
then not faith alone.

But other virtues do Justify -- Therefore, etc.

The Minor he proves out of the Council of Trent, Sess. 6. cap. 6. where
seven preparatory, graces to Justification, are reckoned up.

1 Faith. 2 The Fear of God, 3 Hope in his mercy. 4 Love of God, as the
Fountain of Justice (and ad benefactoris, says Bellarmine) 5 Repentance, a
sorrow and detestation of sin. 6 A desire of receiving the Sacrament of
Baptism. 7 A purpose to lead a new life, and keep Gods Commandments. All
these (says Bellarmine) do justify a Man, Praeparatorie, antecedenter,
dispositiue. Faith, that's the root and beginning of our Justification, the
rest follow in order; all must go before as needful preparations: and
Justification follows, as the effect of all in common, etc. Ergo, Not of Faith
alone. The Lib. 1. cap. 13.
Jesuit goes over every particular, to show by Scriptures what force each of
those graces have to Justify. But it is not worth-while to repeat his proofs.
Unto the Argument, we answer two things.

Justification; namely, that Regeneration and Sanctification is all one thing
with Justification; and that to Justify a sinner is nothing but to do away
inherent corruption, by infusion of inherent righteousness. This we have
heretofore by the Scriptures cleared to be false; and therefore this Argument
proouing our Sanctification to be wrought by other graces as well as by faith,
touches not the point of Justification in the Remission of sins, which faith
alone obtains through the promise.

Aristotle's Physickes; and those disputes touching praeuious, or foregoing
dispositions, that qualify the matter for receiving of the Form. We
acknowledge, that in man's Regeneration all graces of the Spirit are not
perfected at once. But as the joints and sinews in the bodily: so the graces
of Sanctification in the spiritual New Birth, are at first weak and feeble:
Which in continuance of time gather more strength, according to our growth in
Christ. But yet these are true for the substance: though imperfect in their
degrees and measure. There is now true Spiritual life in such a one which was
before dead in sin: although there be not the free and able exercise of all
the vital powers. Health there is, but not entire from all degrees o^
sickness, and every kind of disease. Wherefore we aff^^me that these virtues
which are by our Aduersarics reckoned only as dispositions unto Regeneration:
are, if they be true and not counterfeit Metal, the maine parts and fruits of
Regeneration.

Hence we believe that these are foul errors ( viz.) To teach that a man
without grace by the power of his free will may dispose himself to his
Regeneration, by believing in Christ, fearing and loving of God, hoping of his
Mercy, repenting of his sins, resolving upon amendment, and all this with
true and sincere affection: or to teach if a man cannot do these things of his
own mere strength and free will; yet by the Spetiall aid of God inciting and
helping him; (...) may do them whilst he is utterly vns^nctified in statu
peccati. That true Faith, and Fear, and Hope, and Love, and Repentance, and
purpose of Reformation, are Virtues and Graces in a Man that is yet graceless
and without Virtue, because destitute of Sanctification. That these Graces
consisting in the inward motion of the soul, and change of the Affections, are
wrought in Man, not by any sanctifying Grace of the Holy Ghost, inwardly
touching the heart: but by some other kind of Virtue and aid (they know not
what) Lib. 1. cap. 2^. Nectamen est a Deo intus inhabitante, per gra^^am
Sanctificari: sidextrins^cus ad^^vante, and exitonte.
external, Et Cap: 13. page 311. H.
exciting and helping forward the strength of Nature. Fear.
All these are monstrous and misshapen imaginations, bred in proud hearts that
would feign share the glory of their Conversion, between Gods grace and their
own free will, and maintained by curious heads, whom Philosophical
speculations have transported beyond the simplicity of divine Truth. The
Scripture speaks otherwise of these Graces, as of those that belong to such as
are not in the way to be made good, but are made so already. [ Ye are all the
Children of God by Faith in Jesus Christ] says the Apostle Paul Gal. 3. 28.
Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the son of God: God dwells in him
and he in God.] says John 1. 1. Ioh. 4. 15. and Chap. 5. 1. [ Whosoever
believes that Jesus is that Christ; is borne of God.] Do we by true Faith
become the Children of God, borne of him, in whom he dwells and we in him,
when as yet in the mean time we are yet unsanctified, unholy, unclean, and
not in the state of Grace? Bellarmine will prove that a man may have Faith; yet
not the Child of God: ou^ of John 1. 12. [ As many as received him, to them he
gave power to become the Sons of God: even to them that believe on his name.]
See (s^^th he) they that believe are not yet, but have power if they list, to
become the Sons of God, ( viz.) by going on further from Faith to Hope and
Love, and the rest of the Tridenti^e dispositions. For it is Love properly and
not Faith, that makes us the Sons of God; as he would prove (contrary to that
express place of the Galat.) out of the 1 Ep. of John, where the Apostle has
much excellent matter, but nothing to that purpose. To the place of John, we
answer, that the Jesuit plays with the ambiguity of the word (...), which
is not here a liberty to do what we list; as if we could at our pleasure
become Gods adopted sons: but it is a right and privilege which Christ the
natural Son bestows on true believers, to be made Gods adopted sons, and
so coheires with him of the heavenly inheritance. When is this privilege of
Adoption bestowed? Then when they believe, and as soon as they believe, before
they be Regenerate? No, Saint John denies it. [ He gives power to be the Sons
of God, even to those that believe in him.] Who be they? He answers, verse.
15. [ Which were borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God.] Faith then is not a Preparatiue to Justification, but
a part of it.

And is not Fear of GOD too? Fear.
No, says Bellarmine. That is the Psalm ^11. 10. Pro. ^. 7. Faith is radix: a
part of the tree.
beginning of wisdom (that is) of a perfect Justification. A bad
interpretation, but a worse Argument. It Is the beginning, therefore not part.
Nay; If the fear of God be the Alpha of Christian graces, certainly it self
makes one Letter of that Alphabet. It Is such a beginning of wisdom: as its
self is wisdom too. Else God himself deceaues us: who, as it is, Job 28. 28.
[ Said unto man: Behold the fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to depart
from evil is understanding.] And therefore to take it in the Jesuits gloss,
Fear of God is Justification as well as the beginning of it.

For Hope; Hope.
If it be true, ( viz.) That Romans 5. 5.
which makes not ashamed,] Which is the Heb. 6. 18.
Anchor of the Soul, sure and steadfast, that enters within the Veil.] It
would be known what difference the Jesuit will put between that Hope which
is in a man before: and that which is in him after his Sanctification. If he
say, It differs only in degree: then he grants, it is the same in substance:
whence we have a fair position; That man sanctified and unsanctified, is
alike capable of the saving graces of Gods Spirit.

The like we say for Love of God, if it be sincere and without dissimulation
bred in the heart: Love.
Upon those spiritual considerations not only of Gods Mercy in Christ: but
also of his Justice and infinite Righteousness; ( For so the Trent Fathers
will have this Love to respect God, vt fontem Iustitiae) then we affirm this
spiritual Love is not to be found but only in those Hearts, that are in some
measure Regenerate and made spiritual. In ( whom Romans 5. 5.
this Love of God is shed abroad by the Holy Ghost that is given to them.] as
the Romans 5. 5.
Apostle speaks. This Bellarmine is son forced to grant: yet he puts it off
with a distinction [ No man can love God perfectly with all his heart, without
the Holy Ghost: but love him he may imperfectly without the Holy Ghost dwelling
in him, though not without the special aid of God.] Whereto we answer; it is
one thing to love God perfectly, and another to love him truly. To love him
perfectly, is to love him with all the heart, all the soul, all the mind, and
all the strength: which we grant no man can do without the Holy Ghost: but we
also affirm, that no man did or shall ever do it in this life, so long as
there is lustful corruption in him causing any the least auersion of his soul
from God in any motion thereof. So that if none have the Holy Ghost abiding in
them; but such in whom Love is thus perfected; he must be confined with the
Saints in heaven, and not have his dwelling with the faithful on earth. But if
imperfect Love of God be also from the Holy Ghost, dwelling in the hearts of
the Godly, who love God truly in unfeigned uprightness of heart; though in
much imperfection by reason of sin, which diuerts the heart unto other
pleasures: then it must be known of the Jesuit, what he means by imperfect
Love. Is it false Love, such a mere natural Man may conceive upon general
grounds: That God is good, the chiefest good, just, holy, and full of all
excellency? He will not say for shame, this is a true preparatiue unto
Justification. Is it true love, but in its degree imperfect, not so vigorous,
so vehement, so hot as coals of Juniper: yet such as has some strength and
warmth of spiritual affection? Then we require that these men will draw us out
a line by the Rule of the Scriptures, and to tell us how far the true Love of
God may come, without the grace of the Holy Ghost sanctifying the heart: But
after it is past such a degree, then there is required the sanctifying grace of
the Holy Ghost for it. Twill trouble their Mathematickes to describe unto us in
what degree of Perfection that Woman's love was situated, whose example they
allege for a proof of this point out of Luke 7. 47. [ Her sins which were
many, are forgiven her, for she loved much.] Can Bellarmine tell us how much
this was? that so by that pattern we may know how far men go in the true
Love of God before they be at all sanctified by inherent Grace? For such
wonders they would make us believe concerning this penitent Sinner; that when
her soul was full of Faith and Love to Christ, her heart full of sorrow, her
eyes full of tears for her sins; yet for all that she was a graceless,
unholy person, whose Love, and Faith, and Sorrow, came not from the sanctifying
grace of the Holy Ghost, but only from free will helped with some kind of
external aid of God.

We have not Faith to believe such Mysteries as these. Nor yet in the last
place can we conceive how there should be true repentance, Repentance.
with a sincere purpose of Reformation and obedience, Reformation.
where the Heart is not changed and renewed by the Holy Ghost. Not of Ahab or
Judas.
That Godly sorrow and Hatred of sin should spring out of a graceless heart,
that so holy a Resolution of Amendment of Life should be in an unholy person;
be Assertions so contradictory and iarring: that no Christian Ear can with
patience endure to hear them. We conclude then touching these dispositions
unto Sanctification, that if these Graces be true, they are parts and chief
Branches of inherent Righteousness. But if they be false and counterfeit, they
are not so much as Preparations thereunto. So much of this first Argument:
wherein yet one of these 7 dispositions first reckoned up is omitted ( viz.) a
Desire of receiving the Sacrament of Baptism. (that is) A Man that's baptized
in his youth, afterward, before he be Justified, must have a desire to be
Rebaptised. For what is it for one baptized to desire to receive that Sacrament
again? This conceit is so absured that howeuer Bellarmine reckon it up among
the other Dispositions; because of the Authority of the council of Trent: yet
Tom. 2. Tract. ^ cap. 3. Quest. 3. Bell. lib. 1. c. 14.
Becanus gives it over in plain Field; numbering these fore naming six graces
only, choosing rather to venture the Counsels credit, then his own, by
defending an unreasonable position.

2 Argument. 2 Arg.
If Faith alone do justify us; then it may d^e^t when other graces are
absent; as well as when they are present. For seeing the Virtue of Iustifing us
depends upon Faith alone: and that in this act it receaues no aid from any
other grace; It follows that it needs not the company of any other grace: as
in the law of sense. If the whole force of Burning proceed only from Heat:
then where Heat is, though there be no other Qualities yet there will be
burning; yea if Faith only have force to Justify, it will follow, that it may
justify not only in the absence of other graces: but in the presence of the
coutrary vices. For as the absence of other graces does not hinder: so the
presence of other vices will not hinder Faith one jot in it office of
Justifying.

But twere absurd to affirm, that Faith can Justify without other virtues
with other vices -- Ergo, The force of Justifying is not in Faith alone.

To this we answer. That this sophisme is fashioned upon the same Block with
the former, that to Justify and Sanctify are all one. In which sense we
confess the Consequence is unavoidable. If Faith alone by it own virtue and
force did sanctify: then it would effect this not only in the absence of
other graces; but in the presence of their contrary Corruptions: and the
similitude which we bring to illustrate our assertion, would confirm that of
the Adversaries. It Is the eye only sees, say our Men: yet the Ear is in the
Head too. Yea, reply they, But the eye could see well notwithstanding the Ear
were deaf. It Is the (...) antid. ^onc. Trid. Sess. 6 cap. II.
Heat only of the fire or Sun that warmes, though there be light joined
with it. True say they, But if there were no Light, yet if heat remained, it
would warm for all that: as the Heat of an Oven, or of Hell, burns, though
it shine not. Thou hold in thy hands many seeds (It Is the old comparison of
Luther on the 15 of Gen.) I enquire not what it is together but what is the
virtue of each one single. Yea, reply our Adversaries; that's a very needelesse
question indeed. For if among them many seeds there be some one that has such
sovereign virtue; that it alone can cure all diseases, then it is no Matter
whether thou have many or few, or none at all of any other sort in thy hand.
Thou have that which by it own virtue without other ingredients will work the
Cure Nor have we ought to make answer in this case; If, as the Eye sees, heat
warmes, seeds and other simples do cure by their own proper Virtue: so Faith
alone by its own efficacy did sanctify us. But there is the Error. Faith
works not in our sanctification or Justification by any such inward power and
virtue of its own, from whence these effects should properly follow. For
Sanctification Faith, as we have seen, is part of that inherent Righteousness
which the Holy Ghost has wrought in the Regenerate: and it is opposed to the
Corruption of our Nature which stands in Infidelity Faith sanctifies not as a
cause, but as a part of insused grace: and such a part as goes not alone, but
accompanied with all other Graces of Love, Fear, Zeal, Hope, Repentance, etc.
Inasmuch as Man's regeneration is not the infusion of one; but of the Habit of
all graces. Again, it is not the Virtue of Faith that iustifies us; The grace
of Justification is from God, he works it: but it is our Faith applies it and
makes it ours. The Act of Justification is Gods mere work; but our Faith
only brings us the Benefit and Assurance of it. Justification is an external
privilege which God bestows on believers; having therein respect only to
their Faith, which grace only has peculiar respect to the Righteousness of
Christ and the promise in him. Whereby it is manifest that this argument is
vain. Faith alone is respected in our Justification: therefore Faith is or may
be alone without other graces of Justification. Bellar: Cap. 15. eiu^dem Lib.
primi.
would undertake to prove that true says may be severed from Charity and other
Virtues: but we have heretofore spoken of that Point: and showed, that [true
Faith, yet without a Form:] [true Faith, dead, and without a soule] be
Contradictions as vain as [A true Man without reason] [A true Fire without
heat.] We confess indeed that the faith of Jesuits (the same with that of
Simon Magus) may very well be without Charity and all other sanctifying
graces; a bare assent to the truth of Divine Revelations, because of Gods
Authority. As it is in Devils, so it is in Papists and other Heretics. But we
deny that this is that which deserves the name of true Faith: which whosoever
has, he also has eternal life. As it is, John 6. 47.

3 Argument. 3 Argu^
That which Scripture does not affirm, that is false doctrine.

But the Scripture does not affirm that we are Justified by Faith alone --
Ergo, so to teach, is to teach false Doctrine.

This Argument touches the quick: and if the Minor can be proved, we must
needs yield them the Cause. For that the Jesuits conceive that this is a
plain case: Bell. lib. 1 cap. 16.
for where is there any one place in all the Bible, that says, Faith alone
Iustifies? They even laugh at the simplicity of the Heretics (as they
Christen us) that glory they have found out at last the word ( Only) in Luc.
8. 50. in that speech of Christ, to the Ruler of the Synagogue, [ Fear not,
believe only, and she shall be made whole.]

And much sport they make themselves with Luther: That to help out this matter
at a dead lift, by plain fraud he foysted into the Text, in the 3. to the
Romans, the word ( Only.) When being taught with the fact, and required a
Reason: He made answer according to his Modesty, ( Sic volo, sic iubeo, stet
pro ratione voluntas.) It Is true that Luther in his Translation of the Bible
into the Germane tougue: read the 28. verse of that Chapter, thus. ( We
conclude that men are justified without the works of the Law: only through
Faith.) [Allein durch ^en gsaubren.]
Which word only is not in the Original. Where, in so doing, if he fulfild
not the Office of a faithful Translator: yet he did the part of a faithful
Paraphrast, keeping the sense exactly in that Alteration of words. And if he be
not free from blame: yet of all men the Jesuits are most unfit to reprove him;
whose dealing in the corrupting of all sort of Writers, Divine and humane, are
long since notorious and infamous throughout Christendom.

What Luthers Modesty was in answering those that found fault with his
Translation: Bell. quotes Lu^beri Resp. ad duos Art. ad ami^^m quendam.
we have not to say. Only thus much, That the impudent Forgeries of this
Generation, witness abundantly: that it is no rare thing for a Lie to drop out
of a Jesuits or Friars pen. But be it, as it may be; It Is not Luthers
Translation; Nor that place in the 8. of Luke, that our Doctrine, [touching
Justification by Faith alone,] is founded upon. We have better proofs then
these: as shall appear unto you in the confirmation of the Minor of this
Syllogism.

Whatsoever the Scriptures affirm, that is true doctrine. But the Scriptures
affirm, a man is justified by Faith alone.

Therefore thus to teach, is to teach according to the word of whole-some
doctrine.

Our Adversaries demand proof of the Minor. We allege all those places
wherein the Scriptures witness: that we are Justified by faith, without the
works of the Law. Such places are these. Romans 3. 28. (Therefore we conclude
that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the Law.) Romans 4. 2. 3.
(If Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory: but not before
God. For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God: and it was counted to
him for righteousness.) And verse. 14. 15. 16. (For if they which are of the
Law be heirs: faith is made void, and the promise made of none effect. Because
the Law works wrath, for where no Law is, there is no transgression.) Gal. 2.
16. (Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the
Faith of Jesus Christ: Even we have believed in Christ, that we might be
justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law. For by the
works of the Law shall no flesh be justified.) Gal. 3. 21. 22. (Is the Law
then against the promises of God? God forbid. For if there had been a Law
given, which could have given Life: verily righteousness should have been by
the Law. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin: that the promise by
the faith of Jesus Christ, might be given by them that believe.) Ephe. 2. 8. 9.
(For by grace ye are saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves; It is
the gift of God: Not of works, least any man should boast.) Phil 3. 8. 9. (Yea
doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. For whom I have suffered the loss of all
things: and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ. And be found of
him not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law: but that which is
through the faith of Christ: Tit. 3. 5. 6. 7.
the Righteousness which is of God by Faith.) Out of which places, not to name
more, expressly touching this point of our Justification, we argue thus.

A Man is justified either by the works of the Law, or by faith in Christ. But
he is not Justified by the works of the Law. Ergo, He is justified only by
faith in Christ.

In this disjunctive Syllogism, they cannot find ^ault with us for adding the
word [ onely] in the Conclusion; which was not in the Praemises. For Reason
will teach them, that where two Terms are immediately opposite, if one be
taken away, the other remains alone. So that in every disjunctiue Syllogism,
whose Mayor Proposition stands upon two Terms immediately opposite: if one
be removed in the Minor, the Conclusion is plainly equivalent to an exclusive
Proposition. As if we argue thus. Either the wicked are saved: or the godly.
But the wicked are not saved. Thence it follows in exclusive Terms,
Therefore the godly only are saved. Our Adversaries cannot deny, but that the
Proposition [A Man is justified by works, or by Faith,] consists of Terms
immediately opposite. For else they accuse the Apostle Paul of want of Logic,
who Romans 3. should conclude falsely, [A man is iusitified by faith without
works: if he be justified either by both together, or else by neither. Seeing
then he opposes Faith and works as incompatible, and exclude works from
Justification: we conclude infallibly by the Scriptures, That a man is
justified by faith alone. This Argument not auoidable by any sound a^swere,
puts our adversaries miserably to their shifts. Yet rather then yield unto the
truth, they fall unto their distinctions: whereby, if twere possible, they
would shift off the force of this Argument. Whereas therefore the Scriptures
oppose Works and Faith: the [ Law of Works,] and the [ Law of Faith.] Our [
own righteousness which is of the Law] and the ( Righteousness of God by
Faith,) manifestly telling us that we are Justified, (Not by Works, by the Law
of Works, nor by our own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that we are
justified by Faith, by the Righteousness of God by Faith.) Our Adversaries
have a distinction to salve this Matter withal. They say then Works are of
two sorts.

1 Some go before Grace and Faith, and are performed by the only strength of
free will: out of that Knowledge of the Law, whereunto Men may attain by the
light of Nature, or the bare Revelation of the Scriptures. These works or this
obedience unto the law, which a mere natural man can perform, is (say they)
that Righteousness which the Scripture calls our own. By this kind of
Righteousness and Works, they grant none is Justified. 2 Some follow Grace
and Faith: which are done by Man's free will, excited and aided by the special
help of Grace. Such Obedience and Righteousness is (say they) called the (
Righteousness of God,) because it is wrought in us of his gift and grace. And
by this Righteousness a man is justified.
By this Invention they turn of with a wet finger, all those Scriptures that
we have alleged. We are Justified ( not by the works of the Law,) that is,
by the Obedience of the Moral Law, which a man may perform without Gods
Grace: But we are Justified by ( Faith of Christ,) that is, by that obedience
of the Moral Law, which a man may perform by faith, and the help of Gods
grace. Romans 3. (...).
Boasting is excluded, says the Apostle, by what Law? By the Law of works,
that is, by the Law performed by the strength of Nature? Nay, For he that
performs the Law by his own strength, has cause to boast of it. By what Law
then? By the Law of Faith, that is, by faith which obtaines Gods grace to
fulfill the Moral Law. Now he that obeyes the Law by Gods help, has no cause
to boast. ( Romans 9. 31. 32 How knows Bellarm^ne that? Bell. lib. 1. c. 19*
Israel which followed the Law of righteousness, could not attain unto the
law of righteousness.) Wherefore? Because they sought it not by Faith; that
is, they sought not to perform the Law by Gods Grace; ( But as by the works
of the Law,) that is, by their own strength: Thus Paul desires to be found in
Christ, ( not having his own righteousness which is of the Law) that is that
righteousness he performed without Gods grace before his Conversion; ^ello.
cap. 16.
But ( the righteousness of God which is by faith.) i.e. That righteousness
which he performed in obeying the Law by Gods grace after his Conversion. For
confirmation of this distinction, and the Interpretations thereon grounded,
Bellarmine brings three reasons to show that when works and faith are opposed:
all works of the Law are not excluded.

1 Its manifest; Faith is a work: and that there is a Law of Faith as well as
works. If therefore, Romans 3. all works, and all Law be excluded from
Justification: then to be justified by Faith, were to be justified without
faith. 2 Its plain the Apostle, Romans 3. intends to prove that neither Jews by
the Bell lib. 1. ^. 19.
naked observation of the law of Moses: nor the Gentiles for their good works;
before they were (...). Tom. 2, tract. 4. cap. 2* quest. 6.. 15.
converted to the faith of Christ, could obtain righteousness from God. 3 The
Apostle shows, Romans 4. 4. what works he excludes from Justification, ( viz.)
such whereto wages is due, by debt, not by grace. Now works performed without
Gods help deserve Bell. cap. 19*
reward ( ex Debito:) but works performed by his help, deserve wages ( ex
gratia.
I doubt but (notwithstanding these seeming Reasons) the forenamed distinction
and expositions of Scripture according thereto; appear unto you at the first
sight, strange, uncouth, far besides the intent of the Holy Ghost, in all
those fore-reckoned passages of Scripture. Let us examine it a little more
narrowly: and ye shall quickly perceive; that in this School distinction,
there is nothing but fraud and shifting. (By works done, by the strength of
Nature we are not justified. By works done with the help of grace we are
justified.) This is the distinction: resolve it now into these terms which
are more proper, and it runs thus. (A man is not sanctified by those works of
the Mora^l Law which he does without grace: but a man is sanctified by those
works of the Moral Law he does by Grace.) Both Sentences are squint eyed, and
look quite awry from the Apostles aim in this dispute touching Justification.
Is it his intent, Romans 3. to prove that a sinner destitute of grace cannot be
made inherently holy, by Morality, or outward works of Piety? or thus. That a
Sinner cannot attain to Sanctification by his own strength: but he must
attain to it by the grace of God? Take a survey of the Chapter, and follow the
Apostles Argumentation. All both Jews and Gentiles are under sin, verse 9.
therefore ( every mouth must be stopped) and none can plead innocence; ( and
all the world must be guilty before God.) and so liable to condemnation, verse
19. What follows hence now? ( Therefore by the works of the Law, shall no
flesh be justified in his sight, verse. 20.

How strange were this Conclusion, taken in our Adversaries Construction. Ergo,
By Obedience unto the Moral Law done without grace no flesh can attain
Sanctification in his sight. For neither does the Apostle speak of
Sanctification, but of absolution as is apparent; All are sinners against the
Law, Ergo, by pleading innocence in the keeping of the Law, no Man can be wholly
sanctified nor Justified nor absolved from Blame in Gods sight. Nor yet will
the Reason immediately annexed admit that gloss [ Works without Grace] By the
works of the Law shall no flesh be Justified in his sight. Why] For by the Law
comes the Knowledge of Sinne] that is, By the Law Men are convinced of Sin,
and declared not to be innocent. Which reason is not worth a Rush, according to
our Adversaries Construction. He that without grace shall do the works of the
Law: he is not thereby made holy. Why? Because the Law is the knowledge of
sin. The Law thus observed tells him he is a sinner. In which reason there is
no force, unless it be true on the other side. He that by the help of grace
does the works of the Law, is thereby sanctified: because the Law thus kept
tells him he is not a sinner, which is most untrue. In as much, as not only
those which are destitute of grace; but those that have grace also, and by the
help thereof, keep the Law in some measure, are by the Law notwithstanding
convinced to be sinners. The Apostle yet goes forward. ( If we be not justified
by the works of the Law, by what then? He answers, ( verse 21.) But now is
the righteousness of God made manifest without the Law.) We are justified by
the righteousness of God: But what is that? It is (says the distinction) that
obedience to the Law which we perform by Gods grace. A gloss apparently
false. For the righteousness of God here is a Righteousness without the Law:
But obedience to the Law, though performed with grace, is a Righteousness (
with) the Law; because it is the Righteousness of the Law. For it is all one, he
that obeyes the Law by his own strength; if he do it As Adam.
perfectly he has the righteousness of the law, and he that obeyethit
perfectly, by Gods grace, has still the same righteousness of the law, and no
other. For so the Law be kept, it alters not the righteousness thereof, that we
keep it by our own strength, that we have of our selves, or another help
that gives us strength to do it. For then that strength which he gives us is
our own. Which point duly observed cuts in sunder the sinews of this
distinction; for it is clear the Apostle distinguishes the Righteousness of
the Law and of God as different in their kinds: these make them to be one and
the same thing, [Obedience to the moral Lawe] but done by diverse helps; one
by mere nature: the other by Grace. This is most contrary to the Scriptures,
and specially to that excellent place Romans 10. 3. 4. etc. where the Apostle
showing the difference between the Righteousness which is our own or of the
Law; and that which is the Righteousness of God or Faith: tells us. The
Righteousness of the Law is thus described [ Th Man that does these things
shall live thereby:] but the Righteousness of Faith speaks on this wise [
whosoever believes on him (i. e. Christ) shall not be ashamed.) Can any thing
be more plain; then that the Apostle opposes here [Doing of the Law; and
[Beleeuing] in Christ: Not [doeing] the Law by our own strength, and doing of
the Law by [Gods grace.] These are Jesuitical glosses that corrupt
Apostolical Doctrine, and strangely pervert the work of Christ in our
Redemption as if he had done no more for us but this So Bellarmin^ cap. 19.
answering that place* Gal. 2. [If righ^teousnesse be by the Law, then Christ
dyed in vaine] says: Nay, seeing we are justified by faith* and works
following it, Christ died to purpose, that God might give us grace so to be
justified.
( viz.) procured that where as we could not live by doing of the Law through
our own strength: God will now aid us by his grace, that we may fulfill the
Law, and by that Legal Righteousness obtain Justification and remission of
Sins. We abhor such Doctrine, and do reject as vain and imaginary that
distinction whence such absurdities necessarily follow Works without grace do
not justify.
More Why? because imperfect, or because done by natures strength. Not the
later: For then Adam not justified. Not the former forse all good works of the
best are imperfect.
might be said in confutation thereof, were it needful: but we have dealt
long upon this point, and it is time to hasten forward. By the way unto the
Jesuits Arguments in the defense of this Distinction We answer.

1 We confess Faith is a work, and in doing of it we obey the Law, because
(as Saint John speaks) John. 3. 23. [ This is Gods Commandment, that we
believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ.], And therefore the Gospel is
called [ The Law of Faith.] because the promise of grace in Christ is
propounded with Commandment that Men believe it. But now we deny that Faith
iustifies us, as it is a work which we perform in Obedience to this Law: It
justifies us only as the Condition required of us; and an Instrument
embracing Christ's Righteousness. Nor can the contrary be proved.

2 The Jesuits are mistaken in the scope of the Apostle Romans 3. whose intent is
not to show the Jew or Gentile could not attain Sanctification without Gods
grace; by such Obedience to the Law; as they could perform through the mere
strength of Natural Abilities. They affirm it strongly: but their Proofs are
weak, being manyfestly confuted by the whole File of the Apostles disputation,
who clearly and plainly exclude both Jews and Gentiles, from being Justified
by the works of the Law without making mention or giueing the least
Intimation, by what means these works must be performed, whether without
grace or by the Help of grace. Yea it had been quite besides his purpose so to
have done. For the Apostles argument is clear as the Light; and strong as a
threefold cord. All are Sinners against the Law, therefore by obedience unto
the Law, (Let Men perform which way they list or can, without grace or with
grace) no Man is in Gods sight pronounced innocent,

Romans 4. 4. we answer, The Apostle there proves: that the Faithful, children
of Abraham; are not justified by works. Because Abraham the Father of the
Faithful was Justified by Faith; and not by works. Where we affirm; That
the Apostle excludes all the works of Abraham from his Justification: both
such as he performed when he had no grace, and those he did when he had grace.
For those works are excluded wherein Abraham might glory before Men. Now
Abraham might glory before Men as well in those works which he did by the
help of Gods grace: as those which he did without it. Nay more in those: then
in these. As in his obedient Departure from his own Country at Gods command;
his patient expectation of the promises; his ready willingness even to offer
his own Son out of Love and Duty to God, his religious and Just demeaning of
himself in all places of his abode. In those things Abraham had cause to glory
before Men, much more, then in such works as he performed before his
Conuertion: when he served other Gods beyond the Flood. Therefore we conclude
that Abraham was Justified; neither by such works; as went before Faith and
grace in him: nor yet by such as followed after. This is most clear by the v.
2. [ If Abraham where justified by works, he had wherein to glory: but not
with God.] Admit here the Popish Interpretation: and this speech of the
Apostles will be false. Thus [ If Abraham were justified by workes] that is by
such works as he performed without Gods gracious help [ he has wherein to
glory*] viz. before Men: but [ not with God.] Nay, that's quite otherwise. For
its evident. If a Man be Justified by obeying the Law through his own strength:
he may boldly glory before God, as well as before Men; seeing in that case he is
not beholding to God for his help. But according to our doctrine, the Meaning
of the Apostle is perspicuous. Abraham might glory before Men in those
excellent works of piety, which he performed after his vocation: and in men's
sight he might be justified by them. But he could not glory in them before God:
nor yet be justified by them in his sight. So then all works whatsoever are
excluded from Abraham's Justification: and nothing lest but Faith, which is
imputed unto him for Righteousn^sse; as it is v. 3. Whence it follows. That as
Abraham: so all others are Justified without all Merit, by Gods free grace and
favor. For so it follows, verse 4. 5. [ Now unto him that works, the wages
is not counted by favor; but by Debt: but to him that works not; but
believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
Righteousness.] These words run clear, till a Jesuit put his Foot into
the stream to raise up the Mudde. To him that worketh] that is, which
fulfileth the Righteousness of the Moral Law: [ the wages of Justification
and Life [ is not counted by favor: but by debt] for by the perfect
Righteousness of the Law* a Man deserves to be justified and saved. [ But to
him that works not] that has not fullfilled the righteousness of the Law in
doing all things; that are written therein: [ But believes in him that
justifies the vngodly] That is relyeth upon Christ, who by his Righteousness
obtained absolution for him (that is) Rightousnesse in himself.] His Faith is
imput^d for Righteousnesse] that is. He by his Faith ob^aynes I^stification in
Gods sight: not by Merit of his own, but Gods gracious acceptance of Christ's
Righteousness for his.

But here our Adversaries trouble the water by a false Inte^^retation. [ To him
that worketh] that is, say they that fulfill, the Law by his own strength.
Wages is not counted by favor, but by debt,] but if he fulfill it by Gods
grace, his wages is pai^^ him by favor, not of debt. Where unto we reply: That
1 This gloss is a plain corruption of the Text. For by works in this fourth
verse the Apostle understands that kind of works were of mention is made v 2
By which Abraham was not Justified: and these as we have showed where works
done by the help of Grace not by the mere strength of Nature. 2 And again
for the Assertion it self, namely [ He that fulfils the m^rrall Law by the
help of Gods grace is justified, by favor not by debt] we say it is either a
manifest falsehood or at best, an ambiguous speech. For it is one thing to bestow
Grace on a Man to fulfill the Law: and it is another thing to Justify him; when
he has fulfilled the Law. If God should give strength to a Man exactly to
fulfill the Morral^ Law that were indeed of his free favor and grace: but when
this man, that has received this strength shall come before God with the
perfect Righteousness of the Law, pleading that in every point he had done
what was required God is bound in Justice to pronounce him innocent, and of due
Debt to bestow on him the wages of eternal Life. Adams case is not unlike to
such a Man. For God gave Adam what strength he had: yet Adam fulfilling the Law
by that strength, should have merited Justification and Life. Therefore when
the Apostle speak (...) all works in the perfect fulfilling of the Law, he
says, that [ to him that works Wages is not counted by favor but: but by
debt:] he speaks exactly, and the Jesuits in excluding works done by Grace
comment absurdly. Thus much touching the third point concerning Man's
Justification by Faith alone: as also of the first general Head promised in
the Beginning. Namely, the condition required of us unto Justification ( viz.)
Faith.

SECT. 3.
CHAP. I*
Of the righteousness whereby a man is justified before God: that it is not
his own inherent in himself: that in this life no (...) has perfection of
holiness inherent in him.
I Proceed unto the second General, Sect. 3. c. 1.
of the Matter of our Justification where we are to enquire what Righteousness
it is, for which a Sinner is Justified in Gods sight. Iustificat^on and Justice
a^e still coupled together; and some Righteousness there must be, for which
God pronounces a Man Righteous: and for the sake whereof he for Gi^eth unto
him all his Sins. No^ is a Sinner just before God because Justified: bu^ he
is therefore Justified because he is some way or other Just. -- The
Righteousness for which a Man can be Justified before God is of necessity one
of these two. 2 General. heads.


1 Either inherent in his own Person and done by

2 Or inherent in the Person of Christ: but imputed

A Man is Justified either by something in him and performed by him: or by some
thing in another performed for him. The wisdom of Angels and Men has not bin
able to show unto us any third Means. For whereas it is affirmed by some that
God might have reconciled Mankind unto himself by a free and absolute parden
of their Sins without the interuention of any such Righteousness, either in
themselves or in Christ whereby to procure it: to that we say That God has
seen it good in this matter rather to follow his own most wise Counsels;
then these Men's foolish Directions. It Is to no purpose now to dispute what God
might have done, whether God by his absolute omnipotency could not have freed
Men from (...)
Hell, by some other Means without taking satisfaction for Sin from Christ:
whether God ought not to have the same privilege which we give unto any
mortale King, freely to pardon a Rebel, and receive him to favor, without
consideration of any goodness in him or satisfaction made by him, or ano^ for
him? Or, whether Sin do make such a deep wound in Gods Justice and Honor,
that he cannot with the safeguard of either pass by it without amends. Such
question* as these are vain and curious prosecuted by idle and vnthinkfull*
Men, who not acknowledging the Riches of Gods (...) and grace in that course of
their Redemption which god has followed; would accuse God of Indiscretion, for
making much ado about nothing, and teach him to have go^e a more compendious
way to work, then by sending his own son to (...) for us. (...) stand what
God has not tell him what he might or should have done. (...)
According to which course of his now revealed will we know that God has
declared his everlasting hatred against Sin* as that thing which most
directly and immediately opposes the Holiness of his Nature, and the Justice
of his Commandments. We know that for this hatred which God bears to Sin, no
sinful creature can be able to stand in (...) And therefore before
reconciliation it was needful, Satisfaction should be made where offense had
bin given. Which seeing man could not effect by himself* God thought it good
to provide a Mediator, who should in make peace between both. So that what
ever may be imagined of possibility of other means to bring man to Life: yet
now we know that sicioportuit, Thus Christ ought to suffer, Luc. 24. 26. and
that it ( Behooved him to be like us that being a Faithful high Priest, he
might make Reconciliation for our Sines.) Heb. 2. 17. Leaving then this new way
to Heaven never frequented, but by Imagination; let us follow the old ways of
Justification that the Scriptures have discovered unto us: which are two and no
more. Either by our own Righteousness and works: or by the Righteousness
and works of another ( viz) Christ. The former is that way whereby Man might
have obtained Justification and life, had he not bin a Sinner. But now, Man,
that is a Sinner, cannot be Justified and saved: but only in the later way (
viz.) by the Righteousness of Christ the Mediator.

This Duine truth is of most infallible certainty and sovereign consolation
unto the conscience of a Sinner: as shall appear in the process of our
Discourse wherein we shall first remove [ our own Righteousness: that so in
the second place we may [ establish the Righteousness of Christ] as the only
Matter of our Justification in Gods sight.

By our own Righteousness we understand as the Apostle does Romans 10* [ The
Righteousness of the Law or of workes] which is twofold.

1. The fulfilling of the Law whether by the [ Habitual of the Heart: or by
the [ Actual Iustice] of good works proceeding thence For the Law requires
both, That the Person be Holy* endued with all inward qualities of [ Purity and
Iustice] and that the works be Holy being performed for Matter and all the
Circumstances, according to the Commandment.

2 The satisfying for the Breach of the Law. For he satisfaction to the Law,
which is broken, is afterward no debtor to the Law: but to be accounted Just
and no Violater thereof: We must now enquire touching these two: whether a Man
can be Justified* by his own OObedience to the Moral Law* Secondly, Whether
he can be justified by* his own Satisfaction for Transgression of the Morrall
Law. Concerning which two Quaeres: we lay down these two Conclusions which are
to be made good.


For the former. It is the Conclusion of the Apostle Romans 3. 20. Conclusion.
Therefore by the works of the Law shall no flesh be Justified in his sight]
which we prove by these Arguments.

The first shall be that of the Apostle in the forenamed place which stands
thus. Arg.


Whosoever is a Transgressor of the Moral Law: he cannot be Iustifi^d by his
Obedience thereto. But every Man is a Transgressor of the Moral Law. ergo, No
Man can be Justified by his obedience thereto.

The Mayor is an undeniable Principal in Reason. It being a thing Impossible
that a party accused as an offender should be absolved and pronounced innocent
by pleading Obedience to that Law which he has plainly disobeyed. Wherefore
the Apostle takes this Proposition for granted in these words of his [ For by
the law comes the Knowledge of Sinne] v. 20. That which conuinceth us to be
sinners: by that it is impossible we should be declared to be righteous. that
plea wilneuer quit us; which proves us guilty. Yea twere not only folly, but
madness to allege that for ones just excuse which it self is his very fault
whereof he is accused. The Mayor then is certain.

The minor is no less. ( viz.) That every man is a transgressor of the Moral
Law) If any Son of Adam will deny this, his own conscience will give his
tongue the Lie: and the Scriptures will double it upon him. Which having
concluded [ Romans 3. Gal. 2.
all under Sinne] aver. That John 1. 8.
[ If we (an Apostle not excepted) say We have no sin we deceive our sel^es
and the truth is not in us.] Yea ( If Verse 10.
we say we have not sinned, we make God a her, and his word is not in vs] The
conclusion then is vnfallable ( That by the Obedience of the Moral Law, no Man
shall be justified (that is) quitted and pronounced innocent before Gods
judgment seat.] This Aposticall argument utterly overthrows the pride of Man
in seeking for Justification by the Law: and it is of so clear evidence, that
the Adversaries of this Doctrine cannot tell how to avoid it. But, for as much
as many exceptions are taken, and shifts sought out, for the further
manifestation of the force hereof against gainsayers of the truth: it will be
requisite to examine there euasions. Which we shall do in the next argument.
Which is this.

2 Whosoever having once broken the Law and can never after perfectly fulfill
it: 2 Argument.
he cannot be Justified by his obedience thereto.

But Man having once broken Gods Law can (...) after that perfectly fulfill
it. Ergo, Man cannot be Justified by Obedience of the Law.

The Mayor of this Argument is framed upon another ground then the former and
opposed unto that erroneous tenent of our Adversaries. [ That howsoever a man
be a sinner against the Law, yet neurthelesse afterward be may be justified by
his obedience of the Law. Because God for the time following* gives him grace
perfectly to fulfill it.] Which opinion is directly contrary to the reason of
the Apostle which is: [ That once a sinner, and always incapable of
Justification by the Law: for how should the Law declare him innocent that
has, though but once transgressed against it.] He that has stolen in his
youth, and ever after lived truly and justly, can never quit himself in
Judgment from the guilt and punishment of thee very by pleading, he has kept
the Law in his latter Times. Obedience that follows after, iustifies not from
the guilt that went before. As we shall see more ^ereafter in the point of Man's
satisfaction. But let us grant that the Law though once broken, yet afterward
fullfilled would Justify a Man: we here defend the Minor (That Man having
broken G^ds Law, can never after wards perfectly fulfill it) and so by that
means also he is excluded from Justification by it. This Proposition the
Romanists will not yield to, with out strong proof: Let us explain it and
confirm it. The Proposition may beset down in these terms [ No Man whosoever
can perfectly fulfill the Moral Law in this Life] Man hear we consider in a
twofold estate of Nature of Grace. Touching man in the estate of nature, it is
a greed on both sides that the keeping of the Law is utterly and absolutely
impossible unto him. But concerning Man regenerate and justified, they of Rome
affirm he may keep the Law: we of the Reformation granting that absolutely
it is not impossible (for we will not say; but God might if he saw good
bestowne such perfection of grace upon a Regenerate Man, that afterward he
should Live without all (...), and be translated to Heaven without death) yet,
according to the order which God now holds in bringing Man to salvation; we
deny that there ever was or ever will be any Mortal Man that has or shall
perfectly fulfill the Righteousness of the Moral Law: This shall appear unto
you, by parting the Righteousness of the Law into its branches, whereby you
may see what it is to fulfill the Law, and how impossible it is so to do.

The Righteousness required by the Moral Law is of two sorts.

Habitual, in the inherent holiness of Man's whole person, when such gracious
Qualities are fixed and planted in every faculty of soul and Body: as do
dispose and incline the Motions of both only unto that which is conformable to
the Righteousness of the Law. That such Righteousness is required by the Law,
is a plain Case and confessed; That which commands the good, or forbids the
evil action; does command the virtuous and forbid the vicious Habit too. He
that looks for purity in the stream, cannot but dislike poison in the
Fountain: and God that commands us to do good, bids us also to be holy; Pure
in heart undefiled (...) the way,
nor can we do the one, unless we do the other. And therefore the Apostle
ioynes both together. [ The end of the Commandment is love, (but where?) out
of a pure heart.] 1 Timothy 1. 5.

Actual, In the exercise of all good works enjoined by the Law, and
forbearing the contrary evil works. Whether these good or evil works be
inward in that spiritual obedience which the Law required; ( viz.) in the
right ordering of all the motions of our souls, that every one of our
Thoughts, Imaginations, Purposes of our mind, and all the secret workings and
stirrings of our affections, be altogether employed upon Piety and Charity, not
so much as touching upon any thing, that is contrary to the love of God, or our
neighbor. Or, whether these good and evil works be outward in the bodily
obedience unto the Law, in doing all and every external duty of Religion
toward God: of Justice and Mercy toward man; and in leaving undone the
contrary.

Further this actual righteousness of the Law is to be considered two ways:

1 As it respects all the Commandments, and so that 2 As it respects any one
Commandment, or any one
So you see what is to be done of him that will perfectly fulfill the Law: let
us now see whether any man can do so, or no. We say no man can do it; and we
make it good in the confirmation of these three Propositions.

1 No man in this life has perfection of grace and holiness 2 2 Cap. ^.
No man in this life can fully observe all those good works both inward and
outward which the Law requires. 3 3 Cap. 3.
No man in this life can perform any one particular good work so exactly, that
in every point it shall answer the rigor of the Law, and Gods severe judgment.


Where sinful corruption remains in part, Proposition.
there in herent holiness is not perfect.

But in every Man during this life there remains sinful corruption. Ergo, In
no man is there, during this life, perfect inherent holiness.

The mayor is without exception. For he that is part bad and sinful, it is not
possible, he should be totally good and holy.

The minor is most evident by Scriptures and each Man's experience and reason it
self. Gal. 5. 17. The Apostle describes the Combat that is between the flesh
and the spirit, (that is) between corruption and grace, in a man regenerate. [
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: and
these two are contrary one to the other, so that ye cann^t do the same things
that ye would.] Who can say that holiness is perfect in that man, in who^
corruption of Nature, not only troubles, but hinders grace in its holy
operation? Shall we say this contention lasts but for a while after a man is
newly regenerate: but in success of time the Spirit gets an absolute victory,
corruption being not only ouermastered; but also annihilated? If we say so,
experience will accuse us, and conscience will judge us to be Liars Where is
that man, and who is he named, that can say, he finds no rebellion or
distemper in his affections or desires, no disorder in any motion of his soul:
but that all within him is sweetly tuned unto obedience, without jar and
discord arising from corruption? Certainly that humble confession of a most
holy Apostle, may cause blushing in any such proud Iustitiary* Had Paul the
body of sin in him, and have thou no^e? He fights and wrestles, [ against the
Law in his members, rebelling against the Law of his mind.) yet he is so checked
and mated by it, that [ He can neither do the good he would, nor avoid the
evil he would not, when he would do well, evil is still present with him.]
And so tedious is this toil unto him; that he complains of it at the very
heart, and cries out bitterly for help in this conflict. Whereupon though he
have help from God through Jesus Christ, yet has he not full deliverance
from this inherent corruption; but is feign to conclude in this pitiful
manner, [ So then I (...). even I my self.
my self in my mind serve the law of God: but in my flesh the law of sin.]
Even Paul serves God in the better half of him: do what he can, sin will
have a place in his heart, and a part of his service, though he be unwilling to
yield it. If any will compare and prefer himself to this holy man: he may
prove himself prouder, but better then him he cannot. It Is arrogance for a
simple Friar to claim perfection, when so great an Apostle disauowes it. He
that will not acknowledge that corruption in himself, which Paul (in the name
of all) confesses in his own person; it is not because such a one is more holy
then the Apostle: but because he is ignorant, and sees it not; or high-minded
and scorns to be known of it. Furthermore, Reason confirms what Scriptures
and experience do witness; ( viz.) that sinful corruption will hang fast
upon us unto our dying day: for if we suppose an utter abolishment of sin and
corruption in our Nature; it must needs follow, there will never be any
sinfulness at all in our works and lives. Where the Habit is perfect, the
Action is so too: and a sweet Fountain cannot send forth bitter waters.
Wherefore seeing not the best of men can live without manifold actual sins:
It it apparent, that this ill fruit comes from a bad humor, in the tree, and
this defect of actual obedience, comes from the imperfection of habitual
holiness. This is sufficient for Justification of the truth of our first
Preposition [ That inherent holiness in this life, is not perfect;] Because
it is always coupled with some sinful corruption.

But here our Adversaries cry out with open mouth, that we maintain moastrous
propositions. Namely (...)
That there is n^ inherent holiness in a man that's justified, that after
Justification, a man still remains a sianer and unjust. That in Justification,
sin is not abolished, but only covered with Christ's mantle. Thence they fall
to their Rhetoric, That all Calvinists are but painted Sepulchers, fair
without full of rottenness within. Like foolish Virgins that have no oil of
their own: But think to be supplied by that of other folks. Like Wolves in a
Lambs skin, which hides, but takes not away their ravening and fierce
nature. Like a leprous person in fine clothes; that looks to be favored and
embraced by his King, because his is well apparelled. For this is (say they) to
teach, That a Man justified is yet a sinner in himself. That corruption,
filthiness, and uncleanness remain in him, when yet in Gods sight he is
accounted pure and clean, because he has hid himself v^der the cloak of
Christ's righteousness. Whence also they tell us it well follow, We make
Christ's body monstrous, a holy, beautiful head joined to filthy leprous
members. Christ's marriage polluted; A most holy and fair Bridegroom coupled
to a foul deformed Spouse.

To this we say. Truth is modest; yet she will not be out-faced with big
words. Their eloquence has slandered; partly us, partly the truth. Us, in that
they affirm we deny all inherent righteousness in a person justified, which
is an impudent calumny. The truth, in condemning that for an error which is
sacred verity taught us by God in the Scriptures, ( viz.) That a person
justified, is yet after that in himself in part sinful. This we still teach
and maintain for a truth, firm as the foundation of the earth, that cannot
be shaken, namely, That although a Justified person is by the grace of the
Holy Ghost dwelling in him made inherently holy: yet this sanctity is not that
perfect purity of the heart, which the Law requires, because some degrees of
impurity and corruption do dwell in him till death. And therefore the most
justified person living, is yet in himself partly sinful and unjust; but the
sinfulness is pardoned unto him in CHRIST.

Against this the R^manists contend, laboring to prove, that in him that is
justified. Sin does not remain at all: but is vt^erly abol^shed. They prove
it by such Arguments as these.

1 The Scriptures testify, That Christ is the John 1. 29.
Lamb of That He was Heb 9. 28.
offered to take away the sins of many. That in Repentance, our sins are
Acts 3. 19. (...), etc.
blotted out. That God will subdue our iniquities and Micah. 7. 19.
cast our sins into the bottom of the Sea; in allusion to the drowning of
the Egyptians in the red Sea. Wherefore if sin be taken away, blotted out,
drowned in the Sea, like the Egyptians: then sure it is abolished, and
remains no longer.

2 They prove it from the Properties which are ascribed Sin; as namely
these. 1 Sin is compared to spotts, stains and filthynesse: but from thence
we are washed by the pouring on of ( clean Ezekiel. 16. 2^.
water) upon us; and by the (Blood of Christ.) Apoc 1. 6. 1 John 1. ^7.
2 Sin is compared to Bonds, Fetters, and the Prison, whereby we are holden
captive under the power of Satan: Now Christ has broken these Chains and
opened these prison doors, having ( delivered us Col. 1. 13.
from the power of darkness) and ( redeemed Tit. 2. 14.
us from all iniquity) and (made us free Romans 6. 18. 2^
from Sin to be come the servants of Righteousness.) 3 Sin is compared to
sicknesses, diseases, and wounds. Now God is the best Physician, the most
skillful Chirurgian: and where he undertakes the Cure, he does his work
thoroughly: he cures all diseases and each on perfectly. He does not spread on a
sick Man a fair Couerlid, or cover a festred wound with a fair cloth, as
Calvin imagines: but by a purgative potion he expelles the disease, by a
healing plaster he cures the wound. So that there is not left, nor corrupt
matter, nor dangerous sore, that can prove deadly according to that Romans 8. 1.
( There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus.) that is. There
is no matter at all for which they deserve Condemnation, as those expound. 4
Sin is likned to death, nay it is the spiritual Death of the Soul. Now he
that is justified is restored to Spiritual Life, and where Life is there death
is quite taken away, seeing a Man cannot be alive and dead both together.
Wherefore the Apostle says Romans 6. 6. [ Our old Man is (...).
crucified with him, that the Body of Sin might be (...).
destroyed, that hence forth We might not serve Sin) and v. 11. ( We are dead
unto Sin.)
Hence they conclude.

If the filthiness of sin be washed away, the Chains of sin broken, the
Diseases and hurts of Sin healed, the Death of Sin abolished: then it
follows, that Sin is quite exstinguished, and remains no more in those that
are justified.

blasphemy (all Heb. 4. 14
things being naked and bare before his eyes.) If he know it, then either he
hates it or he hats it not. If he does not hate it how does the Scriptures say
true that he is a ( God that hates Iniquity.) If he do hate it the^ certainly
he must punish it: God cannot see a fault and hate a fault but he must also
punish it to. If he punish it, then he which is justified shall yet be
condemned which is absurd.

Unto these Arguments we answer. Unto the two former thus. When we say Sin
remains in a Man regenerate and Justified we must distinguish the ambiguity of
the word Sin. In Sin, to use that distinction which is authentical with ou^
Adversaries; There are three things.

1 The offense of God, which is the fault. 2 The obligation unto eternal
punishment, which is the guilt. 3 The stain or pollution of the soul, (viz)
the inherent vicious inclination of it unto evil. From whence the fault
committed first issued, and which by committing of the fault is augmented. For
evil once committed leaves a further pronnesse in the heart to do it again.
This we call the corruption of Sin.
Thus then we answer. Sin does not remain in those that are justified, and
regenerate in the two first respects, viz. of the fault and the guilt, both
which are taken away by the death of Christ. But Sin does remain in the
regenerate according to the 3 respect, ( viz.) the vicious quality and
corruption thereof, inherent in the soul: We shall explain these answers,
and apply them to the Arguments. We say then; That the fault and guilt of sin
in the regenerate, is utterly abolished by the death of Christ. Which we do
not take in such a sense as this. That in a man regenerate there is not at all
any one fault or guilt to be found, for to say that a man regenerate, when he
sins, were neither faulty nor guilty, were a gross untruth, ^ seeing it is
impossible that man should sin, yet God not be offended; that man should
sin, and yet not be guilty, and deserving eternal death. Wherefore we
confess that in the holiest of men, if they sin, there is a true fault, and
God is displeased with it; there is also true guilt, and for it they deserve to
go to Hell. But yet this truth also must be acknowledged withal, that all
faultiness and guiltiness are quite abolished and taken away from them by
Christ, because that both are pardoned unto them. God is offended; but yet they
feel not the woeful effects of his indignation: because in Christ he is
graciously contented to be reconciled with them. Again they have deserved
everlasting death: but they come not to the pains thereof, because freed from
the punishment by Christ's satisfaction. Thus then we understand the first part
of the answer. That the fault and guilt of sin is utterly abolished, that
is, totally pardoned unto the Regenerate, by means of Christ, so that no
final eternal punishment shall befall them therefore. The other part. That
Sin ( in the uitious quality and corruption if it remain in Men justified)
we understand with this necessary Romans 6. 12. 14.
Limitation, That it remains in them not in its power and strength: but in its
Being and Life. It has vitam: but not Regnum. It reigns where there is no
Grace at all: but it lives even where Grace is. which though it mightily a bate
to power of it: it cannot utterly d^stroy its being. Hence now its easy to vnty
the Arguments. Sin is taken away, b^otted out, drowned in the bottom of the
Sea, in regare of those mischievous effects which sin would have brough on
us: God is reconciled, the obligation, to punishment cancelled; and all the
power, force, and strength of Sin defeated; So that like the dead Egyptians
they can no longer pursue the Israelites to annoy them, not shall stand up as
an adversary in judgment to condemn us. The Guilt of Sin is washed away
total by the blood of Christ: the filthynesse of corrupted Nature is in part
by Degrees cleansed by the Spirit of Christ powered on us in his sanctifieing
Grace. The Fetters and bonds of Sin, whereby we were held in bondage under
condemnation, these are quite broken asunder: but those chains, whereby with
Paul, Romans 7 ( we are led captive) to disobedience are some broken, all
weakened. We are freed from the power of Satan and fear of Hell: but not
wholly freed from Sin, whereby we are often captives against our will. Sin
is a sickness, and God is the Physician; a wound, and God is the Chirurgian,
true: but the cures neither perectly, yet correct that word. He cures our
sickness and sores perfectly: but not suddenly, where he begines the work
he will finish it: but he will not do all in a day. The cure begins and goes
onward to perfection during this life: but it is never finished till after death.
He forgiues Psalm. 103. 3.
all our iniquity and that's done ^utirely and totally [ and heals all our
infirmities]: but this is by degrees, not all at once. In which course God has
no cause to fear the censure of a Jesuit for unskillfulness nor stands he in
need of Man's counsel, for prescription, nor Man's help to hold his hand in
working, if the Cure go on more slowly then our foolish hastiness thinks
fit. That's fit and best what God thinks so: and if we count him faithful and
wise in his art; it is our duty to take his advice: but saucy persumption to give
him any. Lastly, where Sin is said to be the ( Spiritual Death of the Soul)
and so Life being restored in Justification Death must needs be quite
abolished: the weakness of this Argument appears straight, if the
metaphorical term be changed in to proper. The death of Sin is either the
Separation of all grace from the Soul, or the Separation of Gods Favor from
the Soul. We are dead in trespasses and Sins both ways: In regard that in
the state of unregeneration the Soul is utterly destitute of all Grace and
goodness: and also be cause in that condition it is liable to eternal Death.
Now the Death of Sin that is eternal death in the perpetual Loss of Gods
favor this is clean taken a way from him that is regenerate. Christ by his
death has purchased to him Life and immortality. But touching that other;
(death (that is) the want of all inherent Grace in the Soul) They say. That in
Regeneration Grace and Holiness is restored to the Soul, yet not so perfectly
as to abolish every degree of Sinful Corruption. Before Regeneration the
Soul had no grace atall and so was utterly dead but it follows not, That
therefore in Regeneration, it has all grace given it in all perfection, and so
made perfectly alive: what ever harshnesse there is in the Metaphore, the
plain terms in this case are smooth enough. A Man may be at once a live and
dead, that is, at once a Man may be partly holy, and partly sinful. [ Our
old Man is crucified with Christ upon whose Cross it received a deadly wound;
(because Christ by his sacrifice has procured the sending of the Holy ghost
into the hearts of the Elect; who by sanctifying them, abolished their natural
corruptions by degrees. [ That so the body of sin might be destroyed.] that
is, not presently annihilated: (...) made of no force and strength, made unable
to work strongly in us. [ That henceforth we might not serve sin.] Though
always we should have sin in us. So are we [ dead to sinne] not as if sin
were utterly dead in us; or had no more working in us, then it has in a dead
carcass: but because the guilt of sin is fully taken away, and the power of
sin hat^ received a deadly wound, does bleed out some of its life now, and
shall infall^bly bleed out the last drop of its life hereafter.

Unto the third Argument, we answer thus, That the Horns of those Dilemma's
be made of wood, and may be easily battered. We say then that God sees and
knows the sinful corruption which is in the regenerate; for we cannot assent
unto that wild and frantic imagination of some; who have troubled the quiet
of some places in this Land, by preaching that God does not, nay cannot see any
iniquity or matter of blame, in those that be in Christ Jesus. We believe that
nothing is hid from his eyes: nor be our sins less visible to him then our
graces. God knows what sins his children commit, he judges them to be
faults, and such as deserve his infinite wrath. Yea, to go further, as he
sees the sin of the regenerate: so he hates it with a perfect hatred; it
being impossible, that his pure eyes should behold impurity and love it. But
now what follows hence? If he see it and hate it, then he cannot but punish
it. True, that consequence is certain. But what is next? If God punish that
sin which is in the Regenerate how then is their sin covered and their
iniquities forgiven? How does he account them Just, whom he knows and
punishes for unjust? Here Is a Sophisme. He sees sin, and hates sin, and
punishes sin of the Regenerate: Therefore he punishes it in, and upon their
own persons. That's a non sequitur. He punishes it, but it is in the person of
Christ [ who has trodden the Winepresse,] of the fierce wrath of God conceived
against all sinfulness whatsoever in his Elect: by which means his hatred
toward the sin of the Regenerate, is fully satisfied, and also his love
toward their persons procured. He graciously passes by their iniquity,
pardoning unto them what he hates, and has punished in Christ: in which
respect he may be truly said not to see that sin in them which he will never
punish in them, and to cover that sin which shall never be laid open in
judgment against them.

CHAP. II.
No man can perfectly fulfill the Law in performing all such works, both
inward and outward, as each commandment requires, against which truth Popish
Objections are answered.
ANd thus much touching the first Proposition and the first point wherein Man
falls short of his obedience to the Moral Law, ( viz.) in the imperfection of
habitual inherent holiness.

We go on unto the next Proposition, touching Man's actual Obedience unto the
whole Law. Where we teach,

That no man can perfectly obey the Law in performing all such works, 2
Proposition.
both inward and outward, as each commandment requires.

A man would think this point needed no other proof but only experience. In
all the Catalogue of the Saints, can you prick out one that after
regeneration, never committed sin against the Law? We shall kiss the ground
he treads on, if we know where that man haunts, who can assure us that since
his conversion he never brake the Law. Shall we find this perfection in a
Monks Cell, or in a Hermits Lodge, an Anachorites Mue, under a Cardinals Hat,
or in the Popes Chair? All these are Cages of uncleanness, not Temples
wherein dwells undefiled Sanctity. Never to sin; that's a happiness of Saints
and Angels, with whom we shall hereafter enjoy it: but whilst w^e are mortal
we can but wish for it. [ Thy Law, (says David) is exceeding large.] It
compriseth in it not a few, but many and manifold duties. Good works are by a
kind of Popish Soloecisme brought to a short sum Prayer, Fasting, and
Almes-deedes. These are eminent among the rest: but not the hundredth part of
the whole number. There is besides a world of duties enjoined, and as many
sins forb^dden: each Commandment has it several Ranks, every duty its
manifold Circumstances; to reckon up all, were a business which the wit of the
subtilest Jesuit, or the profoundest Diu^ne could hardly master. To perform
them is a task, which is beyond the strength of the holiest Man, who in
finding it a great difficulty to do any one well, would forthwith judge the
performance of so many an impossibility. But if this suffice not; we have
express Scriptures to prove that no man does actually obey the Law in all
points. Such places are these:


Whence we conclude, that [ de facto] never any man did keep the Law: but
brake it in some, yea, in many things. And therefore we say that the dispute of
our Adversaries, touching the possibility of keeping the Law, vanishes to
nothing. For seeing no man has, or will ever actually keep it (as the
Scriptures witness) to what end serves all the quarrelling and dispute about
the possibility of keeping it. No man shall be justified by the Law, because he
has a power to keep it if he list: but because he has actually kept it.
Whence it is manifest that the reply of our Adversaries is ridiculous. No man
indeed does keep it: but yet they may if they will. For 1. what is that to
Justification? Can a man that's regenerate be justified by his obedience of the
Law, when yet after his regeneration he does not keep it? 2. And again. How
know these men that there was, or is, such a power in the Saints to keep the
Law, when yet the world never saw it brought into Act? Is it not more probable
that what never was nor will be done, never could nor can be done? Were they
all idle, and did not do their best endeavor? It Is true, none does so much
good as he should and might; but yet it is a sharp censure to say that none
would put themselves forward to the utmost of their might. What shall be said
of Saint Paul, ( Phil. 3. 12.) He confesses that himself was not yet perfect:
but that he sought after it. How? negligently? No, with great diligence and
intention. He followed after. [(...)] v. 12. and that eagerly, Reaching forth
to catch the things that were before (...), v. 13. And pressing toward the
mark (...), v. 14. Here was diligence, and we cannot say that Saint Paul did
not do his best. Did Paul then fulfill the Law? It seems so, for here we see
he was willing, Lib. 4. cap. ^0.
and in another place Bellarmine tells us he was able, for so we have it, Paul.
4. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me: that is,
fulfill the Moral Law by the grace of Christ. Now if he were willing and
able, then certainly he kept it. Nay it is certain he did not keep it. Witness
the Testimony of himself. I do not the good things which I would: but the
evil which I would not, that do I Romans 7. 19. Where is the fault then? In the
Apostles will? No, It Is plai^e he would have done it. Wast then in his ability?
Yea, this was it. to will was present with him: but he found no means to
perform that which is good verse 8.

The Jesuit then abuses us with a false exposition of of that place to the
Philippians interpreting it of the Apostles ability to perform the moral Law,
which himself meant concerning that strength where with Christ enabled him
unto contentation and patience in all conditions whatsoever. Paul was able to
bear all afflictions patiently, to use prosperity soberly: but to fulfill the
Law in all things perfectly he was not able. And if he were not, who is? We
conclude that the actual Obedience of the moral Law in fulfilling all the
commandments exactly, is impossible to a regenerate Man in this Life. Let us
now take a short survey of our Adversaries Arguments whereby they would prove
That actual obedience to the whole Law is not only possible: but also very
easy to the regenerate and Justified. They are those.

^ That burden which is light may be carried without shrinking under it, Bell.
lib. 4. de Just. cap. 1. 10. 11. 12 13. Bec^tom 2. tract 4. cap. 4. quest. 1.
that yoke which is easy, is worn without pain; those commandments which are
not burdensome, may be observed without difficulty. But such is the moral Law.
[My yoke is easy and my burden light] Mat. 11. 30. [This is the love of God
that ye keep his cammandments, and his commandments are not (...),
grievous.] 1 John 5. 3. Ergo, The Moral Law may be easily observed.

To this we answer, That the place of Matthew is to be understood not of the
Moral Law: but of the yoke and burden of the cross and afflictions which
every one must bear, that will follow Christ and obey the Gospel. To those
that are wearied and laden with the Cross, Christ's speaks by way of
Consolation, telling them whether to resort for help. ( Come to me and I will
give you rest) that is comfort and deliverance. 2 Then he persuades them to
patience under their affliction. ( Take up my yoke upon you) and bear it
chearefully, which is persuasion he strength Learn of me) to do and suffer as
I do, enduring so many persecutions and afflictions with all meekness and
patience. For I am meek and lowly in heart, quietly bearing all wrongs and
indignities from man without murmuring against God, repining against man,
seeking revenge at their hands that have unjustly persecuted me. 2 From the
success of CHRIST'S example. And ye shall find rest unto your souls; comfort
in affliction, seasonable deliu^rance from affliction. 3 From the Nature of
such crosses. For my yoke is easy, etc. Though they be yoakes and burdens
which for the present seem grievous: yet they be easy, they be light, because
Christ's yoke and Christ's burden which he lays on all his true Disciples that
follow him, and which he will give them strength to support and bear out with
cheerfulness. This seems the most natural interpretation of this place, and
it is most agreeable to the twelfth Chapter to the Hebrews. Where the like
Arguments are used to comfort the godly in such afflictions, as follow the
profession of the Gospel. But yet if John, That the Commandments of God are
not grievous to the Regenerate; not because they can perfectly and easily
fulfill them: but because that which made them intolerable and unsupportable
unto them, is now taken away. What Is that? The rigor of the Law in requiring of
every man exact obedience, under pain of the curse of eternal death. Here was
the vneasinesse of the yoke which punched man in his sinful state; this was
the wai^ht of the burden, under which every man out of Christ must needs be
crushed and sink down to Hell. Now Christ having fulfilled the Law, and
satisfied for all our trangressions thereof, has made this yoke easy for the
necks, and this burden light upon the shoulders of the Regenerate; because
though they be tied to obey; yet not upon those severe terms of being
eternally accursed, if they at any time disobey. Now they are assured their
hearty obedience shall be accepted, so far as they are able to perform it;
and where they fail they shall be mercifully pardoned. Which is a singular
encouragement of a Christian heart, to show all willing and cheerful
endeavor in obeying Gods Commandments, whereby he may give good proof of his
unfeigned love unto God himself.

moral Law, is to be taken in regard of the Enmity and opposition which a
carnal man bears unto the obedience thereof. Unto a natural man it is the
greatest toil and wearisomnesse in the world, for him to be made to draw in
this yoke. For him to bridle his desires: to check his disordered affections;
to restrain himself of his pleasures; (...)
to be tied to the exercises of Religion; to have a lawless mind brought in
subjection to a strict Law: Oh what a weariness is it, how he snuffes at it?
He chafes and sweats under such a burden, more then under the weight of ten
talents of Lead. But now unto a heart sanctified by grace, all such obedience
becomes sweet, pleasant, and delightful. (...)
The heart now loves the holiness of the Law; it Romans (...).
delights in the Law; takes contentment in Psalm. 119. per (...)
the obedience of it, and is full of singular affection and desire after it.
Whence, though it fail in many things through manifold infirmities and
temptations: yet it cease not in a willing, constant, and cheerful
endeavor to perform all. Grace fights with may difficulties, and in the
combat takes many a foil: but yet at last the victory falls on her side. For
(says Saint John,) Verse. ^
He that is borne of God overcomes the world. So that The lust of the eyes,
the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life; which he understands by the
world, (1 John 3. 16.) prevail not against him, to turn him away from the
holy Commandment given unto him. But he still obeyes cheerfully and
syncerely; though not every way perfectly. This of the first Argument. The
second is this.

2 If the hardest precepts of the Law may be kept; (...)
then much more all the rest which are easier.

But the hardest precepts may be observed, -- Ergo, the rest also.

They prove the minor thus.

Three precepts there are, which are most hard as all confess.

1 Thou shall love the Lord with all thy heart. 2 Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self. 3 Thou shall not covet -- The tenth Commandment.
But now all these three commandments may be kept by the Regenerate. Ergo the
rest; and so the whole Law.

We deny the minor of the Prosyllogisme; and say that those three precepts are
not to be kept perfectly by any man in this life. They prove it in each
particular.

1 That a man in this life may love God with all his heart. This they prove.

^ By Scripture. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and
the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, that thou may live. This is a praediction or promise of that
which was heretofore, and is still accomplished in the regenerate, who being
sanctified and purified from sin (a work of Gods Spirit in the heart figured
by external circumcision of the flesh) should love God with all their hearts.

2 By example of David, who says of himself, Psalm. 1 9. 10. With my whole
heart have I sought thee; and God also testifies of him: That he kept his
commandments, and followed him with all his heart, to do that only which was
righteous in his eyes, 1 Kings 14. 8. The like is recorded of Josiah, 2 Kings
23. 25. And like unto him was there no King before him that turned to the Lord
with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according
to all the Law of Moses: neither after him arose any like him. These men then
loved God with all their hearts.

3 By reason; For to love God with all the heart, carries one of these three
senses. First, to love him only, and nothing else, and so we are not
commanded to love God with all our heart, because we must love our neighbor
too. 2 To love him tanto conatu, quanto fieri potest; (that is) as much as may
be. Nor is this commanded ( says Becanus) and yet if it were, who would say
twere impossible to love God as much as one can. 3 To love God above all (that
is) to prefer him before all creatures, before father and mother, as Christ
did, Mat. 10. 37. and as Abraham did; before his only Son. Now this only is
to love God with all the heart, and this, men may do, as appears in the
Martyrs and others, who left all for Gods love.

Unto these Arguments we answer. That it is not so easy a matter to love God,
with all the heart: as these imagine. Lib. 4. cap. 1^.
Bellarmine indeed makes a (But) at it. There is nothing required (says he) of
us: But to love God with all the Heart. As if it were as easily done, as
spoken. But we believe that in this ( But) God has set up a white, which all
the men in the world, may and must aim at: but none will shoot so steadily as
to hit it. Unto the place of Deuteronomy, we say. God therein tells us what his
gracious work is in circumcising, or sanctifying our hearts, and what our
bounden duty is thereupon ( viz.) to love him with all our hearts: the
performance whereof we must endeavor syncerely, chough we cannot do it
perfectly. For the examples of David and Josiah, who are said to follow the
Lord with all their heart; there is nothing else meant thereby: but a sincere
intent and endeavor in the general to establish and maintain Gods pure
Religion in their Kingdom free from corruption of Idolatry; as also for their
own particular conversation to live unblameably. For David, it is a clear case
that not perfection; but syncerity is his commendations; whose many sins
recorded in the Scriptures witness sufficiently that he had in his heart that
corruption which many times turned the love thereof from God to other things.
How did he love God with all his heart when he defiled Vriahs bed, shed Vriahs
blood, intended to murder Nabal, judged away an honest man's Lands to a fawning
Sycophant, with such other faults. The Prophet himself in that place in 119.
Psalm. witnesses; as the uprightness of his heart, [ With my whole heart have
I sought thee:] so withal, the weakness and corruption of it; against which
he humbly craves Gods assistance in the very next words, [ Let me not wander
from thy commandments.] For Josiah: it is plain that this singular
commendations is given him, because of his through reformations of the most
corrupt estate of Religion, which was before his reign. Wherein many Godly
Kings before him had done something in redressing some abuses: but none went so
far in a zealous reformation of all, according to Moses Law. Wherefore the
Text says, that there was no King before him like unto him, which cannot be
meant absolutely of all, (for David is said to follow Gods will with all his
heart; as well as Josiah:) but since the time that Religion began to be
corrupted in the Jewish Church, there was none of all the Kings of Judah, that
was so faithful as Josiah, to restore all things to their first purity. Whence
he has the praise, that he turned unto God more entirely, then any other King
before or after him. But now from Iosiahs zeal in reformation to conclude,
that in every particular of his life he kept the Law perfectly, loving God with
all his heart; is a consequence, that wants strength of connection.

Unto the reason from the meaning of the Law, we grant. That the first is not
the meaning of it. But for the second, ( viz.) That to love God with all the
heart, is to love him as much as may be. The Jesuit has no reason either to
deny, that this is not commanded; or to affirm that if it were commanded, it is
yet possible to do it. Would any man say; except he care not what he say, that
God does not command us to love him as much as may be? Or will it be a truth
from any man's tongue, to say, that he loves God with as great perfection as may
be? It cannot. Which appears thus. Gods will is, that we should love him with
all our hearts. Now Christ has taught us to pray. Thy will be done in earth
as it is in Heaven. Thence it is evident, We on Earth are bound to fulfill the
Commandment of loving God: as the Saints in Heaven do fulfill it. But now our
Adversaries themselves grant, that whilst we be [ in via] we cannot love
God so much as we shall dee [ in Patria] Whence it follows, that no man can
love him so much as may be, and as he ought to do: seeing no man has his
heart replenished with that measure of Divine love, whereof his Nature is
capable, which either Adam had in his inoncency; or the Saints have in glory.

Touching the third sense of the words, we grant indeed; that to Love God with
all the heart, is to love him super omnia, that is above all Creatures. But the
Jesuits take here but one part of true love of God. It Is a singular part of
Divine love, when the heart is so fixed on God: that neither the love nor fear
of any earthly thing can draw it from obeying of God. Which we say, is a matter
wherein every one fails in some kind or other, more or less, though in the
end may Martyrs and other holy men, have herein by faith overcome the world.
But this is not enough unto perfect love, to prefer God before all Temporal
pains and pleasures, profits or discommodities. He loves God with all his
heart, not only who loves him above all, but also obeies God in all. This is
the love of God, that we keep his Commandments. He that for Gods love will
not obey Gods Law: he loves his sins more then God. Offend but in the least
thing, there is presently want of love: for he that will not do as God bids
him then, is void of that love which moves him to obey at other times. He then
that keeps Gods word, in him is the love of God perfect indeed. -- (...), 1
John 2. 5. Perfect obedience and perfect love are inseparable. Now seeing the
former cannot be found in mortal men: we cannot in them seek for the latter.
And therefore this Commandment [Loue God above all things] cannot be kept in
this life.

2 That a man may love his neighbor as himself. For which purpose they turn
us unto Romans 13. 8. He that loves another has fulfilled the Law. Because the
Law is comprehended in this saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self,
v. 9. and love does not evil to his neighbor: therefore is love the
fulfilling of the Law, verse. 10. And they bid us look Gal. 5. 14. Where we
read, For all the Law is fulfilled in one Word: Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thyselfe.

Hereto we answer. That there is in these places, nothing that needs answering.
We grant, that the love of our neighbor as of our selves, is the fulfilling of
the Law; that is, of the second Table of the Law, touching our duty unto man,
and so much these places witness, commanding us also so to do. But now how
do our Adversaries prove out of these places, that men can perfectly ob^serue
this Law. We yield the Regenerate love their neighboars as themselves: but that
perfection of love, which in every point fulfils the Law, doing our neighbor
no hurt, but all good, in all our thoughts words and deeds; this we cannot
grant them, unless upon better proofs. Let us go to the tenth Commandment,
which they say may be kept, that is,

3 Thou shall not covet. This tenth Commandment of the Decalogue, is (say
they) possible to be fulfilled by a Regenerate man. For three things must be
observed, touching this concupiscence or coveting forbidden in the tenth
Commandment.

1 The vicious pro^enesse and inclination of Nature unto baddesires, which is
styled concupiscence in actu primo. As to have a theeuish mind.

2 The inordinate motions of the heart immediately arising from that corrupt
disposition, which prevent reason, and go before consent; as to desire another
man's money: but suddenly vanishes of it self, or upon deliberation it is checked.

3 The consent of the will, when either it takes (...) mediate delight in such
desires themselves; as speculatiue f^rnication etc. or when it resolves to put
in execution what the heart imagined; as to lay a plot to spoil another of his
goods.

The two former, the vicious disposition of Nature, and the inordinate desires
that go before consent: these be no sins (say the Romanists) and so not
forbidden in the ten Commandments. The last (viz.) Evil desires with
consent, they be the very sins which are forbidden in that Commandment; Whence
they conclude that a Regenerate man may avoid the breach of this commandment;
seeing it is in the power of his will, whether he will consent unto such
motions of the heart or no: and if he do not consent: then, he sins not.

Hereunto we answer. That whereas they of Rome teach, that the Habitual
vitiousnesse of Nature and the disorderly motions of the Heart which go before
Consent, are no Sins: they therein err grossily against Scriptures and sound
Reason. This the gift of these Men always to judge flatteringly and favorably
on Natures side: they concipt to themselves a God in Heaven like their God in
Rome, Facilem Deum, one that will wincke at small faults, and grant Indulgence
by the Dozen. Look what they judge a small Matter God must be of there mind:
or else they are not pleased. His Love must fit there Humors; what they think
they can do; that God shall have leave to command or forbid: but if otherwise
they will tell him to his face, that he is a fool ct a Tyrant, to command them
that, which now they cannot perform. For God (say they) to require of a Man a
freedom from all vicious Inclinations and evil desires, this were as mad an
injunction, as for a master to command his servant never to be hungry, or
thirsty, hot or cold, and to threaten him, that he should look through a
halter, in case it be otherwise with him. This error we shall more
conveniently speak of in the refutation of common and general exceptions,
which they make against all those proofs, that do demonstrate the
impossibility of keeping the Law, whereof this is one, that Concupiscence in
the first and second act is not Sin. But now whereas they affirm that it is
in a Regenerate Man's power not to yield consent to the motions of Sin, and that
therefore he may fulfill the Law which said (thou shall not lust:) we grant
them that the Spirit may many times get the victory, ouermastring such vuruly
motions of the heart: but this is not perpetual. For who is there (except
extremely ignorant of Grace and Nature) but will confess that many times
these (...), affections of Sinne] as the Apostle calls them, do work in them so
strongly, upon such circumstances and advantages; that they do not only
[(...), combat and fight] against the powers of grace: but also [(...)
vanquish them] and even lead a Man regenerate captive unto the Law or command
of sin. The Apostle confesses so much of himself Romans 7. 23. Who yet was
able to do as much as he that thinks himself best. And therefore what ever
power we may seem to have not to yield consent: yet it is certain that we
shall often fail in in our practice.

This of the second Argument touching the observation of the observation of the
hardest precepts of the Law: The third follows.

3 If a Man may do more then the Law requires: 3 Arg.
he may certainly do as much.

But a Man may do more then the Law requires. Ergo He may do as much.

The minor Bellarmine proves by the example of the young Man Mat: (...) 9. who
telling Christ that he had observed all the commandments and that from his
youth; our Savior bids him do one thing more and then he should be perfect.
[If thou will be perfect, go sell that thou have and give to the poor and
follow me.] ver. 20. Now if the young Man had done this, he had done more then
the Law required. In as much as whatsoever the Law required he had observed
formerly. For do you not believe him that he spoke true? [All these things have
I observed from my youth] verse 9.

Whereto we answer. That we do not believe the Testimony of that vain young
Man touching his own Righteousness. Who boosted of keeping the 2. Table in
the outward duties thereof: when as yet he wanted inward Charity toward his
Neighbuor and Love toward God. He auou^hed that he had kept all perfectly
fulfilling that commandment [ Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self:] and
there upon is so bold as to ask Christ. what lack I yet; Christ to convince
him of his pride and wants, put him to the Trial. If thou have such perfect
Charity toward Man; then certainly if God command thee to bestow, that a
part, but all thy goods upon the poor, upon promise of better things to thy
self: thy duty unto God and singular Charity to Men, will make thee do so. [
Go then sell all that thou have and give (...) (...)
to the poor.] Upon this special Commandment, this covetous mind shows it
self. Nay, it is plain he loved not his Neighbor, so well as his riches. He
is neither so dutiful to God; nor charitable to the poor: as for either of
their sakes, to part with his possessions. But, might he say, what? will not
ordinary alms, or a little more then ordinary serve the turn? Must I give
away all. Ind^ede the Law requires that I be merciful to the poor: but where is
any Law that bids me sell my whole estate and distribute to them that want?
Christ lays an unnecessary burden upon me; if I cannot be perfect without
vndo^ing my self, I will content my self as I am, and not seek after such
perfection. Here a Papist will say he speak reason, seeing Christ's speech was
but acounsaile of more perfection, then the Law required. Now a Man is not to
be blamed if he choose only to be as perfect as the Law commands him, and so
this young man was: if you will believe him or them. But the Scripture makes it
plain that he did evil in disobeying Christ; and, that if he had obeyed him
in that particular, he had done no more then the Law required at his hands. For
obedience to every special Commandment is included in the general. The Law
indefinitely commands us to give alms: now if God by a special commandment
limite how much we shall give; whether half, or all our Estates, to obey such
a particular precept is not to do more then the general Law requires us. Such
a particular Commandment was this of Christ unto the young Man, wherein he sets
him a spell, according to that conceit of perfection which he had of himself:
putting him to the practice of the highest duty which the Law of Liberality can
possible require of a Man ( viz.) to part with all. This he ought to have done
upon Christ's particular commandment; in not doing of it he brake the Law, and
proclaimed his heart to be full of covetousness, deuoide of faith in God; and
true Charity toward his Neighbor. From this place then our adversaries cannot
prove, that this young Man might have done more then the Law required: or that
we are bound at any time to do as Christ bid him. Christ's command was for his
particular Trial: not for our Imitation. They that take it otherwise be a
generation of men that profess Beggary; and possess Kingdoms, who were
willing enough to part with that little they had of there own, that so they
may live the more Largely and plentifully upon other Men's. We go forward to
the next argument.

4 If the Law were impossible to be kept it were no Law: for there is no Law of
things impossible. Yea God were more cruel and foolish then any Tyrant, too
command us to do that which is impossible for us to do.

To this we answer, That the consequences were true if God had given a Law
which Men never had strength to perform. But now the Law written in tables on
Mount Sina, was but a reviving and repetion of the same Law, which was written
in Adams heart; the Characters whereof were now defaced in his sinful
Posterity. Adam had strength sufficient to fulfill it: which as he received for
himself and us; so he lost it for both. Nevertheless though Strength to obey
be lost: yet the obligation to Obedience remains. We are no more discharged of
our duties, because we have no strength to do it: then a debtor is quitted of
his Bands because he wants money to make payment. Nor is this cruelty or folly
in God, that when he published this Law unto the Isralites, he did not qualify
the exactness thereof, fitting the precepts to there abilities, commanding
the^ to do just as much as they could or would do. Had God made a Law in that
sort in favor of man's sinful nature: they might with better reason have laid
folly to his charge, for bending the rule to the crokednesse of man's heart; and
not leuelling it according to the straightness of the Rule. God was to set
forth a Law of Liberty, that should not flatter but freely rebuke Man of all
unrighteousness; Iam. 1. 25. Psalm. 197.
a perfect, Law containing in it a full description of Holiness and Justice,
which Man ought to have and perform toward God and his Neighbor: and in this
case God had just reason to have respect unto man's duty; not his ability, which
once he had; but now had forfited and lost.

The next Argument is.

5 Every Prayer made in Faith according to Gods will is heard and granted. ^
Argu.
But we pray that we may fulfill the Law perfectly. (For we pray that we may
do Gods will in Earth, as it is in Heaven.)

Ergo God hears us, and gives us such grace that we can doci.

Hereto we answer. That this prayer shows us what we are bound too; and what
is our duty continually to endeavor. That we may do Gods will every day more
perfectly, cheerfully and constantly, then other. And so far God hears the
faithful prayers of his loving children, enabling them to better performance,
the longer they live. But that such perfection of Obedience is given to us in
this life; as the Saints enjoy in Heaven, will not be granted by our
Adversaries themselves. Wherefore they must also grant that that Prayer is
heard and granted us by degrees. In this Life we attain such perfection as God
sees fit for us: afterward, that which is complete.

6 They prove by these Scriptures, that the Law may be fulfilled. 6 Arg.
Gal 5. The apostle reckons up the fruits of the spirit. Love, joy, Peace etc.
then he says ver. 23. that against such there is no Law. [That is (says
Bellarmine) the Law cannot accuse such men of Sin. So 1 John. 3. 9.
[Whosoeuer is borne of God, does not commit Sin, for his seed remains in
him; and he cannot Sin because he is borne of God.] Ergo, the regenerate
cannot so much as break the Law.

We answer. That both these places are perverted by false Interpretations.
Against (...)*
such there is no Law says the Apostle. Against what? such persons, or such
graces? If it be meant of Persons, ( viz.) That such as have the Spirit, and
bring forth the fruits of the Spirit there mentioned against those there is no
Law: we must take it in the Apostles own meaning, which he expresses. verse
18. [ If ye he led by the spirit ye are not under Law] How is that? Are not
the Regenerate under the Law, that is under the Obedience of the Law? Yes, we
grant on both sides that Grace frees us not from subjection and obedience unto
Gods Law. How then are they not under the Law. It Is plain. They are not under
the Curse and Condemnation of the Law, as those be that walk in the flesh and
do the works thereof, who therefore [shall not inherit the Kingdom of God]
v, 19. and that's to be accursed. But such as walk in the Spirit being
regenerate and Justified, are not under the Curse: and therefore though the Law
may and does accuse them of Sin: yet the Law is not so against them, as to
bring condemnation upon them (as it does upon other) from which in Christ they
are freed. If the clause be under stood of the Graces of the Spirit, there
reckoned up the sense is this. Against such works there is no Law forbidding
them, as there is against works of the flesh: these agreeable, those contrary
to the law. But this makes nothing to our Adversaries purpose. For the place in
John [He that is borne of God does not commit Sin yea cannot.] If our
Adversaries exposition according to the very Letter may stand good it will
^ollow. That in the regenerate there is not only a possibility to keep the
Law: but also an impossibility at any time to break it. But they easily see
how absurd this position is, and that it being granted their doctrine of
falling away from Grace lies flat in the dust; seeing John says expressly.
That a man regenerate, not only, does not, but cannot Sin. Therefore
certainly he cannot fall from Grace. Wherefore they help it out with a
distinction. He cannot sin, that is, mortally. He may sin, that is,
venially, and venial sins may stand with grace and with perfect Obedience of
the Law. This distinction is one of the rotten pillars of the Romish Church;
tw'ill come in fit place to be examined hereafter: for the present, we say, He
that Sins venially (as they mince it.) breaks the Law; and again a Man
Regenerate may sin mortally; which is true not only according to there
doctrine who teach that a Man may fall from the Grace of Regeneration which to
do is a mortal Sin: but much more according to the Scriptures and
Experience which witness that Peter, David, Solomon, and Many, yea all the
Saints, have at sometime or other there grievous falls; out of which
notwithstanding, by the Grace of the Holy Ghost, abiding in them they recover
themselves so that finally they fall not a way.

The last Argument is from the examples of such men as have fulfilled the Law.

7 The Scriptures record that diverse men have been perfect in fulfilling the
law in all things: 7 Argu.
(...) Genesis 17. 1.
Abraham, Genesis 6. 9.
Noah, 1 King 14. 8.
David, 2 King 23. 25.
Josiah, 2 Chro. 15. 17.
Asa, Luke 1. 6.
Zachary and Elizabeth, the John. 17 6.
Apostles, and other Phil. 3. 15.
holy Men.

Therefore the Law is at least possible to be kept by some.

Not to stand in particular examination of all the places of Scripture, which
are alleged for proof of these examples; we answer briefly. That it is every
ma^s duty to aim at perfection in his obedience, according to Christ's
Commandment, Mat. 5. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father in Heaven
is perfect. 2 That in this life there are many degrees of grace, which God
bestows diversely on diverse men, according to his own pleasure, and their
greater or less diligence in the practice of Holiness. So that comparatively
some men may be said to be perfect, because far more perfect then others, as
the greatest stars be said to be of perfect light, because they shine
brighter then those of lesser Magnitude, though yet not so bright as the Sun.
But 3. we affirm that no man in this endeavor after perfection, goes so
far, as for inward Holiness and outward obedience to answer the perfection
of the Law in all points. Even in these holy Saints which they bring for
instance, the Scriptures have recorded unto us their failings, that in them at
once we may see a pattern of Holiness to be imitated, and an example of
humane Infirmity, to be admonished by we have Genesis 15. ^. 3.
Abraham, sometimes misdoubting of Gods promise and protection, and helping
himself by a Genesis 20. 11.
shift scarce warrantable. Genesis 9. 21.
Noah ouer-seene in drink. 2 Samuel 11.
David breaking the sixth and seventh Commandments, one after another. 2 Chronicles. 25. v. 20. 21 22.
Josiah running wilfully upon a dangerous enterprise against Gods Commandment.
2 Chronicles. 16. 7
Asa relying on the King of Syria for help against the King of Israel, and not
upon the Lord, Ver. 10.
and in a rage imprisoning the Prophets for reproving him; Ver. 12.
and in his disease seeking not to the Lord: but to the Physicians. Luke 1. 18.
Zachary not giving credence to the Angels message. The Mar. 14. 50* 66. etc.
Apostles all at a clap forsaking, or denying Christ. We cannot then in these
Saints find perfection in the full obedience to the Law; amongst whose few
actions registered by the Holy Ghosts pen: we may read their sins together;
with their good works. And had the Scriptures been silent in that point: yet
who could thence have concluded, that these men or others had no faults,
because no mention is made of them? It was Gods purpose to relate the most
eminent, not every particular action of their lives; even Christ's story falls
(...) 20. 30. 31.
short of such exactness.

We conclude then notwithstanding these Arguments. Our second Proposition
stands firm and good ( viz.) That no man in this life can fulfill the Law in
every duty both inward and outward: but that the iustest man on earth will
fail in many things. So if he should seek for Justification by this his
actual obedience to the Law: he throws himself under the curse of the Law.
For cursed is every one that continues not in [all] things, which are written
in the book of the Law to do them, says the Gal. 3. 10.
Apostle out of Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Moses. Which curse must needs light on those, that are of the works of the
Law, that is, seek for Justification and life by the obedience of the Law,
which yet they cannot in all things perfectly obey.

CHAP. III.
No man in this life can perform any particular good work, so exactly that in
every point it shall answer the rigor of the Law, proved by conscience,
Scriptures, reason; and Popish objections, answered.
I Proceed unto the last Proposition, Proposition.
which concerns Man's actual Obedience to any one particular precept of the
Law. Wherein will appear the third Imperfection of man's Obedience in
fulfilling of the Moral Law. We have seen. That no man has perfect inherent
sanctity free from Natures corruption. Again, That no man can perform perfect
actual obedience to all and every duty of the Law without failing in any one
point. And this much our Adversaries will not much stick to yield unto us, and
confess. That there is no man, but sins at some time or other; and that it is
scarce possible to avoid venial sins, as they style them. But then they
deny utterly. That a man sins in every particular good work; though he
cannot do all perfectly, yet in some he may exactly fulfill the Righteousness
of the Law, not missing in any one circumstance. And therefore at least by that
obedience he may be justified. This opinion of theirs has neither truth in it
self: nor yet brings any benefit at all to their maine purpose in proving
Justification by works. For to what end serves it them to stand quarrelling
for the perfection of our obedience in some one or two good works; when yet we
fail in many things besides? One thing well done will not justify him that
does many things ill. For that of Saint James must be a Truth: He that keeps
the whole Law, and yet fails in one point, is guilty of all. James 2. 10.
Much more guilty is he, that keeps it in a few: and breaks it in many. But
yet further, we reject this opinion also, as an Error: and we teach on the
contrary. That

No man in this life can perform any one particular good work, so exactly,
that in every point, it shall answer the rigor of the Law, and the severe
trial of Gods Judgment.

About this Assertion our Adversaries raise much stir and many soul
slanders against us, proclaiming us to all the world, open enemies to all good
works, that we be Factors for the Kingdom of darkness, promoting as much as
in us lies all licentiousness in evil courses, and taking of the courage and
endeavor of Men after pious duties. For who will set himself (say they) to
do any good work if the Protestants doctrine be true, that in doing of it he
shall commit a mortal Sin? who will pray, fast, and gives alms, if when he
does these things he cannot but sin? As good then it were to do evil as to
do good: a man can but sin, and so he shall, let him do his best. These
slanderous incongruities fastened on us, spring not out of our Doctrine rightly
understood: but out of froward and perverse hearts, that will not see the
truth. Such aspersions will easily be wiped of, when after the confirmation of
the Truth we shall make answer to such objections, as seem to infringe it.
We say then. That no man can perform any good work required in the Law with
such exact observation of every circumstance: that (were it examined by the
rigor of the Law and Gods Justice) no fault at all can be found in it. This
we prove by Conscience, by Scriptures, by Reason.

First we here apeale unto the Conscience of Man, the Judgment whereof is to be
regarded; and whereunto we dare stand in this matter. Thou that boastest that
in such and such good works; that thou hastnot committed any Sin at all.
Dare thou indeed stand to it, and upon these Terms appear in Gods
Judgment? Dare thou abide the strictness of this examination standing ready
to Justify thy self against every thing that he can object; Will thou venture
thy self upon this Trial even in the best works thou do, That God cannot
with his most piercing eye of Justice spy a fault in the^, if he number the^,
he shall find nothing short? if he weigh them not one grain too light? Again
let conscience speak, when thou have prayed, fasted, given alms, done any
other excellent work of Piety and Charity in the deuoutest, and most
unblameable manner thou think possible. Think thou verily, that in this
case thou do not at all stand in need of Gods favor, to pass by thine
infirmities, and that thou need not even in this behalf pray; Lord forgive
me my trespasses? What man durst say or think in any good work: Lord in this
particular I do not desire thou should be merciful unto me? Without doubt
there is no man living upon earth that shall in serious consideration of the
severity of Gods judgment, and the great infirmity of his own Nature, compare
his own obedience with the severity of Gods Justice, but his heart will
presently shrink within him, and his conscience shun this trial; as much as
ever Adam did Gods presence. The thought of such a strict proceeding in
Judgment, would make the proudest heart to stoop and tremble, the boldest
face to gather blackness, filling the soul with an horrible fear in the
expectation of that day; should the most innocent life, the most holy actions
of men be there scanned according to the rigor of Justice: not graciously
pitied, pardoned, and accepted according to that merciful love of God which
covers and passes by multitudes of sins. Twere arrogant pride in any man
to utter that speech in a sober temper; Whereunto Job breaks out in a passion,
chased by the sense of his miserable tortures; and the froward disputes of his
friends. Job 16. ^1.
Oh (says he) that a man might plead with God, as a man pleads with his
neighbor. And again, Lay Job 17. 3.
down now, put me in a surety with thee, who is he that will strike hands with
me? And again, Oh that Job. 23. 3. 4. ^.
I knew where I might find him, that I might come even to his face, I would
order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments. I would know the
words which he would answer me, and understand what he would say unto me.
Speaks the man reason? or is he beside himself? what? challenge God to
dispute with him, and hope to make his party good in the quarrel? This was
Jobs infirmity; Its our Adversaries arrogance, who dare set their foot against
Gods; and bid him pry as narrowly as he list into their good works: they will
maintain the righteousness thereof against all that he can object to prove
the least sin^ulnesse. Job saw his folly: God grant that these may theirs. In a
calmer temper, when conscience was not ouerclouded with grief and anger: he
reads us a quite contrary lesson. In the 9 Chapter of his book. How should
man be just with God? if he contend with him he cannot answer him one of a
thousand, v. 2. 3. And again, having reasoned and questioned of Gods wisdom
and power, not to be questioned or resisted by any. How much less shall I
answer him (says he) and choose out my words to reason with him? whom though I
were righteous, yet would I not answer: but I would make supplication to my
judge, v. 14. 15. Further, If I would justify my self mine own mouth will
condemn me, If I say I am perfect, it shall prove me perverse. Though I were
perfect yet would I not know my soul, I would despise my life, v. 20. 21. And
once more. If I wash my self with snow water, and make my hands never so clean,
yet that thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me.
For he is not a man as I am that I should answer him, and we should come
together in judgment, verse. 30. 31. 32 See, this holy Saint, who elsewhere
stands peremptorily to the defense of his Innocence and uprightness against
that wrongful imputation of hypocrisy which his friends charged him withal,
telling them that till he die, he will not take away his innocence from
himself, nor his heart shall not reprove him of his days: yet when he sets
himself before the Tribunal of Gods Justice, he dares not stand out in his
own Justification, but submits himself to the mercy of his Judge, with humble
supplication for his favor. These confessions of Job be not complements out of
a fained and needless modesty: but the fruits of a conscience rightly informed
and apprehensiue of its own sinfulness, and the severe rigor of Gods
judgment. The serious meditation of which two particulars, we commend unto our
Adversaries, and all other of their humor; that are apt to entertain
favorable and gentle opinions touching their sins: and withal to nourish
high conceits of their own goodness. Whence they grow by degrees to think,
that Gods judgment is like their own foolish imaginations; and where they out
of blindness or self-love cannot see a fault: that there God himself can
find none. We hardly see beams in our own eyes: are we then so skillful to
spy the smallest moate? who can understand his faults (says David) will thou
answer him; Yes I do? A secret fault may soon s^^p it, a deceitful heart
may in one circumstance go beyond thy wit and watchfulness. Here then humility
would do well, and prayer for thy ignorances, for thy secret sins; unknown
to thy self as much as others. Here true modesty would have her place, that
thou prefer Gods wisdom and judgment above thine own, remembering that he
judges not as man judges: but sometimes otherwise then thou do, accounting
that abomination, which in thine eyes is much set by; and always more exactly
then thou caust; seeing much evil in that where thou see little, and some
evil where thou think there is none. And therefore always speak unto thy
self in those excellent words of Saint John* If my heart condemn (as in many
things it does) God is greater then my heart, and knows all things. 1 John 3.
20. God forbid then that in any thing I should presume to plead with him in my
Justification. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength; who has hardened
himself against him and has prospered, Job. 9. 2. Thus much touching our
first Argument, for the inward witness of the conscience. Which in the most
innocent life, often in the most holy work, draws back from Gods Judgment
seat, and is afraid to put it self upon the trial of his severe Justice.

We have the Scriptures to witness unto us the same Truth. Psa. 143. ^. 2. [
Hear my prayer O Lord give ear^ unto my supplication: in thy faithfulness
answer me and in thy righteousness.] Here the prophet seems to appeal to
the Justice of God requiring his help upon such terms, as if God out of pure
Justice could not have denied him. But it is nothing so. It Is the mercy of God the
holy Prophet sues unto. Answer me in thy faithfulness and Righteousness, that
is, in those gracious promises, wherein thou have made me to trust, where upon
I do rely. Thou art just and faithful: in keeping promise, be so to me in my
distress, who according to thy promise seek unto thee for succor. Unto this
Righteousness of God David presents himself, and his supplications; but
before that strict and severe Justice of God he dares not stand, but in all
submissiuenesse prays in the next words. [ And enter not into Judgment with
thy servant.] He craves merciful audience of his prayers: but deprecates the
strict examination of his Life and doings. He knew well that if God should
deal with him upon so hard Terms; his own Innocence could never have made
his prayers exceptable ( For (says he) in this shall no Man living be
Justified). The force of this place Lib. 1. cap. 20.
Bell. seeks to decline by three poor miserable shifts. That David would not
have God enter into Judgment with him to judge him ( seili^et) according to
such things as he had of himself: N^li iudica^e ex his quae in me (...).
but according to such things as God had given him, that is, Judge me not
according to that righteousness which I have by Nature: but according to that
righteousness which thou have given by thy Grace.) Which interpretation how
ridiculous a phantasy it is, and quite besides the meaning of the Prophet, it is
easy for any one to Judge by reading of that Psalm. Bell. therefore has
another string to his Bow: but as rotten as the Former.

Lord enter not into Judgment,] that is, Lord I will not contend with thee I
confess my self a sinner and crave pardon, Diverse small faults I have
committed not against the Law: but besides the Law, and thou may easily
pardon them. My case is not singular. I do therein, but as other Men do,
amongst whom, there is none so just but some time fails and offends. And
therefore do not lay such faults to my charge. Men of corrupt conscience that
thus sport with Sin and play with the Scriptures. The Jesuit must bring us
better proofs, then he does, else we shall never believe that David was a Man
of Bellarmine his mind touching Venial Sins. That doctrine is part of the
dregs of corrupted Nature, maynatined by Popish Moabites, who are settled on
their Lees, infatuated by the Love of Sin, and flattering themselves in that
wickedness as little and light which God accounts worthy to be ha^ed. we
acknowledge no Venial Sins: but such as deserve eternal death, which
hereafter we shall make good. And therefore if David would not that God should
enter into judgment with him, because of venial sins that accompany his
holiest practices, it is in effect, that which we say; the difference is only in
an Epithete. We say David prayed not to come into judgment, because [ his best
works were sinful:] and Bellarmine adds, Because venially, or, pardonably
sinful. Which aduantageth him not a jot. For let him mince it, how him
l^st^tis manifest, that these were such sins, as for them David durst not
venture his best works to come unto the Bar of Gods severe Judgment. There
is yet another devise.

That thirdly David speaks by comparison. ( viz.) That unrighteousness. As a
candle set in the Sun, seems to have no light: and a little light compared
to a greater, seems darkness. Whereto we answer that David here makes a
confession of his own sinfulness; not a comparison of his own
righteousness, with the righteousness of God. He desires that God will not
enter into judgment with him; not because he had not so much righteousness as
God, in comparison of whom it seemed little or nothing: but because he was
sinful, and had not so much Righteousness as he should. Man may have a
Righteousness of his own; infinite degrees, below the Righteousness of God,
which yet may pass the Trial of Gods Judgment without all reproof. As is
manifest in the Righteousness of Adam and Christ's Humanity: both which, though
inferior to Gods Righteousness, were yet able to endure that strict
examination. Wherefore we are not accounted unjust for that imperfection,
because we have less Righteousness then our Maker: but because we have not
so much as we ought to have, according to the capacity of our Nature wherein
he made us. But of this more hereafter. Let this serve for the clearing of
this first place of Scripture, and the exceptions against it.

The second place of Scripture, is that, Isa. 64. 6. But we This is the
confession of the Church of God, submitting herself to him in the
acknowledgement of her sins, and the justness of his anger against her. The
confession is every way general: both for Persons, not one excluded; We all
(...) are as an unclean thing, and likewise for works, none are excused from
faultiness. All our Righteousness (nay in the plural) all our righteousness
(...) are as filthy rags. Hence they acknowledge that God is justly angry
with them, and that in his righteous displeasure, they are afflicted, consumed
and brought into great adversity, the glory of the Church, and state decaying
more and more, like a fading leaf that fall^ from the tree, and is driven away
with the wind; And we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the
wind have taken us away. Against this plain acknowledgement of man's
sinfulness in all his most righteous works, the Jesuits except diverse ways.

1 That the Prophet speaks here in the person, not of the godly: but of
wicked, who make here this confession of their sins. And how proved they
this? Thus. The Text says. Behold thou art wrath, for we have sinned. Now God
is not angry with the godly: but with the wicked. Again, the Text says, There
is none that calls upon thy name. That is, None of the wicked persons, for
the godly do call on Gods Name. This exception is manifestly refuted by the
whole order of the Text, whereby it is apparent to any that has but half an
eye, that this Recognition of Sin, and prayer for mercy beginning at the 15
verse of the 63. chapter, to the end of the 64 chapter, is made by the whole
Church, and all the faithful therein, confessing their own faults, as well as
others, and suing for relief, not only in behalf of others, but of
themselves too. His reasons are worth nothing. God is not angry with the godly,
says Bellarmine. No? Then Peter is in an error, who says, 1 Pet. 4. 17. 18.
The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God; and if it begin
at us, what shall the end of them be that obey not the Gospel of God; And if
the righteous be scarsly saved; where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?
Here Is Judgment on Gods house, that is, on the righteous, that obey the
Gospel, as well as on the ungodly that obey it not. And so it is, when the godly
sin, they smart for it, in private afflictions, in public calamities, both
ways they find God is not well pleased with their ill doings. When a Church
and a State is ruinated, may not the most righteous take up this confession.
Lord thou art angry for we have sinned Even we by our sins have hastened and
increased the public miseries? I trow, none will deny it. Again, the Text
speaks of those that do not call upon Gods Name. But the godly call upon it,
Ergo. it is not meant of them. True, they do call upon Gods Name: but is this
done always with that diligence, with that zeal which God requires? How comes
it to pass then, that the godliest men are many times secure, slothful, cold
and careless in the duties of Gods most holy worship? Yea, in the corrupt and
declining times of the Church this happily is their fault chiefly, who
themselves begin to freeze in so general a coldness of the season, loosing
much of that seruency of Spirit which the Apostle requires of us, as at all
times: so then especially, when it should revive and put heat into others, when
their love of Religion begins to wax cold. At such times zeal in Gods
service, vehemence in prayer, constancy in all Relious exercises, resolute, but
discreet forwardness in the holy profession of Religion is most commendable.
But yet it so comes to pass, that even then much security and slackenesse
ouercomes the godly, and whilst they should be a means to prevent a
mischief, they hasten it upon themselves and others.

And thus the Jewish Church here in this place confesses, that there were none
that called on the name of the Lord, a careless negligence, and slacknesse in
the Service of God, was come upon them, so that as it is in the next words, [
there was none that stirs up himself (...) to take hold of God.] None
awaked and rouzed up himself with diligent endeavor to apply himself to the
worship of God, A fault wherewith God may justly be angry: as he then was.
This first exception then is frivolous. Others there be as idle.

2 That by ( all) in this place is to be meant the greatest part; not all the
Jews, nor all their works were sinful; but the greatest part. For so the word
[ All] is taken in some places of Scripture: and therefore the Jesuits think,
it must needs be taken so here.

3 That if it be meant of ( all) simply: yet it is not to be understood at all
Times. All the People and their works were naught and sinful, when they
were to be carried away Captive: but it follows not, that they were so at other
times.

4 This must be restrained to the righteousness which consistes in Obedience
to the Ceremonial Law. [ All our Righteousnesse] that is, all our Ceremonial
works in Sacrifices, Observations of Sabboaths, New-moones, Fasts and such
like, [are as filthy clouts] being done in that manner as we do them ( viz)
without Faith and Obedience. To these we say. That there would never be an end,
were a Man bound punctually to refute every Cavil, which an Adversary may
frame out of his fancy-full imagination, and froward heart. We owe the
Romanists no such credit: as to assent to any point of Religion upon their bare
affirmation. We can as confidently deny such Exceptions as these, without
yielding them a refutation: as they do boldly make them without bringing any
proof. And certainly most vain and ungodly is that course which our
Adversaries or any that tread in there steps do hold in their Disputations,
about serious points of Christian Doctrine: when being urged with conuincing
Scriptures, they think they have done the part of Scholars, and satisfied the
Consciences of others desirous of Truth, if they can amuse and stonny you a
little with two or three Interpretations and pretty exceptions, and so leave you
to choose which you list. They will not tell you which they will stand to: but
even when there answers cross one another, yet all shall down, that if one
help not, another may, and altogether may vex you, when they cannot satisfy
you. This quarrelsome humor of men, who seek not the truth in love: but write
to maintain, to dispute, is not the least vexation of the spirit, and
weariness to the flesh of man; as all those will witness, whose much reading
has led them along into the perplexed mazes of Schoole-learning, whether
Divine or humane.

The third place of Scripture is, Psalm 130. 3. If thou, Lord should mark
iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? This place Prophet desires God to be
attentive to the voice of his supplications, craves this audience merely of
Gods favor; not upon any righteousness or worth of his own. As for that he
confesses. That if God should be strict to observe wherein he and all men do
amiss: neither himself, nor any other could be able to stand in his presence.
Whence he flies from his Justice unto his mercy. But there is forgiveness with
thee that thou may be feared. verse 4. Presumption then it is, and arrogant
pride for any Romanist to say. Lord if thou do observe Iniquities: yet I shall
be able to stand. In such and such good works, be extreme to mark what is
done amiss; I fear not the trial, nor will sue to thy mercy.

From Scriptures we come to Reason. Which is thus.

Wheresoever there is concupiscence and inordinate motions of the heart;
wheresoever there is a defect of Charity toward God and Man; Wheresoever
venial sins (as our Adversaries calls them) are mingled with good works:
there the best works of men are not free from some corruptions and sinfulness.

But in a man Regenerate there is concupiscence and evil motions of the heart
present with him, when he would do good; there is a want of that measure of
love to God and Charity to Man, which he might and ought to have, there also
are besides many venial faults that accompany his best works.

Ergo, the works of a Man Regenerate are not every way good: but in part
sinful.

The Minor is clear and confessed by our Adversaries: especially for the two
former circumstances of concupis^^^ce, and imperfection of Charity: and for
venial sins, they also acknowledge it a very hard matter to (...) in any
good work. Wherefore they are Bill* lib. (...). 17.
driven in a desperate manner to deny the Mayor and to avouch. That neither
concupiscence nor imperfection of Charity to God or our Neighbor; nor yet
venial sins mingled with good works, do at all impair the goodness and
perfect righteousness o^ our obedience to the Law; but that they are as good
with those infirmities, as without them. Bad causes must be helped out, by bold
and desperate attempts; and so it ^ares with our Adversaries in this point.
They will utterly deny that there is any thing evil in a man Regenerate:
rather then be forced to confess there is any thing evil in the works, that
he performs. The impudent unreasonableness of this their Assertion, we shall
shortly speak of. In the mean we go on unto the consideration of such
Arguments, which are brought by our Adversaries, to prove. That the good works
of men Regenerate, are truly and perfectly good, without all faultiness in
them. They prove it then.

1 From the examples of Job and David. (...) 4. c. 13. 17.
Of Job is said. Job 1. 22. In all this Job sinned not; nor charged God
foolishly, Be (...). 2. tract. 2. cap 2.(...) 4 and cap 4. quest. 1.
and chap. 2. verse 10. In all this did not Job sin with his lips. Again
for David: he is conscious to himself, of his own innocence, and that no
fault can be found in his doings, wherefore he prays, Psalm 7. 8. Judge me, O
Lord according to my righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in
me. And after all this, Psalm. 18. 23. 24. He professes openly his innocence,
and reward for it. I was, says he, also upright before him, and I kept my
self from mine iniquity. Therefore has the Lord recompensed me according to
my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in his sight. And
Psalm. 17. verse 3. He declares how GOD had thoroughly tried him: and yet found
him faultlesse. Thou have proved mine heart, thou have visited me in the night,
thou have tried me, and yet shall find nothing: I am purposed my mouth shall
not transgress. How then can any man say that Job and David sinned mortally in
their sayings and doings: when God himself witnesses for them that they d^e
not sin?

Hereto we answer. That we do not lay sin unto the charge of those holy
men: nor do we say they did ill* where the Scriptures witness they did well.
Job in that first Act of his trial quitted himself well, and overcame the
Temptation. He sinned not as afterward he did, breaking forth into impatiency:
and that is all the Scripture meant by that speech; In all this Job sinned not.
But whether Jobs patience were in this first conflict every way so
unreprovable, that not the least fault could be spied in it, in Gods severe
Judgment, is more then we dare affirm, or our Adversaries will ever be able
to prove. For David; his innocent demeanor of himself, in the time of Saul's
reign was such: that no Imputation of unfaithfulness or ambition could justly
be laid to his charge. Wherefore when Saul's followers accuse him of treason
against their Master: David appeals unto God desiring him to deal with him
according to his Innocence in that behalf. His own conscience, and God with
his conscience, after trial made, acquit him from plotting and practicing
against Saul, as his Adversaries said he did. Thence it follows that David
did not offend in that kind whereof his Adversaries accused him. His heart was
upright; his life was innocent; neither his Aduersares could make proof,
neither did his conscience accuse him, or God condemn him of these faults,
that he was charged withal. Thus far David durst stand to Gods Judgment;
that he was innocent in those particular evils, whereof man had accused him:
but it follows not therefore he durst enter into judgment with God; and
plead, that God himself could find no fault at all with him. He might have
many secret faults and imperfections even in this most innocent passage of his
life; which neither himself knew, nor his enemies could come to the knowledge
of: and therefore though he dare plead his righteousness before God, so far
as man can accuse him of unrighteousness, yet he dare not go further to
clear himself against all that God may object against him. Hear what
himself says in this case, Psalm. 139. 23. 24. Search me, O God and know my
heart, try me and know my thoughts. Speaks the Prophet this out of confidence,
that God upon search and trial, shall find no evil in his heart and
thoughts? No, but out of holy desire, that whatsoever evil is found in him may
be amended. He knows well that many things may be found faulty in him: and
therefore he stands not to justify himself: but only sues for grace to
redress them; adding in the next words. And see if there be any wicked way in
me; and lead me in the way everlasting.

They prove that the works of Men regenerate are not Sinful by the
Scriptures which call them good works and say that they are pleasing unto God.
1. That they are good. [Let your light so shine before Men that they may see
your good work:] Matthew: 5. 16. (Charge the rich that they do good and be
rich in good works.) 1 Timothy 6. 18. [wee are his workemanshippe created in
Christ unto good workes] Ephesians. 2. 10. [why trouble ye the woman; for she has
wrought a good work upon me.] Mat* 26. 10. 2. That they are also pleasing
unto God is apparent by these places. Ye are made (an holy ^riesthood to offer
up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ) 1 Peter 2. 5. In
the Epistle to the Philippians, the Apostle calls their alms seat unto him
(An odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable well pleasing unto God)
Philip 4. 18. Again. (To do good and to communicate forget not, for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased) Heb. 13. 16. Hence they argue. If the works of
Men regenerate be good and acceptable unto God: then certainly the
Protestants err in their Doctrine, teaching that the best works of Men are
sinful, for as much as Sin is neither good in it self nor any way
pleasing unto God. Who is infinitely, offended at all iniquity.

Hereunto we answer. That this Argument is nothing, but a forward and wilful
mistake of our doctrine. We teach, that the best works of the best men are in
part sinful. They thereupon cry out that we take away all goodness from
the works of the godly, and that we account them to be [ in se. (...) 3. c.
14.. ^.
i. e. Ex natura sua] damnable and mortal sins. This is a foolish calumny of
Men that cannot distinguish, between the disease and the diseased Body: but
straightway conclude that the whole body it self is nothing else, but a mere
rotten ulcer, because it has swellings and sores in some parts of it.
Wherefore to unfold their eyes in his point, they are to understand that we
make a necessary and true distinction between That which is sin and that
which is sinful: teaching that the good works of the Regenerate be not
sins, though they be sinful. We explain it thus. That is to be called
Sin in its own Nature, which is the transgression of the Law in doing any
act forbidden; or in leaving undone any act commanded by the Law. The omitting,
or committing of any such act is properly [ Bell lib. 4. c. 77. erres in
saying. [Opera b^na^x gen^^e ^ue ex obiecto, sed (...) circumsta^^^ (...) And
it is false which he adds that God does simply condemn (facto) almsdeeds,
etc done with a^^d intention for vain glory, etc. God does not simply condemn
the the wo^^^ b^^ them for their ill doing of it.
in se and ex Natura sua] a sin. Because it is directly and totally in the
very substance of it against the Law. As to pray to a false God, or neglect
prayer to the true God, are both of them sins in their very proper Natures:
because both are forbidden by the moral law. That we call sinful, which is
for the maine substance of the work conformable to the Law; but it fails and
offends against the Law in some circumstances required in the doing of it, when
the thing is done which the Law commands, but no^ perfectly in every point as
the Law commands it: such a work, we say, is not a sin, though it be
sinful; there is sin in it, but it is not all sin. This distinction our
Adversaries cannot but admit of, as in the works of the Heathen and Christians
vnregerate: so in the good works of the Regenerate themse^ues. We and they
confess that the moral Virtues of the Heathen were good and commendable in
the substance thereof: nor do we think there is any men so deuoide of reason,
as to affirm that the Justice, Temperance, Chastity, Liberality of a Heathen,
are mere vices and sins. We all grant, they were virtues: but yet our
Adversaries themselves cannot affirm, that they were every way virtuous, free
from all spots and stains of Su^t Vitata (...).
Vice; seeing they had neither faith and sanctity from whence they sprung; nor
the glory of God, at which they aimed. Now as the virtues of the natural man,
are in part vicious: so the good works of the Regenerate are in part
sinful. To fast, to pray, to give alms, with the like works of Piety or
Mercy, we affirm and teach that they are good works, good in their nature and
use: being such actions as the Law commands. We know none of our side so far
gone with passion, as to maintain that a godly man sins, because he fasts,
prays, and gives alms; as if those very acts were nothing but damnable sin.
We detest such frantic opinions; and if any of our Writers have let slip such
words, as may give occasion to our Adversaries, so to think of us: we do not,
nor are we bound to justify every hot and choleric speech, breathed out in
eagerness of disputation. Good works they be, truly and verily good: but they
are not perfectly good. When a godly man prays he does well: but he never does
so well; but he may do better. Nor dare any man in the world avouch, that
either the root whence good actions come, is purged by perfect Holiness: or
the manner of doing them, is so exactly kept in a precise observation of every
circumstance, or the end in doing them Gods glory, and Man's good, so syncerely
and truly aimed at: that the severity of Gods Justice, cannot find any the
least failing in any of those things. This is all we teach touching the
sinfulness of good works, and thus we stand too: as a most certain truth.
And we say. That this sinnefulnesse accompanying our good works, is sufficient
to bar us from Justification by them. For we deserve not reward for what is
well done, except all were well done. But nevertheless it shall not hinder
Gods gracious acceptance of our good works, who is well pleased with the
obedience of his children so far as it is good and holy: and when it fails,
for Christ's sake he mercifully pardons their Trespasses. Thus much of the
second Argument. The third is from reason grounded on Scriptures.

3 Where there are ( sufficientia principia rectae operationis) sufficient
causes and means of well-doing: there a good work may be done without all
fault. -- But in a man Regenerate, there are causes and means sufficient for
well-doing -- Ergo, He may do well, and not offend.

They prove the Minor thus. To the performance of any good work, there is
required nothing, but these things, Knowledge of what is to be done, will and
power to do it -- But now a Regenerate man has all these. For first, his
understanding is enlightened, so that he can easily know what is good to be
done. Secondly, his will and affections are sanctified and aided by grace, to
desire and endeavor the performance of it. And thirdly, and lastly, he has
power to put in practice what he knows and desires, there being no impediment
inward, or outward that should hinder him -- Ergo, he may do well and sin
not.

Here we desire them to show us. How a man Regenerate is enduded with such
perfect abilities, as may help him: and quite rid him of all such impediments,
as might hinder hi^ in well doing.

This ( they say) is done by the grace of Sanctification, given unto a
Regenerate man, whereby he is freed from all contagion of sin: and such
incombrances, as hinder him in well-doing. For by this grace given to him, he
is made a good tree: now [A good tree cannot bring forth ^ad fruit, Matthew 7.
18. -- And ergo, a good man cannot do bad works. (...) made a fruitful
Branch of Christ the true Vine, as it is John 15. 5. I am the Vine, yea are the
branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, the (...) bears much fruit.
And Ergo, That fruit only which is good. Which Similitude of a Branch much
illustrates the matter ( in their Imagination.) For as in a Vine-Branch. If
first it have sufficient moisture from the Body of the Vine. Secondly, if it
have sufficient heat of the Sun to digest that moisture. And thirdly, if it
be not hurt nor hindered by Frosts, Wette, Winds, Worms, or other such
discommodities of the Air and Soil; then certainly it will be are very much,
and very good fruit: so is it in a man regenerate. From Christ he receives
sufficient moisture of Divine Grace, which is in him, [as a well of water
springing up unto everlasting life. John 4. 14.] He has heat sufficient of
spiritual affection, to cause him to bud forth into good works. For Christ
says [I am come to send fire on the earth, and what will I if it be already
kindled. Luke 12. 49. And [Did not our hearts burn within vs] said the two
Disciples that went to Emaus, Luke 24. 32. Ergo, they have heat enough.
Finally, they have no impediment. Neither inward. For why? It is written, Romans
8. 1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Ergo, no
inward impediment to well-doing. Nor outward. For it written, [nothing shall
separate us from the Love of God, that is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8. 38.
Ergo, no outward impediment of good works.

Hereunto we make answer. That this Argument is a sophistical cauillation;
which proves that which we do not deny. They say that a Man Regenerate, has
sufficientia principia rectae and honestae operationis. We say so too;
confessing that he is made a good tree, a fruitful Branch; that he is
enlightened; sanctified, and strengthened by the spirit of God unto the
performance of good works. We grant that now he is enabled to do well, who
before his Regeneration could do nothing saue^ll: but the question still
remains, whether now he do so well, as that he does nothing ill when he does
best. We grant that the Vine, which in former time yielded nothing, but wild
grapes, now being transplanted and grafted into the best Vine, bears good
grapes: but we deny that they are so weet and kindly in eu^^ respect, as not to
have a little relish still of their former wildness and sowrenesse. Wherefore
our Adversaries do but trifle with us to tell us that Men Regenerate have
means sufficient to do those works that be good: this we deny not; but we
question whether they have help sufficient to perform any work so absolutely
and perfectly good; that God himself cannot charge it with any Sin at all.
This we constantly deny. And to their discourse, ( That a regenerate Man has
sufficient Knowledge, Power and will to do good perfectly) in this they
affirm more then will ever be proved. Our imperfections in every one of these
three particulars witnessed to our Conscience by Scripture and experience does
disable us ever from doing any work entirely and totally good. Knowledge we
have: but much darkened by ignorance. We have a will to do good: but that also
corrupted with much forward Rebellion. A power we have to do good: but always
crossed and much restrained by manyfold Lusts within, and Temptations without
us. How is it possible for us, being compassed about with so many infirmities:
but we should offend in one thing or other; Becanus here brings us an instant
of a good work: and bids us show what sin there is in it. If (says he) A
Man regenerate read or hear those words of Christ. Mat: 6. [ give almes] he
being enlightened knows that this is a worthy and honest work. Whereupon he is
touc^ed in heart and stirred up to do it. He consents to this motion, and
resols upon the execution, which (supposing that he be rich) nothing now can
hinder because he is both able and willing to give. Now then this alms being
thus given out of knowledge, and a pious motion of the Heart tending to Gods
honor and our Neighbors good, the Jesuit desires to knew of us, where their
is any Sin in it. We say there is some evil in every good work and
therefore he would have us tell him what evil there is in this Almesdeed.
Unto this we say, that this enquiry of the Jesuit is the most ridiculous and
absurd thing, that can be. He asks us where is the Sin? what if we answer
him we do not know; Is he now ever the wiser? what has he gained hereby? Are
other Men's work without all faults because we know not what they be? Nay, are
they without fault, because themselves know not whether there be any in them:
or no? what silinesse were it to argue in this sort? Therefore when we come to
this point strictly to examine the works of Men. First we tell the Jesuit
that he must not put Cases touching generalities [suppose that such a good
work be done so and so what then] we dispute now touching particulars in every
Man's real practice. The enquiry is not for the general. ( What evil is there
in such and such a good work) done thus and thus, according as the
Circumstances are framed in an Imagined Case. As to ask what Sin is their in
an Almesdeede done out of Faith and Charity to Gods glory. This is a fond
question thus framed upon general terms we say their is no Sin in it. But
the enquiry is in particular, what Evil their is in such a work done by this
or that, Man, according to all Circumstances, that were at that time incident
to the work, as. What sin was there in Zacheus or Cornelius almsdeeds?
This question we admit, and answer to it, That some Sin there was for which
those holy Men, as well as others, would not have been willing that God should
enter into judgment with them, strictly to judge them. Yea, but will the
Jesuits reply, name what Sin this was; or else you wrong them. Now this is
mere impudency. For who is judge of their actions? Are we? or is it God and
their own Consciences? we can be no judges, who at furthest can judge but
accordrng to outward appearance. We know not their Hearts: nor are we privy
unto every particular Circumstance, that did accompany those actions of theirs
Circumstances in every particular action differ infinitely, one Man may offend
in this point, another in that: nor have we a general Rule whereby to judge
alike of all. And therefore it is a childish quaere to ask on Man whether
another Man offendes, who may do evil a 1000 times, not only secret from
others, but unwitting to himself. If then the Jesuit will have an answer to
his question, he must resort to particular men's Consciences, and to God: for
only the spirit of Man, and the spirit of God know the things of Man. Let him
ask a Cornelius when he gives alms, whether he do think this work so well
done, that no fault can be found with it. Doubtless he will answer, that he
cannot excuse himself from all faultiness: though he knew nothing by
himself, yet he dares not stand to Gods judgment. His confession and prayer
would in this case be the same with Nehemiahs. Nehem. 13. 22. [ Remember me O
my God concerning this also, and spare me according to the greatness of thy
mercy.] at once begging favorable acceptance of his obedience, and gracious
pardon of his infirmities. If this suffice not in the next place, the Jesuit
is to repair to God almighty and question him, where the Sins in such and
such a good works, who no doubt can shape him an answer that will sore
confound his pride and folly, and make it quickly appear unto him, that
sinful Man, when he pleades with God, is not able to answer him one
objection of a 100, that God shall make against him.

This of the third Argument. That Man has sufficient means to do well and
not Sin. The last follows, drawn from such absurdities, as they say do
follow upon our Doctrine. Thus.

4 If (say they) our Doctrine be true that the best works of Men be Sinful:
then these absurdities be likewise true doctrine. That to be justified by faith
is to be justified by Sin. That no man ought to believe, because the work
[Beleeuing] is Sin. That all good works are forbidden, because all Sin is
forbidden. That God should command us to commit Sin: because he commands us
to do good works. That God bidding us be zealous of go^d works, should in
effect bid us be zealous of mortal Sin. That to pray for the pardon of Sin
were a damnable Sin. These and such other absurd Positions would be true: if
the protestants doctrine concerning the sinfulness of good works may stand
for good.

Hereunto we answer. That these absurdities issue not out of our Doctrine, but
out of our Adversaries malicious Imaginations. Who like the ragine Sea casting
up mire and Dirt from its own Bottom would feign throw all this filth in the
face of the Reformed Churches, to make them odious and hateful to the world.
The best is. Truth cannot be disgraced though it may be belyed. These foul
Absurdities; touch us not: but follow upon that Doctrine which is none of ours.
Namely, That the good works of the Regenerate are in their very Nature
altogether sins, and nothing else but sordes* inquinamenta, and merae
iniquitates. Such an absurd assertion would indeed yield such an absurd
consequence. But we defended it not: and they abuse us grossly, when in their
writings they report of us the contrary that we do mainetaine. This only we
teach. That men's good works are in part sinful. Much good they have in them:
but with all some evil mingled therewith. Amongst the gold, some dross also
will be sound, that will not be able to abide the fire of Gods severe Trial.
Imperfections will appear in our best works, so long as humane infirmity and
mortality hangs upon us. This we teach, and from this Doctrine all that have
reason, may see that no such unreasonable conclusions can be collected. And let
thus much suffice for the clearing of this third Proposition, touching the
imperfection of our obedience to the Morrall Law of God, even in the good
works which we perform. From whence every godly heart should le^rne both
Christian Humility and also Industry. First, Humility not to boast in the
flesh and glory in its own Righteousness, thinking that God must highly
account off, and reward largely, that which is very little worth. Secondly,
Industry in a faithful endeavor after perfection. That what cannot be done
well as it ought: we may yet every day be done better then before it was.

CHAP. IIII.
Three general exceptions against the truths delivered in this third Section*
THus we have stood long in the confirmation of our second Argument, touching
the impossibility of Man's fulfilling of the Law in this Life, and so
consequently of justification by the Law.

Against all that have bin said for the profit of this point; our Adversaries
have three Common and general Exceptions. Which are these.

1 That Concupiscence or Natural Corruption in the first and second act of it,
Bell. lib. 4. cap. 1^. and passim aubi.
is no sin. 2 That imperfection in our Charity and Obedience is no sin. 3
That smaller faults, or ( as they tell them) Venia^^ sins, do not hinder the
Justice and goodness of any good work.
To these three Positions they have continually recourse. ^ Exceptio^^.
For whereas they cannot deny; but that their is in the Regenerate; both a
pronesse of Nature unto Evil, and also many inordinate Sinnefu^l motions
arising thence: they first deny, that, either these Natural Corruptions, or
disordered Motions of the Heart be any sins.

Again, they confess that no man has such perfect love of God and Man; but
that he may increase in charity: nor be his good works so perfectly good; but
that they ought still to strive to do them better: but then here also they
deny, that this imperfection of our charity and good works, is any sin.

Lastly, they grant that no man can avoid venial sins, scarce in the best
works he does: but then they deny that venial sins be contrary to the Law,
so that albeit a man commit them, yet he may perfectly fulfill the Law of God.
I cannot stand largely in the refutation of these foul errors. The confutation
whereof belongs properly to the Article of remission of sins; where the
nature and kinds of sins are to be handled. For this present I shall but
touch on them briefly, and proceed to the matter.

1 For the first; we defend this conclusion.

The vicious inclination and pronnesse of Nature unto evil, Conclusion.
as also the inordinate moti^ns of concupiscence, which go before consent,
they are sins even in a man regenerate.



Romans 7. not once nor twice: but almost in every verse of the Chapter. I am
carnal sold under sin. The sin that dwells in me. ver. 17. 20. The Law
of sin. verse 23. 25. In it self it is sin, and deserves the wages of
sin, eternal death. For which cause the Apostle there calls it. The body of
this death. verse 24. Because this inward Corruption (which is like a Body that
has many members consisting of diverse evil affections spreading themselves
throughout his whole Nature) made him liable to eternal death, from which
only Gods mercy in Christ could deliver him.

Ergo, To have a rebellious inclination is sin likewise. (...). 3. 12. 13.
For if the act be evil, the habit must needs be naught: if the Law forbid
one; it must needs forbid the other. If it be evil to break any Commandment
in act: is it not evil to have, a pronenesse and readiness of mind to break
it? (...). 4. 8. ^ense your ^nds: purge ^ur hearts.
The habit denominated a man sinful and not the act. Nor does God less
abhor the pronnesse of man to offend him: then we do abhor the ravenous
disposition of a Wolf, though it be a Cubb, not yet used to the prey; or one
tied up in a chain, and kept from ravening.

That the evil motions of the heart without consent be sins.

1 They are forbidden in the Morrall Law. In the Thou shall not covet. For
motions with consent are forbidden in the other Commandments. As appears
manifestly in Christ's exposition of the Commandments. Mat. 5. 22. were not
only the outward act of Adultery: but the inward desire is also forbidden; if
we believe Christ the best interpreter of the Law: When Ergo the tenth
Commandment forbids coveting [ of our Neighbors Wife, it either means the
same kind of lusting, with a needelesse Tautology: or a different. viz. that
which is not consented unto. Nor can our Adversaries shift this off: though
Becanus most impudently denies it, Tom. 2. page 885.
with out any reason of his so doing.

2 We prove it thus. Whatsoever is inordinate and repugnant to right Reason:
that is Sin.

But these Motions without confent be inordinate. -- Ergo They be Sin, The
Minor is confessed. That these Motions be inordinati and recta Rationi
repugnantes.

The Mayor is apparent. For what is Ordo and recta Ratio in Moralibus: but that
course of doing any thing, which is conformable to Gods Law and his will. God
is the God of order. Mark them that walk disorderly, (...), i e. sinful,
otherwise according to the Law.
His Law is the rule of order in all humane actions. Recta Ratio what is it;
but the conformity of man's understanding and will unto Gods will, which only is
the rule of righteousness; We never purpose and will matters aright: but when
we will them agreeably to Gods will. Wherefore it is a gross absurdity to
deny the Sinnefulnesse of these disorderly motions: seeing no man can break
those orders which God has made, and yet be faultlesse. Nor is it possible a
Man should do that which is contrary to Gods will: And yet be without Sin in
doing of it. These motions then without consent be confusions in Nature
opposites to the righteousness of the will of God; and unto that even and
straight order expressed in his Law.

We conclude then that Concupiscence and inordinate motions of the Soul not
consented unto, are Sins contrary to our Adversaries assertion.

They bring some Reasons to prove they are not.

1 Original sin is taken away in Baptism. 1 Arg. Adu.
But concupiscence is not taken away in Baptism; as appears by experience in
the regenerate in whom it remains. -- Ergo, concupiscence and pronnesse to
Sin, is no sin.

This Argument is frivolous. In Original sin, there are two things, First,
the guilt. Secondly, the inherent corruptions. We say in Baptism the guilt is
altogether washed away from the Baptized Elect, by the blood of Christ. And for
the corruption thereof, it is part done away by the sanctifying Spirit of
Christ, powered out upon the Regenerate, which by degrees purges out the
inherent sinfulness of Nature, by replanting the graces of Sanctification in
all parts. Concupiscence then, notwithstanding Baptism remains in the
Regenerate, and is a sin in them, the guiltiness whereof God mercifully
pardons in Christ.

2 What is not in our power to avoid: 2 Arg. Adu.
that God does not forbid us by his Law.

But it is not in our power to avoid the Motions of the heart that prevent
Reason and consent. Ergo, they be no sins forbidden us.

To this we answer. The Mayor is true in things merely Natural, that fall
out by the Necessity of Nature well disposed. So we say, Gods Law were uncouth,
should he command a man never to be an hungry or thirst, which things he cannot
avoid, but they come upon him, will he, nill he; by the mere necessity of
Nature. But concerning inordinate motions, there is no such matter. God has
laid no such necessity on Nature in her creation: but we by our sin have
brought it upon our selves.

Now such a necessity excuses us not. In this case it helps a man no more to
say. [ I cannot avoid evil thoughts and desires:] then it does a desperate
sinner, that by countenance has hardened himself in evil courses; or then it
helps the Devils and the damned, if they should say; We cannot choose but do
evil.

3 They argue thus. That which would have been natural and without fault in
man, 3 Arg. Adu*
if he had been created, in puris Naturalibus; that is, no sin nor fault in
us.

But motions preventing consent, would be natural, and without fault in men so
made. -- Ergo, In us they be no faults of themselves.

Here our Adversaries have made a Man of white Paper, or the like to Materia
prima: that has not any quality in him morally good or bad. That is. A Man
that has neither the Image of God in knowledge, righteousness, and holiness,
engraven on his understanding, will, affections, and whole person; nor yet,
though it have it not, has in him any contrary evil quality, that comes upon
him by reason of such a defect. Now of such a Wiseaker they dispute. If God had
created a Man thus* in puris naturalibus, neither good, nor bad, then. What
then? As the old word is. If the Heavens fall, we shall have Larkes good
cheepe. Suppositions framed by our Imaginations touching what might be done,
are vain and needless when we see what is done. This we see that Man was
created in God's Image invested with all real Qualities of Righteousness and
Holiness. This we see also, that Man being fallen is borne in Original
corruption, deprived of God's Image, and thereupon depraved in his whole Nature
by sinful infirmity. Wherefore a man in his pure Naturals, one that has
neither Grace, nor Corruption, was never found in this world: yea, it is a
contradiction to imagine a man thus naked without his Qualities; that he has
Reason, but neither enlightened, nor darkened, a will but merely indifferent,
neither inclined to good, or evil; affections, but neither virtuously, nor
vitiously disposed. In a word, that he is a Man capable of Virtue, or Vice;
Holiness, or Sinfulness, and yet has neither. That were to make a Man little
better then an unreasonable Beast. But to follow them a little. Suppose a Man
were made in his pure Naturals, would such disorderly motions be found i^ him?
(...)
Yea, say they, and that boldly. Si Homo crearetur a Deo in puris naturalibus,
proculdubio constaret duabus partibus repugnantibus, Spiritu and Carne: and
haberet duos app^titus contrarios. Rationalem, and Sensitivum: ergo naturaliter
haber^t quosdam motus repugnantes Rationi. Without doubt the Jesuit is
deceived in this his Imagination, and his Argument is not worth a Button. A Man
in his pure Naturals should have two parts, a Soul and a Body, Spirit and
Flesh; he should have two appetites, Reasonable and Sensual, ergo, these parts
in their motions and desires would be contrary one to the other. This
consequent is false. They would be diverse, not opposite and repugnant. The
Body and the Sensitiues would lead a Man to those things that are agreeable to
the Body. The Soul and reasonable appetite, or will would incline him to those
higher and more noble objects agreeable to the Soul. But neither of these
inclinations would cross and trouble one another, the inferior faculties,
like the lower Spheres would move differently from the superior: but yet most
orderly according to their own nature, without impeaching the Motions of the
other. Each faculty in it is place would work orderly in sweet harmony and
agreement each with other, had not Sin brought in confusion and discord into
the world, as between God and Man: so between Man and himself. This we
further make good by this argument. Whatsoever is natural, and so without
blame in Man: that Christ took one him -- But these inordinate Motions of the
sensitive appetite, repugnant unto Will and Reason; Christ took not on him --
Ergo they are not natural, and without blame. The Mayor we prove by that,
Phil. 3. 7. He was made like unto Man: and Heb. 2. 17. In all things it behooved
him to be made like unto his Brethren. And again, Chap. 4. 15. We have not a
high Priest which cannot be touched with a feeling of our infirmities: but was
in all things tempted in like sort: yet without Sin. Whence it is manifest
that Christ taking on him our Nature, took on him all the properties of our
Nature, and with all such infirmities of our Nature as not sinful in
themselves, or the effects or punishments of Sin in us. If therefore it be
natural unto Man, that the Motions of the sensitive appetite should prevent
and be repugnant unto Reason, and that this is no Sin except consent make it
so: then certainly Christ had in him such motions and inordinate desires. But
to affirm that, there were in Christ such disorderly Motions of his inferior
Faculties, repugnant unto his Reason and Will, is a blasphemy against the
immaculate Lamb of God, Christ was indeed tempted (as the text says) and in
like sort as we are: but will any Man here understand this of inward
Temptations arirising from any thing within Christ, as if he were like unto us
drawn aside with Iam. 1. (...)
Concupiscence and enticed, the motions of his sensitive faculties, inclining
him to that which was contrary to his understanding and will? We confess that
he was fiercely tempted by Satan and wicked Men from without: but that he was
tempted by any thing in himself, by disorderly Motions of his heart tending
unto evil, and ergo checked by his will and Reason, this we account an
abominable Error touching the spotless humanity of our Savior. Wherein we
deny, that there ever was any the least disorderly desire, thought, word, or
work whatsoever. And therefore we conclude, that such motions are not natural
unto Men, becoming sinful only by accident, because they are consented unto:
but they are accidental unto him, being the fruit of original Corruption, and
are in themselves verily and properly Sins.

For Conclusion of this point, let us hear that Argument which Bell. makes. 4
Arg. Bell.


4. Where there is no Law, Lib. 4. cap. 1^.
there is no sin. Romans 4. 10.

But there is no Law prescribed unto sense and sensual appetites. Ergo The
Motions thereof are not sinful.

The Mayor we grant. The Minor he proves* Because the Law praesupposeth Reason
in all that whereto it is given. But the sensitive part of Man is without
Reason, and ergo not capable of a Law, according as it is in brute beasts, to
whom ergo no Law is given. This he further proves by that place, Romans 7. 20.
Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but Sin that
dwells in me. Where it is plain ( says Bell.) that the Apostle did not
sin, because he lusted against his will. 'Twas not he did the work: but
'twas the Sin in him. Wherefore he says afterward. That in his mind, i. e.
in his superior faculties he served the Law of God: and kept it: although in
his flesh, i. e. sensitive appetite and inferior faculties he served the Law
of sin: yet, for all that he sinned not in so doing, because sin cannot be
but in the mind, and the Law is not given to those facul^ies that be
unreasonable.

To this we answer. That God gives no Law to unreasonable Creatures, but such
as have Reason. The sensitive faculties of bruite-beasts have no other Rule
then Natures instinct, which guides and moderates their several motions in due
order and measure. But in man those inferior faculties how ever unreasonable,
are yet capable of Reasons Government, which according to Gods Law prescribes
unto the motions of the sensitive appetite their measure and bounds, beyond
which they may not pass. If a man were vncorrupt, the appetite would obey this
rule of Reason and keep it self within those prescribed Bounds. But being now
corrupt by Sin, it breaks out beyond this compass and ouerbeares Reason and
will, which in their sinful weakness are not able to bridle these unruly
motions. wherefore when Bell. says. That the Law is given to the reasonable
will, not to the sensiue appetite; it is utterly false: Because in Man it is
probable of government, and so subject to the Law. Our Reason has even in this
our corrupted estate a civil command over our appetite and affections; so that
it can moderate them by fair persuasions now and then. That which it can do
sometimes, it ought to do always, and if any affections can obey Reason at
sometimes, were they not infected with Sin, they would do it at all times.
And if they do well when they obey, certainly they do evil when they
disobey. And ergo such motions of them, as are repugnant to right reason, are
nothing but rebellion against God's Law. As to the place in the 7. Romans we
answer. That that Interpretation of it which Bell. brings is most perverse and
against all Sense. The Apostle complains that he did the Evil, which he would
not; no doubt in so doing he did sin. But what is it now which committed
this guilt or sin? It is not I that do it says the Apostle: but that sin
that dwells in me. That is, according to Bell: not I in my mind, or superior
faculties of Reason and Will: but my inferior Appetite and affections which do
this evil against my consent. So the meaning shall be Concupiscence in that
duel in the Apostle committed Sin: but the Apostle himself committed it
not. Which is very absurd. As if a cholericke-Man having done a mischief in
his anger should sa^e, It were not he did it; but his raging passion: or an
adulterer, that 'twas not he committed the Sin; but his sinful Affection
that carried him further then reason would. So that if God will punish such a
sin; he must not punish him: but only his sensitive appetite which was in
fault. This is ridiculous, for besides that it crosses the Romanists Doctrine
manifestly; in teaching that such disorderly motions of the sensitive appetite
be no sins, which here the Apostle contradicts, saying plainly ( that the
Sin which dwelt in him did do the evil he would not. (viz, Sin:) it
draws after it this gross Error. That some faecultie in man may sin, and yet
the man not sin himself. Wherefore the Apostle in that speech, It Is not I
do it: but sin in me. does not oppose one faculty against the other, the
reasonable will, against the sensitive appetite, seeking for a shift to excuse
his sin, by putting it off from himself, to that which was not capable of
Sin: but he opposes grace in every faculty to Corruption in the same
faculty; as two contrary Principles and causes of his actions, one moving to
good; the other enclining to bad. Thence the Apostle says, that (when he does
evil) it is not I that do it. i. e, I regenerate according to the Grace, that
dwells in me, for that inclines me to do good: but it is the Sin dwelling
in me which (when I would do well) inclines me to do evil. He here shows
the Root, whence this Evil comes: but yet he does not put off the fault from
himself. As it is himself does well: so it is himself does ill too, according
as he concludes. verse 25. Then I my self. (...) do both well and ill; well,
according to Grace, in my mind that is regenerate, part both of inferior and
superior faculty. I serve the Law of God; but ill according to corruption
remaining in me: but in my flesh, unregenerate part the Law of Sin. Much more
might be added: but it is not my purpose, here to enter upon the common place
at large,

I proceed to the second quaestion of our Adversaries, who teach that albeit
our Love of God be imperfect: yet this imperfection is not sin in us. They
grant. That no man has any grace of the spirit: but he may increase in it
daily. that the Love of God and our Neighbors may still grow on to farther
degrees of affection; That no grace, nor good work has that full perfection,
which it might have in this Life, or which we shall attain unto in Heaven. But
they deny this defect to be any fault or sin.

2. Defectus Charitatis quod ( viz) non faciamus opera nostra tanto feruore
dilectionis, Excep^ion.
quanto faciemus in patria, Be^ lib. 4 c. 10. ^ 17. ^ cap. (...).
defectus quidemest: sed culpa and peccatum non est. says Bell. and again
Charitas nostra quamuis comparata ad Charitatem beatorum, sit imperfecta: tamen
absolute perfecta dici potest.

This is an Error, against which we defend this Conclusion in general,
touching both Charity and all man Righteousness.

The defects or want of Perfection in Man's Righteousness is Sin. Conclusion.
contr.


For the proof of this point we are to observe, that the Imperfection, or
Perfection of any thing is to be considered of two ways.

1 Comparatively. When any thing set by another is more or less perfect, then
that other.

2 Absolutely. When considered in it self, it has or wantes that Perfection
which it should have by its proper Nature.

Between these there is great difference. For Comparatiue imperfection is not
evil: absolute imperfection is Evil. We may see it in an example, The Senses
that are in Man being compared with their like in other creatures, it is
manifest they are much excelled by them, as by an Eagle for sight, a spider for
touch. etc. Here we say that the eye of a man is not perfect as the eye of an
Eagle: but yet we do not account this imperfection any Natural evil of the
eye of a man. God might have given a stronger and a clearer sight to men: but
we, blame not his works; nor count our sight imperfect because it has not
that singular Temper which is in other Creatures; but because it wants at any
time that temper which is agreeable to our nature. Such a defect only, is
properly an Evil in Nature, when something is wanting to the perfection of any
part, which by the Course of nature should be there. Thus it is also in Grace.
Compare we the Righteousness of man, or Angels, with the Righteousness of God; we
say that God's is infinitely more perfect then the Creatures. But now is this
imperfection in Humane or Angelical righteousness any Evil and Sin in them?
We say No. Neither are the Angels sinful because less righteous then God:
nor Adam sinful because less righteous then either. God made them both less
good then himself: yet very good and without all Sin. There be degrees of
Righteousness, and though the Creature be infinitely below the heighest pitch of
goodness (which is God:) yet he may be still above that lowest descent unto
Sin and unrighteousness. In Phylosophie we dispute whether the slackening of
any degree in one Quality, be the mingling of another that is contrary. As heat
in eight degrees if it decrease unto seven, whether there is any degree of cold
mingled with it. It Is heard to say that there is. But concerning Grace and
Righteousness it is certain, there is that remissio graduum without any
admixtion of Sin and iniquity. As the Holiness of Saints is less then that of
Angels; that of Angels less then the Holiness of Christ's glorified Humanity,
this less then his Diety. And yet in the least of these Righteousnesses there
is no Unrighteousness at all to be found, no not in the severe judgment of God.
Except we say there is unrighteousness in Heaven where no unclean thing can
enter. Well then. What Imperpection of man's Righteousness is it, which is Sin?
We say. That Imperfection, when man in any Grace or good Work wantes that
degree of goodness, which he ought to have. As in nature. If the Eye want that
cleernes of sight which should be in it: it is a natural Evil. In Morality if
a man want that Temperance or degree of Temperance he ought to have, its a
vicious and moral evil: so in Grace the want of that righteousness or degree
of righteonsnes which God requires to be in man, is a Sin and spiritual
Evil. All such priuations of what should be present are Evil in what kind
soever. If they be in nature they be malamiseranda, deserve pity and cure: if
in Virtue and Grace; they be mala culpanda worth of blame and punishment. Such
defects as these in Grace, when man falls short, not only of that which is in
others; but that which should be in himself, do always arise from the
mixture of Corruption and Sin. He that loves not God or his neighbor so
much as he ought to do: it is because his heart be wicked, at the least in
part; and that he loves others things more then he should do. These things are
certain and undeniable according to those words of St. Augustine that are
authentical. (...)
Profecto illud quod minus est quam debet, ex vitio est. And again. Lib. de
perfect. (...). 15
Pec^atum est, vel cum non est charitas, quae esse debet: vel minor est quam
debet. It Is a Sin, not to love. God at all: or to love him less then we
should. Wherefore here we ask the Jesuit whether Charity and other Graces in
a man regenerate be so perfect in this Life, as they ought to be? If he say,
they be not so perfect, as they ought to be. how can he affirm that this
defect is no fault nor Sin: Can a man possibly do worse, or be worse then he
should; and yet be i^ no fault therefore? If he say they be as perfect as they
should be, his own Conscience and the Conscience of all the men in the World
will gainsay him for a liar. No man can say, that he loves God and his
Neighbor as much as he ought to do: and that he is not bound in every grace
and good work to ariue at greater perfection, then he has for the present.
He that thinks himself come nearest unto the mark, will yet be driven to
confess, that he falls many bows short of those patterns which we ought to
imitate, Adam in his Innocence; Christ's Humanity, and the Saints in Heaven. We
here bid them ( Depinge ubi sistam) make a point where we shall stop: that
when we are come so far, we need seek no further perfection. If they cannot
do this, then they must confess, as the truth is, that every man is bound by
Gods command to be more holy, to be more perfect in all Graeces and good
works; and so far as he wants any degree or dram of goodness, that should
be in him and his works, so far he is sinful and guilty of a fault.

3 I go on to the last Assertion of our Adversaries, 3 Exception. Bell. lib. 4
c. 17.
which is to^ching venial sins, (viz.) That these do not hinder the
righteousness of men's good works. A man may be a perfect just man, though he
commit many venial sins. The reason whereof they make to be [because venial
sins are not contrary to charity, the love of God and our neighbor, and so
may stand well enough with the fulfilling of the Law.

Against this error, tending to the obduration of man's heart in impenitency and
love of sin: we maintain this conclusion.

Those sins which the Church of Rome calls venial, Conclusion contr.
do truly make a man regenerate, and his works unrighteousness in the sight
of God.

This we prove by this one Argument.

Whosoever transgresses the Law, he is unrighteous in so doing.

But he that commits venial sins, transgresses the Law. Ergo, He that
commits venial sins is an unrighteous man.

The Mayor is undeniable. For the Minor our Adversary is at a stand. They are
loath to grant it: yet cannot tell how to deny it with any honesty. Bellarmine
after one or two shuffling distinctio^s of simpliciter, (...). 4. cap. 14.
and secundum quid; perfect and imperfecte, at last plainly denies that
venial sins be contrary to the Law. For answering unto those places in
James. [ In many things we offend all,] and that in John. [ If we say we have
no sin, we deceive our selves.] He says they cannot hansomly shift
themselves of those places, who hold that venial sins be [ proprie contra
Legem.] Such as be of that opinion [ Let them look to it (says he) what they
will answer to that of Saint James.] He that keeps the Law in one point,
etc.] He therefore will be more wise and wary. [ Sol^da igitur respensio est
(says he) Peccata venialia, sine quibus non viuitur, non esse peccata
simpliciter, sed imperfecte and secundum quid: neque esse contra Legem, sed
praerer Legem.] And thus says he, Omnia cohaerent (like a Pebble in a With) [
Nam qui ostendit in vno praeuaricans scilicet vnum praeceptum, reus est omnium
and simpliciter iniustus constituitur and tamen in multis offendimus omnes,
quia tametsi nihil facimus contra Legem; tamen multa facimus praeter Legem. Et
qui ^atus est ex Deo, non peccatat transgrediendo Legem, and tamen si dicamus
q^ia peccatum non habemus. (viz.) nihil praeter Legem faciendo: no^ ipsos
seducimus, and veritas non est in Nobis.] This is an unbound Besome, as will
appear by undoing that distinction which seems to hold it together. Venial
sins are not against the Law: but besides the Law. Well, we must now know
what is against the Law, and what besides. ^^t^er meaning of these words
[against] and [Besides] there can be (...)
That is against the Law, when any thing is done which the Law forbids; or left
undone which it commands. That is besides the Law, when the thing done is
neither commanded, nor forbidden in the Law. He then that commits a venial
sin, does some such act as the Law neither forbids nor commands. Here then we
ask. Be venial sins, sins? Yea, they be. Is God offended with them? Yea,
and he may justly punish them, on us with the loss of Heaven. For so
Bellarmine himself confesses. Lib. 4. cap. use.
[ Peccata venialia nisi misericorditer remittantur impediunt ab ingressu
illius Regni in quod nihil coinquinatum intrare potest.] Now sure this is
admirable, that such acts as these should defile a man, deserve hell, offend
God, in a word be sins, and yet for all this neither commanded nor forbidden
in any Law of God. Was there ever such a toy heard of as this? as Sins beside
the Law. It Is a most ridiculous contradiction, Peccatum praeter Legem. He that
does any thing beside the Law, not mentioned, nor include ^ therein by way of
prohibition or command, it is most apparent he sins not, nor offends not at
all. For whom does he offend, or who can challenge him of Sin? Does God the
Lawgiver? No, for it was not his intention to command or forbid such an act, and
ergo, be it done or not done, it crosses not his will: nor has he any reason
to find fault or be displeased at it. Satan or Man cannot accuse him. For let
them then show the Law that proves him an offender. If they cannot allege a
Law against which he has transgressed: they wrongfully accuse him of a fault.
Were it not absurd accusation against a prisoner at the Bar; to say that he
has indeed done nothing against the Laws of the Land: but many things besides
the Law not forbidden nor commanded in the Law, those he has done and
deserves to be punished for it as an offender?

But now if those venial sins be mentioned in Gods Law: then are such
actions either commanded or forbidden. If commanded, then the not doing of such
a thing, is plainly contrary to the Law. As for example. (...)
To steal a penny, or some other small matter, to please an idle word, to tell
an officious lie; these be venial sins say our Adversaries. But how hnow
they, they be sins? who told them so? The Scriptures they will say. Where? In
the 8 and 9 Commandment. Ask them now. Did God intend in those Commandments
to forbid those actions of stealing and lying? Yea, or No? If he intended it
not; then it is no sin at all to do them, seeing it cro^seth not Gods will,
nor offends him. If he did intend to forbid us those things: then to do them
is a sin, manifestly contrary to the holy will of God, the Lawgiuer. Wherefore
let us here remember that excellent rule of Bernard. Bernard de Praecept^^
Dispen.
[Non iussa quidem licite vtrumlibet, vel admittuntur vel omittuntur: iussa
vero sine culpa non negleguntur, sine crimine non ^ontemnuntur. For things not
commanded: we may either lawfully do them or leave them: but for things
commanded, to neglect them is a sin, to contemn them is a heinous crime.
Wherefore this distinction of sins against, and sins beside the Law falls
to dust: and our Minor Proposition stands firm: That he who commits venial
Sin, transgresses the Law of God, and therefore is unrighteous for his so
doing.

Tom. 2. tract. 2 cap 2 q. 2.
Becanus here forsakes the Cardinal in this distinction: and helps him by an
other deuis^. He grants that Venial Sins be against the Law, and proves it,
[ because every Venial Sin is moraliter malum, and Ergo contra rectam
rationemet Legem aeternam.) But here is now the distinction: It is one thing to
be contra Legem; another contra finem Legis. All Venial sins be against the
Law: but no venial sin is properly against the end of the Law. that is,
against Charity the Love of God or our Neighbor. Is not this a superfine
Invention? (...). Man. confess praelud. ^. Number. 16.
As if a Subject that has in many things broken the Law, should say. True my
faults be against the Law of the Land: but yet they are not against the end of
those Laws. viz. obedience to my Prince, and Love to the good of him and my
Country. Though I break the Laws: yet I would not have you think; but I love
and honor my Prince and Country well enough. Just so the Jesuits. A man may
commit many sins against Gods Law: and yet observe the end of the Law, in
loving God with all his heart; and his Neighbor as himself. Then which
nothing can be more senseless, that a man should offend God in breaking of his
Law: and yet not withstanding love God with his whole heart. That a man should
wrong his Neighbor doing that to him which he would not have done to himself:
and yet, for all that, love his Neighbor as himself. ( If ye love me keep
my Commandem^nts) says Christ. John. 14. 15. Nay (say the Romanists) we love
him and yet break his Commandments. ( Love does none eu^l to his Neighbor)
says the Apostle Romans. 13.. 10 Nay (say the Jesuits) Love may do evil to
his Ne^ghbour: and yet keep the name of love. A man may be angry with another
without cause, revile him, and call him Racha, he may defraude him in small
matters (for these they make venial sins) and yet in the mean time, all
this without breath of Charity. Himself would not willingly be so used: but
he will use another in this sort; and yet look to be thanked for his love
too. Such gross absurdities do our Adversaries run in to, by coining such
senseless distinctions of ( Sins not against: but besides the Law) of sins
not against the end of the Law: though against the Law it self. Our
Consciences cannot be satisfied with such silly shifts: and therefore we leave
them unto those that can content themselves; and choke up their Consciences
with a little sophistry. Men who make a pastime of sin; and take liberty to
qualify and dispense with Gods Law as they think agreeable to their
Conscience; hoping by tricks of wit and dodging Distinctions to a void the
accusations of Conscience, and to elude the severity of Gods Judgment.

SECT. 4.
CHAP I*
Justification by works makes void the covenant of grace of the difference
between the law and the Gospel. of the use of the Law. of the erroneous conceit
of our Adversaries in this point.
THus much of these three Exceptions of our ^econd Arg^ment, proving the
impossibili^y of our Justification by the works of the Law, because we cannot
perfectly fulfill the ^aw. We go now forward unto two Arguments more; taken,
the one from the difference of the two Covenants God has made with man. First
of works, the other of grace: and the other from the Nature of true Christian
Lib^rty obtained for us by Christ's death.

(...).
Argument. That which makes void the Covenant of Grace is a false and
haereticall doctrine.

But Justification of works of the Law, makes void the Covenant of Grace.
Ergo, It Is false and haeriticall so to teach.

For confirmation of the minor in this Argument we must briefly show. 1 ( What
the Covenant of Grace, what the Covenant of works is) 2 What opposition their
is between these two.

By the Covenant of Grace Covenant of Grace.
we understand in one word, the Gospel, i. e. the gracious appointment of God
to bring man to Salvation by Jesus Christ. In the administration of this
gracious purpose of God we must observe four periods of time, where in God
has diversely ordered this means of Man's salvation.

1 The first is from Adam until Abraham. (...).
Werein God made the promise to Adam anon after his miserable fall: and renewed
it as occasion served unto the Patriarchs and Holy men of that first Age of
the world. viz. That ( the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head)
This blessed promise containing the whole substance of man's redemption by
Christ, was religiously accepted of, and embrased by the servants of God in
those times. who witnessed their Faith in it, by their offering of sacryfice as
God had taught them: and their Thankfulness for it, by their Obedience and
holy Conversation.

Abraham to Moses. After that men had now almost forgot Gods promise and their
own duty: and Idolatry was crept into those Families, wherein by succession
the Church of God had continued, God calls forth Abraham from amongst his
Idolatrous kindred, and with him renues that former promise in form of a League
and Covenant confirmed by word and solemn Ceremonies. God on the one side
promising to be the God of Abraham, and of his seed, and that in his seed all
the Nations of the earth should be blessed: Abraham for his part believing the
promise, and accepting the condition of ^bedience to walk before God in
uprightness. This Covenant with Abraham is rat^fied by two external
Ceremonies. One of a fi^e-brand p^ssing between the pieces of the Heifer and
other Beasts with Abraham, according to custom in making of Leagues had
divided in twain. Genesis 15. The other the Sacrament of Circumcision upon the
flesh of Abraham and his posterity. Genesis 17.

The third period is from the time of Moses until Christ. Idolatrous
Egyptians, grew extremely corrupt in Religion and Manners) God again reuiues
his former Covenant made with Abraham. Putting the Jews in remembrance of the
Covenant of grace in Christ. 1 By adding unto the first Sacrament of
circumcision another of the Passover, setting forth unto the Jews, the Author
of their deliverance; as well from the spiritual slavery and punishment of
sin; as from the bodily bondage and plagues of Egypt. 2 Afterward by
instituting diverse Rites and Ceremonies concerning Priests sacrifices, etc. all
which were shadows of good things to come ( viz.) of Christ, the Churches
Redemption by his death. Which things were prefigured under those types, though
somewhat darkely, yet plainly enough to the weak understanding of the Jews.
Who in that Minority of the Church stood in need of such Schoolemasters and
Tutors to direct them unto Christ.

The fourth period and last is from Christ's death, to the Prophecies and
promises that went before of him: and by the Sacrifice of himself, confirmed
that Covenant a new: which so long before had been made with the Church.
Withal having abolished whatsoever before was weak and imperfect, he has
now replenished the Church with abundance of knowledge, and of grace, still to
continue and increase, till the consummation of all things. In all these
periods of time, the grace of God that brings salvation to man was ever one and
the same: only the Revelation thereof, was with much variety of circumstances,
as God saw it agreeable to every season. In the first it was called a Promise, in
the second a Covenant, in the two last Periods, a Testament; the Old from Moses
till Christ's death; the New from thence to the worlds end, in both Remission of
sins, and Salvation bequeathed as a Legacy unto the Church: and this bequeast
ratified by the death of the Testator, typically slain in the Sacrifices, for
confirmation of the Old: Really put to death in his own Person, for the
Sanction of the New Testament. But notwithstanding this or any other diversity
in circumstance, the substance of the Gospel, or covenant of Grace, is but one
and the same, throughout all ages. Namely, Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day,
and the same for ever.

In the next place. By the Covenant of Works, Covenant. 2 Works.
we understand that we call in one word the Law: Namely, That means of
bringing man to Salvation, which is by perfect obedience unto the will of God.
Hereof there are also two several Administrations. 1 The first is with Adam
before his fall. When Immortality and Happiness was promised to Man, and
confirmed by an external Symbol of the Tree of Life: upon condition that he
continued obedient to God, as well in all other things; as in that particular
Commandment of not eating of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil. 2 The
second Administration of this Covenant was the renewing thereof with the
Israelites at Mount Sinai: where (after that the light of Nature began to grow
darker, and corruption had in time worn out the Characters of Religion and
Virtue, first graued in man's heart) God revived the Law, by a compendious and
full declaration of all duties required of man, toward God or his Neighbor,
expressed in the Decalogue. According to the Tenor of which Law God entered into
Covenant with the Israelites, promising to be their God; in bestowing upon them
all blessings of Life and Happiness, upon condition that they would be his
people, obeying all things that he had commanded. Which Condition they accepted
of, promising an absolute Obedience. All things which the Lord has said we
will do. Exodus 19. 24. and also submitting themselves to all punishment in
case they disobeyed; saying Amen to the Curse of the Law. Cursed be every one
that confirms not all the words of this Law to do them: and all the people
shall say, Amen. Deuteronomy. 27. 26.

We see in brief what these Covenants of Grace and Works are. In the second
place we must inquire what opposition there is between these two; Grace and
Works; the Gospel and the Law. The opposition is not in regard of the End
whereat both do aim. They agree both in one common end, namely the Glory of
God in Man's eternal Salvation. The disagreement is in the means, whereby this
End may be attained; which are proposed to Men in one sort by the Law, in
another by the Gospel. The diversity is this. The Law offers life unto Man
upon Condition of perfect Obedience, cursing the Transgressors thereof in the
least point with eternal Death: The Gospel offers Life unto Man upon another
condition, viz. Of Repentance, and Faith in Christ, promising Remission of
sins to such as repent and believe. That this is the maine Essential and
proper difference between the Covenant of works and of Grace (that is)
between the Law and the Gospel, we shall endeavor to make good against these
of the Romish Apostasy who deny it. Consider we then the Law of Works, either
as given to Adam before the promise: or as after the promise it remained in
some force with Adam and all his posterity. For the time before Man's fall. It
is apparent that perfect obedience was the condition required for the
establishing of Adam in perpetual bliss. Other means there was not: nor
needed any be proposed unto him. But when Man had failed in that Condition; and
so broken the Covenant of Works: God to repair Man's ruined Estate, now
desperate of ever attaning unto happiness by the first means: he appoints a
second offering unto Adam a Savior; that by Faith in him, and not by his own
unspotted Obedience, he might recover Justification, and Life which he had
lost. So that what Adam should have obtained by works without Christ: now he
shall receive by Faith in Christ without Works. Since the time of Man's fall we
must consider, that the Law and Gospel though they go together, yet as they
still differ in their use and office between themselves: so also the Law
differs from it self, in that use which it had before, and which it has since
the Fall. To us now, it has not the same use which it had in Man's innocence.
It was given to Adam for this end, to bring himself to Life, and for that
purpose it was sufficient both in it self, as an absolute Rule of Perfection:
and in regard of Adam who had strength to have observed it. But unto Man
fallen, although the Band of Obedience do remain: yet the End thereof (viz.)
Justification and Life by it, is now abolished by the promise, because the Law
now is insufficient for that purpose, not of it self, but by reason of our
sinful flesh, that cannot keep it. This is most manifest by the renewing of
the first Covenant of Works with the Jews, when God delivered unto them the
Moral Law, from Sinai, at which time God did not intend that the Jews should
obtain Salvation, by Obedience to that Law. God promised Life if they could
obey, and the Jews, as their duty was promised they would obey; but God knew
well enough they were never able to keep their promise, and ergo 'twas not
God's intention in this Legal covenant with the Jews, that any of them should
ever attain Justification, and Life by that means. As that first the Promise
need not to have bin made unto Adam, if the Law could have suffised for the
attaining of Life: so after the Promise was once made, the Law was not renewed
with the Jews; to that end that Righteousness and Life should be had by the
observation of it. This is the plain doctrine of the Apostle. Gal. 3. in that
his excellent dispute against Justification by the Law. The doubt that troubled
the Galatians was this. God had made an Evangelicall covenant with Abraham,
(...).
that in Christ he and his faithful seed should be blessed; that is,
Justified. Afterward 430 years, he made a Legal covenant with Abraham's
posterity, that they should live, that is, be justified and saved, if they did
fulfill all things written in the Law. The Quaestion now was, which of these
two covenants should stand in force, or whether both could stand together. The
Apostle answer, that the former covenant should stand in force, and that the
later did not abrogate the former; not yet could stand in force together with
the former. This he expresses v. 17. 18. And this I say, that the covenant
that was confirmed before of God in respect of Christ, the Law which was 430
years after, cannot disanull that it should make the Promise of none effect.
For if the inheritance (viz) of Righteousness and life, be by the Law; it is not
by the Promise: but God gave it to Abraham by Promise, Here now they might
object, Wherefore then serves the Law? If Men cannot be justified by keeping
the Law, to what end was it given so long after the Promise was made? To this
the Apostle answers. It was added (unto the Promise) because of the
transgressions. Here Is the true use of the Moral Law, since the fall of Man,
not to justify him and give life: but to prove him to be unjust and worrhy of
death. It was added [ because of transgressions.] that is. 1. To convince Man
of Sin, that he might be put in remembrance what was his duty of old; and
what was his present infirmity in doing of it, and what was God's wrath against
him for not doing it. That seeing how impossible it was for him to attain unto
life by this old way of the Law. First appointed in Paradise, he might be
humbled and driven to look after that new way, which God had since that time
laid forth, more heedfully attending the Promise, and seeking unto Christ, who
is the End of the Law unto every one that believes in him. Which use God
pointed out unto the Jews, figuring Christ unto them in the Mercyseate,
covering the Arc wherein the Tables of the Covenant were kept, and in the
Sacrifices appointed for all sorts of Transgressions against this Covenant. To
admonish the Jews a further thing was aimed at in giving them the Law, namely
the bringing of them -- to Christ the promised seed, in whom Remission of
Sins, and Life Eternal was to be had. 1. To restrain Man from Sin. That
the Law might be a perpetual rule of Holiness and Obedience whereby Man
should walk and glorify God to the utmost of his power. That so those Jews
might not think that God by making a gracious Promise, had utterly nullified
the Law, and that now Men might live as they list; but that they might know
these bounds prescribed them of God, within which compass they were to keep
themselves, that so the ouer-flowing of Iniquity might be restrained. These
most excellent, perpetual and necessary uses of the moral Law, God intended
in renewing of the Legal covenant with the Jews: and ergo the Apostle
concludes, that God did not cross himself, when first he gave the Inheritance
to Abraham by promise, and afterward made a Legal covenant with the Jews his
posterity. Is the Law then against the Promises? (says the Apostle) God
forbid. For if there had been a Law given, which could have given Life, surely
Righteousness should have bin by the Law: But the Scripture has concluded all
under Sin, that the promise by the Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to
all that believe. ver. 21. 22. Whence it is most clear that the Law and the
Gospel in some things are subordinate and uphold one another; in other
absolute, and destroy one another: As the Law by the discovery of Sin and the
punishment of it, humbles man and prepares him to receive the Gospel. 2. As
the Law is a sacred direction for Holiness and Obedience to those that have
embraced the Gospel and all others. 3. As the Law requires satisfaction for
the Breach of it, and the Gospel promises such satisfaction: thus the Law and
Gospel agree well together and establish one another. But as the Law gives
life to them that perfectly obey it, and the Gospel gives Life to them that
steadfastly believe it: thus the Law and Gospel are one against the other; and
overthrow one another. And ergo if God had given such a Law to the Jews, as
could have brought Salvation to them through the perfect fulfilling of it: it is
apparent that God had made void his former Covenant unto Abraham, because
Righteousness should have bin by the Law, and not by Christ. But now God gave no
such Law, as could be kept by the Jews, as the Apostle proves, because all
were sinners against it; and therefore it follows that notwithstanding the
giving of the Law, the Promise stands good for ever; and Righteousness is to be
odtained only by the Faith of Jesus Christ.

From hence we conclude firmly. That the difference between the Law and the
Gospel, assigned by our Divines is most certain and agreeable to the
Scriptures. viz. That. The Law gives Life unto the Just upon Con^ition of
perfect Obedience in all things: The Gospel gives Life unto Sinners upon
Condition, they repent and believe in Christ Jesus. Whence it is plain. That
in the point of Justification these two are incompatible, and that therefore
our minor Proposition stands verified. That Justification by the works of the
Law, makes void the Covenant of Grace. Which Proposition is the same with the
Apostles assertion elsewhere. Gal. 2. 21. If Righteousne: be by the Law Christ
died in vain. and Gal. 5. 4. Ye are abolished from Christ: whosoever are
justified by the Law; ye are fallen from Grace.

By so much more iuiurious are these of the Romish Church unto the Gospel of
Christ, when, by denying this difference, they would confound the Law and
Gospel: and bring us back from Christ to Moses, to seek for our
Justification in the fulfilling of the Moral Law. They would persuade us that
the Gospel is nothing, but a more perfect Law, or the Law perfected by
addition of the Spirit, enabling men to fulfill it; That the promises of the
Gospel be upon this Condition, of fulfilling the Law* with such like stuff.
Their Doctrine touching this point is declared unto us by Bellarmine. Lib 4. de
Iustificat. cap. 3. 4. Where he comes many distinctions between the Law and
Gospel: but will by no means admit of that which our Reformed Divines make to
be the chief. The chief distinction which he conceaues to be between them he
frames thus. The Gospel (says he) is taken in a double sense. 1 Cor. ^.
1. For the Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles by them preached and written;
2. For the Grace of the Holy Ghost given iu the New Testament, which he makes
to be the Law written in our Hearts, the quickening Spirit, the Law of Faith
Charity shed abroad in our Hearts, in opposition to the Law written in stone,
to the dead and killing Letter, the Law of Works, the Spirit of bondage and
fear. Upon this he proceeds to the difference between the Law and the
Gospel. Thus. The Law teaches us what is to be done, the Gospel (if it be
taken for the Grace of the holy Ghost) so it differs from the Law; because it
gains strength to do it: but if it be taken for the Doctrine delivered by
Christ and his Apostles, John 1. 17.
so it agrees with the Law, teaching us, as the Law does, what things are to be
done. This Argument the Jesuit illustrates and proves in three particulars.

1. The Gospel contains, Doctrinam operum, or Leges. For Moral praecepts,
they be the same in the Gospel, that be in the Law; (...). 20.
even those praecepts that seem most Evangelical. ( viz) of loving our
Enemies, witness of this all the writings of the New Testament, wherein every
where we find praecepts, and exhortations to the same virtues, Prohibitions and
dehortations from the same vices, which the Law forbids or commands. So that
for Morals, the Doctrine of the Gospel is but the Doctrine of the Law; newly
(that is) most clearly and fully expounded. Nor is the Gospel in a more
perfect substance: but in Circumstance a more perspicuous Doctrine.

Which, though a Truth, yet is very ridiculouslie proved by the Cardinal out
of. Mat. 5. Nisi abundauerit etc. Unless your Righteousness exceed. What? He
says not the righteousness of the Law and Prophets: but of the Scribes and
Pharisees; ye shall not enter etc. A profound Gloss. (Christ would not add to
the Burden of the Law: but take away from the false gloss of the Scribes and
Pharisees.) Surely good cause had our Savior to tax both the Doctrine of the
Pharisees in interpreting, and their manners in their hypocritical practice of
the Law in outward matters; without inward Obedience; But little Reason was
there that Christ should require of man more perfection then Gods Law required
and it is a fancy to dream of any such meaning, in our Saviors speech.

2 The Gospel contains Comminations, and threatenings as the Law does. Witness
the many woes from Christ's own mouth against the Scribes and Pharisees;
together with those frequent denunciations of Judgment and Damnation to such
as are ungodly, that do not repent and obey the Gospel.

3 Thirdly the Gospel contains promises of Life and happiness: but these
Evangelical promises be not absolute but upon the same Condition, that the
Legal are. ( viz) Cum condition implendae Legis, Cum condition Iustitiae
actualis, and operosae, quae in perfecta Mandatorum obseruatione consistit.
Cap. 2.

This the Jesuit would prove unto us.

1. From that. Math. 5. Unless your Righteousness aboud etc. (that is, in
Bellarmines Construction) so far as, unto the perfect keeping of the Law: you
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. From Mat. 19. 17. Mat. 10. 19. Where Christ speaks to the young man. Asking
him what he should do to be saved. If thou will enter into Life keep the
Commandments. And to the Lawyer. (10. 28.) who asked the like Question he
answers. This do and thou shall live. That is. Fulfill the Law, and thou
shall be saved. In which words they say; That Christ did preach the Gospel,
and showed unto these men the very Evangelical way to Salvation.

3. From the many places of Scripture. Wherein Mortificati^n of Sin, and the
studious practice of Holiness. and Obedience is required of us. As. Romans 8. If
ye mortify the deed's of the flesh by the Spirit: ye shall live. So. Ezekiel
18. 21. If the wicked will return from all his Sins, that he has committed;
and keep all my statutes, and do, that which is lawful and Right: he shall
surely live and not die. With a Number such like places.

4. From the very Tenor of the Gospel. John 13. 17. If ye know those things,
etc.
He that belieueth shall be saved: but he that belieueth not, shall be damned.
John 15. 14. Ye are my friends ^ye do what^uer I com^^d you.
Where we see the Promise of Life is not absolute, but conditional. If we do
such and such works.

From hence the Romanist concludes: That seeing the precepts, threatenings, and
promises of the Gospel, be for matter the same, that those of the Law are: the
true difference between the Law and Gospel shall be this. That the Law
nakedly proposes what is to be done without giving grace to perform it: but
the Gospel not only proposes what is to be done, but withal gives Grace and
strength to do it: and therefore the Law given by Moses the Lawgiver cannot
justify, because it was given without the grace of fulfilling it: but the
Gospel given by Christ the Redeemer does justify, because it is accompanied
with the grace of the holy Ghost, making us able to keep the Law. For which
cause also the Law of Moses is a yoke unsupportable, the Law of ^om 8. 15.
(...) 4. 24. 25.
fear and bondage; because it gives not grace to keep it, but only
conuinceth our Sin, and threatens us punishment: but the Law of Christ, the
Gospel is a light yoke, a Law of love and liberty; because it gives grace to
keep it, and of love to God and man: and so by fulfilling frees a man from
feared punishment.

This is the sum of the Romish Doctrine touching the difference betwixt the
moral Law and the Gospel in the point of Justification, as it is delivered us
by Bellarmine, the rotten pillar of the antichristian Synagogue. Wherein we
have scarce a syllable of distinct Truth: but all perverted by aequiuocations
and gross Ambiguities, as shall appear by a short surucy of the former
discourse. Whereas then he distinguishes the Gospel into the doctrine of
Christ, and his Apostles, and into the Grace of the Holy Ghost: let us follow
him in these two parts.

First for Doctrine. We grant that the Gospel is often so taken: but in this
matter about Justification, this acception, on is too large; and not distinct
enough. For although, by a Synecd^che of the chiefest and most excellent part,
the whole Doctrine and Ministry of Christ and his Apostles with their
successors, be called the doctrine of the Gospel, and Romans 12. 16. At that day
when God shall judge, the secrets of Men by Jesus Christ according to my
Gospel.
the Ministry of the Gospel: yet all things which they preached or wrote, is
not the Gospel properly so called. But as Moses chiefly delivered the Law unto
the Jews, though yet with all he wrote of Christ, and so in part revealed unto
them the Gospel: so Christ and his Ministers, though chiefly they preach the
Gospel, yet in its place they urge the law withal, as that which has its
singular use in furthering our Christian faith and practice. Wherefore when we
speak of the Gospel as opposite to the Law, it is a Jesuitical equivocation to
take it in this large sense. For the whole doctrine of Christ and his Apostles,
preached by them, and written for us in the Book of the New Testament, we
follow the Apostle in his dispute of Justification. Gal. 3. 4. 5. And according
as he does take the Gospel strictly for the promise of Justification and life
made unto man in Christ Jesus. This is in proper terms the Gospel ( viz.)
that special Doctrine touching man's Redemption and reconciliation with God by
the means of Jesus Christ; the Revelation whereof was indeed [(...)] the
gladdest tidings that were ever brought to the ear of mortal man. Which
Gospel in strict tea^rmes the Angels preached. Lue. 2. 10. 11. Behold, I bring
you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people, That unto you is
borne this day in the City of David, a Savior which is Christ the Lord. And
afterward Christ and his Apostles fully explained the mysteries thereof unto
the world. According to this necessary distinction, we answer. That if we take
the Gospel in that large Acception; it is true which Bellarmine has. That the
Gospel contains in it the Doctrine of works ( viz.) the Moral Law, even the
very same precepts, prohibitions, threatenings, and promises which are delivered
in the Law. All which as Christ and his Hpostles preached: so may all Ministers
without blame, yea, they must, if they will avoid blame, press the same upon
their hearers, seasonably and discreetly, that the Law may make way for the
better receiving and entertainment of Grace in the Gospel. But hence it
follows not, that the Gospel properly so taken, is to be confounded as one
and the same thing with the Law; because the Law is conjoined with it in the
preachings and writings of the Ministers of the New Testament. They still are
divided in their Nature and Offices: nor has the Gospel any affinity with the
Law in praecepts, threatenings, or promises. Wherefore when Bellarmine teaches
us. That Evangelical promises be made with condition of perfect fulfilling the
Law. It Is a desperate error, and that in the very foundation. You heard his
proofs before recited: see now a little how passing weak they be.

Mat. 5. Except your righteousness, etc. To this we answer. The plain
meaning of the place is this. Our righteousness must abound more then that of
the Pharisees (that is,) It must not be outside only as theirs was: but inward
Righteousness of the heart, in inward sanctity of the thoughts and affections,
as well as of the outward Action: or else such our hypocrisy will keep us
from entering into Heaven. But does it hence follow, that because we must be
more perfect then these Pharisees, we must be as perfect in all things as the
Law requires: we must exceed them, ergo, equal the holiness of the Law in all
points? Because we must be sincere without hypocrisy, ergo, we must be
perfect in all things without blame? Such consequents as these, the Jesuit has
concluded out of his own head, not out of the text.

Mat. 19. and the Lawyer. Matt. 10. That if they did fulfill the Law, they
should live. We answer, that Christ in so speaking unto them did not preach
the Gospel: but showed unto them the Legal way to Salvation. For these erring
that grand error of the Jew in seeking for righteousness not by faith but by
the works of the Law, seuering the Law, from Christ the end thereof; (as the
Apostle shows. Romans 9. 31. 32. and 10. 3. and so supposing to be saved by
doing some good thing. Christ answers them in their humor, as every one
should be answered, that swells with high conceits of his own righteousness and
works, That there was a Law to be kept: and if they could fully observe the
righteousness of it, they should be saved, sending them of purpose to the Law,
that they might be humbled thereby and see their great folly in seekeing for
life by that, which they were so unable to keep. Against which answer the
Calv. I^st. lib. ^. cap. 18. 9.
Jesuit has nothing to rely; but stands much in confuting of another answer
made by some of our Divines. That Christ spoke these things Ironically. This
Bellar. seeks to confute; nor do I labor to confirm it; though it might be
justified for any thing he brings to the contrary.

3 Unto those those places of Scripture that every where holiness in life and
conversation, that we mortify the lusts of the flesh, walk in the Spirit,
overcome the world, etc.] We answer, that, Obedience is one thing, perfect
obedience is another. We say that the promises of the Gospel be all upon
condition of obedience: but none upon condition of perobedience. It Is an injury
done unto us, when they say; we teach that Evangelical promises be absolute
and without condition, as if God did promise and give all unto us; and we do
nothing for it on our parts. We defend no such dotage. The promises of the
Gospel be conditional (viz.) Namely upon condition of repentance and
amendment of life. That we study to our power to obey God in all things; but
this is such a condition as requires of sincerity and faithfulness of
endeavor, not perfection of obedience in the full performance of every jot and
Tittle of the Law.

Unto the last Argument, from the tenor of the New Covenant That we must
believe if we will be saved; ergo, the promise of the Gospel is with condition
of fulfilling the Law. This is an Argument might make the Cardinals cheek as
red, as his Cap, were there any shame in him. Faith indeed is a work: and this
work is required as a condition of the promise: but to do this work, To
believe, though it be to obey Gods Commandment; yet it is not perfectly to
fulfill the whole Law; but perfectly to trust in him, who brings mercy and
pardon for transgressions of the Law.

CHAP. II.
Of Bellarmines erroneous distinction of the word Gospel.
SO much of the first member of the Jesuits distinction, wherein his
sophistical fraud appears, taking the Gospel for the whole doctrine of the
New Testament, published by Christ and his Apostles, and ergo, confounding the
Law and Gospel as one: because he finds the Law as well as the Gospel
delivered unto us, by our Savior and his Ministers: I proceed to the second
branch of it. The Gospel (says he) is taken for the grace of the holy Ghost
given us in the New Testament: whereby men are made able to keep the Law. It Is
so taken. But where is it so taken? The Jesuit cannot tell you that: [ Vt verum
fatear (says he) nomen Evangelij non videtur in Scripturis uspiam accipi, nisi
pro doctrind,] No good reason for it, in as much as it is evident to all me, that
there is great difference between the doctrine of Man's salvation by the Mercy
of God through the Merits of Christ (which is properly the Gospel) and the
graces of the Holy Ghost bestowed on man in his Regeneration, whereby he is
made able in some measure, to do that which is good. But the fault is not so
much in the name in calling the grace of God in us by the name of Gospel: as
in the mis-interpretation of the matter it self. Wherein two errors are
committed by the Jesuit.

1 In that he makes the grace of the New Testament, to be such strength given
to man: that thereby he may fulfill the Law.

2 In that he says. The Law was given without grace to keep it. In both which
assertions their is ambiguity and Error.

For the first. We grant that grace to do any thing that is good, is given, by
the Gospel, not by the Law. The Law commands: but it gives no strength to
Obey, because it persupposeth that he, to whom the command is given, has, or
ought to have already in himself strength to Obey it. And Ergo, we confess it
freely, that we [ Receive the Spirit not by the works of the Law: but by the
hearing of Faith preached] as it is Gal. 3. 2. The Donation of the Spirit in
any measure whatsoever of his sanctifying graces is from Christ as a Savior,
not as a Lawgiuer. Thus when we agree. That all Graces to do well is given
unto us by the Gospel; but next we differ. They teach that the Gospel gies
such grace unto man, that he may fulfill what the Law commands: and so be
Justified by it. we deny it, and say that Grace is given by the Gospel, to
obey the Law sincerely without hyppocricy: but not to fulfill it perfectly
without infirmities. In which point the Jesuit fails in his proofs which he
brings.

1 Out of those places where contrary Attributes are ascribed to the Law and
Gospel. Unto the Law. That it is [ the ministry 2 Cor. 3. 7.
of death and Condemnation] 2 Cor. 3. 6.
[ Killing Gal. 5. 1.
Letter] that it ( works wrath) that it is a [ Yoke Gal. 5. 1.
of Bondage a [Testament Romans 4. 15. 1 Cor. 15. 56.
bringing forth Childeren unto Bondage]. But unto the Gospel, Gal. 4. 24.
that it is [ The ministry 2 Cor. 3. 6.
of Life] and [ of Reconciliation] 2 Cor 5. 19.
the 2 Cor 3. 6. 7. 17. Gal. 4. 16.
( Spirit that quickens) the ( Testament that brings forth Childeren to
Liberty) which opposition Bellarmine will have to be, because The Law gives
precepts without affording strength to keep them: but the Gospel gives grace
to do what is Commanded. But the Jesuit is here mistaken. These opposite
attributes given to the Law, are ascribed to it in a twofold respect, 1
Inregard of of the punishment which the Law threatens to offenders ( viz.)
Death. In which regard principally the Law is said to be the ministry of Death,
to work wrath, to be not a dead, but a Killing Letter: in as much as being
broken it leaves no hope to the Transgresser: but a fearful expectation of
eternal Death and condemnation of the Law under the Terrors whereof it holds
them in bondage. But on the Contrary the Gospel is the ministry of Life, of
reconciliation of the quickening spirit and of Liberty, because it reueales
unto us Christ in whom we are restored to Life; from the deserved Death and
condemnation of the Law, unto Gods favor, being delivered from the wrath to
come, unto liberty; being freed from slavish fear of Punishment. This is the
chief Reason of this opposition of Attributes. Secondly the next is in regard
of Obedience. In which respect the ministry of the Law is said to be the
Ministry of the Letter written in tabels of stone: but that of the Gospel is
called the ministry of the Spirit which writes the Law in the fleshly tables
of the heart. Because the Law bearely commands: but Ministers not power to
obey; and so is but as a dead Letter without the Virtue of the Spirit. But in
the Gospel grace is given from Christ, who by the Holy Ghost sanctifies the
heart of his Elect, that they may live to Righteousness in a sincere thought
not every way exact conformity to the Law of God. The like answer we give unto
another proof of his.

2 Out of that place (John 1. 17. The Law came by Moses: but Grace and truth by
Jesus Christ.) that is (says Bellarmine) The Law came by Moses without grace
to fulfill it: but grace to keep it, by Christ.

We answer. The true interpretation of these words is this: Moses delivered a
twofold Law, moral and ceremonial. Opposite to these Christ has brought a
twofold privilege. Grace for the moral Law, whereby we understand not only
power given to the regenerate in part to observe this Law, which strength could
not come by the Law it self: but also, much, more Remission of sins
committed against the Law and so our Justification and freedom from the guilt
of sin and course of the Moral Law. Secondly, Truth for the Ceremonial Law
the substance being brought in and the shadows vanished. wherefore the Jesuit
erres greatly in this point, when he makes the grace of the New Testament to
consist in this. That strength is thereby given us to fulfill the Law. The
grace of God in the Gospel is chiefly our Justification and Redemption from
the curse of the Law: and in the next place strength afforded us to Obey the
Law in some measure not perfectly as our Adversaries would have it. In the next
point he erres as much in saying that the Law of Moses was giueu without grace
to obey it. A false assertion. For although the Law of it self give not grace:
yet it is certain that grace was given by Christ even then when Moses published
the Law. Sufficient for the proof hereof are. 1 These excellent properties
ascribed unto the Law of God, as in other places of the old Testament: so
spetially in the Book of the Psalms. And amongst them in the 19. and 119.
Psalms. Where the Law of God is said to ( give light to the ei^s, to convert
the Soul, to rejoice the Heart etc.) which it could not do of it self, had
not the grace of the Holy Ghost being given in these times. without which the
Law could work no such saving Effects. 2 Experienee of those times in the
Faith, Patience, and ^bedience, and all sorts of graces shining in those
ancient Saints (who lived before and after the Law was given. Which graces they
received from the Holy Ghost, shed upon their hearts by virtue of Christ's
mediation, whereby they received strength to live holily in Obedience unto the
Law of God. The difference between these times, and those under the Law, is
not. That we have grace and they had none: but only in the m^asure and extent
of the same grace bestowed, both on us and them. In those times as the Doctrine
of the Gospel was more obscurely revealed: so the grace which acco^panies it was
more sparingly distributed, being confined to to a Church collected of one
nation, and bestowed upon that Church in a lesser measure, then now; though yet
suffitiently in that measure. But in the times of the New Testament, the light
shines more brightly, and grace is dispensed more liberally, being extended
indifferently to all Nations and poured upon the Godly in a larger Abundance:
according as was promised Jeremiah 31. Though also this comparison must be
restrained unto whole Churches, what generally is now done; for no doubt in
many particulars some men under the Law exceed for abundance of Grace, many
under the Gospel. Wherefore it is a notable injury unto the Bounty of God, and
the honor of those Saints of old, to exclude them from partaking of the
Gospel; to affirm that they were led only by the Spirit of Fear, Thou art
our Father
and not of love; that they received not the Spirit of adoption to cry Abba
father as well as we (though not plentifully as we; and so See Beca^^^ Tom.
2. Tract. 4. cap. ^ Quest. 1. 2. 3.
that they were not Sons though under Tutors and governors, as we confess
they were but very Servants held in Bondage and excluded from the inheritance
of Grace, and glory till after Christ's Death. So that at best their adoption
was but conditional with regard of Time to come: but, for the present, they
were handled as slaves feared with temporal punishments allured by temporal
rewards, like a heard of Swine fed with base achors and husks. These be absurd
Errors bred out of Scripture misunderstood. Especially that of John 1. Grace
came by Christ. Ergo, not before Christ's In^arnation. A sily Argument. Christ
is as old as the World and his Grace as ancient, as the Name of Man upon Earth.
grace always came by Crhist, and was in its measure given by him long before
he appeared in the flesh. He was ever the head of his Church, and that his
Body, which he always quickened by the blessed influence of his Spirit
ministered thereunto. Whereby the Godly before as well as since his incarnation
were made living members of that his mystical Body. Wherefore it is apparent,
that grace is not to be tied to the Times of the Gospel and severed from the
Law. Nay, as of old the Law was not always without grace: so now many times
the Gospel it self is without grace Christ himself being a stumbling stone
and rock of offense, the Gospel a Savior of Death to those many upon whom
Grace is not bestowed; to believe and embrace it.

I conclude then. That this difference, with our Adversaries make between the
Law and Gospel is false: and that their Error is pernicious in makind the
Gospel to be nothing, but a Spirit added to the Law that man may fulfill it to
his Justification. That thus a man may be saved by Christ through the perfect
fulfilling of the Law. Which is a monstrous and uncouth Doctrine laying an
unsupportable burden upon the conscience of man and hazarding his soul to
^ternall destruction, whiles by this means he frustrates the Grace of God in
Christ; and withal frustrats his own hopes of life expecting to obtain it by
that Law which he is never able to fulfill.

SECT. 5.
CHAP. I.
Justification by fulfilling the law, overthrows Christian liberty, the parts
of our Christian liberty.
SO much of the Third Argument: The last follows drawn from the Nature of
Christian Liberty. Which is this.

4. Arg. 4. Argument,
That which overthrows our Christian Liberty purchased for us by the death of
Christ: that is no Euangelical, but an Haereticall Doctrine.

But Justification by the works of the Law overthrows the spiritual Liberty
of Man obtained for him by Christ.

Ergo. It Is an Haeresie against the Gospel.

For the proof of the minor Proposition, let us in brief consider wherein
stands that Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, that so we may the
better perceive what part thereof, this doctrine of Justification by works does
nullify and deprive us of. The Liberty we have in Christ is either in regard
of the Life to come, or of this praesent life. The first is the Liberty of
Glory consisting in a fu^l deliverance from that state of vanity and misery,
both sinful and painful, whereunto we are now subject. And not we only, but
the whole Creation, which with us (...), groaneth and trauaileth in pain, till
with us it also be delivered, ((...); From the bondage of Corruption, into the
Glorious liberty of the Sons of God,) as the Apostle declares Romans 8. 19.
and seq. This Liberty we have in hope, not in possession. The next we actually
enjoy in this life, and that is the Liberty of Grace. This we may divide not
unfitly into 3 branches: 1 Freedom from Sin. 2 Freedom from the Law: 3
Freedom from Men.

1 Our Freedom from Sin stands in 2 things; 1 In our deliverance from the
Punishment of Sin. For whereas every Sin of it is own Nature brings with it
guiltines, and a sure obligation unto punishment, binding over the transgressor
unto the pains of God's aeternall wrath by a stronger chain then of Steel or
Adamant: Christ by his meritorious satisfaction has broken these bonds, and
ransomed us from this fearful Bondage unto Hell and destruction. He being
made a Curse for us, has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law. Gal. 3. 13.
That is, By taking on himself the punishment of our Sins, in his own person
suffering, and satisfying the wrath and Justice of God, he has once for ever
set us free from the dreadful vengeance of God, which we deserve should fall
upon us for our Iniquities.

2 In our deliverance from the Power of Sin, which though it abide in us in
the Relics of our corrupted Nature: yet by the power of the Holy Ghost
dwelling in the Hearts of the Regenerate, it is subdued and kept under, that it
does not reign nor exercise it is commanding authority without Control. So
that whereas the Unregenerate be the Servants of Sin, wholly at the command
of Satan and wicked affections, the Regenerate are freed from this slavery
being ruled and guided by the Spirit of the Lord, which wheresoever it is,
there is liberty, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 3. 17. Liberty from that
blindness wherein we are holden by Nature, not knowing what the will of God is.
Liberty from that rebellion and infirmity of our Nature, whereby we are, nor
willing, nor able to do the will of God. From which we are freed in part by
the Spirit of Christ, inlightning our Minds, and changing our Hearts. This
Liberty from Sins dominion and damnation, S. Paul joins together, Romans 8. 2.
( The Law of the Spirit of Life, which is in Christ Jesus, has freed me from
the Law of Sin and of Death.) And again, Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have
Dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace.

2 Our freedom from the Law is either from the Ceremonial or Moral law.

The Ceremonial Law contained in it diverse Carnal Ordinances ((...)) to
endure until the time of reformation. Heb. 9. 10.
From all which Christ has freed the Church of the New Testament, as namely.

1. From the whole burden of Legal ceremonies whatsoever used in the worship
of God. Those resemblances are of no use now, when the substance it self is
come in place: nor may such beggarly and impotent rudiments be sought after,
when greater perfection is to be had. Gal. 4. 9.

2. From that restraint in things indifferent, whereunto the Jews were tied,
but we are not bound. Such are the observations of days, of Meats and
Drinks, of Garments, with the like. Wherein the Jews were rest^ayned: but our
consciences are left free, being taught that every Creature of God is good
being sanctified by Prayer and thanksgiving. 1. Tim. 4. 4. 5. And that to the
1 Ti^. 1. 15.
pure all things are pure. Only this being observed, that we abuse not this
our Liberty, but that as we are informed by Faith that all things are lawful
for us: so we should be taught by charity to see what are expedient in regard
of others. 1 Cor. 10. 23.
That a due regard be had of others infirmity, that nothing be done whereby the
truly weak may be scandalized, as the Apostle commands, Rom 14. 21. By which
^eanes Knowledge on the one side still preserues us, that our consciences be
not i^snared with superstition, and charity on the other side shall keep our
Liberty from degenerating into Licentiousness, and unchristian contempt of our
weak Brethren.

2 Our freedom from the Moral law stands in this, that whereas the Law
requires of every Man, upon strictest terms of Necessity, full and complete
Obedience to all things whatsoever contained in it, if he will avoid the
punishment of Hell fire: Christ has freed all that believe in him from this
heavy and rigorous exaction of the Law, taking away from our Consciences this
obligation unto a necessary fulfilling thereof, upon pain that we shall
forfeit Heaven if we do it not. As we shall see more anon.

3 In the last place our Freedom is from Men: This Liberty from humane
Constitutions binding the Conscience, is (...)
namely from all power and authority they may claim over our consciences: they
may hold our persons in subjection, but they cannot command over our
consciences. We acknowledge no Jurisdiction of Man or Angel over our
Consciences; but only that of God that created us, and of Christ that has
redeemed us. Whosoever ergo shall impose upon Man any humane Traditions,
Opinions, or Ordinations whatsoever to tie his conscience unto obedience by
virtue of his own authority, such a one trenches upon Gods high Praerogatiue,
and usurps tyrannically over the souls of Men, according, as at this day,
that Man of Sin does. But here we must observe that Humane Constitutions be
either Ecclesiastical or Political. Ecclesiastical concern either the
matter and substance of God's and worship when any thing is invented by Man,
and commanded, wherein and whereby to worship God. 2 The Manner and external
order of God's worship in the determination of indifferent circumstances
tending to decency and comeliness.

For the former we renounce and reject all humane authority whatsoever, that
shall without warrant from the Scriptures, prescribe unto the Church any
doctrine to be received as a divine Truth or Custom, Ceremony or Practice
whatsoever, to be observed as a proper part of God's most holy worship.
According as our reformed Churches have happily recovered their Liberty by
breaking asunder those cords, and casting away that Yoke of false doctrine of
Superstitions, ^^r^moniall will-worships, wherewith not Christ, but Antichrist
had ensnared and oppressed the Church. And they have God's own warrant for so
doing, Isay. 29. 13. ratified and explained by Christ, Mat. 15, 9. ( In vain
they worship me, teaching for doctrine Men's precepts:) which was a thing
contrary to God's express commandment, Ezech. 20. 18. ^^. ( Walk ye not in
the ordinances of your Fathers, neither observe their manners, nor defile your
selves with their Idols: I am the Lord your God, walk in my Statutes, and
keep my Judgments and do them.)

For the later, namely humane Constitutions concerning indifferent
Circumstances in God's worship, tending to orderly decency, agreeable to the
simplicity and purity of the Gospel: herein we must acknowledge the authority
of the Church though not over our Consciences to bind them: yet over our
practices to order and limit them. Accordingly as also we do in the other
branch of humane Obediences. viz. Political or civil, comprising all Law,
touching lawful things made for the governance of Kingdoms; or inferior
states by the supreme Magistrate, that has authority so to do. Whereunto we
( must be subject, not because of wrath only, Romans 13. 5.
but also for conscience sake.) For Conscience sake, not because the highest
Monarch on Earth has power over the Conscience of his meanest subject; to
bind it by virtue of his own authority: but because God has established the
Magistrates authority and commanded subjects Obedience in lawful things, and
therefore we cannot disobey them without breach of Conscience, in disobeying
and viol^ting also Gods Commandment. But otherwise for any immediate power
over the conscience, to restrain the inward liberty thereof, no man without
praesumption may arrogate its nor any without slavish baseness yield to another,
1 Cor. (...)
as the Apostle commands ( ye are bought with a price, be not ye servants of
men.) This is in breife the Doctrine of Christian or spiritual l^berty, which
we call Christian: 1. from the cause of it, Christ, by whose purchase we enjoy
it. 2. From the subject of it, Christians, in opposition to the Jews, who had
not this liberty in all parts of it as we have. Namely in freedom from the
Ceremonial Law, and restraint in things indifferent. In all other parts they
in their measure were freed by Christ as well as we. Again we call it
spiritual in opposition to civil and bodily Liberty: because it stands in the
freedom of So^le and Conscience, not in the freedom of the outward man; the
bondage and subjection whereof is no impeachment to this spiritual freedom:
As Anabaptisticall Libertines would persuade the world contrary to the Apostles
decision. 1. Cor. 7. 22. ( He that is called in the Lord being a servant, is
the Lords Freeman.

CHAP. II.
Justification by works subjects us to the rigor and curse of the Law
WE are now in the next place to see which branch of our liberty is cut off by
the doctrine of Justification by works. Not to meddle with others whereat it
gives a backblow, but to take that which it directly strikes at: we say, it
destroies our Liberty from the moral Law, which stands herein, that we are not
obliged unto the perfect fulfilling of that Law, upon pain of aeternall
Daemnation, if we do it not. This gracious liberty Christ has enfranchised us
withal, whosoever believe in him: and they that now teach we are justified by
works of the Law, do rob our Consciences of this heavenly Freedom, bringing
us again under that miserable bondage unto the Law, wherein all men are holden,
which are in state of infidelity and unregeneration, from whom the Law in
extremest rigor exacts perfect Obedience if they will be sau^d.

For the clearing hereof, this in the first place is manifest. That he which
will be justified by the works of the Law, is necessarily tied to fulfill the
whole Law: seeing it is impossible the Law should justify them that transgress
it. In the next place then we must prove, that for a man's Conscience to be thus
tied to the fulfilling of the Law for the obtaining of Justification, is an
unsupportable yoke of spiritual Bondage, contrary to that liberty, wherewith
Christ has made every believer free. This shall appear in confirming of this
Proportion.

A Man regenerate endued with true faith in Christ Jesus, is not bound in
Conscience unto the fulfilling of the whole Law for his Justification.

This Proposition seems very strange unto our adversaries and to be nothing
else but a ground-plot wherein to build all licenciousnes and Libertinisme, as
if we did discharge men of all Allegiance to God and subjection to his Laws.
But their Calumnies are not sufficient confutations of orthodox Doctrine: for
the stopping of their mouths we throw them this distinction, whereon they may
gnaw while they break their teeth, before they bite it in pieces. Man's
conscience stands bound unto the Law of God in a two fold obligation. Either

1. Of Obedience, that according to the measure of Grace received he endeavor
to the utmost of his power to live conformably to the Law of God in all things.

2. Of fulfilling the Law, that in every jot and tittle he observe all things
whatsoever it commands upon pain of everlasting condemnation for the least
transgression.

We teach that no true Believer is freed from the Obligation unto Obedience,
but so far as by grace given him he is enabled, he ought to strive to the
utmost, to perform all duties toward God and man commanded in the Law, if he
will justify his faith to be sound, without Hypocrisy. And ergo our Doctrine
is no doctrine of Licentiousnes. But on the other side we teach, That every
true believer is freed from that obligation unto the fulfilling of the Law, for
the attaining of life and justification by it. Which material difference for
the clearing of our doctrine not observed or rather suppressed by Lib. 4. de
Iustif. cap. 5.
Bellarmine, causes the Jesuit to labor much in a needless dispute, to
prove against us, That a Christian man is tied to the observation of the moral
Law. He tells us that Christ is a Lawgiver as well as a Redeemer of his Church,
praescribing orders for all in common, for each one in particular. That he is a
Judge that sentenceth according to Law. That he is a King that rules over
subjects unto a Law. That Christ by his coming did not destroy, but fulfill
the Law, expounded it and enjoined it to be observed by us. That his Apostles
urge it in every Epistle. That a Christian man sinniug offends against the Law,
and ergo is bound to keep the Law. In all which the Jesuit encounters his
own phantasy and not our doctrine which is not wounded by such misguided
weapons. For we grant without striving, that every Christian is tied to observe
the Moral Law, and we aver that it is a most unchristian and Jesuitical
slander to affirm, as he does, that we teach ( Christianum Ibid (...)
nulli Legi obnoxium and subjectum esse in Conscientia coram Deo.) Nay we teach
that he is bound to obey to the utmost of his power: and from this obligation
no authority of Man or Angel, Pope or Devil, can discharge him. So much we
grant the Arguments alleged by the Cardinal do enforce, and nothing else.
They prove Obedience necessary to a believing Christian: but they can never
prove perfect fulfilling of the Law, to be necessarily required of him. From
this heavy burden Christ has eased the shoulders of all such as are in him by
a lively Faith, of whom God does no longer exact perfect Obedience to his Law
in those strict and rigorous terms. that they shall be accursed if they
fulfill it not. This we prove by these Scriptures.

1. Gal, 1. 2. 3. ( Stand fast (says the Apostle) in the Liberty wherein
Christ has made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of
bondage.) But what is this Yoke of Bondage? Is it only the observation of the
Ceremonial Law? No. That was indeed part of the yoke which the Apostles
sought to lay on the Consciences of the Galatians. But 'twas the least and the
lightest part, the weightiest burden was the fulfilling of the Moral Law,
whereunto by the doctrine of the false Apostles, the Galatians stood obliged.
This is plain by the Text in the words following. ( Behold, I Paul say unto
you that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify
again to every man, which is circumcised, that he is bound to keep the whole
Law) The Apostles dispute is here evident. The Galatians may not be
circumcised, not observe the Ceremonial Law. why? Because if they did Christ
should not profit them at all. But what reason is there for this, that
Circumcision and the Ceremonies should frustrate the benefit of Christ's death?
The Apostle alleges a good reason, because the observation of the Ceremonial
Law, tied them also to the fulfilling of the whole Moral Law. The Argument is
thus framed.

They who are bound to keep the whole Law have no profit at all by Christ.

But they who are circumcised, are bound to keep the whole Law. ergo,

They that be circumcised have not profit at all in Christ.

The minor in this Argument is the express words of the Text, and the proof
of it is evident in Reason, because the retaining of Legal ceremonies did in
effect abolish Christ's coming in the Flesh, who by his coming in the Flesh,
had abolished them. And ergo, they who in reviving them, denied Christ's death,
had no means at all to be saved: but only by the fulfilling of the Moral Law.
Whereunto they were necessarily bound, if they meant not to perish. Which
reason yet is of no force before Christ his coming, and ergo then circumcision
and other legal ceremonies, did not lay upon the Jews such a strict
obligation to fulfill the whole Law. The Mayor Proposition is the very reason
of the Apostles Enthymeme; thus. ( Men circumcised are bound to keep the whole
Law: Ergo, Christ shall not profit them) The Reason of the consequence is this
Proposition, ( Whosoever are bound to keep the whole Law, Christ profits
them nothing at all.) This Argument, and the Reason thereof, will hardly pass
with approbation in the Jesuits Schools, ( Men are bound to the whole Law,
ergo, Christ shall not profit them.) Nay, will they reply: That Is a non
sequitur. For by that doctrine, Christ's death has cancelled that straight
obligation of fulfilling the Law: But every one that believes the promise of
salvation in Christ, is yet notwithstanding obliged to fulfill the whole Moral
law. For this is (say they) the very Condition whereupon he must have benefit
by the promise, even ( Lib. 4. cap. 2.
Perfecta Mandatorum ^bservatio:) and therefore he is so far from being freed
by Christ from this obligation unto the Law, that for a certain, except he
fulfill it, he shall never be saved; as Lib. 4. cap. 7. (Si Promissio vitae
aeternae est conditionata, ut cap. 1. probavimus, certe necessarium est implere
Conditionem, si quis sal^us fieri vel^^. ^^s;^ iustus non est liber ab
ebligatione Legis divine: certe nisi eam impleat ^onsaluabitur,)
Bellarmine peremptorily and bloodily determines. These Men when they list are
wondrous merciful toward Sinners, and can teach them tricks by very easy
means, to merit Heaven and Remission of Sins. But their cruelty betrays
their kindness in other matters; in as much as when all comes to the vpshot, a
Sinner is driven to this. If he will be saved by Christ, he must as he is bound,
perfectly keep the whole: law else there is no hope for him. This is cold
comfort for the poor believer: but it is happy we have not Jesuits, Pharaoh's
taske-masters, set over us, to exact the whole Tale of Brick: but a Jesus, who
has freed our souls from this bitter thraldom and delivered us from the
power of so rigorous and strict commands of the Law. We believe an Apostle of
Christ against all the Sycophants of Rome, and tell them that they give the
holy Ghost the lie, when they teach that in believers the obligation to keep
the whole Law stands still in full force and virtue not discharged by the death
of Christ; directly contrary to this Argument of the Apostle. ( Ye are bound
to keep the whole law, ergo, Christ shall not profit you.) Whence we argue
thus. Whosoever are bound to keep the whole law, to such Christ is
unprofitable.

But unto true believers Christ is not unprofitable. Ergo

True believers are not bound to keep the whole law. A conclusion most
certain, as from these irrefutable praemisses: so from most evident Reason.
For if such as believe in Christ, ( Who through the Spirit wait for the hope
of Righteousness through Faith) as the Apostle speaks here, v. 5; if such be
yet bound to fulfill the whole Law for their Justification, to what end is it
to believe in Christ, unto Righteousness and Justification? If when all is
done we must be saved by doing, what profit comes there by believing? Can the
conscience find any benefit and comfort at all in Christ, when we shall come to
this woeful Conclusion; that notwithstanding there is in Scripture much talk
of Faith, of Christ, of Promises, of Grace; yet all this will bring us no
commodity, except this condition be performed on our parts, If the Law still
rule over us as servants requiring the praescribed task: or else shaking the
Whip, and threatening stripes, and not as over son commanding Obedience.
that we perfectly keep the Law of God: If any thing in the World, this is to
imprison the soul in wretchlesse slavery, and to lay the conscience upon the
rack of continual Terrors, if Heaven be not to be had but upon such hard
terms. And this is most apparantlie to frustrate all benefit of Christ, of
Promise, of Faith, of Grace, of the whole work of Redemption, seeing in fine
it is the Law that we must live by, and not by Faith: the perfect fulfilling of
the Law must make us righteous in God's sight: and not our believing in Christ,
that we may be justified. For he that keeps the whole Law, is thereby
righteous, and by nothing else. Here it is but a bare shift to say, Though we be
bound to fulfill the Law; yet Christ profits us, because he gives us Grace to
perform our Band in exact Obedience. This evasion might it stand good, Saint
Paul were indeed finally confuted as a weak disputant. But the Error of this
has bin touched before, and if nothing else were said, this Apostolical
Argument is sufficient to refute it. I proceed to other Scriptures.

2. 1 Timothy 1. 9. ( Ye know that the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully;
knowing this, that the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the
lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly, for Sinners, for unholy, and
profane, etc.) The Law is not given to the Righteous. How must this be
understood? Is it not given ( quoad directionem) as a Rule prescribing what is
to be done, what is not to be done? Yes, we all agree in that. How is it then
not given? It Is ansvvered, ( quoad coactionem and maledictionem) as it compels
to obedience, and curses the Transgressors. Thus is it not given to the Just.
This answer is full of ambiguitie, and needs some explication, that we may
know what is the coaction or compelling force of the Law, from which the
Just are freed. In unfolding whereof our adversaries and we differ. Whether
are in the right, we shall see by the proposal of both our Interpretations. They
say, ( The Law has no coactiue or compelling power over the Just, because the
Just do obey it, spoute, libenteer, and alacriter, and ex instinctu
charitatis) that is, willingly, out of Love: but it has a compulsiue force
over the unjust, because they recalcitrant and cogi quodammodo debent ad
obsequium) that is, they obey vnvvillinglie, being forced to it by Terrors and
Threatenings, and therefore; The law rules not over the just, as servants who
obey for fear: but sons who obey for Love.

We expound it otherwise. The Law has not coactiue power over the just,
because the just (that is) true believers in Christ Jesus, are freed from the
necessity of perfectly fulfilling it, for the obtaining of salvation. But the
Law has a coactiue power over the unjust and unbelievers, because they are
obliged unto the perfect fulfilling thereof, or else to be certainly accursed.
And ergo we say, the Law command's over the just as over Sons requiring of
them a faithful and willing endeavor: but it commands over the unjust, as
over Servants, of whom it exacts the uttermost farthing, and upon the legal
default threatens eternal malediction. The difference then betwixt them and
us, is this. They make the coaction of the Law to consist in the manner or
quality of man's obedience to it. The Law compels when men obey unwillingly. We
make the coaction of the Law to consist in the quality of the command, and
condition, whereupon Obedience is required. The Law then compels, when it
exacts full obedience upon poenalty praecisely threatened to the disobedient.
Wherein the truth is manifestly on our side. For it is plain, that compulsion
in a Law must be taken in opposition to direction, not persuation, for Laws
persuade not, but command. For if we speak properly a Law cannot be sai'd to
compel those, to whom it is given, as if by any real and physical operation it
did enforce them to obedience. So a King in under the Direction: not the
Compulsion of the law; because not tied to the Penalty.
It proposes what is to be done, it sets before a man, the punishment for
disobedience: but it works not on the will of man, to force it one way, or
other. Wherefore if we know what direction in a Law is; we shall soon know
what Compultion is. Direction (as all agree) is the bare praescription, of what
is to be done, or left undone. Compulsion, that is, the exaction of obedience
upon paenalty to be inflicted. What other coactiue force there is in a Law, no
man can imagine. Well then to apply this. The just are sub directione Legis:
but not sub coactione. This must of necessity be understood thus, the just are
not under the coactiue power of God's Law, ^^cause it does not exact of them
full obedience upon paenalty of aeternall death, to be otherwise inflicted on
them. As it does exact of the unjust. For otherwise there will be no difference
between the just and the unjust in regard of this coactiue power of the Law,
if both the one and the other be obliged to yield, alike, perfect obedience
upon the like paenalty. In this case the Law will be as coactine to one, as the
other, exacting aequall obedience, upon aequall terms, both of the just and
unjust. (viz) obey fully in all things: or you shall be cursed. The Son and
Servant shall be all one, and the Law shall still command, over the children,
with as much terror, as over the Bondslaue. There is no difference in the
world; in our adversaries doctrine, both sorts are bound to obey perfectly, or
else certainly they shall not be saved. So that the Law of itself shall be as
rigorous toward one; as the other. But we know the Scriptures offer unto us
more mercy: and that Christ has discharged us from this rigor of the Law,
under which every one, that is out of him in the state of unbelief is holden
in bondage. As to the difference they make ( the just obey willingly, the
unjust unwillingly, and ergo the Law compels these and not those) this is
nothing to the purpose. For it alters not the nature of the Law, that it is
obeyed with diverse affections. The Law is the same, for its command and
authority; howsoever it be obeyed willingly or unwillingly; that matters not.
The Law cease not to be coactiue, because it is willingly obeyed: even as a
slave cease not to be under the coaction and compelling power of his Master,
though he love his master; and out of a willing mind be content to abide in
thraldom. And as Adam, though he obeyed the Law willingly; yet was under the
coactiue power of it; because he was tied to obey it, or else he should
certainly die the death for his transgression of it. Wherefore I conclude, that
the just are not freed from the Laws direction, nor from the Laws compulsion,
as it compels or enioynes them absolute obedience in all things, and for
default thereof threatens the vnauoydeable malediction of Gods aeternall wrath.

3 Lastly for proof of this point we have those places formerly alleged, Romans
6. 14. [ We are not under the Law, but under Grace.] Gal. 5. 18. [ If we be led
by the spirit, we are not under the Law.] cum v. 11.
2 Cor. 3. 17. [ Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord
is, there is Liberty.] Gal. 3. 13. [ Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of
the Law, being made acurse for us.] All which, with Romans 7. 1. 2. etc.
other the like, do establish this orthodoxe Doctrine; That believers have
ohtained freedom by Christ, from the rigor of the Moral Law, and are not any
longer bound in conscience to the perfect fulfilling thereof upon this assured
peril: that if they keep it not, they shall not be saved. We might stand
longer upon each Testimony: but let that which we have said, suffice for the
vindicating of our conscience from that Torture and Bondage wherewith these
^^opish Doctors would ensnare us. The knowledge of which our Liberty, is not to
give us occasion of security or licentiousness, as these Men calumniate: but
to restore peace and spiritual rest unto our souls, knowing that we are now
delivered from the necessity of obeying, or of perishing, which before we were
in Christ, lay more heavy upon our souls then a mountain of Lead. That so
being freed from this thraldom, we might serve him who has freed us,
thankfully, and chearefully, obeying him in all duty, by whom we have obtained
this glorious privilege; that whereas perfect obedience was sometimes strictly
exacted of us: now our sincere, though imperfect endeavors, shall be mercifully
accepted at our hands.

SECT. 6.
CHAP. I.
The reconciliation of that seeming opposition, between S. Paul, and S. James
in this point of Justification.
THus much of this Argument and of the first Branch of man's Righteousness,
whereby if it were possible he should be justified. viz. His Obedience to the
Law of God. By which means we have showed, no flesh shall be justified in Gods
sight. We are to proceed unto the text branch hereof. 2 Conclusion.
viz. Man's satisfaction for his transgression of the Law. Wherein we have also
to prove, that a Sinner cannot be acquitted before god's judgment seat, by
pleading any satisfaction, that himself can make for his offenses.

But in our passing unto that point we are to give you warning of that
stumbling stone which St. James, (as it may seem) has laid in our way: lest
any should dash his Faith upon it; and fall, as our adnersaries have done into
that Error of Justification by works. That blessed Apostle, in the second
Chapter of his Epistle, seems not only to give occasion: but directly to teach
this doctrine of Justification by works. For in the 21. ver. etc. He says
expressly, that Abraham was justified by works when he offered his son
Isaac upon the altar; and also that Rahab was in like manner justified by
works, when she entertained the spies. Whence also he sets down ver. 22. a
general Conclusion. That a Man is justified by works and not by faith alone.
Now in show, nothing can be spoken more contrary to St. Paul his Doctrine in
his Epistle to the Romans and elsewhere. For in the fourth chap. speaking of
the same example of Abraham, he says clean contrary, that Abraham was not
justified by works, for then he might have boasted. ver. 2. And in the 3 chap.
treating generally of man's Justification, by faith; after a strong dispute he
draws forth this conclusion. That a man is justified by Faith without the
works of the Law. v. 28. Which Conclusion is in appearance contradictory to
that of St. James. This harsh discord between these Apostles seems unto some
not possible to be sweetened by any qualification, who knowing that the Holy
Ghost never forgets himself have concluded that if the spirit of truth spoke
by St. Paul it was doubtless the spirit of error, that spoke by the author of
this Epistle of James. For this cause most likely it was doubted of in ancient
times, as Hist. Eccl. 2. cap. 22. (...).
Eusebius and Hier^me witness. But yet then also publicly allowed ((...)) in
many Churches, and ever since received in all: Out of which for the same cause
Luther and others of his followers, since him would again throw it forth,
accounting the author of it to have built not gold and silver; but straw and
stubble upon the foundation. Erasmus assents to Luther. And Musculus agrees
with them both, who in his Commentaries upon the fourth to the Romans, speaks
his mind simply, that he sees not how James and Paul can agree together, and
therefore he turns out St. James for the wrangler, supposing that this James
was one of the Desciples of James the Apostle, the brother of Christ, who under
pretense of his Master's name and authority, continually snarled at the Apostle
Paul, and opposed his Doctrine. Howbeit his Epistle got credit in after times,
( cum veritas paulatim inualescente mendacio proculcari caeperit.) That is.
When error by degrees praevailed against the truth. But this medicine is worse
then the disease, and is rather violence, then skill, thus to cut the knot
where it cannot be readily untied. A safer and milder course may be holden;
and some means found out for the according of this grand difference without
robbing the Church of so much precious Treasure, of divine knowledge, as is
stored up in this Epistle. Wherefore both they of the Romish and we of the
reformed Churches, admitting this Epistle for canonical do each of us search
after, a fit reconciliation between the Apostles. But they and we between our
selves are irreconcilable in our several reconcileations of them. They
reconcile them thus. By distinguishing. 1. of Justification. 2 of Works.
Justification (say they) of two sorts.

1. The first when a man of unjust is made just and holy, by the Infusion of
Grace, or the Habit of Charity.

2. The 2. When a man of just is made more just by the augmentation of the
Habit of Grace first given unto him.

Again they divide works into two sorts.

1. Some go before Faith, being performed by the mere strength of nature, and
free will without the help of grace; and such works as these are not
meritorious.

2. Some follow Faith, being performed by the aid and assistance of grace
given unto man: and such works as these be meritorious.

These distinctions praepared, the work is now ready for the soddering, which
they finish artificially glewing together the proposition of the two Apostles
in this sort. St. Paul says that Abraham, and all men are justified by Faith
without works. This (say they) is to be understood of the first Justification,
and of works done before Faith, without grace, by the strength of nature. So
that the meaning of Paule's proposition (Abraham and all men, are justified by
faith without works is this. Neither Abraham, nor any other can deserve the
Grace of Sanctification, whereby of unjust and unholy they be made just and
holy, by any works done by them, when they are Natural Men, destitute of
Grace, but only by Faith in Christ Jesus, or thus. No Man merits Grace to make
him a good Man of a Bad, by any thing he does before he believe in Christ; but
by believing he obtains this. On the other side S. James says, that (Abraham
and all others are justified by Works, not by Faith only.) This ( say the
Romanists) is meant of the second Justification, and of such works as are done
after Faith, by the aid of Grace: So the meaning of the Proposition shall be
this. Abraham and other Men being once made good and just, deserve to be made
better, and more just by such good works as they perform through the help of
Grace given unto them; and not by faith only. Being once sanctified, they
deserve the increase of Sanctification through that merit of their Faith, and
good works out of Faith and Charity.

Is not this difference between these Apostles finely accorded think you? They
will now walk together being in this sort made friends through the mediation
of the Schoolmen. But it is otherwise. They are so far from reconciling them,
that they have abused them both, and set them farther asunder making them
speak what they never meant. Neither in S. Paul nor S. James is there any
ground at all, whereon to raise such an interpretation of their words. And
therefore we respect this reconcilement, as the shifting quercke of a
Scholeman's brain, that has no footing at all in the text. Which we do upon
these Reasons.

1. That distinction of Justification (that is of Sanctification) into the
first giving of it, and the after increase of it, (howsoever tolerable in other
matters) is utterly to no purpose, as it is applied unto the doctrine of these
Apostles. Who when they speak of Justification of a sinner in God's sight do
understand thereby the Remission of Sins through the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, and not the infusion, or increase of inherent Sanctity in the
soul of man. This confusion of Justification with sanctification is a prime
error of our adversaries in this article, as has bin showed, in clearing the
acceptions of the word Justification: and shall be showed more at large in
handling the form of our Justification,

2. The distinction of Justification taken in their own sense, is falselie
applied to St. James as if he spoke of the 2. Justification, and to St. Paul as
if he spoke of the first. For first Lib. 4 de Just. cap. 18. Lorin (...) Iac.
Bellarmine himself being judge St. James in the example of Rahab speaks of
the first Justification, because (as he says) she was then, at the first made
a believer of an infidel a righteous woman of an harlot. And again Paul, he
speaks of the 2. Justification in the example of Abraham, which is alleged by
both the Apostles. Here Is then a confusion instead of a distiction. Paul
speaks of the first, James speaks of the 2. and yet both do speak of both
Iustifications. Again when they say James speaks of the second Justification,
whereby of just a man becomes more just, it is a groundless imagination for
as much as it was to no purpose for the Apostle James to treat of the second
Justification, whereby men grow better: when those Hypocrites, with whom he had
to do, had erred from their first justification, whereby they were not, as
yet, made good, as the learned Iackson of lust. Faith. S. 2. cap. 6.
Iackson observes. Nay there is not in all St. James his dispute, any s^llable,
that may give any just suspicion that by Justification, he means the increase
of inhaerent Justice. Leeo supra ^^tat.
Bellarmine catches at the clause. v. 22. ( By works Faith was made perfect)
which is, in the Jesuits construction, Abraham's inhaerent justice, begun by
faith, received increase and perfection by his works) But this is only the
Jesuits frenzy. Abraham his faith and his Righteousness, whereof his Faith is
but a part, was not made but declared to be perfect, by so perfect a work)
which it brought forth, as even Lorinus another of that sect expounds it
orthodoxly.

3 Thirdly, that distinction of works done before Faith, without grace, and
after Faith by grace, is to as little purpose, as the former; in this matter of
our Justification. Heretofore we have touched upon that distinction and showed
the vanity thereof, in limiting St. Paul to works done without grace, when
simply he concludes all works from our Justification. And St. James though he
require works of grace to be joined with that Faith which must justify us:
yet he gives them not that place and office in our Justification, from which
Paul does exclude them, and wherein our adversaries would establish them, as it
shall appear anon.

Leaving then this sophistical reconcilement coined by our adversaries I come
to those reconciliations which are made by our divines; wherein we shall have
better satisfaction upon better grounds. Two ways there are whereby this
seeming difference is by our Men reconciled.

1. The 1. by distinguishing the word (^ Justification) which may be taken
either 1, For the absolution of a Sinner in Gods judgment. 2, For the
declaration of a man's Righteousness before men.

This distinction is certain and has its ground in Scripture which uses the
word Justify in both acceptions, for the quitting of us in Gods sight, and for
the manifestation of our innocence before man against accusation or suspicion
of faultines. They apply this distinction for the reconciling of the two
Apostles. Thus. St. Paul speaks of Justification, (in foro Dei) S. James
speaks of Justification ( in foro hominis) A man is justified by faith without
works says S. Paul: that is in God's sight, a man obtaines remission of
Sins and is reputed just only for his Faith in Christ, not for his works
sake. A man is justified by works; and not by Faith only says S. James that
is, in man's sight we are declared to be just by our good works, not by our
Faith only: which with other inward and invisible Graces, are made visible
unto man only in the good works, which they see us perform. That this
application is not unfit for to reconcile this difference, may be showed by the
parts.

1. For S. Paul, it is agreed on all sides that he speaks of man's justification
in God's sight. Romans 3. v. 20.

2. For S. James we are to show that with just probability he may be understood
of the declaration of our Justification and righteousness before men. For proof
whereof the Text affords us these reasons.

1. Verse. 18. Show me thy Faith without thy Works and I will show thee my
Faith by my works. Where the true Christian speaking to the Hypocritical
boaster of his Faith, requires of him a declaration of his faith and
Justification thereby, by a real proof, not a verbal profession, promising
for his part to manifest and approve the truth of his own Faith by his good
works. Whence it appears, that before man, none can justify the soundnes of
his Faith: but by his works thene proceeding. 2. V. 21. Abraham is said to be
justified when he offered up his son Isaak upon the Altar. Now it is manifest
that Abraham was justified in Gods sight long before; even. 25. years Genesis 15.
6. Therefore by that admirable work of his in offering his Son he was
declared before all the world to be a just man and a true Believer. And for
this purpose did God tempt Abraham in that trial of his Faith: that thereby
all believers, might behold a rare pattern of a lively and justifying Faith,
and that Abraham was not without good cause called the Father of the Faithful.

3. V. 22. It is said that Abraham's faith wrought with his work and by works
was his faith made perfect. Which in the judgment of popish Lor^^ in lacob.
Expositors themselves, is to be understood of the manifestation of Abraham's
faith by his works. His Faith directed his works: his works manifested the
power and perfection of his Faith.

It is not then without good probability of Reason, that Calvin and other
Expositors on our side, have given this solution unto this doubt. Lib. 4 cap.
18.
Bellarmine labors against it and would feign prove that justification cannot
be taken here pro declaratione Iustitiae. But his Argument cannot much trouble
any intelligent reader, and therefore I spare to trouble you with his sophistry.

This now is the first way of reconciling the places. Howbeit the truth is,
that although this may be defended against any thing that our adversaries
objected to the contrary: yet many and those very learned divines chose rather
to tread in another path and more nearly to press the Apostles steps; whom
also in this point ^ willingly follow.

2 The second way then of reconciling these places, is by distinguishing of the
word ( Faith) which is taken in a doubled sense.

1. First for that Faith, Gal. 5. 6.
which is true and living ((...), Faith which works through love) and is
fruitful in all manner of Obedience.

2. Secondly for that Faith which is false and dead, being only a bare
acknowledgment of the truth, of all Articles of Religion accompanied with an
outward Formality of Profession: but yet destitute of sincere Obedience.

This distinction of this word ( Faith) is certain by the Scriptures, as has
heretofore bin showed in handling of that Grace. Our Men now apply it thus. S.
Paul when he affirms that we are justified by Faith only, speaks of that
Faith which is true and living working by Charity. S. James when he denies a
Man is justified by Faith only, he disputes against that Faith which is false
and dead, without power to bring forth any good works. So that the Apostles
speak no contradictions, where Paul teaches we are justified by a true Faith,
and S. James affirms we are not justified by a false Faith. Again S. Paul
says we are not justified by works. S. James says we are justified by
Works. Neither is here any contradiction at all. For S. James understands by
Works, a ( working Faith) in opposition to the idle and dead Faith
before-spoken of ( by a Metonymie of the Effect.) Whence it is plain that
these two Propositions (We are not justified by Works) which is Paul's, and (
We are justified by a working Faith) which is James, do sweetly consort
together. Paul seuers Works from our Justification, but not from our Faith.
James joined Works to our Faith, but not to our Justification. To make this a
little plainer by a similitude or twain: There is great difference between
these two sayings, ( A Man lives by a Reasonable soul) and ( A Man lives by
Reason.) The former is true, and shows us what qualities and power are
ess^ntiall unto that soul, whereby a Man lives. But the later is false,
because we live not by the quality, or power of Reason, though we live by that
soul which has that quality necessarily belonging to it, without which it is
no humane soul. So also in these Propositions, ( Planta vivit per animan^
auctricem) and ( Planta vivit per augmentationem) each Puny can tell that the
former is true, and the other false. For although in the Vegetative soul
whereby Plants live, there be necessarily required to the ( Being) of it,
those 3 faculties of Nourishment, Growth, and Procreation: yet it is not the
faculty of growing that gives life unto Plants, for they live when they grow
not. In like manner. These two Propositions ( we are justified by a working
Faith) and ( We are justified by Works) differ much. The first is true, and
shows unto us what qualities are necessarily required unto the ( Being) of
that Faith, whereby the Just shall live. Namely, that beside the power of
believing in the Promise, there be also an Habitual Pronnesse and Resolution
unto the doing of all good Works, joined with it. But the later Proposition is
false. For although true Faith be equally as apt to work in bringing forth
Universal Obedience to God's will; as it is apt to believe and trust
perfectly unto God's promises: yet nevertheless we are not justified by it as
it brings forth good Works; but as it embraces the promises of the Gospel.
Now then James affirms that which is true, that ( We are justified by a
working Faith,) and S. Paul denies that which is false: viz. ( That we are
justified by works.

CHAP. II.
The confirmation of the Orthodoxe reconciliation of S. Paul and S. James, by a
Logical Analysis of S. James his disputation in his second Chapter.
THis Reconciliation is the fairest, and has the most certain grounds in the
text. It will, I doubt not, appear so unto you, when it shall be cleared from
these Cavils that can be made against it. There are but only two things in it
that may occasion our Adversaries to quarrel. The first is touching the word (
Faith) we say that S. James speaks of a false and counterfeit Faith. They say
he speaks of that which is true, though Dead without Works. This is one
point. Bell. lib. 1. de ^ust. cap 15.


The second is touching the interpretation of the word ( Works) used by S.
James when he says, ( We are justified by Works.) This we interpret by a
Metonymie of the Effect for the Cause, We are justified by a working Faith, by
that Faith which is apt to declare and show it self in all good Works. This
interpretation may happily prove distastefull to their nicer Palates, who are
very ready when it fits their humor, to grate sore upon the bare words and
letter of a Text. These cauils removed, this reconciliation will appear to be
sure and good. For the accomplishment of this I suppose nothing will be more
commodious, then to present unto you a brief resolution of the whole dispute
of S. James touching Faith, that by a plain and true exposition thereof we may
more easily discover the cauils and sophistical forgeries wherewith our
Adversaries have pestered this place of Scripture. The disputation of S. James
begins at the 14. v. of the second Chapt. to the end thereof.

The scope and sum whereof is. A sharp reprehens^ion of hypocritical Faith
of vain Men as they are called (v. 20) Which in the Apostles time under
pretense of Religion thought they might live as they list. Two extremes there
were, whereunto these Jews, to whom the Apostle writes, were misled by false
teachers and their own corruptions. The 1. That notwithstanding Faith in
Christ; they were bound to fulfill the whole Law of Moses; Against which Paul
disputes in his Epistle to the Gal. who also were infected with that Leven. The
other was, that Faith in Christ was sufficient without any regard of Obedience,
to the Law: so they believed the Gospel, acknowledging the Articles of
Religion for true, and made an outward profession all should be well, albeit in
the mean Time Sanctity and sincere Obedience were quite neglected. The former
Error brought them in Bondage: this made them licentious pleasing haeresie if
any other, whereof there were and will be always store of sectaries who
content themselves to have a form of Godliness, but deny the power thereof.
Against such hypocrites and vain Boasters of false Faith and false Religion, S.
James disputes in this place, showing plainly that such men leaned on a staff
of Reed, deceiving their own selves with a counterfeit and shadow of true
Christian Faith instead of the substance. The reproof with the maine Reason is
expressed by way of interrogation in the (14. v.) What does it profit my
Brethren, though a Man say he have (as many then did, and always will say,
boasting falselie of that which they have not in truth,) And have not works;
that is, Obedience to God's Will, whereby to approve that Faith he boasts of?
Can that Faith save him? so that Faith without Works a saving Faith, that
will bring a Man to Heaven? These sharp Interrogations must be resolved into
their strong Negations. And so we have these two Propositions. 1 Containing
the maine sum of the Apostle's dispute: The other a general Reason of it.
The Arg. of S. James.
is this. Faith without Obedience is unprofitable. The second proving the
first, is this. Faith without Obedience will not save a Man. The whole
Argument is.

That Faith which will not save a man is unprofitable, of no use.

But the Faith which is without Obedience will not save: Ergo

Faith without Obedience is unprofitable.

The Mayor of this Argument will easily be granted. That it is an
v^pro^itable Faith which will not bring a Man to life and Happiness. But how
does S. James prove the Minor. That a Faith without works will not do that?
though it scarce need any proof* yet because hypocrisy is ever armed with
sophistry, for a plainer Conviction, the Apostle proves it by this manner of
Argumentation.

That Faith which saues a Man is a true Faith.

But a Faith without works is not a true Faith. Ergo

A Faith without works will not save a Man.

The Maier is evident to all that have Reason. The Minor S. James proves by
diverse Arguments.

1. The first is contained v. 15. 16. 17. and it is drawn ^ pari, from
comparison with another like virtue. Namely Charity toward the poor. The
Argument is thus. If Charity toward the poor professed in Words, but without
works be counterfeit, then Faith in God professed in like manner without
Obedience is also counterfeite not true. But Charity toward the poor in words
professed without deeds is a counterfeit Charity. Ergo, Faith in God without
Obedience is a counterfeit and false Faith.

The Reason of the mayor Proposition is evident, from the similitude that is
between all Virtues and Graces. There is no virtue, but men may counterfeit
and falsely arrogate it to themselves; as they may boast of a false Faith, so
also (as Solomon and experience speaks) of a false Liberality, false Valor,
false Prudence, etc. Now there is but one way to discover this counterfeiting
in any kind, and that is to go from words to works, from praesumptions and
boastings to actions. This way all count most certain, nor will any man
believe words against works, or be persuaded by fair speeches, that the
habites of virtues and graces be truly seated in his mind, whose tongue tells
us they be so: but his doeings confute his sayings. Wherefore the Apostle in
his comparison proceeds on an undeniable ground. Now for the minor ( that the
Charity which is rich in good words, and poor in almesdeeds, is not true but
counterfeit pity) the Apostle shows by an ordinary instance ( If a brother or
sister be naked, and destitute of daily food) that is. If a beleiuing Christian
want food and raiment or other necessaries ( and one of you say unto them,
depart in peace, and be ye warmed and filled) If he give him kind words, Alas
poor soul I pity thee and wish thee well, I Would I had to give thee, go in
God's name where thou may be releiued, and so let him pass with a few
pitiful Complements, notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are
needful for the body: what does it profit. Is the poor man's back ever the
warmer? or his belly the ^^ller, with a few windy complements? Can such a man
persuade any that he has in him indeed the bowels of mercy and compassion
toward the needy, when they find such cold entertainment at his Gates: It Is
manifest that this is but a mere mockery, and that such pitiful words come
not from a heart that is truly merciful. The Apostle now applies this touching
Charity, unto Faith. v. 17. Even so Faith if it have not works is dead being
alone. As that Charity, so also that Faith which men profess without Obedience
is false and fained, and therefore unprofitable to save a man. It is dead: How
must this be understood? Faith is a quality of the soul, and qualities are
then said to be dead, when they are extinguished. As if we should say such a
man's Charity is dead; it is because he has lost it; that which was in him is
abolished. But this is not the meaning. For then when St. James says that
Faith is dead being alone: his meaning should be that Faith severed from
works, is no Faith at all: but quite extinguished. Now this is not so. For
there is a Faith severed from works in Hypocrites, Haeretiques, Reprobates and
Devils. Which Faith is a general assent to all divine truths: and this Faith
in them has a true being, but no saving use. Wherefore. it is called ^ dead
faith in regard of the effect: because it is nothing availeable to bring them in
whom it is, to Life and Salvation as a true and liu^ng Faith is. Here our
Adversaries have much strange Contemplation, telling us that Faith without
works though it be a dead Faith, yet it is a true Faith. Even as an Instrument
is a true Instrument, though it be not used. So that in their Philosophy it is
one and the same true Faith which is dead without, and living with works. Even
as it is one and the same Body which lives with the Soul and is dead without
it: or as water is the same whether it stand still in a Cisterne or run in a
River. Whence they proceed to discourse that Charity is the form of Faith: and
conclude that it is not the inward and Essential form of it, as the Soul is
the form of a man (for that works are not essential to Faith) nor the
accidental form as whitenes is of Paper; because Faith according to their
Schools, is in the understanding, and Charity in the will* But it is the
external Form of it, because it gives to Faith a merit and worthiness for the
deserving of Heaven. These fond speculations of the Form and merit of Faith I
pass by now, having touched upon them heretofore. To that which they say.
That a living Faith, and a dead Faith is one and the same true Faith: it is
utterly false, they differ as much as Light and Darkness. 1. In their subject. a
dead Faith is in the Reprobate Men and Devils. A living Faith only in the
Elect. 2. In their Object. A dead Faith assents to divine Revelations as barely
true or good only in the general: a living Faith assents to them, as truer
and better in themselves; then any thing that can be set against them. 3, in
their Nature. A dead Faith is no sanctifying Grace: but a common gift of
Creation as in the devil; of ordinary illumination as in Reprobate Men. A
living Faith is a sanctifying Grace, a part of inhaerent holiness wrought in the
heart by the special power of the Holy Ghost. All which have bin heretofore
cleared in handling the Nature of Faith. Wherefore unto those arguments or
Sophismes rather, which Lib. 1. de Just. cap. 15.
Bellarmine brings to prove that James speaks of a true divine, infused,
Catholic, Christian Faith, though it be dead faith; I answer breifely. That
we grant a dead Faith to be a true Faith: but it is in its kind. Because it
has a true being in men and devils, in whom it is, and it is directed toward
true objects: But it is not that true Faith which is Catholic Christian and
saving. This is of another kind, and in comparison of this, that other is but a
mere shadow and counterfeit resemblance of true Faith. Wherefore when those
Hypocrites accounted themselves to have that faith which is truly Christian
and saving, S. James shows them, that this their faith which was alone naked
of Obedience, was nothing so: but a Faith of another kind, a dead faith, having
only a false show of a true and living faith. This of the first Argument.

2 The 2d Arg. of S. James.
Argument is contained. v. 18. being drawn from an impossibility, in proving
the truth of it. The Argument stands thus.

That Faith, which is truly Christian may be shown and proved so to be.

But a Faith without works cannot be demonstrated to be a true faith.

Ergo. A Faith without works is no true Faith.

The major is omitted as most evident of itself. Because there is no moral
virtue, or grace of the Holy Ghost truly planted in the heart: but it may be
known by some external Actions, which it is apt to bring forth. Even as life
is known by breathing, or beating of the Pulse. The truth of an invisible
Grace has it is demonstration in visible works. But now for the Minor, S.
James proves that Faith without Obedience cannot appear by any proof to be
true faith. Which he does in a Dialogue between a true believer and a
Hypocrite. Yea a man may say, thou have Faith, and I have Works show me thy
faith without works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. That is. Thou
say thou have a true Faith, though thou have no works: I say I have true
faith because I have works. Come we now to the trial, and let it appear who
says true, thou or I. If thou say true; prove thy Faith by something or
other to be true. Show me thy Faith (...) or (...) not (...). The former
reading is most agreeable to the Art gument of the Apostle* So the
Syriack-Beza, the Vulgar, the French, our last Translators. Pareus ^ollowes the
other reading (...). and so Piscator. But they give no good reason of this she
is so doing. The change was easy from (...) into (...).
without thy wotkes. Works thou have none, whereby to show thy faith, make it
then appear by something else. But that is impossible. Where works are
wanring, there is no demonstration else whereby to justify the truth of faith.
And therefore thou art driven to confess that thou vainly boastest of that
which thou have not. But on the otherside (says the true Believer) I can make
good, that which I say, proving that my faith is true by my works. I will show
thee my faith by my works. My sincere Obedience is a real demonstration: that
my belief is no verbal ostentation and vain bragg. This proof of S. James
is very con^incing, and gripes the Consciences of Hypocrites, smiting them with
shame and confusion when they come to this trial; and so have their false and
fraudulent hearts laid open. But here it will be asked what works do
demonstrate the truth of faith, and also how they do prove it. Whereto we
answer Works are of two sorts. 1. Ordinary, such works of Sanctity and
Obedience, as are required to a holy Conversation. 2. Extraordinary. viz,
Miracles. We say S. James understands the former, and those only: our
adversaries conclude both. But erroneously, for as much as S. James speaks not
of the doctrine of faith, but of the Grace of faith. The Grace requires good
works of Piety and Charity as perpetually necessary for the conmirmation of
it is Truth. So does not the doctrine of Faith always require Miraculous
works for the confirmation of it is divinity: But oney at the first publication
thereof. Wherefore Lorinus is very ridiculous, who upon this place tells us,
that they may justly demand of us Haeretiques (For so they bedust us) Miracles
for the confirmation of our new and false Doctrine. Indeed were it new and
false their request were not unreasonable, that we should make our doctrine
credible by doing of Miracles. But sure the Jesuit judges of our doctrine by
his own, which did he not suspect for a new Error, we see no reason they
should still require Miracles for confirmation of an old Truth For our selves
we seek not the aid of a lying Wonder to uphold a true doctrine: nor do we
count it any disgrace at all to our Religion, that we cannot by our Faith so
much as cure a lame Horse, as the Jesuit out of De lib. arbi^
Erasmus scoffs at us. Now surely if such a beast as Bellarmine's devout Mare,
want help to set her on all four, we cannot be yet so well persuaded of that
virtue of Romish Faith, as to think that a Friar will do more good at such a
jadish miracle, then a Farrier. But whereas the Jesuit goes forward to require
of us the other sort of good works, of Piety and Charity for the demonstration
of our Faith he has reason so to do, though not so much as he imagines, when
he charge us with neglect of good Works and unbridled licentiousness.
Would to God we could clear our practice from such neglect, as well as we can
our doctrine from teaching it. But yet, by their favor, if we come to
comparisons, we know no Reason why we should run behind the door, as more
ashamed of our practices, then they may justly be of theirs, in which case we
boldly bid him amongst them; that is without sin to cast the first stone at
us. To proceed. Seeing Works of Obedience are the proof^s of a true Faith, it
must be considered in what sort they prove it. For may not good Works be
counterfeited as well as Faith? I answer. That in this trial the judgment of
verity and infallibility belongs unto God, who only knows the heart and
conscience, being able to discern every secret working of the Soul, and so to
judge exactly whether or no all outward appearances come from inward syncerity.
But for the judgment of Charity that belongs to us. If we behold in any man
the Works of Obedience to God's will; of such a Man we are to judge that he
has true Faith. Though yet herein we must as far as humane frailty will
give leave, judge also not according to appearance, but judge righteous
judgment. Men's practices must be examined: if hypocrisy bewray it self, (as
it is hard for a Counterfeit not to forget himself at some one time or other, if
he be duly observed) there Charity must not be blind: it must see and censure
it. It Is not a charitable, but a perverse Judgment to call evil good: nor is
it any offense to call that a barren or bad Tree, that bears either no fruit
at all, or none but bad; And thus of this second Argument of the Apostle, that
these Hypocrites Faith was vain, because, when it comes to the proof, it
cannot be justified to be found and good.

3 The Arg of ^. James.
Argument is v. 19. from the example of the devils themselves, in whom there is
a Faith without Works, as well in hypocrites: and ergo it is in neither of
them a true Faith. The Argument is brought in to confute a Cavil with the
hypocrite might make against the former reason. True might he say, I cannot
show my Faith by my Works: yet for all that I have a true Faith. And why?
Because I believe the Articles of Religion, that there is one God, with the
rest. Hereto the Apostle replies. That such a belief is not a true Christian
Faith, because it is to be found even in the devils. The Argument runs thus.

That faith which is in the devils is no true Christian faith.

But a bare assent to the Articles of Religion without Obedience is in the
Devils. Ergo

A bare assent without Obedience is no true Christian faith.

The Mayor of this Argument will easily be granted. That the devils have not
that true Faith which is required of a Christian Man to his salvation. The
Minor is also evident. That the devils do believe the Articles of Christian
Religion. S. James instances in one for the rest, namely the Article of the
Godhead, whereto the Devils assent as well as Hypocritical Men. Thou beleeuest
that there is one God, says the true believer to the hypocrite, pleading that
he believed the Articles of Faith, Thou do well. It Is a laudable and good
thing to acknowledge the Truth of Religion. But vvithall thou must know that
the devils deserve as much commendation for this belief, as thou do. The
devils also believe. Even they confess the Truth of that and the other
Articles of Religion. An evident proof whereof is this, that they tremble at
the power, wrath, and justice of God, and the remembrance of the last
judgment, which did they not believe, they would not fear: but now they
expect it with Horror, because they know it will come upon them. Whence
it is plain that the Faith of Hypocrites and devils is all one, neither better
then other, both unfruitful to bring forth Obedience, both unprofitable to
bring unto salvation, and therefore neither of them that true Faith, which is
Christian and saving. This Argument of the Apostles, pincheth our Adversaries
sore, who stiffly maintain that S. James speaks of a True, though of a dead
Faith. For they can not for shame say that there is a true Faith in the devils
and damned Spirits. But yet S. James has concluded that they have that dead
Faith which hypocrites boast of. What then? Then a dead Faith is no true faith,
as our Bell. lib. 1. d^ Iustif. cap. 15.
Adversaries affirm it is. Wherefore to help themselves, they deny that it is
one and the same dead Faith, which is in hypocrites and evil Spirits. Indeed
ex part obiecti, they grant that the Faith of devils is as true and catholic
as that of wicked Men, because they both believe the the same things. And also
in regard of the effects, they grant their Faith to be alike, because both be
unfruitful. But not ex part subiecti, so they say there is much difference.
The Faith of devils is of one sort, and the Faith of hypocrites of another. But
here they make a little to bold with the blessed Apostle, ouerturning the force
of his argument, to uphold their own fancy. The Apostle proves against
Hypocrites that their idle Faith without Obedience is not true saving Faith.
Why? Because the diuel's idle Faith destitute of Obedience is no true saving
Faith. But now. Is the Faith of devils and hypocrites of the same kind and
Nature. Yea, or no? No, they be not, they be of a diverse nature, say the
Adversaries. Let it be then considered, what force there is in the Apostle's
Argument. Faith without works in Devils saues them not. Ergo Faith without
works in wicked Men, saues them not. Might not one prompted by a Jesuit,
reply upon the Apostle. Nay by your leave, your Argument is inconsequent,
because you do not dispute, ad idem. Faith in the devils is of one kind,
Faith in Hypocrites is of another: and therefore though Faith without works
cannot save devils; yet Faith without works may save Men. Thus were the
Apostle's Argument laid in the dust, if these Men's Opinions may stand for
good. But would you know what distinction these Men make between the faith of
devils and wicked Men, which St James takes for the same. It Is thus. First the
Faith of Evil Men is free, the Faith of devils is compelled and extorted from
them by a kind of force. So (...)
Bellarm. Fides hominum malorum libera est, captivante nimir um pia voluntate
intellectum in obsequium Christi: Fides vero Daemonum est coacta, and extracta
ab ipsarerum Evidentia. Quod insinuavit idem Iacobus dicens. Daemones credunt,
and contremiscunt. Nos enim non credimus contremiscentes, id est, inviti and
coacti, sed sponte and libenter. Wicked Men believe freely and willingly. Why?
Because their pious and godly Will captiuates their understanding to the
Obedience of Christ, so causing it to assent unto the Truth. The devils believe
upon compulsion, being forced to it by the Evidence of the things themselves.
Which Saint James intimates, They believe and tremble: that is, they believe
against their Wills. Is not this a shameless Jesuit that will say any thing
to patch up a broken cause? For be not these absurd Contradictions to say, that
wicked Men have godly Wills, that by a pious Motion of the Will, their
understanding is captiuated to the Obedience of Christ, and yet they be
hypocrites and wicked Men still. No Man can relish such assertions, who knows
how averse and fromward the will of Men is to embrace any thing that is of God,
till such time as it be regenerate by sanctifying Grace. It is therefore
without all reason, to affirm that wicked Men believe willingly, and it is
against all experience, which shows that ungodly Men are utterly as unwilling
to believe any truth that makes against them in any kind whatsoever; as a bear
is to be brought to the stake. Indeed in matters that like them, or such as be
of an indifferent Nature, neither favoring nor crossing their Corruptions,
they will be apt to believe, though not out of a pious affection, as the Jesuit
dreams: but out of self-love and other selfe-considerations. But take them in
any other point of Religion, that does any way grate upon their wicked
affections, all the persuasion and instruction in the World, cannot work them
to a belief of it, till the Conscience (spite of their hearts) be convicted by
some notable Evidence of the Truth. Now what else can be said of the devils;
who will as willingly believe what makes for them, (if any thing did) or what
makes not against them; as any wicked man can do? And they are as unwilling to
believe any thing, that makes against them, as any wicked Man is. Nor would
they believe it, did not the cleerenes of divine Revelations convince them of
the certain Truth thereof. So that there is no difference at all in this
respect, as the one, so the other believe unwillingly; as devils, so wicked Men
believe with trembling. The devils indeed with greater horror, as their belief
and knowledge is always more distinct then Man's: but yet Men with horror too,
when their Consciences by fits are awakened to behold the woes, that are
coming upon them. Unto this difference of Becanus.
Bell. others add two more. Namely: 1 That the Faith of devils is natural;
that of wicked Men supernatural and infused. 2 That the Faith of Devils is
dishonest, the Faith of wicked Men is an honest Faith. Whereto we say thus
much. That touching the first difference, we grant indeed that the Faith of the
devils is not supernatural except it be in regard of the object. The faculties
which they received in their creation are not so far corrupted in them: but
that they are able to assent unto, and apprehend divine Revelations without
further help, then of their own natural Abilities. Man in his fall sustained
greater loss in the spiritual powers of his soul, and therefore stan^s in
need of help. Which help is afforded even unto the ungodly; but this is by
ordinary illumination, not by special infusion of any sanctifying Grace.
Enlightened they are above the ordinary pitch of natural blindness: but not
above that whereto a mere natural understanding may be advanced. Yea were
Man's Understanding raised up to that perfection which is in devils: this were
more then Nature, yet less then Grace. This common gift of Illumination
bestowed on wicked Men, but not on devils, is no proof that their Faith is of
a diverse kind. As to the last difference we are not so far studied in
Moralities, as to conceive wherein the dishonestie of the diuel's Faith, and
the honesty of Hypocrites Faith does lie. To ordinary understanding it seems
every way as honest and commendable a matter, for a wicked fiend, as for a
wicked Man, to believe what God reueales unto him. If not, we must expect to be
further informed by these Jesuits Men that are better read in that part of
Ethickes, whether diabolical or hypocritical.

4. (...) of S. James.
This of the Apostle's third Argument. we come to the fourth.

The 4. Argument is contained in the 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25 verses. Before
which the Apostle repeates his maine Conclusion. That Faith without Obedience
is a false and dead Faith. But will thou know O (...) as an empty Vessel
without liquor
vain Man (or hypocrite) that Faith without works is dead? v. 20. For the
convincing of him further, he proceeds to a new Argument to prove it unto him.
The Argument is this.

That Faith which will not justify a Man is a false and dead Faith.

But the Faith which is without works will not justify. a Man. Ergo

It Is a dead and a false Faith.

The Mayor the Apostle omits as most evident of it self. The Minor he proves
by an induction of two Examples. Thus.

If Abraham and Rahab were instified by a working faith, thou that Faith which
is alone without works will not justify.

But A^raham and Rahab were so justified, viz. by a working Faith. Ergo

Faith without works will not justify a man.

The Reason of the Consequence is manifest. Because as Abraham and Rahab: so
all other must be justified. The means of justification and Life, were ever
one and the same for all men. Which also the Apostle intimates in that clause
v. 21. Was not our Father Abraham etc. implying that as the Father, so also the
children, the whole stock and generation of the Faithful, were and are still
justified by one uniform means. The two instances the Apostle vrges, that of
Abraham. v. 21. 22. 23. that of Rahab. v. 25. The conclusion with aequally
issues from them both, he interserts in the midst, after the allegation of
Abraham's Example. v. 24. I shall go over them as they lie in the Text.

In the example of Abraham, the Apostle v. 21. sets down this proposition.
That Abraham was justified by a working Faith. For this interrogatiues Was not
our Father Abraham justified by works? must be resolved into an affirmative
Abraham our Father was justified by works. That is a working Faith. Which
proposition the Apostle confirms by it is parts. 1. Showing that Abraham's
Faith was an operative faith declared and approved by his works. Secondly,
proving that by such a working Faith Abraham was justified in God's sight. That
the faith of Abraham was operative, full of life and power to bring forth
Obedience unto God, the Apostle alleges one instance instead of all the ^est
to prove it. And that is that singular work of Obedience unto God's command.
When he offered up his son Isaak upon the Altar. Many other works there were
performed by Abraham abundantly justifying the truth of his Faith: But the
Apostle chooses this above all other, as that work which was of purpose
enjoined him by God for a trial of his faith. Wherein Abraham mightily
ouer^oming all those strong temptations to disobedience and infidelity, made it
appear, that his faith was not an idle, dead and empty Speculation, but an
active and working Grace. Wherefore the Apostle adds ver. 22. See thou how
faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect? That is as
in other works of that holy Patriarch, so specially in that sacrificing his
son, all that can see, may plainly behold, the strength and life of his
faith. Faith wrought with his works. That is. His faith directed and supported
him in the doing of that work, as the Apostle Paul expounds it. Heb. 11. 17 By
faith Abraham offered up Isaac: that work had not binne done, if faith had
not wrought it. In every circumstance thereof faith did all in all from the
beginning of the work to the end. This interpretation is most simple and
generally received. Faith wrought with: That is. In or by his works, unto the
performance whereof the force of faith was in spaeciall manner assesting.
Pareus reads the words by a (...)
tmesis. (...). (that is) (...) ( scilicet) (...), (that is) Faith being with
his works wrought. What? his Justification. But this construction seems
somewhat hard and not necessary for this place. The other sense is much
plainer, showing us by or with what virtue Abraham's works were wrought. viz.
By the virtue of his faith, which in most powerful manner incited and enabled
him to obey. The Apostle goes forward, And by works was faith made perfect.
That is declared to be perfect. (...)
For works did not perfect Abraham's Faith essentially, in as much as long
before this time, it was perfect, as is plain in that Abraham was justified by
it 25 years before the oblation of his son Isaac, and also by the strength
of his Faith had done many excellent works and obtained great blessings at the
hand of God. So that the offering up of Isaac was not the cause but a fruit
of the perfection of Abraham's Faith, the great difficulty of that work showed
the singular petfection of that Grace which was able so to encounter and
conquer it. The goodness of the fruit does not work, but declare the goodness
that is in the tree; the qualities of the fruits always depending upon the
nature of the Tree: but not on the contrary. Thus then the first part of the
Proposition is plainly proved by the Apostle. That Abraham's Faith was a lively
and working Faith declaring and approving it is own truth by the works of his
Obedience.

The next part. Namely. That Abraham was justified in God's sight, by such a
working Faith, he proue^. 1. By a Testimony of Scripture. 2. By an effect or
consequent thereof, Both are expressed in the 23. v. The first in these words.
And the Scripture was fulfilled which says. Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed unto him for Righteousness. The application of this testimony is very
heedfully to be observed, because it serves excellently for the clearing of the
Apostles meaning, when he says we are justified by works. And the Scripture
was fulfilled says S. James. When? At the time, that Isaac was offered. But
was it not fulfilled before that time? Yes. Many years, when the promise of
the blessed seed was made unto him, as appears Genesis 15. 6. Whence this
testimony is taken. How was it then fulfilled at the oblation of Isaac? Thus.
The Truth of that which was verified before, was then again confirmed by a
new and evident experiment. Well. Thus much is plain enough. But here now the
difficulty is, how this Scripture is applied unto the Apostles former dispute.
In the 21. v. He says that Abraham was justified by Works when he offered
Isaac. How proves he, that he was so justified? why by this testimony. Because
the Scripture was fulfil^ed at that time, which says, Abraham believed God
etc. Mark then the Apostle's Argument. When Abraham offered Isaac the
Scripture was fulfilled which says Abraham was justified by faith. For that is
the mea^ing of that Scripture. Ergo, Abraham when he offered Isaac^ was
justified by works. This at first sight s^emeth far set, and not only
besides, but quite contrary to the Apostles purpose to prove he was then
justified by works, because the Scripture says, he was then justified by
Faith. But upon due consideration, in^erence appears to be evident, and the
agreement easy. The Apostle and the Scripture alleged, have one and the same
meaning: the Scripture says. He was justified by Faith, meaning, as all
confess, a working Faith fruitful in Obedience. S. James affirms the very
same, saying, that he was justified by works, that is. Metonymically by a
working Faith* And therefore the Apostle rightly alleges the Scripture for
confirmation of his assertion: the Scripture witnessing. That by Faith he was
justified; the Apostle expounding what manner of Faith it means. Namely a
Faith with works or a working Faith. So that the application of this Testimony
unto that time of offering up of Isaac is most excellent: because then it
appeared manifestly what manner of Faith it was, wherefore God had accounted
him just in former times. Without this Metonymie it appears not that there is
any force in the application of this Scripture and the Argument from thence.
The Scripture witnesses that Abraham was then justified by Faith. Ergo it is
true, that he was then justified by Works. What consequence is there in this
Argument except we expound S. James by that metonymie, Works, that is a
working Faith? And so the Argument holds firm. Take it otherwise, as our
adversaries would have it, or, to speak truth, according to the former
interpretation of our divines; it breeds an absurd construction either way.
Abraham in offering Isaac was justified by works, that is, secunda
Iustificatione of good he was made better. How is that proved? By Scripture.
Because the Scripture says. That at that time he was justified by faith. That
is, prima Iustificatione of bad he became good. Is not this most apparent
Nonsense. Again according to the Interpretations of our divines, Abraham at
the offering up of Isaac was justified by works (that is, say they) declared
just before men. How is that proved? by Scripture. Because the Scripture
says. That at that time, he was justified by Faith. that is, accounted just
in God's sight. In which kind of arguing I must confess I apprehend not how
there is any tolerable consequence. Wherefore we expound S. James
metonymically, putting the effect for the cause; works, for a working Faith,
as the necessary connection of the text enforced us. Nor is there any harshnes
at all, nor violent straining in this figure, when two things of necessary and
near dependence one upon the other, ( as works, and a working Faith) are put
one for another. Neither have our adversaries more cause to complain of us for
this figurative interpretation of works, then we have of them for their
figurative interpretation of faith. For when we are said to be justified by
faith, they understand it dispositiue and meritorie not formalitere Faith in
itself is not our sanctification, nor yet the cause of it. But it merits the
bestowing of it, and disposes us to receive it. Let reason judge now, which is
the harsher exposition. Theirs? faith iustifies (that is) Faith is a
disposition in us deserving that God should sanctify us by infusion of the
habit of Charity. Or ours? Works justify, that is, the Faith whereby we are
acquitted in God's sight, is a working Faith. Thus much of this Testimony of
Scripture proving that Abraham was justified by a true and working faith,

In the next place the Apostle shows it by a visible effect or Consequent that
followed upon his Justification expressed in the next words: And he was called
the friend of God. A high prerogative, for God the Creator to reckon of a poor
mortal Man as his familiar friend; but so entire and true was the faith of
Abraham, so upright was his heart, that God not only graciously accounted it
to him for Righteousness: but also in token of that gracious acceptance entered
into a league with Abraham taking him for his especial friend and confederate;
A League of^ensiue and defensive. God would be a Friend to Abraham [Thou shall
be a blessing] and a friend of Abraham's Friends. I will bless them that bless
thee; (...)
and an Enemy of Abraham's enemies: I will curse them that u^se thee. Which
League of freindship with Abraham before the offering up of Isaac was
thereupon by solemn protestation and oath renewed, as we have it Genesis 22. v.
16. etc.

Thus we have this first example of Abraham. From thence the Apostle proceeds
to a general conclusion in the next verse (24) Ye see then how that by works
a man is justified, and not by Faith only. That is. Therefore it is evident.
That a man is justified by a working faith: not by a faith without works.
Which Metonymicall interpretation is again confirmed by the inference of this
conclusion upon the former verse. The Scripture says, That Abraham believed
God and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness. Ergo (says ^ James) Ye see
how a man is justified by works and not by Faith only. A man might here say.
Nay rather. We see the contrary. That a man is justified by faith only and
not by works. For in that place of Scripture there is no mention at all made
of Works. Wherefore of necessity we must understand them both in the same
sense. And so the conclusion follows directly. That every man is justified by
an active not an idle Faith, because the Scripture witnesses, that Abraham was
instified by the like Faith. Our Adversaries collection then from this place.
(That Faith and Works be compartners in Justification, we are (...) partly by
faith, partly by works) is vain and inconsequent. For when the Apostle says,
A Man is justified by works and not by faith only: his meaning is not, that
works and faith are two Coordinate causes by their ioynt-force-working our
Justification; but the Apostle utterly excludes Faith only from Justification,
and attributes it wholly unto works. For by (...) Faith only, he understands
faith alone, that faith which is (...) v. 17. alone, solitary, by itself,
without works. And such a dead faith whereof these hypocrites boasted. S.
James excludes wholly from justifying of a man. I say then that he is not
justified by faith only: but that he is justified by works. That is a working
faith that is fruitful in Obedience.

The Apostle goes forward from the Example of Abraham unto that of Rahab verse.
2 Example,
25. Likewise was not Rahab the Harlot justified by works? That is in the same
manner as Abraham: so also Rahab was justified by a working says. Which
appeared to be so by that which she did when she received the messengers,
entertained the two spies which were sent to search the land, lodged them in
her house without discovering them. And when by accident they were made known,
hid them secretly upon the roof, and afterward sent them out another way,
conveied them away privily, not by the usual, but by another way (that is)
through the window letting them down over the wall by a Cord as the story has
it. Ios. 2. In this dangerous enterprise, wherein this weak woman ventured her
life in succouring the Enemies of her King and Country: it appears plainly
that she had a strong and lively Faith in the God of Israel: and that the
confession which she made with her mouth to the spies (The Lord your God, he is
the God in Heaven above and in the Earth beneath. Josh. 2. 11.) proceeded from
a truly believing heart, insomuch as her words were made good by works, that
followed them. Wherefore the Apostle justly parallels these 2 examples of
Abraham offering his son; and Rahab in the kind usage of the Spies, because
both those facts were singular trialls of a lively faith which was able in that
sort to overcome what was hardest to be conquered. viz. Natural affection. In
Abraham both fatherly affection to the life of a dear and only son: and in
Rahab the Natural love to ones Country and a man's own Life did all stoop and
give way, when once true Faith commands Obedience. Here again our adversaries
trouble themselves, and the Text with needless speculations telling us, that
now the Apostle has altered his cliffe, and gone from the second Justification
in Abraham's example, to the first Justification in this of Rahab. That Rahab
was converted at this time of receiving the spies being made a believer of an
infidel, a good woeman of a bad. That she by this good work did expiate her
former sins and merited the grace and favor of God, notwithstanding that she
committed a venial sin in handling of the business, telling a downright
lie, which though she should not have done; yet it hindered not the
meritoriousnes of the work, with such other fond imaginations perverting the
simplicity of the Truth. But first they are not agreed among themselves
whether the Apostle do in that sort shift from one Justification to another.
Bellarmine affirms it and many more. But others deny it, as may be seen in
Lorinus his exposition of the. 21. v. of this Chapter. And were they agreed
upon it, sure I am they should disagree from the Apostle, who makes this second
instance of the same nature with the former. (...). In like manner says he,
was Rahab justified: viz. as Abraham was. Again when they say Rahab became a
true believer at that time of receiving the spies, not before, it is more then
they can prove. By the circumstances of the story it appears plainly, that
she believed before they came, by the relation of the great works which God
had done for his people, and the promises that were made unto them, that they
should possess Rahabs country. This bred fear in others: but faith in her,
by the secret working of the holy Ghost: See Joshua 2. 9. etc. And certainly;
(had she not had Faith, before the spies came, who can think she would have
given entertainment to such dangerous persons? But she knew them to be the
Servants of the God of Israel in whom she believed; and therefore by this Heb.
11. 31.
Faith she received them peaceably; though Enemies of her Country. Lastly to
that of the Merit^riousnes of the work of Rahab, to deserve Grace and Life
aeternall; we reject it, not only as a vain but an impious conceit, which
never entered into the humble hearts of the S^. of old: but has bin set on
foot in the last corrupt ages of the world by men drunken with Self-love, and
admiration of their own Righteousness.

Thus we have these 2 Examples whereby the Apostle has proved sufficiently,
that the Faith which is separated from Obedience, will not justify a Man, and
therefore that it is a dead Faith, and not a true living Faith according as was
proposed. v. 20. Now for a close of this whole dispute he again repeates that
conclusion, adding thereto anew similitude to illustrate it by, in the last
verse of the Chapter. For as the Body without the Spirit is dead, so faith
without works is dead, that is, As the Body without the Spirit, i. e. the
Souls, or the Breath and other Motion (is dead) unable to perform any living
action whatsoever: So Faith without works is dead; that is, utterly unable to
perform these living actions, which belong unto it. What are those? Two. 1. To
repose it steadfastly upon the promise of life in Christ, which is the proper
immediate living Action of Faith. 2. To justify a Man in the sight of God,
which by a special privilege is the consequent of the former. These living
actions cannot be performed by that Faith which is dead, being destitute of
good works. That Faith which has not power to bring forth Obedience, is
thereby declared to be a dead Faith, deuoide of all power to embrace the
promise with confidence and relyance as also to justify. A Man would think
this were plain enough, and needed not to be troubled with any further
C^villations. But it is strange what a coile our Adversaries make with this
similitude, writhing and straining it to such Conclusions as the Apostle never
intende^* Hence they gather. 1. That as the Soul gives life to the Body, as
the ^^rme of the Body: so Works give life to Faith as the form of it 2 That
as the Body is the same true Body without the Soul and with it: so Faith is
one and the same true Faith without works and with them, which are nothing but
sophistical speculati^^^ besides the purpose of the Text. The Apostle intends
nothing but to show the Necessity of the Copulation of a living Faith and
Obedience together: by the similitude of the like Necessity of the union of a
living Body, and the Soul. But his purpose is not to show, that the manner of
their Connection is the same, that just in every point as the Soul is to the
Body, or the Body to the Soul: so Works are unto Faith, and Faith unto Works.
It suffices to his intent, that as in the absence of the Soul, the Body: so
in the absence of Obedience, Faith is dead. But thence it follows not, that
works by their presence do the same thing to Faith; as the Soul to the Body
by it is presence; or that Faith in the absence of Works remains the same; as
the Body does in the absence of the Soul. If we must needs be tied to the
strict terms of the Similitude: let us a little examine the comparison, and we
shall see our Adversaries all fly off first from it. Let the comparison be
first thus. Between the Body and the Soul, Faith and Works as the terms be
in the Text. As the Body without the Soul is dead because the Soul gives
life, i.e sense, breathing, and all other Motion to the Body.

So Faith without Works is dead, because Works give life unto Faith.

But now this Comparison will not run on all four. For Works are not unto
Faith as the Soul is to the Body; but as sense and motion is to the Body.
Seeing Works are external acts, not internal habits: and so are
proportionable not to the Soul, but to the living actions thence issuing.
Wherefore it is as absurd to say, that Works give life unto Faith, as it is
ridiculous to affirm, that Sense and Motion give life to the Body, which are
not Causes; but Effects and signs of Life. Therefore when Faith without Works
is dead, it is not spoken in that sense, because Works give life to Faith, as
the Soul does to the Body. L^^ then the Comparison be thus. Between the Body
and the Soul. Faith and Charity.

As the Body without the Soul is dead, because the Soul is the form of the
body, and gives life to it.

So Faith without Charity is dead, because Charity is the Form of Faith, and
gives life to it.

But neither will the Comparison hold upon these terms. For 1. our Adversaries
here put in Charity the habit, for Works the act: which is more then
themselves ought to do, seeing they will tie us at short Bitts, to the very
letter of the Text. For though we can be content to admit that interpretation,
would they admit of the Apostle's plain meaning, and not strain for querkes:
yet seeing they argue so precisely from the Words of the Comparison, they must
not now have liberty from us to go from them, but be content to take the
Words as they lie in the Text, and make their best of them. Yet seeing it is
most senseless to make Works (that is) external Actions the Form of Faith
an internal habit: let them take Charity instead of them, an internal habit
likewise, Will it be any better now? belike so. The^ it is thus. As the Soul is
the Form of the Body: so Charity is the form of Faith. and as the Soul gives
life and action to the Body, so Charity unto Faith. Will they stand to this?
No. Here again they fly off in both Comparisons. Charity is one habit, Faith
another distinct between themselves, and therefore they deny, as there is good
reason, that Charity is either the Essential form of Faith, as the Soul of
the living Body: or the accidental Form, as whitenes of Paper. They say it is
only an external Form. But this now is not to keep close to the Apostle's
comparison, but to run from it at their pleasure, when they fall upon an
absurdity in pressing of it so strictly. The Soul is no external, but an
internal essential Form, and therefore Charity must be so, if all run
round. Again does Charity give life or living actions unto Faith as the Soul
does unto the Body? Neither dare they hold close to this Comparison. For the
proper work or action of Faith is to assent unto the Truth of divine
revelations, because of Gods authority, as themselves teach. Whence now comes
this assent? From the Habit of Faith, or of Charity? They grant that it comes
immediately from the Habit of Faith, which produces this action, even when its
severed from Charity. Then it is plain that it is not Charity that gives life
to Faith, which can perform the proper action that belongs to it, without it is
help. How then does Charity give life unto Faith? For this, they have a silly
conceit. Charity gives Life, that is Merit unto Faith. The belief, or assent
unto divine Truth is meritorious if it be with Charity. If without, then it is
not meritorious, This is a fine toy, wherein again they run quite from the
Comparison of the Apostle. For the Soul gives living Actions to the Body, not
only the Qualifications of the Actions: and so Charity is not like the Soul,
because it gives only the qualification of Merit unto the Action of Faith, and
not the action it self. Beside. A most vain interpretation it is, without any
ground from Scripture, to say a living Faith, (that is) a meritorious Faith:
when even in common sense, the life of any habit consists only in a power to
produce those actions, that naturally and immediately depend upon that Habit.
And what Reason is there in the World why the Habit of Charity should make the
actions of Faith meritorious, or, why Charity should make Faith meritorious,
rather then Faith make Charity meritorious, seeing in this life there is no such
praeeminency of Charity above Faith? Wherefore we despise these speculatiue
Sophismes, which with much fair glozing, our Adversaries draw from the Text:
but yet when all comes to the Trial, themselves will not stand to the strict
application of the similitude, because it breeds absurdities, which even
themselves abhor. Now if they take liberty to qualify and interpret, they
must give us leave to do so too, or if they will not we shall take it. To shut
up all. Their other Collection is as weak as the former: namely. A dead body
is a true body. ergo a dead Faith is true Faith. This Argument forces the
Similitude, and so is of a Force. In material things which have a diverse
being from different Causes, it may hold. But it is not so in Virtues and
Graces. Truth and Life are both essential to such qualities. True Charity is
a living Charity (i. e.) active, as the Apostle himself proves. v. 15. True
Va- Valor. And so of every virtuous quality, if it be true, it is living and
stirring in Action: if it be otherwise, it is counterfeit, some other thing that
has only a shadow of it. All these Tricks are pin upon the Apostle to
pervert his plain meaning; viz: That as it is necessary to the being of a
living body that it be coupled with the ^oule, so it is necessary to the being
of a living true Christian Faith, that it bring forth Works of Obedience.

SECT. 7.
CHAP. I.
None can be justified by their own satisfaction for the transgression of the
Law. A brief sum of Popish doctrine, concerning humane satisfactions for
sin.
THus we have the resolution of the dispute of S. James, together with such
Cauils, as our Adversaries make upon the several passages thereof. By the
whole order whereof it appears sufficiently that Saint James disputing against
Faith, means thereby that false and bastard Faith which hypocrites pleased
themselves withal instead of a true Faith: and that disputing for works, he
means nothing but a working Faith. And it appears also that the drift of the
Apostle is not in this place to dispute directly of Man's Justification: but
only to bring that in, as an argument to prove his principal Conclusion. That
Faith without works is dead, because it will not justify. In sum it is
evident, that neither these Apostles do disagree between themselves, nor ye^
either of them do agree with our Adversaries in teaching Justification by the
the Works of the Moral Law. Of the impossibility of Man's Justification by
which means, Hitherto.

The^r ex^ Proposition is, 2 Conclu^^^^ proved.
that [ None can be justified by their own safisfaction for the transgression
of the Law] For this is this is the only way (...) for an Offender to obtain
Justification and Absolution: vi^: to allege that he has satisfied for his
offense committed, by doing or suffering so much as the party offended could in
justice exact of him. Which satisfaction being made, he is no longer debtor
unto him, but deserves his absolution and his favor, as if he had not offended
at all. Now then the Question is. Whether a Sinner may, by any thing done, or
endured by himself, satisfy the Justice of God, and so obtain absolution at
the Bar of God's Judgment. We defend the Negative. That it is impossible for
a Sinner, by any Action or Passion of his own to do so much as shall be
aequivalent unto the wrong which he has done unto the glorious Justice of God:
that there with he may rest satisfied and exact no further paenalty. Which
point is so evident unto the Conscience of every one that knows himself to
be, either a Creature, or a Man, or a Sinner: that it needs not any
confirmation. If we be considered as Creatures, there is nothing that a finite
strength in a finite time can perform, which can hold proportion with the
offense of an infinite goodness and Justice, Phil. 4. ^.
and the eternal punishment thereby deserved. Consider us as Men, Deuteronomy. 5. 6.
so we are bound to fulfill the Law of God in all perfection, nor is there any
thing so true, so honest, so just, so pure, so worthy love and good report: but
the Law one way or other obliges us unto the thought and practice of it. So
that besides our due debt of Obedience, we have nothing to spare over and
above, whereby to satisfy God for those Trespasses that we have committed upon
his honor and Justice. Lastly consider us as Sinners, so we are tied in a
double Obligation, 1. of punishment to be suffered for Sin committed. 2.
Another of Obedience to be perpetually performed. Both these debts of
punishment and Obedience, are equally exacted of sinful Men, and ergo it is as
absurd in Divinity to say, the Obedience of the Law or good works, will
satisfy for the Transgression of the Law: as it is in civil dealing to account
the payment of one Band the discharge also of another. Wherefore every one that
is not blind and proud in heart will here be soon persuaded to relinquish all
claim of Heaven by his own satisfaction, running unto him only, who alone
without the help of Man or Angel has trodden the Winepresse of the
fierceness of God's wrath, bearing our Sins in his Body on the Tree,
suffering the utmost, whatsoever was due to the punishment of them. Our
Adversaries in this business are at a stand, mistrusting their own, yet not
daring wholly to trust to Christ's satisfactions. They will give him leave to
have his part: but, by his leave, they will have one share too in satisfying
for Sins. For they are a generation of Men that are resolved to be as little
beholding to God, as may be, for grace, or for glory. And if there be any
article of Religion wherein Scripture and Reason would give the honor of all
unto God, they look at it with an Evil Eye, and cast about which way to
thrust in themselves for copartners. It Is strange to see to what pass Pride
and Covetousness have brought the doctrine of Satisfaction, as it is now
taught and practiced in the Romish Church. With you patience I shall take a
short survey of it, that you may see whether of v^twaine rest our Consciences
upon the surer and more steadfast anchor: we that trust only to Christ's
satisfactions; or they that join their own together with his.

The sum of their doctrine, as it is delivered unto us by the Council of
Trent. Sess. 6. cap. 14, 16. and Sess 14 cap. 8. 9. with the Romish Catechism.
part. 2. cap. 5. quaest. 52. and seq. and explained at large by Bellarmine in
his two books De Purgatorio in his 4th Book De Poenitentia, and his Books De
Indulgentijs: is this. Sins are of two sorts.

1. Sin committed before Baptism: as Original Sin in all that are
baptized Infants: and actual sins in those that are baptized at years of
discretion.

2. Sin committed after Baptism, when after the Grace of the holy Ghost
received in Baptism; men fall into Sin, polluting the Temple of God, and
grieuing his Spirit.

Touching the former sort of Sins, they are agreed that Men are freed from
them both, the fault and punishment, by the Merits and satisfaction of Christ
only without any satisfaction on our part. But now for Sins after Baptism,
in obtaining of Remission of them, Christ and we part stakes. Which
copartnership is declared unto us in this manner. In (...) Sins (we must
know) there are three things considerable.

1. The fault in the offense of God's Majesty, and violation of our friendship
with him. Here they grant also, That Man can not satisfy for the fault, doing
any thing that may appease God's displeasure; and procure his love. Christ
only has done this for us, for whose only satisfaction. God of his mercy
freely returns into favor and friendship with us. But this must be understood
in a catholic sense, viz: for fault of Mortal Sins; as for Venial Sins
God is but slightly angry with them, and so we may satisfy him for the fault
thereof, both in this life, and in Purgatory

2. The stain or corruption of Sin, called the Relics of Sin abiding in
the Soul. For the purging out of which, there is great force in such
satisfactions, as are made by Prayers, Fastings, Almesdeed^s, and other
laborious works, although the Heretics say otherwise. That the abolishing of
inhaerent corruption is by the gift of grace freely bestowed on us by degrees,
in the use of all godly means.

3. The punishment of Sin, which after the fault is pardoned, remains yet to
be suffered. For although it be true that God in some causes does pardon both
fault and punishment wholly, as in cause of Martyrdom, which sweepes all
clean, and makes a^ l reckonings even; and although God might, if it had so
pleased him, always for Christ's sake have pardoned the whole debt: yet Holy
Mother Church has d^t^rmined, that he does not so use to do. But after that
in mercy he has forgiven the faul^^ yet there is an after reckoning, and we
must come to Coram for the punishment, by which his Justice is to receive
satisfaction. But (ye must know) the punishment of Sin is two fold.

^. Eternal* in the destruction of Soul and body in Hellfire to endure for
ever.

Here now Christ's satisfaction comes in again. By whose merits alone they
grant, we are delivered from the eternity of the punishment of Sin. Which
must be noted, that Christ's satisfaction has not eased us of the substance of
the punishment it self: but only in the continuance of it.

2. Temporal; to endure only for a time, whereof there are also two degrees.

1. One in this life, as namely all calamities and afflictions upon the Body,
Soul, Name, Goods, etc. together with death the last and greatest of evils.
All which are inflicted upon m^n; as punishments of ^inne. Of these some come
upon us inui^^bly as death upon all men, or as death in the wilderness on the
Children of Israel, with the like punishments, certainly and irreuocably
denounced. Now here is no remedy but patience, and that is an excellent remedy
too. For (as the ghostly Fathers of Tre^t inform us) If they be borne
willingly with patience, they be satisfactions for Sins: but if unwillingly
they be God's just revenge upon us. Other some come, Euitably. And here such a
course may be taken, that we need not suffer the punishment it self: but we
may buy it out and make satisfaction for it unto God by other means. Which
means are principally four.

1. By the vehemence of Contrition, or inward sorrow. Which may be so intensiue
as to satisfy for all punishments, both in this life and also in Purgatory.

2. By other outward laborious works. Whereby we may buy out the obligation to
temporal punishments. Such Works are these.

1. Prayer with Confession, Thanksgiving. etc. For, if we believe the
Cathol^que Doctors it is a very good satisfaction to a Creditour, if the debtor
pray unto him for the forgiveness of his dept. According to that text. Psalm. 50.
15. Call upon me in the day of trouble and I will d^liuer thee. Ergo, Prayer is
a satisfaction for the punishment of sin.

2. Fasting, under which is comprehended the sprinkling of Ashes, wearing of
hair cloth, whippings, goeing bare-foote and such other paenall works. These
also satisfy for sins as it is written 2. Sam. 12. David fasted, lay upon the
ground and wept all night. Therefore he satisfied for his Sins of Murder and
Adultery. And again. Paul says 1. Cor. 9. 27. I beat down my body. That is,
I whippe and cudgel my self to satisfy for my sins. And again. Luke 18.
13. The Publican smote upon his breast. Ergo. Corporal chastisement is a good
satisfactions for sins.

3. Almesdeedes: comprehending all kind whatsoever works of mercy. These also
buy out the punishments of sin according to the text Dan. 4. 24. Break off
thy sin by Righteousness: and thine iniquity by mercy toward the poor. that
is. By almesdeeds satisfy for the temporal punishmens of thy Sins. And
again. Luke 11. 41. Give alms of that which you have and behold all things
shall be clean unto you. That is to say (in the language of Babell.) The
temporal punishment of sin shall be taken away. Now all such works as these
are either.

1. Voluntarily undertaken of our own accord, as voluntary Pilgrimage,
Scourgings, Fastes, Sackloth, Weepings, and Prayers of such a number and
measure, with the like rough punishments, which we take upon our selves to
pacify God. All which being done with an intent to satisfy for the punishment
of our Sins; must needs be accepted of God almighty for good payment: because
in so doing, we do more then he has required of our hands. Now it is very
pleasing to God to do what he bids us not: or what he bids us, to do to
another end of our devising. He therefore that voluntarily undertakes such
needless pains, gives God high satisfaction. According to the Text. 1. Cor.
11. 31. If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged.

2 Enjoined by the Priest. Who by virtue of the Keys committed unto him might
iudicially absolve the paenitent from the whole debt, were it not thought fit
upon special considerations to keep back a part. Wherefore when he has
absolved him from the fault and aeternall punishment, he binds him unto
satisfaction for the temporal punishment, and therefore he enjoynes him what
he shall do to buy it out. Let him go visit the shrine of such and such a
Saint, say so many Aues and Paternosters before such an Image, whip himself so
many times, fast so many days, give so much alms with such like paenalties.
And when he in humble obedience has done these things commanded by the Priest:
then it is certain his sins be satisfied for. For it is to be noted that in
enioyning this Canonical satisfaction, as it is called, the Priest and God
almighty be just of the same mind. Look how much the Priest enioynes for
satisfaction, God must be content to take the same, or else the paenitents
conscience will not be quiet, because, it may be, God expected more to be done
for satisfaction: then the party has done by the Priests iniunction. But it is
to be supposed, that as the Pope, so every Priest in his Chair of confession
has an infallible spirit, whereby he is able exactly to calculate the just
propo^tion between the sin and the punishment, and the price of the
punishment, that so he may enjoyne just so much penance, as will buy it out;
neither more lest the paenitent be wronged: nor less, lest God be not
satisfied. All which is trimly founded upon that text which says. Whatsoever
ye bind on Earth shallbe bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye loose on Earth
shall be loosed in Heaven. Mat: 16, 19. and 18. 18. That is. Priests may
forgive the fault and retain the punishment, and what satisfaction they
enjoin on Earth to expiate the punishment, that will God accept in Heaven: Or
else they be deceived. This is the second means to satisfy for temporal
punishments.

The 3. Means is by Pardons and Indulgences. Wherein the superabundant merits
of Christ and the Saints are out of the treasury of the Church granted by
special grace of the B^. of Rome unto such as are liable to suffer the
temporal punishment of their Sins. So that they having got by his grant a
sufficient portion of satisfactory works, out of the common stock, they are
fre^d thereby from satisfying Gods Justice, by their own works. Which is a
rare privilege no doubt.

4. The fourth means is by another living man's satisfaction for them. For not
only the superabundant works of Christ and Saints departed: but the good
works of just men alive will satisfy for another, being done with that
intent. So great is God's clemency toward good Catholics, that, though one
man cannot confess, nor be contrite for another; yet satisfy he may the
Justice of God for his sins. Both these means are grounded upon pregnant
places of Scripture. Gal. 6. 2. Bea^e ye one another burden, that is,
satisfy one for another. Again 2 Cor. 12. 15. I will most gladly bestow and
be bestowed for your sakes: that is, to satisfy for your sins. Again 2 Timothy
2. 10. I suffer all things for the Elects sake: that is, that my sufferings may
be their satisfactions. So Col. 1. 24. I rejoice in my sufferings for you and
fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake,
which is the Church. That is. My sufferings with Christ's sufferings make up a
Treasury for the Church, that such as want of their own, may make use of his
satisfaction and mine. Again Romans 12. 15. We being many are one another
Members Ergo, We may impart sati^factory works one to another, as one member
does heat to another. To conclude. It Is in our Creed, I believe a communion
of Saints. Ergo, There is a communion of satisfactions. And so the point is
very fitly proved. Whereby it appears that the Ch^l^ren of the Romish Church
are reasonable well provided of Means to recompense God's, Justice, and
redeem the Temporal punishment of their sins in this life.

The other degree of the temporal punishment is in the life to come, namely,
in ^urgatory, whereinto all they drop who die in Venial Sins, the fault
whereof was not forgiven in this Life; or in Mortal Sins, the fault whereof
was forgiven in this Life; but full satisfaction was not made for the
punishment before death. Such must fry awhile in Purgatory longer or shorter
time according as their Sins are more or less heinous; or as Men's hearts on
Earth be more or less pitiful toward them. But howeuer there they must be
till the Temporal Punishment of their Sins be fully suffered: or bought out
by something else that may satisfy God's Justice.

This Punishment of Sin inflicted in Purgatory, is twofold.

1. Poena Damni. of Loss (viz.) of the beautiful vision of God, and joys of
Heaven.

2. Poena sensus. of sense or smart. viz. The bitter pains of God's wrath
sensibly tormenting the Powers of the Soul, inflicted upon them either
immediately by God himself, or by the ministry of the devils as his
Instruments.

For it is a doubt not yet resolved among the Patrons of Purgatory, whether the
Devils have not to do there also as well as in hell. But whether their
Tormentours be Devils or not, this is agreed upon, that the Torment and
Punishment which the Souls do suffer in Purgatory, is for the Substance of it
the very same with the Torments of Hell, differing only from it in continuance.
Those of Purgatory be temporal, these of Hell aeternall. Well now, such as
have not bestirred themselves then, well in this Life to make all even by full
satisfactions, such must be arrested in the mid way to Heaven, and cast into
this Prison. Out of which two Means there be to be delivered.

1. By suffering all this temporal punishment for so many years and days as
it is to continue. How many that is, you must inquire of St Michael, the Church
knows not that. But yet sure she is, that many Souls shall continue in
Purgatory till the day of Judgment, so there shallbe the same period of the
World, and of their Torments. These have a hard time of it; it is easier happily
with others. But be it as 'twill be, such as these pay the utmost farthing,
where they endure in the flames of Purgatory, so long till the time of their
whole punishment be run out. Then God is satisfied, and they delivered.

2. By buying out this punishment by some other satisfactory price. For
although God could so have ordered it, that every Soul being once in
Purgatory, should suffer all the Temporal punishments due: yet he is content
to be entreated to commute poenance, and take some other valueable
consideration by way of satisfaction for this punishment. But this satisfactory
payment cannot be made by the Souls themselves: it must be made by some on
Earth for them. which is done. 1. Either by laborious works of any one just
and godly Catholic, whether he be a friend of the deceased, or other touched
with a charitable pity toward a poor soul. Who by store of devout prayers,
Alms, Masses, Pilgrimages, founding of Coue^ts and Hospitals, etc. may procure
a gaole-deliuery for that soul for which he intends those good works. 2. Or
by the Pope who is purse-bearer to the Church, and has the Treasury thereof
under Lock and Key. He now, though he cannot directly absolve the Souls in
Purgatory from their punishment, as he can Men living on the Earth, yet he may
help them another way by bestowing on them so much of the superfluous
sufferings of Christ and of the Saints, that thereby God's Justice may be
satisfied, for the whole punishment, which otherwise they should have endured.
Yea such is the power of his Indulgences to infuse a virtue into such and such
Alt^^* Shrines, (...) etc. that whosoever shall frequent such places, or use
such prayers, all Complements duly observed: he may at his pleasure free one,
two, three, or more souls our of Purgatory. Nay did not Covetousness cool the
hear of his Apostolical Charity, he might so bountifully power out the
Treasures of the Church upon these prisoners in Purgatory, that they should all
have enough to weigh down the feales, and deserve a passe-port for Heaven. Such
efficacy there is in that spiritual Pick lock which the Pope has in
keeping. All which is very properly proved by the former places of Scripture,
and others also, were it needful now to allege them. But thus we see the
Catholics are every way furnished for satisfactions, that what Christ has
not done for them, they can do for themselves, either to suffer and overcome
the Temporal punishments of their Sins, or else, which is the easier course,
to buy out that punishment at a valuable price of other satisfactionary works,
wherewith Gods Justice shall be abundantly contented. Now whereas those whom they
term Heretics, cry out aloud that such satisfactions to God's Justice be
indeed no Satisfactions at all, because they are no ways equal unto the
offense committed: and so no full recompense of wrong offered unto God: for the
assoiling of this doubt, they give us this distinction very necessary to be
observed. Satisfaction is double.

1. Iustitiae: ex rigore Iustitiae, ad absolutam and perfectam Aequalitatem
Quantitatis. That is. There is a Satisfaction of Justice consisting in a
perfect aequality between the offense and wrong, and the recompense made, when
so much is done, or suffered, as the offended party can in justice exact. Now
they grant that Man cannot satisfy God in this sort in rigor of Justice. Only
Christ has satisfied so; for unto such a satisfaction it is required that it
be done.

1. Ex proprijs. By that which is our own.

2. Ex indebitis. By that which is not debt of it self.

3. Ad aequalitatem. By that which is of aequall worth and value. Now none of
these ways can our satisfaction pass in strict Justice Because whatsoever we
have, it is God's free gift: whatsoever we can do, it is our due Obedience, and
when we have done all, yet we cannot by any finite act do such honor to God,
as shall be equal to that injury we have offered to his infinite Majesty. Even
the right of Nature teaches. as Bellarmine grants, That Man cannot parca
reddere Deo, give him quid pro'quo.

2. Acceptationis facti ex Gratia donante ad imperfectam Aequalitatem
Proportionis and ex Condigno. i, e. There is a satisfaction of favorable
acceptance, wherein there is a kind of imperfect Proportion between the
offense and the recompense, when so much is done or suffered, as God is content
in gentleness to take for good satisfaction. Thus then a man may satisfy God's
Justice, because God gives him grace to do so much as he will accept for
satisfaction. Which Grace is threefold.

1. The Grace of Justification, whereby the Holy Ghost dwells in us and we are
made Members of Christ, and Christ is become our Head. By means of which union
with Christ, and inhabitation of the Spirit, it comes to pass that our works
have a singular virtue. For Christ communicates unto us his satisfaction* and
by merits of them, makes our Works meritorious and satisfactorie unto God.

So that whereas all things whatsoever we could have done, where of no worth at
all in the sight of God: now Christ has deserved such a Grace for us that the
spotted rags of our righteousness and good works being tincta Christi
sanguine (i. e.) died in the blood of Christ receive such a color, that they
will pass for reasonable good cloth. In a word, our money is now good silver
which before was but brass. Again, because the holy Ghost dwells in the just,
Ergo (as Bellar: profoundly argues) their Works proceeding from the Holy Ghost
have [quandam infinitatem] a kind of infinitenes in them, and thereby, quandam
aequalitatem, a kind of aequality with the injury which by sinning we offered
unto God. Even as a man may say, that a fly or a spyder is a kind of infinite
Creature because it is of Gods making: and God you know is infinite. This is the
first Grace of Justification. The 2 ye may call.

2 The Grace of Evangelical Counsels. For although God might of right
challenge all our works as due unto him: yet so it is that he commands not
all, but only persuades and exhortes unto some* By which bounty of God, it
comes to pass that we have certain works Propria and indebita, of our own
which we owe him not; and by these we only make satisfaction. Yea such is the
bounty of God that he suffers us to merit by those things which be of his free
gift, and is willingly content that what we receive at his hand, we give it him
back again for a satisfactorie payment to his Justice. Which is very strange
I tell you.

3 Lastly one Grace more God gives us. Namely. When he pardons the fault he
remoues the aeternity of the Punishment, and makes it Temporal that so it may
be more easily satisfied for. All which particulars and Privileges are sure
and certain, because the Catholic Doctors have firmly proved them out of
their own heads without the help of the Scripture. So then they are agreed.
That our works are not satisfactorie in Rigor of Justice: but only in
favorable acceptance, by grace given to do them, and Gods clemency in
accepting them being done.

CHAP. II.
All sin is remitted unto us wholly in the fault and punishment. For the only
satisfaction of Jesus Christ.
THus I have somewhat largely set forth unto you the popish Doctrine of humane
satisfaction for sin: wherein it is plain to all that can see any thing,
that their aim has bin to lay a plot to delude men's Souls and pi^ke their
Purses. It would require a large discourse to prosecute their Arguments,
whereby they seek to cover their Fraud. But they are not of that Moment as to
spend time about them, being too hasten to other matters. The sum of them all
comes unto this. 1. That those afflictions and Temporal chastisements which
God has laid upon his Children (for the Trial of their Faith and patience,
for their humiliation for sins past by hearty Repentance, for their
admonition for the time to come, for the example of others. etc.) they must
needs be, in these Men's Imaginations, true satisfactions to Gods Justice to
expiate their sins past. 2. That such good works as the godly have performed
for declaration of their piety; testification of their thankfulness unto God;
for to express the sorrow of Heart; for to bring themselves to a greater
measure of true humiliation by much Prayer, fasting, etc. for to obtain
victory over some Corruption, and temptation; for to get some grace which they
wanted; for to prevent or fit themselnes for some Judgment feared; etc. All
this now must be conceived presently to be meritorious and satisfactorie to
Gods Justice for Sin.

3. That such Penance, as in the Primitive Church was enjoined unto those that
after their Conversion and Baptism, relapsed again to Heathenisme; or
otherwise for such as for scandalous offenses were excommunicated: I say that
such Penance enjoined to these for testification of their hearty sorrow for
their offense, and for satisfaction to the Congregation, before they might be
again admitted into it: must now be turned into a direct and proper
satisfaction for the sin it self.

4. That such indulgence or favor as was then sometimes used toward such
relapsed and excommunicate persons (in remitting unto them some part of their
enjoined Penance upon evident tokens of their unfeigned repentance) this is now
by these men turned quite to another use. Namely, to the freeing of men from
further satisfaction to Gods Justice by applying unto them certain
fantastical supererogations treasured up in the Popes Cabbinet. These are the
maine Issues and Errors of their disputes, wherein I will proceed no farther:
but only lay down one general Conclusion opposite unto their Doctrine, and
so end this point with a few Reasons, for the confirmation of the Truth and
confutation of this Error. The Position is this.

All Sin whatsoever; Original or Actual is remitted unto us wholly in the
Fault and Punishment, as well Temporal as Aeternall for the only satisfaction
of Jesus Christ: and not any satisfaction made by us unto the Justice of God.

For confirmation of this sacred Truth delivered unto us in the word and
generally embraced by the Reformed Churches (yea by our Adversaries themselves
when the Agonies of Consciences; the app^ehension of Death and of Gods
Judgment do clear up their eyes, a little to behold the vanity of their poor
satisfactions.) observe we these Reasons.

First the innumerable Testimonies of Scripture ascribing the Remission of
Sin, only to the mercy of God in Christ crucified. That Christ has borne 1
Pet. 2. 24.
our Sins; His blood has purged Heb. 13.
us of all Sin; His death Tit. 2. 14.
redeemed us from all iniquity; His Isa: 53: 5. 1 Pet 2 24.
Stripes healed us; That he has 1 Timothy 2. 6.
paid the (...) or price of our Ransom; That God for his Coll. 2. 13.
sake has for given us our trespasses; Blotted out Ibid v. 14.
our sins; Cast them Isa 38. 17.
behind his back; Forgotten Ier. 31. 34.
them; with store of the like sayings, ascribing the doing away of all Sins
to the Grace of God through the Satisfaction of Christ without limi^ing it to
any Sin, or mentioning any satisfactorie works of ours. Now what say our
Adversaries to this? By a shift they turn of all Scriptures tending to this
purpose. Thus Christ has satisfied for the fault of our Sins; and so
reconciled us unto God, and for the aeternity of the Punishment: but he
satisfied not for temporal punishment: We must endure Torment's though but for
a while. This is a mere Cavil without any apparent ground from such Texts of
Scripture; or necessary deduction from other. We deny it therefore as they
affirm it. And that it may appear to be but a forged devise. Let us inuert
the distinction and we shall hold it with as good probability the other way.
Christ satisfied for the fault, not for the punishments (say they.) We will go
contrary and say, Christ satisfied for the punishment: but not for the fault.
We by our own satisfaction must procure Gods favor. Now let them object what
they can against this: if we list to ca^ill as they do: it may be shifted off
with as fair probability; as they do our Arguments on the other part. Let
them name all the places that say, Christ has Coll. 1. 10.
reconciled us to God his Father. This is easily put off. Christ has
reconciled us. that is, Christ deserved such Grace for us: that we by our
works may reconcile ourselves. Just as they say. Christ has satisfied. that
is. procured Grace for us: that we by our works might satisfy. Let them
object, Our works can be of no worth to appease Gods anger. We will say. True.
Of themselves they are not: but Christ has merited that they should be of
sufficient worth. Just as themselves say unto us objecting, that our works be
not of value to satisfy Gods Justice. True, say they. Of themselves they be
not: but Christ has deserved for them to make them satisfactorious. Thus if
every idle distinction not fortified by necessary deduction from Scripture
might pass for a good answer, the certainty of divine Doctrine were soon
shaken to pieces: and no Position so absurd, but would be defended with much
facility.

2. That Assertion of theirs. Namely. That the fault is forgiven and the
punishment required, is most false and absurd; even in common sense. To pardon
a fault and be friends and yet require full satisfaction; to forgive the debt,
yet to exact the payment, be not these trim kindnesses? Bell. de poen. lib.
4. cap. 1.
Bellarmine tells us, there be some offenses of so grievous Nature: that
satisfaction cannot be made, but in a long time. Now in this case the party
wronged may pardon the other, and be reconciled to him: yet the offender
remain still bound to make entire satisfaction for the wrong. But now the
Jesuit does not name any such case: neither indeed can do. For suppose a
subject has offended his Prince and the fault deserved 7. years close
imprisonment for satisfaction. If the Prince should say unto him I pardon your
offense, you have my love; but yet you shall lie by it to the last day: were
it not a mockery, would any man thank him for such a kindness? It is to be
thought the Jesuits, the incendiaries of Christendom would not thank
Christian Princes for such a courtesy, if they should pardon them their fault,
and hang them up. The like absurdity there is in this, when they say; That
after the fault pardoned; yet in this Life and in Purgatory, the temporal
punishment must be suffered. For wherefore must it be suffered? For
satisfaction say they, To what? To God's Justice. For what now? Is it for the
fault and offense committed? No, That Is pardoned. For what then? For just
nothing.

Again, this Assertion is contrary to good reason. For God's Friendship, and
his Justice may not be divided in this sort, as if he were reconciled and well
pleased with that Creature, which has violated his Justice, and not made
satisfaction for it. God's friendship with Man follows satisfaction to his
Justice: even as his Enmity with Man is a consequent of the breach of his
Justice. His righteous will is transgressed, therefore he is offended. His
righteous will must be satisfied before he be pleased. So that it is a vain
speculation to think. Christ has appeased God's anger, but not satisfied his
Justice, for as much as his favor is purchased only by satisfaction to his
Justice offended.

3. This doctrine of humane satisfactions, obscures the dignity, and
overthrows the Force of Christ's satisfactions. If we have a share, he has
not all the glory. Nay, he has scarce any at all. For ask we. For what has
Christ satisfied? They say, to procure God's Love to us. But that cannot be,
unless he has satisfied his Justice. Has he done this, or no? Yes, he has
satisfied for the Aeternity of the punishment. Yea. But how know they that?
What if we upon their grounds say, That he has not satisfied for the Aeternity
of it: but only merited, that our sufferings and satisfactions should be
aequivalent to the aeternity of the Punishment? Especially considering that our
Works according to Bellarmine, have a certain kind of infinite value in
them. Again, Aeternity is but an Accident of punishment of Sin: the
Essentials of it are the Loss of Joy, and the sense of Pain: if therefore
Christ have satisfied only for that, he has done but the least part.
Nevertheless our Adversaries will needs persuade us, that humane
satisfactions do not so much eclipse as illustrate the glory of Christ's
satisfactions: in as much as thereby he has not only satisfied himself: but
made us able also to satisfy. A great matter doubtless. But where says the
Scripture any such matter, that Christ has merited that we might merit and
satisfy. And moreover by this Trick, whilst Christ makes us able to merit
and satisfy: his own satisfaction is plainly excluded. For come to the point,
and ask. Who is it satisfies God's Justice for Sin? Christ, or we? Here Bell.
Lib 1. de Purga^: cap. 14.. quarta Ratio.
Bellarmine stumbles like a blind horse, and of three answers takes the very
worst. Some say it is Christ, and he only satisfies Properly: but we Improperly.
Our works being only a Condition without which Christ's satisfaction is not
applied unto us. But such smell of the faggot. For it is a perilous Haeresie to
say, Christ only satisfies for Sins. Well others say, That both Christ and
we our selves do satisfy, and also there is two satisfactions for the same
offense. But this metal clinketh not well neither. Wherefore others are of
opinion, and Bellarmine likes it. That We only satisfy, not Christ. Tertius
tamen modus probabilior videtur [Quod una tantum sit actualis satisfactio, and
easit nostra.] Yea this is as it should be, thrust out Christ, and let us only
satisfy while he stands by and holds the Candle. Yet the Jesuit will not do
Jesus so much wrong: for mark, to mend the matter he adds. [ Neque tamen
excludit^r Christus, vel satisfactio eius. Nam per eius satisfactionem habemu^
gratiam, vnde satisfacimus. Et hoc modo nobis dicitur applicari Christi
satisfactio; non quod immediate ipsae eius satisfactio tollat poenam temporalem
nobis debitam: sed quod mediate eam tollat, quatenus gratiam a^ ea habemus,
sine qu^ nihil valeret nostra satisfactio.] Which words they may understand
that can; For I cannot. The Jesuit. walks in the dark: seeking to hide this
shameful Injury to the Merits of Christ, but it will not be. It Is too apparent
that Christ is to them of no account. Only for a fashion they make use of his
Name, when they have reckoned up a bedrol of their own Merits, and Sts Merits,
and such other trash, then to conclude all with a [ Per Iesum Christum Dominum
nostrum.] That Is the burden of the Song, and the oil that seasons all the
Salet: as Tabula de differentia 4 part. Tom. 2. cap. 15. 16.
Marnix merrily.

4. That distinction of Satisfaction in Strict Justice, and satisfaction in
favorable acceptance is vain in this business. We grant indeed that our good
works done out of Faith, are pleasing to God, and graciously accepted of him:
but can it appear, that God accepts them as satisfactions to his Justice? No
Scripture intimates any such thing, That God's favor does thus dispense with
his Justice, and make that satisfaction acceptable, which is in it self no
full satisfaction of his Justice. Shall we think that God in this case is put
upon those terms of Necessity, and complement which fall out in humane
satisfactions, between Man and Man? It may so fall out that a Creditor (to
whom 1000 Crowns are owing) may be content if the debtor will yield up his
whole Estate, though not worth 50. Because no more can be had. So in case of
offense, Bell. lib. 4. de Paenit. cap. 1.
sometime, a little formality, or a word or two of confession of the wrong may
be accepted for satisfaction. But God wants no means to receive full
satisfaction of us, either upon our own persons, or upon Christ for us. And
therefore it is without ground to imagine such a facility and partiality of his
Justice, as to be satisfied with a few poor complementall Formalities.
Satisfactions to God's Justice we acknowledge none; but such as are in Justice
sufficient. Such are Christ's satisfactions. But as for us, we have nothing to
do with satisfactions, but with free Pardons.

5. This Doctrine of humane satisfactions taught in the Church of Rome is
altogether full of uncertainty, and ergo, brings no rest and peace unto men's
Consciences, at all. God pardons the fault: but requires the punishment say
they. But when is this? Is it always? No, sometimes he pardons both. But can
they tell certainly when he does? when not? At Martyrdom he pardons all. How
know they that? or how know they he does it not at other times too? Contrition
(say they) if it be vehe^nen^, satisfies for all. But can they tell us the i^st
asure of that Contrition which is satisfactorie? It may be the party is
contrite enough: yet the Pre^st enioynes Penance when it is needless. It may be
he is not co^^^ite enough: yet no penance enjoined. Where Is the certainty,
what is to be done in such a case? Christ (say they) has satisfied for the
Aeternity of Hell punishments. Well. But can they tell how many years or days
are left unsatisfied for; that so all things may be fitted according to the
Race of time? Laborious works, of Prayers, Fastings, Almes-de^ds, satisfy for
temporal Punishments in this life (say they) Sup^ose it be so. Are they sure
they can also satisfy the pains of Pu^gatorie? The Priest enjoynes
satisfactorie penance. But is he sure he enioynes just so much as will do the
Feate? Is he certain that God will take that for payment, which he decrees to
be paid? What if there be not Aue-Maries enough etc? Again suppose there were
Evangelicall Counsels, as Vows of Chastity, Poverty etc. and that to do
these things were pleasing unto God. Are they sure they shall pass for
satisfactions presently? thou say I give this Alms, I vow Poverty, I do
this and that to satisfy Gods Justice for such or such a sin. What? Is it a
Match presently, that God must do as thou desire: and take what thou
offerest for payment? Soft there, a while. Where Is the warrant for that? Those
that are in Purgatory, when have they satisfied enough? who brings word, when
they are delivered? How knows the Pope when he has bestowed upon them
sufficient supererogatiue Money to pay the Fees of the Prison? Or does S.
Michael that hold's, the Scales send him word, when their satisfactions weigh
down their Sins? Not to reckon more up; there is in all this Doctrine no
firm ground whereon a distressed Soul may cast anchor: But when it has once
let slip that maine Cable, whereupon it might rid it out in all storms ( the
satisfaction of Christ) afterward it is carried a d^ift upon all hazards of
Winds and Seas.

6. The-^rpractise betraies their Opinion. Did they indeed think that there
were any severity in Gods Justice, any necessity or sufficiency in such
their satisfactions, it is not possible, they would prostitute such thing's in
so base a manner, as they do. But when an Aue Maria, a Pater noster before
such or such an Altar; a wax-Candle to such a Saint; a kiss of such a cold
stone; a pilgriamage to Compostella for cockle-shels; a lash or twain upon the
Bare; two or three meals meat forborne; a pardon purchased at a few Deniers;
yea when the roughnes and meanness of Adams figgleaue breeches shall be
accounted a worthy matter to satisfy for his sin, as De po^nit. lib 4. cap.
9. sect. 5. Irenaeus.
Bellarmine most ridiculously doates; I say, when such base trifles shall be
reckoned to be valuable satisfactions to Gods Justice: they must pardon us if
we guess at their meaning. They may dispute and talk while they will in big
words and fair glosses of Bridles against Sins, and I know not what: but in
fine all proves but Gins to catch money: But such as serve themselves thus,
upon God; and play with his Justice, as the fly with the Candle; let them take
heed, lest in the end, they be consumed by it.

To leave then these vain Inventions. Let us give to God the glory that is due
to his name: and so we shall well provide for the peace of our Souls. Trusting
entirely and only unto that Name of Acts Apost, cap, 4. v. 1^.
Jesus Christ. besides which, there is not in Heaven, or in Earth (in Man or
Angel) any name, Merit, Power, Satisfaction, or whatsoever else, whereby we
may be saved. And thus much touching the first maine branch of the matter of
our Justification, namely Our own Righteousness, Whereby, it appears
sufficiently, that we shall never be justified in Gods Sight.

n t THe dxa.
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF EVERY Section and Chapter in this Book.
SECTION 1.
CHAP. I. The explication of these terms. First, Justice, or righteousness.
Secondly, Justification. CHAP. II. In what sense the word Justification ought
to be taken in the present controversy, and of the difference between us and
our Adversaries therein. CHAP, III. The confutation of our Adversaries cauils
against our acception of the word Justification.
SECT. 2.
CHAP. I. The orthodoxe opinion concerning the manner of Justification by
Faith, and the confutation of Popish errors in this point. CHAP. II. The
confutation of the Arminian error, showing that Faith does not justify, sensu
proprio, as it is an act of ours. CHAP. III. The confutation of Popish
doctrines, that other graces do justify us, and not Faith alone.
SECT. 3.
CHAP. I. Of the righteousness whereby a man is justified before God; that is
not his own inhaerent in himself: that in this life no man has perfection of
holiness inhaerent in him. CHAP. II. No man can perfectly fulfill the Law in
performing all such works, both inward and outward, as each commandment
requires, against which truth, Popish objections are answered. CHAP. III. No
man in this life can perform any particular good work, so exactly that in
every point it shall answer the rigor of the Law, proved by conscience,
Scriptures, reason, and Popish objections answered. CHAP. IIII. Three several
exceptions against the truths delivered in this 3 Section.
SECT. 4.
CHAP. I. Justification by works makes void the covenant of grace. Of the
difference between the Law and the Gospel. Of the use of the Law. Of the
erronecus conceit of our Adversaries in this point. CHAP. II. Of Bellarmine's
erroneous distinction of the word Gospel.
SECT. 5.
CHAP. I. Justification by fulfilling the Law, overthrows Christian liberty.
The parts of our Christian liberty. CHAP. II. Justification by works,
subjects us to the rigor and curse of the Law.
SECT. 6.
CHAP. I. The reconciliation of that seeming opposition, between S. Paul, and
S. James in this point of Justification. CHAP. II. The confirmation of the
orthodoxe reconciliation of S. Paul, and S. James, by a Logical Analysis of S.
James his disputation in his second Chapter.
SECT. 7.
CHAP. I. None can be justified by their own satisfaction for the
transgression of the Law. A brief s^mme of Popish doctrine, concerning humane
satisfactions for sin. CHAP. II. All sin is remitted unto us wholly in the
fault and punishment. For the only satisfaction of Jesus Christ.

