A defense of that which has bin written in the questions of the ignorant
ministry, and the communicating with them. By JOHN PENRI.
THere be two things (M. D. Some) wherein you by oppugning that truth which
out of the word of God I had set down, concerning the two former questions,
have been wanting both unto your self and to the cause; the defense whereof
you undertook. The former want of the 2. appears by your spare dealing in a
matter of such great weight; wherein you have dealt with so illiberall a hand,
that what has bin written by you, might seem to proceed rather from any, then
from a man whose gifts and learning seemed to promise the affordinge, of
greater and more weighty matters, then any set down in that treatise.

The number of my resons were many, you only have touched 2. of the^, the rest
are not dealt with. And therefore the cause as yet remains whole. For be it you
had answered these 2. as you have not, yet had you not satisfied the doutful
conscience of those that know not in these points which way to turn them, as
long as any one of my reasons remained unanswered.

In this point there is also another want, which I would had bin redressed. And
that is of two sorts. First, a manifest going from the controversy; For the
question being, whether ignorant men, not ordained of God for the gatheringe
together of the Saints, be ministers or no; you leave that, and prove the
Sacraments administered by them, viz. by popish priests, and our dumb
ministers in the days of blindness and ignorance to be sacraments, which is no
part of the matter in controversy, but another point to be discussed (if men
will be gotten at all to enter thereunto) when the former is determined and
decided.

Secondly, your reasons are so few, and so commonly known unto all, that for
their number, a small deate of paper might contain an answer unto them, for
their novelty, they could not put a man that had according unto knowledge,
but once allowed of the cause, to any great labor in answering them. As being
things so commonly objected by all, learned or unlearned, that hold our
readers to be ministers, and think it lawful to communicate with them, as by
course of spech they fall unto that discourse, where al men may easily see, that
there was a great oversight committed by M. SOME, in deeming that the oppugning
of a cause countenanced by most of the godly learned, would be taken in hand by
any, who could not answer the reasons which he might be sure would be objected
by all. And who could be ignorant, that the odious controversy, concerning the
profanation of baptism, both by popish priests and our dumb ministers, would
offer it self in the forefront to withstand the truth? that the civil
magistracy, the ministry of the dumb Levites, the corrupt outward calling
of our readers would require an answer, which are the reasons, and the only
reasons used by you.

The last want I find in you, is contained in the insufficiency of your
resons, which evidently show the insufficiency of the conclusion, that would
be inferred by them. Your resons are all of them faulty, either because they
desire that for granted which is the question, or make those things of like
nature, wherein there is a great dissimilitude. From the first of the 2. falts it
comes to pass, that you take for granted, that the writings of reverend and
godly men, as of Augustine, M. Beza, etc. will prove that, which the word of
the eternal God does not warrant. Hence you take it granted, that popish
priests were ministers: that the outward approbation of the Church makes a
minister; that whenever the word of institution is pronounced with the
outward element, there must presently be a Sacrament, that I take an evil
minister for no minister; that there was a nullity both of Caiphas his
ministry, because he came in by briberye, and of the litigious ministers in
the Church of Philippi, etc. How soever you take those things as granted
principles, 1. Phil. 1.15.
yet they are the points in controversy, and so far from being yielded unto by
me, that I have showed every one of them to be manifestly false.

The dissimilitude is in the reasons drawn from the Leuitical priesthood, and
the ciui magistracy, with whom if you compare the ministry of the new
covenant, you shall find, first that you bring in a similitude to show that
which is not proved; and secondly that you make those to be twins, which
all men must needs grant to be as unlike, as crooked and straight lines are
unmatchable.

And thus much I thought needful generally to set down concerning your
manner of dealing: Not that I would any way disgrace, you who^ I reverence, for
that is no part of mine intent, the Lord is my witness. Nay, I would be loath to
let that syllable escape me, that might give you or any else the least occasion
in the world, to think that I carrye any other heart toward you, then I ought
to bear toward a reverend learned man fearing God. And howsoever, unless you
alter your judgment, I can never agree with you in these points; because I am
assured you swerve from the truth: yet this disagreement shall be so far from
making a breach of that bond of love, wherewith in the Lord I am tied unto
you, that I doubt not, but we shall be at one in that day, when al of us shall be
at unity in him that remains one and the selfsame for ever.

Now I am to come to your book, from the 20. page whereof, unto the 28. laying
the foundation of the reasons you use against me, to prove the lawfulnes of
communicatinge with dum ministers, you handle two neadles points. First that
they which were baptized by popish priests, have received true baptim as
touching the substance. Secondly that they are the sacraments of baptism and
the holy supper of the Lord, which are delivered in the Church of England by
vnpreching ministers. In these two points M. Some, you have proved nothing
that my writings have denied; but you have quickened a dead controversy, not
unlikely to give the wrangling spirits of this age, cause to breed greater
sturres in the Church. I see no other effect, which the handling of these
questions can bring forth but this. And it is to be feared that the
slendernes of the reasons used in your book, to prove that which you have
undertaken to show; will geeue occasion unto mannie, who of themselves are
too too ready to iangle, to doubt of that whereof before they made no question.
So that by seeking to stay the course of a needful controversy, you have both
given it a larger passage, and opened the door unto a question very fruitless
in our time. you know I deal in neither of these points. If you cannot be
stayed from entering into controversies, that are very odious, and more
impertinent unto the matter in hand: it were good that the church were further
and more soundly satissied by you in these 2. points, which you alone in our
Church have publikly called in question. And for mine own part, when you
have done, I know not who will be your adversary, I see no reason why I
should deal in controversies of so small gain. Of this I am assured, that
neither popish priests, nor any other ignorant guides are ministers. whether
the element administered by the^, be a sacrament or no, look you to that, which
have in your treatise debated that, which my writings never called into
question. If you will needs prove readers to be ministers, because you can not
get me to deny that which has been administered to be a sacrament, you shall
but press that which will prove nothing. Your reason is, as if you should
say, that either all they which supply the places of ministers are ministers,
or else an inconvenience is likely to follow. A strange manner of demonstration,
Gods ordinance must needs be thrust out of the doors because an inconvenience
would be likely to ensue the admittinge of it. The cause will not be thus
answered at your hands; and I am sorry that a man so reverend in mine eyes,
has dealt so vnsubstantially in a matter belonging to the service of the
everliving God: the slenderness of the reason is apparent. In the latter end
of the book I have farther showed the same; thither I am to refer you and
the reader.

Now I could well ouerpasse these two points, because of themselves they
contain nothing that I have withstoode: But in as much as you have not only
grounded them upon false principles, and such as in no wise can be warraunted
by the canon of the word, but also infer upon their grant, that our readers
are ministers, and consequently, that it is no sin to communicate with them.
I am first to set down the state of the question, which in deed is and ought
to be decided between you and me concerning the elemente administered, both by
popish priests, and other unpreaching ministers: and secondly to examine the
grounds whereby you prove the element already delivered by them to be a
sacrament, which you know I do not deny to be so.

And this is the point that concerns our state rather then the other.
The question therefore is not whether the one or the other of them have
delivered a sacrament in respect of the action done; but whether a christian
going unto them for those holy seals, may be assured, that he can receive the
same at their hands. I affirm that we can not; M. Some takes it granted
that we may; my warrant is out of the word, because there is no promise made
to us therein, that the action celebrated by such men, is a sacramental action,
and where there is no promise, there can be no assurance, because our
assurance arises only of faith, which must be grounded upon the promises set
down in the word; we have no promise that they can deliver us a sacrament,
because they are no ministers. For they only are enjoined by our Savior
Christ to deliver a sacrament, Matthew. 28.18.19.
neither do we know what he can deliver which is no minister.

So that the question is now grown to this issue, whether popish priests and
our vnpreachinge ministers, be ministers or no; whom if I can prove to be
none, then the matter is clear, that no man going unto them for the sacrament,
can assure himself there to have the same. And this shall be a general
reason, equally belonginge unto both the points handeled by you, the
particulars whereof shall follow in their places.

That no popish priest therefore is a minister.
1 Every minister must be at the least by profession, a member of the true
Church. No popish prist is by profession a member of the true Church. Therefore
no popish priest is a minister. 2 Every minister has an office with in the
body of the Church. No popish priest has an office within the body of the
Church. Therefore no popish priest is a minister.
The propositions or first part of both these reasons are set down evidently
and plainly by the wisdom of God, in these words. For as we have many
members in one body, Romans 12.4 5.6.
and all members have not one office; so we being many, are one body in
Christ, and every one an others members, seeing then that we have gifts that
are diverse. etc.

The place shows clearly, that whosoever is not a member, is not of the
body, if not of the body, then no minister. A gain, whosoever is no member,
he has no office in the body; if no office, no minister. He that should
object that in this place is mente a member of the body, by election in the
secret counsel of God, and not in the acknowledgemente of the Church by
profession, would not deserve the answering, Because it is vocation and not
election, that makes such a member in the church as may have an office
therein; of which sort the Apostle speaks in this place. by vocation, I mean
that whereof the holy ghost speaks, where it is said, Many are called, but
few are chosen: Matthew. 20.10.
neither can any man deny him to be a member of the Church, which by outward
profession submits himself unto true religion, and such are the members,
whereof the Apostle speaks: To be a member so the true Church is one thing,
and to be a true member of the Church is another thing.
namely such as are members in the judgment of the Church, Judas was a member
in the judgment of the Church, though not belonging to election. A further
proof of the propositions you shall find. 1. cor. 12.26.28. He was no priest
in the old testament, that was not a Jew by profession; yea, and of the line
of Aaron to: and shall he be accounted a minister among us, that is a stranger
from the profession of the truth, and a professed Idolater? Ishmael and Esau,
were circumcized, and the sons of those fathers unto whom the covenant was
made; Even I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. They and their
posterities fell from true religion: well admit that the profanatio^ of
circumcision had still continued in their houses: yet a man supplying the place
of a priest among them, was no priest in deed, though he ten thousand times
profaned circumcision, and would brag never so often, that he worshipped after
his Idolatrous manner, no other God but the God of his father Abraham, and swear
only by the fear of his father Isaak. The reason hereof, is, because that
every priest under the law, must be an Israelite by profession, that is a
member of the true Church, neither could any of the godly assure themselves,
that an Edomitishe priest administered true circumcision according to the
substance. Now I reko^ of a popish prist no otherwise the^ I would have done of
an Ismaelitishe or Edomitish circumcisiser; the profanation of that seal of the
covenant, still continuing in mount Seir.

Whereas in the assumption or second part of both the reasons, I deny popish
priests to be members of the church; my meaning is not that there are none of
the elect, within the body of popery, whom the Lord may call in his good
time: For I would not deny this unto Mahometism, or that there are not left in
popery certain rubishes and steps of true religion, for this difference I
make between the^ and other Infidels, though the Jews also may claim this
unto themselves. But I mean that the popish religion is such a religion as
whosoever lives and dies in the profession thereof: he lives and dies out
of the Church, where salvation is not possibly to be had, for any thing that is
made known unto man. Whence it necessarily follows, that in popery there is
no Church. If it be objected that the papists are within the covenant,
inasmuch as long since they professed the truth. Mine answer will be, that
popery was never the truth as yet, that no papist in that he was a papist,
ever professed the truth, and that God made no covenant with professed
Idolators, as all papists are.

Antichrist I grant should sit as God in the temple of God, 2. These. 2.4.
but it was never the temple of God, since he planted his pestilent chair
therein. Popery in deed has invaded the seats and possessions of true
religion, and began first where the truth was professed. For the mystery of
iniquity first appeared within the Church, and not elsewhere, where true
religion flowrished, and not among the heathen: neither could he be that
adversary, whose beginning should be in Paganism. But although popery took
root in the soil where the true Church was planted; yet it so grew there,
that it still continued to be the synagogue of Satan, and could never as yet
be the Church of God; howsoever it has ouergrowen the possession thereof. And
what though their fathers, who now are papists, were within the covenant, as
professing true religion; shall it therefore follow that their Idolatrous
sons should be so to: If they return the Lord has mercy in store for them
I deny not. But what is there in this point said for the papists, which the
Jews cannot with far more show of reason pretend for themselves? The
profaning of baptism among the papists can make them no more to be within the
Church, then the continuance of the profanation of circumcision among the
Ishmaelits and Edomits could keep them under the covenant. And why should
^^opish baptism any more tie the ^^^des covenant to an Idolatrous race, then
an Ishmaelitish or Edomitish cutting off of the foreskinne, link him to be the
God of those adulterous generations. Oh, but the Lord himself has said, In
Isaak shall thy seed be called, Romans 9.7. genesis 21.12. Mal. 1.2.3. romans 9.13.
and Iaacob have I loved, and hated Esau; why the same Lord in respect of his
revealed will, for with his secret election men must not meddle, has said, the
professors of true religion do I love, but the Idolatrous papists my soul
abhors; It will be here demanded, whether I make no more account of popish
baptism, then of (...) Edomitish circumcision, I see no reason why I should.
For a circumcised Edomite being received, to be a true worshipper at Jerusalem,
should as well content himself with that circumcision (circumcision being not
a thing invented by man, or don in respect of man, but ordained by the Lord,
and done in regard of the covenant made unto Abraham) as we do with popish
baptism, which is not called in question.

And yet that which is spoken concerning the profession of the truth, by the
forefathers, is not altogether true in poperye; for there be many large regions
now professing popery, where not so much as the name of Christ was heard,
until they were become grossly popish. So that their first step was out of
paganism unto poperye. And this is the estate of all those poor oppressed
vassals the west Indians, who now in great nombers profes Romish Idolatry. For
at such time as the Spanyard inuading their land, brought upon them the most
miserable slavery of body and soul, that are upon any people under heaven,
they had not so much as heard whether there was any Christ, Peter. M. de
rebus Occeanicis. Decad 4.5.
but were most hethnish, and senceles Idolaters, as may appear by the popish
hystoriographers themselves, who wrote the stories of those times. And
therefore (to omit, whose posterities many of the nations within Europe are,
that have refused the light of the Gospel) though it were granted, that the
rest of the popish rabble were with in the covenant; yet these miserable hethe^
papists, can be said to be under no covenant, but that which is made unto
popery and paganism, I hope M Some, howsoever you may be persuaded, that
other popish shauelings can deliver a sacrament, yet that you will doubt,
whether any man could be assured to receive those holy seals at the hands of
the heathen massemongers remaining in Cuba, hispaniola, Mexico, or any other
the Eastern parts.

And thus much concerning the assumption, I am not ignorant that famous and
worthy men, M. Calvin epist. 103.
have otherwise written concerning the popish Church, and therefore I am not
to be pressed with their authority.

I might in the 3. place use against you M. Some, a reason of your own thus
concluded. No ministerye is sacrilege, because every ministerye is an
ordinance of God, which cannot be turned unto sacrileage. The popish pristhood
is sacriledg, as you have set down, page 21. Therefore the popish priesthood is
no ministry, and consequently popish priests are no ministers. You may see
that you have ouerthrown your own cause. But this manner of reasoninge,
although it should be of force against your self, inasmuch as your own words
are brought to express your own meaning, yet I account insufficient, my third
reason therefore is this.

3 They are no ministers whose very ministerye overthrows directly the
priesthood of our savior christ But the very ministry of popish priests,
directly overthrows the priesthood of Christ: therefore they are no
ministers.

I know not what can be pretended against the proposition, unless men would
dream of a ministry, with whom the priesthood of the Lord Jesus cannot
stand. The latter part of the reason is true, Heb. 9.28. and 10.10. 1. john
1.7 act. 4.12. Ephesians. 1.7. Heb. 10.12.15. and 9.26. Heb. 5.25. and 10.14. and
9.14.
if it be true that Christ is the only sacrifice for sin, that he is no
more to be offered, that by once offering himself, he has made full
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, and that the popish priests
daily sacrifice to apease Gods wrath, for the sins of the quick and the dead.

Lastly, they are no ministers who are made, that is, called, elected and
ordained by Idolaters. Popish priests are called, chosen and ordained by
Idolators. Therefore they are no ministers.

The proposition appears in that a minister can be made by none, but by such
as unto whom the Lord has given leave to deal in that action, otherwise the
action is frustrate. As if a company of women, though religious and godly,
should go about to make a minister, the action is nothing. Of the assumption
that popish priests are made by Idolators, I make no question. And when did god
give Idolators leave to make ministers.

Seeing therefore that popish priests are no ministers, I see no show of
probability whereupon my faith, or the faith of any can be assured to receive
true baptism at their hands: unless it can be showed by you, M. Some, that
either there may be faith where there is no promise, or that there is a
promise to receive a sacrament where there is no minister, which no man of any
christian modesty will affirm. Hence also it follows, that neither the
obstinate crew of recusants in this land, who offer their children to be
profaned by traiterous and runnagate Jesuits, nor any else within the body of
the Romish Babylon, can assure themselves that their children receive the
substance of baptism. My reasons besides that they are no ministers, are
these. And I desire that they may be examined by you, good M. Some; where you
must remember that I speak not of that which has been done yesterday, but of
the assurance that may be had of that which to morrow is to be done.

Where there is no true christ whereunto men can be engraffed by baptism:
There true baptism as touching the substance cannot be gotten; Romans 6.3. gal.
3.27.
for what baptism is that, which is not an ingraffinge into the true Christ.

But in popery there is no true christ, whereunto men may be ingraffed, because
he is not the true Christ, who cyther will not, Romans 5.15.19.
or cannot satisfy the wrath of God for the sins of the elect, without their
merits, Heb. 5.25.
and such is the Christ professed in popery and no other.

Therefore men can not be assured to have the substance of baptism in the
popish Church.

No man can assure himself to have the substance of baptism out of the
Church, and that by those that are without the Church, for then a sacrament
might be had out of the Church, which were very impious and absurd to be
affirmed.

But popery is out of the Church, and so are all popish priests.

Therefore no man can assure himselt to have the substance of baptism in popery
by any popish priest.

That there is no Church at all in popery, and that al popish priests are out
or the Church, besides the former reasons, this one does further show, If there
be a Church in popery, or if all popish priests be not out of the Church,
then those magistrates that have separated themselves and their subjects (and
all others that made this separation) from the Romish religion, as from that
synagogue where salvation is not to be had, and consequently, where there is no
Church, are schismatikes, to speak the least. Because it is a schism to make
this separation from the Church, detest the corruptions thereof we may, but
make such a separation from the Church, we ought not unless we would be
accounted schismatiks. But those magistrates and their people, that made this
separation, are not schismatickes, because in popery the foundation is
overthrown, You say in your book (M, Some) page 33. that you could press the
argument of the magistracy against me very far; whether you may or no, that
shall be considered when I deal with the point, but this I am assured off,
that in this point, you shall be driven either to defend the absurditye, that
baptism is to be had out of the Church in a company estraunged from
Christ, which I think you will not do, or urged so far, as to the plain
breach of a statute (which far be it from me) even in the cause of treason.
Will ye say that baptism may be had out of the Church: 13. Eliza. A strange
Church that has not Christ for the foundation.
the assertion is absurd; or will you hold that there is a church in popery? the
assertion is dangerous, and I have proved it false. It is dangerous because it
affirms our magistrates to be schismatiks, My meaning is only to show the
danger, and not to press the fame.
inasmuch as they have separated themselves from the Church: I hope rather then
you will fall in to either of these points, that you will grant me the cause.

Lastly, if men might be assured that they could have the true substance of
baptism in popery, then they ought not to keep their children from popish
baptism, if there were no other baptism in the world to be had. For men might
come to their baptism and detest their corruptions, if it be Gods baptism,
as you M. Some affirmed it to be, page 20. And they can ad an edifying word
unto the sacrament: if the recital of the words of institution be an edifying
word, and that be sufficient to make a sacrament, both which you have
written, page 23.24. But men ought rather to keep their children unbaptized,
then to offer them to be profaned by popish baptism, both for the former
reasons, and because we ought to have no more fellowship with papists in the
service of God, then with pagan Idolaters. M. Calvin has written otherwise in
this point, L. Zo. 'Epist. 10.4.
therefore again I appeal to the word.

Seeing therefore in popery there is no Church, no ministry, no Christ; seeing
we ought in no case to be joined with papists in their religion, but to be
separated from them, as from those that are out of the church; and such as are
become a very filthy cage and nest of unclean and sacriledgious Idolators:
therefore also it necessarily follows, that neither our popish recusants, nor
any else, offering their children to be baptized in the popish synagogue, by
those polluted and unclean priests; may assure themselves that they can be
there pertakers of true baptism, as touching the substance of baptism.

Now to the examination of your reason brought to prove that they which were
baptized in popery, have rece iued true baptism. Your conclusion you must
remember, I do not deny, though your reason proves not the same, which is
thus framed.

Whosoever deliver Gods baptism, they deliver true baptism; but popish
priests deliver Gods baptism: therefore true baptism.

You have changed the conclusion from that which was done, unto that which is
done, but this oversight I omit the assumption you thus prove.

Whosoever baptize in the name, not of Pope or Idols, but of the holy Trinity,
they deliver Gods baptism; but popish priests do baptize in the name of the
holy trinity: therefore they deliver Gods baptism.

Your proposition in this last syllogism, is most false, and such as upon the
grant whereof, not only the communicating with unpreaching ministers, might
be aduouched, but also Gods whole ordinance in the institution of his holy
sacraments quite overthrown. For if it were true that there were no more
required to make substantial baptism (as you here require no more) but to
baptize in the name of the trinity; then these impious absurdities would
follow thereof.

1 That an Amalekite might deliver true circumcision, as touching the
substance. 2 That true baptism might be administered unto a substance not
capable of baptism, but this odious instaunce I will not urge. 3 That a woman,
4 That any man not being a minister, as a child of five years old, a Turk or
Jew might deliver true baptism as touching the substance. For these
pronouncing the words of institution, might retain by your reason, the
essential form of Christ's baptism, and so to use your own words; they
baptizing not in the name of Pope or of Idols, but of the holy trinity, should
deliver Gods baptism and not man's? if Gods baptism, then true baptism I am
sure, in like manner, by this reason they should be Catabaptistes, which deny
men to be rightly baptized by Turks or women. I would be full sorry that the
errors of the Katabaptists or Anabaptists, could not be confuted by you with
sounder reasons then this you have brought; and I would be also sorry that you
should defend such absurd co^sequents as I will drive you whether you will or
no, unless you revoke (as I hope you will) that which you have written.
pardone me I pray you. I deal as reverently as I may with you, retaining the
majesty of the cause I defend; and I deal not against you, but against an
erroneous assertion, which I now leave; desiring you very earnestly, that you
would consider how irreverently the ordinance of God in the holy sacraments is
dealt with when the same is made to depend upon the pronouncing of a few
syllables, without any consideration either of the person who is to administer,
or of the substantial form of consecration contained in the exposition of the
holy institution of baptism, and the invocation of the name of God, al which
are necessarily required in the administration of baptism, and could not
possibly be in Egypt, where all was and covered under the darkness of a
strange tongue. Your distinction that popish priests have a calling, though a
faltie, is a begging of the question. For as I have showed, popish priests
have no calling at all in the Church, and therefore how can they sit in the
chair of the ministry? Is there a ministry out of the Church, Caiphas his
priesthood comes afterward to be considered of. The second point is to be
handled next.

That unpreaching ministers are no ministers.

They are affirmed to be no ministers, not because they are evil ministers,
but because their ministerye is an evil and profane mininistery: So that in
this point the fault is not found with the evil minister, but with the evil
ministry. Their ministry is profane and evil, because there is no mention
made of it in the word. And a ministerye not mentioned in the word is no
ministry but a profane constitution. For the Lord has expressly set down
every ministry of the new testament, that should be in the Church unto the
worlds end; Ephe. 2.11
whereas he has not once mentioned the ministry of our readers, because it is
not a preaching ministerye. The sum of this whole controversy is contained
in these three axioms.

1 Every ministry is expressly set down in the word. Romans 12.6.7.8. 1. Cor.
42.28. romans 10.14. 1. Cor. 1.21.


2 Every ministry of the new testament is a preaching ministry.

8 The ministry of our unpreaching ministers, is not a preaching ministerye.

If you can show either of these 3. points to be false, I am overthrown, if
neither, you must yield. The truth of all three, I have showed out of the word,
in the last edition of my book. The two former are confirmed by the places
quoted on the margent, the latter I will briefly prove by these reasons.

1 If the ministry of unpreaching ministers be a preaching ministerye, or if
their function be a pastoral or doctorall function, then there had been a
preaching ministry, a pastoral and doctorall function known in the Church,
though there never had been any preacher therein. Otherwise, how can their
ministerye be a preaching ministry, or their function be a pastoral
function, whereas the same may be in the Church, no preaching ministry or
pastoral function being known there? But no Church, much less a ministry
had there been known, if there never had been any that could have preached;
because God ordained the saints and so a Church, only to be gathered together
by preaching ordinarily, but not by the ministry of readers, because it might
have been in the world, and yet no saint gathered thereby; which thing
experience in our Church proves to be to true.

My 2. and 3* reasons are drawn out of these words of Paul, Romans 13.6.7.8.
Seeing then that we have gifts that are diverse, acording to the grace that is
given unto us; whether we have prophecy, let us prophecy, according to the
proportion of faith; or an office, let us wait on the office; or he that
teaches on teaching, or he that exhorts on exhorting, etc. the 2. reason is
thus concluded.

Whosoever has received a ministerye, and so a pastoral or doctorall
function, he has received prophecy spoken of in this place, verse 6. Because
every pastoral or doctorall function, mentioned in the 7. and 8. verse, under
these words: he that teaches, he that exhorts; are contained under the word
prophecy. verse 6. Insomuch as he that has not received that prophecy there
set down, whereby is meant the interpretation of the word; he has not received
the pastoral or doctoral function set down verse. 7.8. But unpreaching
ministers have not received the prophecy spoken of in this place, which is
expressly set down, verse 6. to be one of the diverse gifts bestowed for the
gouerme^t of the body, which is the church. Therefore also, they have received
neither a pastoral nor a doctorall function, and so no preaching ministerye.

3 No ministry is separated from a gift, because prophecy spoken of in this
6. verse, under which as we see, every pastoral and doctorall ministry is
contained, can not be severed from a gift: but the ministry of our readers is
severed in them from a gift: therefore in them it is no ministry.

It is no ministerye in them I say, although that ministerye, the general name
whereof they have, is not severed from a gift in preaching ministers: but what
is that to them? what is the ministerye of other men unto them? they are not
ministers, by the ministry wherewith other men are endued, but by their own,
which being severed from a gift, is no ministry. Paul had been no Apostle,
and had received no Apostleslip, unless he could have said, I am a minister
according unto the grace given unto me, Ephe. 3.7. and not according to the
grace given unto other Apostles: the general name of whose Apostleship I am
entitled with. A ridiculous speech it were, to say mine apostleshipp has
received grace, but I that am the apostle have received none.

How then may our readers claim a preachinge ministerye unto themselves, seeing
the ministry which they challenge is altogether in them with out a gift,
though it be not so in others?

4 Every unpreaching minister sins in executing the works of a pastoral
function, as the sacraments. etc therefore he has no ministry; and so nyether
a pastoral nor doctorall function. He has no ministry, because, his calling
is not the calling of the ministry, his calling is not the calling of the
ministerye, because he sins in intermedlinge with the works thereof. And
this is an infallible truth, that no man sins because he deals with the
works of his calling. For this is the duty that God requires at the hands of
every man. Many sin in deed because they walk corruptly in their callings,
and have no care to glorify God therein. Col. 3.17. But leave thy corruption
and thou sinnest not, in keeping thee to the works of thy calling. The
hypocrites in the days of Isayah. 1.13 sinned not because they offered
sacrifice, but because they did the same through hypocrisy. Their hypocrisy
they ought to have left, but not his service in sacrificing according to his
commandment; but our readers though they should with as little corruption,
and as great zeal to Gods glory and the good of his Church as any men, deal
in the works of a pastoral ministry, yet they should still do that which the
Lord had forbidden them to do, whence it appears, that the works of the
ministry are not the works of their caling. For God forbids no man to deal
therewith, and not the being works of their calling, they are no ministers,
and have neither pastoral nor doctorall function.

5 This is farther showed, forasmuch as the Lord does not commit unto bare
reders the charge of those souls, over whom they are, which he does unto every
one that has a pastoral function, Acts. 20.16.28. 1, these. 5.12 Heb. 13.17.
For to what end else, should he commit a ministerye unto any, who have souls
under their charge? The Church indeed may commit the souls of men unto reders,
but certainly the Lord commits none unto them. And he is no minister, unto
whom the Lord does not co^mite this charge, as the places before quoted do
show. For the Lord has in his word, ordained not only offices, the executors
whereof should have the oversight of souls, but also the persons who were to
execute those functions. 1. Cor. 12.28. 1. Pet. 4.10. rom 12.6.7.8. Ephesians.
4.7.11. Now unpreaching ministers are non of those persons, because the Lord
knows the^ not to be able to feed souls. And let not men be so injurious
unto the Lord, as to affirm, that he according unto his revealed ordinance
(for thereof I speak as of a ministry, and not of his secret judgments)
bequeathed the souls of men to be starued and kept from salvation, As he must
needs be convinced to do if he bequeathed them unto those men, the
dispensation of whose ministry is able to beget none, feed none, save none.
you must understand again, that I speak of the ministry whereby readers are
ministers, that is of their own, and not of the ministry whereby preaching
ministers are ministers, wherewith readers have nothing to do.

Moreover how can the Lord be said to commit the charge of souls according
to his own revealed ordinance, unto those who may truly object unto him, that
he deals injuriously with the^, by exacting those things to be performed
at their hands and in their own persons, as necessary duties of their
callings, unto the performaunce whereof, they have received no ability from
him. Is man to be aunswerable unto the Lord of that which he never received?
does the Lord require the use of that tallent which he never bestowed? does
he lay that upon any, whereof he may have just cause to complain? when did
he impose a charge upon any, unto whom he gave not gifts to discharge the
same? now the charge of souls which he commits unto any, he requires at
their hands unto whom he has committed it, which he could not do, if he had
not given ability to the discharge thereof.

What then? shall ignorant ministers be free from the blood of souls, in
as much as the lord never committed any soul unto their charge. It were well
with the^ poor men, if the case so stood. But alas it is not so. And yet the
cause of their destruction proceeds not from their unfaithfulness in the
discharge of that vocation which he has allotted unto them, but it comes
justly upon them, in that they have desperately thrust the^seiues contrary unto
Gods revealed will, upon those men with the oversight of whose souls God never
trusted such as they are. The Lord says unto them, intrude your seiues and you
will, unto the places of pastors, and so enforce me to bring heavy and swift
damnation upon you: but surely I will bequeath no soul unto your custodye. They
on the other side in their practice say, Lord whether thou committest unto us
any charge of any soul or no, we care not, but rather then we should not
have the means to live in this life, (for this is their only scope in
continuinge in the ministerye) require the blood of souls, and what thou will
at our hands. And so senseles men, they sell themselves, body and soul unto
everlasting woe and destruction.

The pretense that the Lord commits the chardge of souls unto their
ministry, and not unto them, is first a desiring of that in question; (for
they are denied to have any ministry) and otherwise many wais insufficient. 1
Because the Lord commits not the charge of souls there, where the
punishment of their destruction cannot take hold, as it can not upon the
ministry: Act. 20.28.
2 the ministry is but a dead thing of it self; most beautiful in deed, as
being an ordinance of the Lord, but able to save none, unless it be committed
unto a person, who in the execution thereof, is able to show himself to be
appointed of God for that glorious work. This is taught Ephesians. 4. where the
Apostle verses 6 and 7. having spoken of the gifts bestowed upon men for this
ministerial work, ascribes verse. 11.12* the gathering together of the
saints, not unto the gifts or functions, but unto men endued with the said
gifts. For he does not say that the Lord has appointed for the gathering
together of the saints, an apostleshipp, a pastoral or doctorall function,
etc. but that he ordained apostles, pastors, etc. for that end and purpose;
whereunto because our readers were not appointed, it forcibly ensues that they
have no ministry, no pastoral or doctorall function, and so are no ministers:
which conclusion also in the last edition of mine Exhortation unto my
countrymen, I have enforced by many strong and as I am assured invincible
reasons, drawn out of the infallible truth of Gods word. I would entreat
yon M. Some, when you have answered the reasons I have now set down to
answer also, the 1.2.3. and 25. reason that I have there used. For you shall
but strive in vain against the conclusion, as long as the premises whereby it
is inferred remain firm. If the reader would be further satisfied in this
point concerning the dumb ministry, he is to be referred unto that which in
the aforesaid treatise I have set downe^.

Now to the conclusion, If unpreaching ministers be no ministers, and if I
cannot be assured to receive a sacrament, but only at the hands of a minister;
both which you see M. Some to be proved by me, then cannot I assure my self,
that an unpreaching minister can deliver a sacrament unto me: and therefore it
is unlawful for me or any christian to go unto an unpreaching minister for the
sacraments; if unlawful, then a sin, if a sin, the^ the godly are polluted
which go unto them for the sacraments: you know (M. Some) what I mean by an
unpreaching minister; namely, every one learned or unlearned, that cannot show
himself by the good trial of his gifts, to have that fitnes to teach, whereof
we read. 2. tim. 2.2.1. tim. 3.3. which ability the Lord does not ordinarily
bestow upon any in these our days, without the knowledge of the arts,
especially the two handmaydes of all learning, Rhethoricke and Logic, and the
two original tongues wherein the word was written. And therefore I am as
far from accounting the unskillful preachers, which speak hand ouerhead,
they care not what; against whom your complaint is very just to be ministers,
as I am from acknowledging many of our absurd doctors to be apt to teach, who
can bring nothing into the pulpit, but that which other men have written, and
that very often, so fit to the purpose, of edification, as the reason from the
corner to the staff, is soundly concluded. In these three sorts of supposed
ministers (and there could be a fourth added unto them) consists the woe of
our Church.

The rest of your book is now to be examined. Your conclusion, page 22. that
they which were baptized by vnpreching ministers, are rightly baptized as
touching the substance of baptism; I do not gainsay. Your reasons are weak.
For how could we prove your conclusion, if men should deny popish baptism to
be true baptism, as I do not you know and he should do me great injury, which
would lay that to my charge. Were it sufficient for us to say they were
Katabaptistes which deny popish baptism? How could this be proved? and this
should not prove the matter doubted off. Shall we say that they sin, in
not presenting themselves to be baptized. To whom should they present
themselves? who would baptize the^? Admit they sinned in receiving the Lords
Supper before they were baptized, should they therefore be bereaved of the
comfort of baptism? to affirm that this wear a goinge backward, is no
reason, because they were persuaded that they had baptism, otherwise they
would not have been so far on their journey, until they had been
accompanied therewith. But they omitted baptism of ignorance and not of
contemt: therefore they deny the receiving of the Lords supper to have been a
sin, any more then it would be a sin in them now to receive the Lords
supper, if they could not have baptism. Baptism they would have, if they
could orderlye come by the same. Because men will be so injurious unto them,
as to deny them the comfort of baptism which they cannot have, should they
deny to themselves the comfort of the Lords supper which they may have? Ye,
but no uncircumcised might eat the pascall lamb. Exodus 12.48. True; But what
shall we say unto those that were uncircumcised in the wilderness forty years
almost. Josh. 5.5. Did they never eat the passover all that time? If they
did, the place of Exodus will be quickly answered. It is plain that the
passover was celebrated in the wilderness once at the least. Nom. 9.1, If every
year, why should the godly of the family be excluded from the family be
excluded from the action, the cause why they were uncircumcised not being in
them. None uncircumcised might minister before the altar. True, but did non of
the Leuits that were borne in the wilderness teach Iaacob the law, or offer
the incense of his God in all those fourtye years?

Thus many things you see might be objected against your reasons, and I take
the objections to be of some weight, It had bin well you had considered of
them before you had published your book. And the baptism by unpreaching
ministers, must have better prooffes then any you have brought as yet, or else
I fear me, our posterities will not be satisfied therewith.

Your next reason, page 23. is slender. Readers pronounce the words of
institution with the delivery of the element, therefore say you they deliver a
sacrament: you have once already alleged this to prove popish baptism, page
20. I have answered it page 29. 30. 31. And the place of Matthew. 28.29. brought
in by you page 23. proves your consequent to be false. For it shows that he
who is to baptize, must be also able to teach, which ability is wanting in
our readers. Go says our Savior, and teach all nations, baptizing, etc.
Therefore if he that delivers the element be not able to teach, we cannot be
assured that it is a sacrament. Because the commandment is not generally to
all that could pronounce the words of institution, being thereunto permitted
by the corruption of the time, but perticularly limited unto them that can
teach, unless you will say, that the Lord bids the^ go teach, who cannot
teach which were not once to be concerned of his majesty. The corruption in
the Church of England, that the delivery of the element should be severed from
the preaching of the word, is a breach of Gods ordinance, you cannot deny,
Matthew. 28 19. act. 20.7. and therefore ungodly and intolerable. Whether it make
the action frustrate or no, that is not the question.

Your 3. reason page 24. is this.

Unpreaching ministers do ad an edifying word unto the element, therefore it is
a sacrament. This reason is the same with the former, which shows the great
nakedness and poverty of the cause, that one reason must be thrice perjured to
prove the goodness of it, which notwithstanding it cannot show. I deny the
antecedent, and consequent. Your reason of the antecedent, that the recital of
the sum of Christ's Sermon that is, the words of institution is an edifying
word is false, and maintains charming. For do you think that the word of
institution, being as you say, the sum of Christ's Sermon, is then an edifying
word, whenever it is recited by a profane person, even in the profanation of
Gods ordinance? Look 2. tim. 4.3. and you shall find that the word barely
read, and to no other purpose then to edify by reading, is not wholesome
doctrine. The popish priest either without or, within the book, pronounces
in his dark Latin, the sum of Christ's Sermon, is that an edifying word,
which he profanely breaths. The word of God uttered, is not an edifying
word, unless it be uttered according to the ordinance, both in regard of the
persons that utter the same, and the end wherefore it is uttered. No learned
man will deny the Lords prayer rightly said to be an edifying word. And yet
by your leave, no learned man unless he favors charming or popery, will say
that the Lords prayer pronounced by an ignorant man, in a strange tongue, or
profaned by a witch, is an edifying word.

Concerning your consequent, do you think that every one that can ad an
edifying word unto the eleme^t, may minister a sacrament? it is not so. For
Paul requires the words of every christian (women and al) to be edifying
words, Ephesians. 4.29. even in common talk. Shall therefore the element administered
by every christian be a sacrament? God forbid. And yet every christian can ad
the sum of Christ's sermon unto the element in the administration of the supper;
which if it were sufficient, as by your reason it is, then women, children,
etc. idiots that could not read might deliver a sacrament.

The reason concluding unpreaching ministers to be non, because they are not
apt to teach, you have twice repeated within one twelve lines, page 24.25. and
made two several objections thereof. That was an oversight: The sufficiency
of the argument, I have showed to be such, as Caiphas his ministry, and
Herod's magistracy brought in by you, page 25. 26. will never answer the same.
Both of them with the reason from the outward calling of readers, page 25. I
refer to your next chapter, where they are repeated: thither now I am come,
where the contradictorie of the question shall be set down and proved
briefly; because the nullitie of the unpreaching ministry, may be in steed of
a 1000. reasons to prove the same. By pollution, doubt not, you mean sin.

The godly do sin, which do communicate with unpreaching ministers.

Because 1. they communicate with those who are no ministers. 2. they cannot be
assured to receive a sacrament at their hands. 3 they do not examine
themselves aright, and so are not worthy receivers, 1. Cor. 11.28. inasmuch as
they do not acknowledge it a sin to communicate where there is no minister. 4.
because they either make the element to be a sacrament naturally in it self,
and not by the ordinance of God, or else think the ordinance of God in the
institution of the sacrament only to consist in the recital of the words; I
baptize thee, etc. or rake eat, etc, whereas a minister is a most principal
part of the ordinance. 5 Because they make the sacraments to be marks no more
estentiall unto the Church, then to other idolatrous synagogues. For the
element may be delivered out of the Church by a public person, even as
substantially, as by our mere readers. 6 They approve the sin of the
unpreaching ministry. Lastly, because they are persuaded, that Christ does
deliver unto them the seals or their salvation, by the hands of those that are
not ministers; to wit, by unpreaching readers. In all which points, the godly
sin, and therefore are polluted in communicating with unpreaching ministers.
Now let us see how you have proved the contrary.

Where the reader must again be put in mind, that I you have proved nothing
unless the question be granted unto you: and 2 that your reasons are
repeated too often.

The ministers ignorance say you, page 28. cannot pervert Gods ordinance: and
again, page 29. the sacraments are not the worse for the ignorance of the
minister, etc. All this I grant, but bare readers are not ministers, and the
doubt is, whether the action performed by them be the ordinance of God,
whether it be a sacrament. These be the questions which you ought to have
proved, and not have taken the^ as principles, though you do this: the 3 and 4
time, page 28. line 6. and 24.

M.D. Some, page 28. the worthy pertaker receives a blessing, if a blessing no
pollution.

John Penri; first it is doubted whether we may be assured that it is a
sacrament; 2 he is no worthy receiver that receives of an Idol ministers: 3
there may be a blessing received, and yet pollution in the receiver: Look 2.
Chronic. 30.17.18.19. Nom. 9.7. The objection concerning the giver and the
receiver, in your 31. pa. was never mine: I could turn it against you, but I
must be brief.

Concerning the nullity of our readers ministry, we are to know that there is
a nullitie of a ministerye before God; either because the action proceeds
from a corrupt minister, as psalm. 50.16. whom God would not have to deal with
his ordinances, or from a corrupt and evil ministerye, which is none of Gods
ordinance. The action of the former is substantial in regard of us, of the
latter we know no substance it can have. Of the former there is a nullitie
only in the sight of God; of the latter, both in respect of the Lord and also
of us. The nullitie of our readers ministry is of this latter sort, namely
such as we ought in no wise to account a ministry. Whereas therefore you
grant that there is a nullity of our readers ministry before God, and yet
affirm them to be ministers, you swerve from the point, and so your answer,
page 31. Is nothing to the purpose, but a desiring of the question after your
usual manner. As Caiphas then, and the rest of the sleepye dogs against whom
the prophet cries out, Isa. 56.9.
were wicked men, God would not have such to be his ministers: hither refer
Isa. 1.13. but as they had the ministry which God allowed of, they were
ministers unto the people. This ministry, our readers want, therefore they can
be ministers, neither in respect of the Lord, Ier. 29.31. Zac. 14.14.29.9. Zach
13.5. Iere. 29.25. There is a difference between the nullitie of the minister,
and the nullity of the ministry.
nor of the Church. Shemaiah was a wicked man, and a false prophet, so were the
rest of his stamp. The Lord detested both the^ and their ministry. Zephania
and Caiphas hie priests with their company, were as wicked as any of the false
prophets, the Lord abhorred the me^, but their ministry was his ordinance.

Hence M. Some, it follows, that neither the bribery of your Caiphas, nor the
blindenes of your ignorant Levites, can make such a nullitie of their
priesthood, as they should be no priests unto the people. And therefore great
reason why the parents of our savior, and the rest of the godly whereof you
speak. page 28, 19. should not leave the service of God for the pollution of
the priests. Isai speaks against blind watchmen, 56 10, but chap. 42.19.20.
It shall appear that they saw many things, but kept them not, I pray you confer
the places and it can never be proved that any of them were so blind, as they
could not declare by preachinge the general use of the sacrifices and
ceremonies. Their wants might be many but not like the insufficiency of our
readers. Beit they were as insufficient yet their ministry might be allowable.
For

Unfitness to teach, made not a nullitie of the Leuiticall priests office.

Because 1 it was sufficient to make him a lawful, though not a good priest,
Nom. 3.10 Leuit. 8. Exo. 29.
for him to be of the line of Aron: 2 there was no commandment concerning the
trial of his fitnes to teach: 3 It is not mentioned that any were put from the
pristhood for want of this ability, whereas the dout whether they were the
sons of Aaron. Ezra. 2.63. and their idolatry, 2. Chron. bereaved them
thereof; Act. 21.26.
4 the example of Paul confirms this, who communicated since his conversion
with those prists that were as unlearned as ever any; which he would not have
done if inability to teach, had made them no priests.

Now therefore M. Some to make your argument from the Leuiticall priesthood to
be forcible. For your vnpreching ministers, you must prove that either our
readers ministry is a Leuiticall ministry, that the continuance thereof is
under the new covenant or show that the corrupt aprobation, for so I name the
best outward calling they can have of the Church, is as forcible to make the^
ministers, as was the ordinance of God to make the sons of Aaron sacrificing
at Jerusalem to be priests. Now,

That the corrupt allowance of the Church cannot make our readers to be
substanciall ministers

For so all men and women, without or within the Church might be capable of the
ministry, because all may be capable of this outward alowa^ce; 2 and
perticularly a man, not furnished with natural capacity; 3 a man that could
not read, though he wanted also the gift of interpretation; for such a one
might recite the liturgy without the book; 4 the Church might make a man
minister against his will, though he should never consent thereunto. And this is
the willingness that I mean, when I say that the inward caling is contained in
the sufficiency of gifts, and willingness to practice, which willingness I gather
upon the words, Epith mei and oregetai, used of the A postle. Your reason
therefore from the malicious Philippian ministers, touches not the question. 1.
Tim. 3.1.
Thus Caiphas with his crew of unworthy and monstrous priests (who within a
few pages, in your book have impudently so often troubled the reader) is
answered. And I think it a great judgment of God that the ornaments of our
English and welsh ministry, for the most part consists in the deformity of
such loathsome spots.

M.D. Some page 32. They of whose magistracy there is a nullitye before God,
though they have an outward calling, ought not to be accounted magystrates.
I.P. You demand what I think of this proposition. Surely my judgment is, that
it is altogether without sense, and overthrows it self. For it is as if you
said, he of whose faith there is a nullitye before God, though he be assured of
his salvation is not to be accounted a faithful man. Why? to be assured of
salvation, and to have a nullitie of faith before God, cannot stand together.
No more can the outward calling of the magistracy stand with the nullity
thereof. For the outward calling makes a substantial magistrate.

There be three essential differences betvveene an evil magistrate and a
reading minister

1 The outward calling of an evil magistrate, makes him a substantial
magistrate, so cannot the outward alowance of readers make them to be
ministers. 2 The magistracy of an evil magistrate, may be allowable before
God, so cannot the ministry of readers. 3 Men may be assured to receive that
according to the ordinance of God substantially at the hands of an evil
magistrate, which concerns them to have from him, so can they not of a bare
reader; For there is no man that can assure himself to be pertaker of a
substantial sacrament, at the hands of such, and preach they cannot. I have
handled this point of the magistracy in my former book, from page 47. to 51.

But M. Some, where is that reason which you could press so far? is this it?
they of whose magistracy there is a nullity before God, ought not to be
accounted magistrates. I say your proposition is true, assume what you will, you
know what manner of nullity I mean.

My reason concluding the unlawfulness of communicatinge with readers having but
an outward calling: because it is a sin to communicate with them, which
only want the same having fitnes to teach, is such as I can not but marvel
that you would think it could be answered by a desiring of the question,
which is a fault in reasoninge, wherein be like you seem to take delight; you
say again, that readers deliver a sacrament. How can we be sure thereof, and
why may not I say as well, that a man endued with gifts to teach, does deliver
a sacrament, though he have no outward calling, which assertion would be
false. By an extraordinarye sacrament, I mean baptism or the Lords supper,
administered either privately by a minister, or any way by on that is no
minister. I never affirmed, the elements delivered by readers to be sacraments.
It is one thing not to deny them, another thing to affirm them to be
sacraments; the former I have written, the latter I never did; and they do my
writings great injury, that report the contrary.

Thus M. Some I have run through the points in your book that concerned me, I
have been driven to deal briefly therein. I had determined, and I am enforced
to end, and to omit that, which page 9. line 11. I promised to handle in the
latter end, with diverse other I have not the like liberty for printing that
you M. Some do enjoy. Let me but have the favor to be iudicially heard
according to the word, and I will personally upon the peril of my life, defend
these two points against all men. I am sorry that you whom I reverence, should
be the instrument to oppugn a truth. The Lord respect the cause of his own
glory, and pardon our sin. Amen.

ERRATA.
Page 1. line 20. and 23. for 2. read 3. page, 47. line 14. blot out, family be
excluded from the


