THE Old Wives Tale. A pleasant conceited Comedy, played by the Queens
Majesty's players.

Written by G. P.

Printed at London by John Danter, and are to be sold by Raph Hancocke, and
John Hardy. 1595.

The old VViues Tale.
Enter Anticke, Frolic and Fantastic. Anticke. HOw now fellow Frantic,
what all a mort? Does this sadness become thy madness? What though we have lost
our way in the woods, yet never hang the head, as though thou had no hope to
live till to morrow: for Fantastic and I will warrant thy life to night for
twenty in the hundred.


Frolic: Anticke and Fantastic, as I am frollicke franion, never in all my
life was I so dead slain. What? to loose our way in the wood, without either
fire or candle so uncomfortable? O coelum! O terra! O maria! O Neptune!


Fantas. Why makes thou it so strange, seeing Cupid has led our young master to
the fair Lady and she is the only Saint that he has sworn to serve.


Frollicke. What rests then but we commit him to his wench, and each of us
take his stand up in a Tree, and sing out our ill fortune to the tune of O man
in desperation.


Ant. Desperately spoken fellow Frollicke in the dark: but seeing it falls
out thus, let us rehearse the old proverb.

Three merry men, and three merry men,
And three merry men be we.
I in the wood, and thou on the ground,
And Jack sleeps in the tree.

Fan. Hush a dog in the wood, or a wooden dog, O comfortable hearing! I had
even as live the Chamberlain of the white Horse had called me up to bed.


Frol. Either has this trotting Cur gone out of his cyrcuit, or else are we
nere some village, Enter a Smith with a Lantern and Candle. which should not
be far off, for I perceive the glymring of a Gloworme, a Candle, or a Cats
eye, my life for a half penny. In the name of my own father, be thou Ox or
Ass that appearest, tell us what thou art.


Smith. What am I? Why I am Clunch the Smith, what are you, what make you in my
territories at this time of the night?


Ant. What do we make do thou ask? why we make faces for fear: such as if
thy mortal eyes could behold, would make thee water the long seames of thy
side slops, Smith.


Frol. And in faith Sir unless your hospitality do relieve us, we are like
to wander with a sorrowful hey ho, among the owlets, and Hobgoblins of the
Forest: good Vulcan, for Cupids sake that has cousned us all: befriend us as
thou may, and command us howsoever, wheresoever, whenever, in whatsoever,
for ever and ever.


Smith. Well Masters it seems to me you have lost your way in the wood: in
consideration whereof, if you will go with Clunch to his Cottage, you shall
have house room, and a good fire to sit by, although we have no bedding to put
you in.


All. O blessed Smith, O bountiful Clunch.


Smith. For your further intertainment, it shall be as it may be, so and so.

Hear a Dog bark.. Hark this is Ball my Dog that bids you all welcome
in his own language, come take heed for stumbling on thethreshold, open door
Madge take in guests. Enter old woman.


Ol. Welcome Clunch and good fellows all that come with my good man for my good
man's sake come on sit down here is a piece of cheese and a pudding of my own
making.


Anticke: Thanks Gammer a good example for the wives of our town.


Frolic: Gammer thou and thy good man sit lovingly together, we come to chat
and not to eat.


Smith: Well Masters if you will eat nothing take away: Come, what do we to
pass away the time? Lay a crab in the fire to roast for Lambes-wooll; what
shall we have a game at Trumpe or Ruff to drive away the time, how say you?


Fantastic: This Smith leads a life as merry as a King with Madge his wife;
Syrrha Frolic, I am sure thou art not without some round or other, no doubt
but Clunch can bear his part.


Frolic: Else think you me ill brought up, so set to it when you will. they
sing.


Song.
WHen as the Rye reach to the chin,
And chopcherrie chopcherrie ripe within,
Strawberries swimming in the cream,
And school boys playing in the stream:
Then O, then O, then O my true love said,
Till that time come again,
She could not live a maid.
Ant: This sport dooes well: but me thinks Gammer, a merry winters tale would
drive away the time trimly, come I am sure you are not without a score.


Fantast: I faith Gammer a tale of an hour long were as good as an hours
sleep.


Frol: Look you Gammer, of the Giant and the Kings Daughter, and I know not
what, I have seen the day when I was a little one, you might have drawn me a
mile after you with such a discourse.


Old woman: Well, since you be so importunate, my good man shall fill the pot
and get him to bed, they that ply their work must keep good hours, one of
you go lie with him, he is a clean skind man I tell you, without either
spauin or windgall, so I am content to drive away the time with an old wives
winters tale.


Fantast: No better hay in Devonshire, a my word Gammer, I Will be one of of your
audience.


Frolic: And I another that's flat.


Anticke: Then must I to bed with the good man, Bonanox Gammer, God night
Frolic.


Smith: Come on my Lad, thou shall take thy unnatural rest with me.


Exeunt Anticke and the Smith. Frollicke: Yet this vantage shall we have of
them in the morning, to be ready at the sight thereof extempore.


Old wom: Now this bargain my Masters must I make with you, that you will say
hum and ha to my tale, so shall I know you are awake.


Both: Content Gammer that will we do.


Old wom: Once upon a time there was a King or a Lord, or a Duke that had a
fair daughter, the fairest that ever was; as white as snow, and as redd as
blood: and once upon a time his daughter was stolen away, and he sent all
his men to seek out his daughter, and he sent so long, that he sent all his
men out of his Land.


Frol: Who dressed his dinner then?


Old woman: Nay either hear my tale, or kiss my tail.


Fan: Well sed, on with your tale Gammer.


Old woman: O Lord I quite forgot, there was a Coniurer, and this Coniurer
could do anything, and he turned himself into a great Dragon, and carried
the Kings Daughter away in his mouth to a Castle that he made of stone, and
there he kept her I know not how long, till at last all the Kings men went out
so long, that her two Brothers went to seek her. O I forget: she (he I would
say) turned a proper young man to a Bear in the night, and a man in the day,
and keeps by a cross that parts three several ways, and he made his Lady run
mad: gods me bones who comes here? Enter the two Brothers.


Frol: Soft Gammer, here some come to tell your tale for you.


Fant: Let them alone, let us hear what they will say.


1. Brother: Upon these chalkie Cliffs of Albion
We are arrived now with tedious toil,
And compassing the wide world round about
To seek our sister, to seek fair Delya forth,
Yet cannot we so much as hear of her.

2. Brother: O fortune cruel, cruel and unkind,
Unkind in that we cannot find our sister;
Our sister haples in her cruel chance:
Soft who have we here.

Enter Senex at the Cross stooping to gather. 1. Brother: Now father God be
your speed, What do you gather there?


Old man: Hips and Hawes, and sticks and strawes, and things that I gather on
the ground my son.


1. Brother: Hips and Hawes, and sticks and strawes, why is that all your
food father?


Old man: Yea son.


2. Brother: Father, here is an Alms penny for me, and if I speed in that I
go for, I will give thee as good a Gown of gray as ever thou did wear.


1. Brother: And Father here is another alms penny for me, and if I speed in
my journey, I will give thee a Palmers staff of yuorie, and a scallop shell of
beaten gold.


Old man: Was she fair?


2. Brother: I the fairest for white, and the purest for redd, as the blood of
the Dear, or the driven snow:


Old m: Then hark well and mark well, my old spell:
Be not afraid of every stranger,
Start not aside at every danger:
Things that seem are not the same,
Blow a blast at every flame:
For when one flame of fire goes out,
Then comes your wishes well about:
If any ask who told you this good,
Say the white Bear of Englands wood.

1. Brother: Brother heard you not what the old man said:
Be not afraid of every stranger,
Start not aside for every danger:
Things that seem are not the same,
Blow a blast at every flame:
If any ask who told you this good,
Say the white Bear of Englands wood.

2. Brother: Well if this do us any good,
Welfare the white Bear of Englands wood. ex.

Old ma: Now sit thee here and tell a heavy tale.
Sad in thy mood, and sober in thy cheer,
Here sit thee now and to thy self relate,
The hard mishap of thy most wretched state.
In Thessalie I lived in sweet content,
Until that Fortune wrought my overthrow;
For there I wedded was unto a dame,
That lived in honor, virtue, love, and fame:
But Sacrapant that cursed sorcerer,
Being besotted with my beauteous love:
My dearest love, my true betrothed wife,
Did seek the means to rid me of my life.
But worse than this, he with his chanting spells,
Did turn me straight unto an ugly Bear;
And when the sun does settle in the west,
Then I begin to don my ugly hide:
And all the day I sit, as now you see,
And speak in riddles all inspirde with rage,
Seeming an old and miserable man:
And yet I am in April of my age.
Enter Venelia his Lady mad; and goes in again. See where Venelya my betrothed
love,
Runs madding all enraged about the woods;
All by his curssed and enchanting spells.
Enter Lampriscus with a pot of Honny. But here comes Lampriscus my
discontented neighbor. How now neighbor, you look toward the ground as well
as I, you muse on something.

Lamp: Neighbor on nothing, but on the matter I so often moved to you: if you
do any thing for charity, help me; if for neighborhood or brotherhood, help
me: never was one so combered as is poor Lampryscus: and to begin, I pray
receive this pot of Honny to mend your fare.


Old man: Thanks neighbor, set it down,
Honny is always welcome to the Bear.
And now neighbor let me here the cause of your coming.

Lampriscus: I am (as you know neighbor) a man unmarried, and lived so
unquietly with my two wives, that I keep every year holy the day wherein I
buried the^ both; the first was on saint Andrews day; the other on saint Lukes.


Old man: And now neighbor, you of this country say, your custom is out: but
on with your tale neighbor.


Lamp: By my first wife, whose tongue wearied me alive, and sounded in my ears
like the clapper of a great Bell, whose talk was a continual torment to all
that dwelt by her, or lived nigh her, you have heard me say I had a handsome
daughter.


Old man: True neighbor.


Lampr: She it is that afflictes me with her continual clamoures, and hangs
on me like a Burre: poor she is, and proud she is, as poor as a sheep new
shorn, and as proud of her hopes, as a Peacock of her tail well grown.


Old man: Well said Lampryscus, you speak it like an Englishman.


Lampr: As cursed as a waspe, and as froward as a child new taken from the
mothers teate, she is to my age, as smoke to the eyes, or as vinegar to the
teeth.


Old man: Holily praised neighbor, as much for the next.


Lampr: By my other wife I had a daughter, so hard favored, so foul and ill
faced, that I think a grove full of golden trees; and the leaves of Rubies and
Dyamonds, would not be a dowry aunswerable to her deformity.


Old man: Well neighbor, now you have spoke, here me speak; send them to
the Well for the water of life: there shall they find their fortunes unlooked
for; Neighbor farewell.


Exit. Lampr: Farewell and a thousand, and now goes poor Lampryscus to put in
execution this excellent counsel. Exeunt.


Frol: Why this goes round without a fidling stick; but do you hear Gammer,
was this the man that was a Bear in the night, and a man in the day?


Old woman: I this is he; and this man that came to him was a beggar, and
dwelt upon a green. But soft, who comes here? O these are the harvest men;
ten to one they sing a song of mowing.


Enter the harvest men a singing, with this Song double repeated. All ye that
lovely lovers be, pray you for me,
Lo here we come a sowing, a sowing,
And sow sweet fruits of love:
In your sweet hearts well may it prove. Exeunt.
Enter Huanebango with his two hand sword, and Booby the Clown. Fant: Gammer,
what is he?


Old woman: O this is one that is going to the coniurer, let him alone, here
what he says.


Huan: Now by Mars and Mercury, Jupiter and Ianus, Sol and Saturnus, Venus and
Vesta, Pallas and Proserpina, and by the honor of my house
Polimackeroeplacydus, it is a wonder to see what this love will make silly
fellows adventure, even in the wane of their wits, and infansie of their
discretion. Alas my friend what fortune calls thee forth to seek thy fortune
among brazen gates, enchanted towers, fire and Brimstone, thunder and
lightning. Beauty I tell thee is peerless, and she precious whom thou
affectest: do off these desires good countriman, good friend run away from
thy self, and so soon as thou can, forget her; whom none must inherit but
he that can monsters tame, labors atchiue, riddles absolve, loose
enchantments, murder magic, and kill coniuring: and that is the great and
mighty Huanebango.


Booby: Hark you sir, hark you; First know I have here the flurting feather,
and have given the Parish the start for the long stock: Now sir if it be no
more but running through a little lightning and thunder, and riddle me riddle
me what is this, I Will have the wench from the Coniurer if he were ten Coniurers.


Huan: I have abandoned the Court and honorable company, to do my deuoyre
against this sore Sorcerer and mighty Magitian: if this Lady be so fair as
she is said to be, she is mine, she is mine, Meus, mea, meum, in contemptum
omnium Grammaticorum.


Booby: O falsum Latinum! the fair maid is minum, cum apurtinantibus gibletes
and all.


Huan: If she be mine, as I assure my self the heavens will do somewhat to
reward my worthiness; she shall be allied to none of the meanest gods; but be
invested in the most famous stock of Huanebango Polimackeroeplacidus, my
Grandfather: my father Pergopolyneo: my mother, Dyonora de Sardynya: famouslie
descended.


Booby: Do you hear sir; had not you a Cosen, that was called Gustecerydis?


Huan: Indeed I had a Cosen, that sometime followed the Court infortunately,
and his name Bustegustecerydis.


Booby: O Lord I know him well: he is the knight of the neates feet.


Huan: O he loved no Capon better, he has oftentimes deceived his boy of his
dinner, that was his fault good Bustegustecerydis.


Booby: Come shall we go along? Soft, here is an old man at the Cross, let
us ask him the way thither. Ho, you Gaffer, I pray you tell where the wise man
the Coniurer dwells?


Huan: Where that earthly Goddess keeps her abode; the commander of my
thougts, and fair Mistres of my heart.


Old man: Fair enough, and far enough from thy fingering son.


Huan: I will follow my Fortune after mine own fancy, and do according to
mine own discretion.


Old man: Yet give some thing to an old man before you go.


Huau: Father me thinks a piece of this Cake might serve your turn.


Old man: Yea son.


Huan: Huanabango gives no Cakes for Alms, ask of them that give gifts for
poor Beggars. Fair Lady, if thou were once shrined in this bosom, I would
buckler thee haratantara. Exit.


Booby: Father do you see this man, you little think heel run a mile or two
for such a Cake, or pass for a pudding, I tell you father he has kept such a
begging of me for a piece of this Cake, whoo he comes upon me with a
superfantiall substance, and the foyson of the earth, that I know not what he
means: If he came to me thus, and said, my friend Booby or so, why I could
spare him a piece with all my heart; but when he tells me how God has enriched
me above other fellows with a Cake: why he makes me blind and deaf at
once: Yet father here is a piece of Cake for you as hard as the world goes.


Old man: Thanks son, but list to me,
He shall be deaf when thou shall not see;
Farewell my son things may so hit,
Thou may have wealth to mend thy wit.

Booby: Farewell father, farewell; for I must make have after my two hand sword
that is gone before. Exeunt omnes.


Enter Sacrapant in his study. Sacrapant: The day is clear, the Welkin bright
and gray,
The Lark is merry, and records her notes;
Each thing reioyseth underneath the Sky,
But only I whom heaven has in hate:
Wretched and miserable Sacrapant,
In Thessalie was I borne and brought up,
My mother Meroe hight a famous Witch,
And by her cunning I of her did learn,
To change and alter shapes of mortal men.
There did I turn my self into a Dragon,
And stole away the Daughter to the King;
Fair Delya, the Mistres of my heart:
And brought her hither to revive the man,
That seems young and pleasant to behold,
And yet is aged, crooked, weak and numbe.
Thus by inchaunting spells I do deceive,
Those that behold and look upon my face;
But well may I bid youthful years adue:
Enter Delya with a pot in her hand. See where she coms from whence my sorrows
grow,
How now fair Delya where have you bin?

Delya: At the foot of the Rock for running water, and gathering roots for
your dinner sir.


Sacr: Ah Delya, fairer art thou than the running water, yet harder far than
steel or Adamant.


Delya: Will it please you to sit down sir.


Sacr: I Delya, sit and ask me what thou will, thou shall have it brought into
thy lap.


Delya: Then I pray you sir let me have the best meat from the king of
Englands table, and the best wine in all France, brought in by the veriest
knave in all Spain.


Sacr: Delya I am glad to see you so pleasant, well sit thee down.


Sacr: Spread table spread; meat, drink and bred
Ever may I have, what I ever crave:
When I am spread, for meat for my black cock,
And meat for my red.

Enter a Friar with a chine of Beef and a pot of wine. Sacr: Here Delya, will
ye fall to.

Del: Is this the best meat in England?

Sacr: Yea.

Del: What is it?

Sacr: A chine of English beef, meat for a king
And a kings followers.

Del: Is this the best wine in France?

Sacr: Yea.

Del: What Wine is it?

Sacr: A cup of neat wine of Orleance,
That never came near the brewers in England.

Del: Is this the veriest knave in all Spain?

Sacr: Yea.

Del: What is he a Friar?

Sacr: Yea a Friar indefinit, and a knave infinite.

Del: Then I pray ye sir Friar tell me before you go, which is the most
greediest Englishman?


Friar: The miserable and most covetous Usurer.


Sacr: Hold thee there Friar, Exit Friar.
But soft who have we here, Delia away begone.
Enter the two Brothers. Delya away, for beset are we,
But heaven or hell shall rescue her for me.

1. Br. Brother, was not that Delya did appear?
Or was it but her shadow that was here?

2. Bro: Sister, where art thou? Delya come again
He calls, that of thy absence does complain.
Call out Calypha that she may hear,
And cry aloud, for Delya is near.

Echo: Near.

1. Br: Near, O where, have thou any tidings?

Echo: Tidings.

2. Br: Which way is Delya then, or that, or this?

Echo: This.

1. Br: And may we safely come where Delia is

Echo: Yes.

2. Bro: Brother remember you the white
Bear of Englands wood:
Start not a side for every danger,
Be not afeard of every stranger;
Things that seem, are not the same.

1. Br: Brother, why do we not the^ coragiously enter.

2. Br: Then brother draw thy sword and follow me.

Enter the Coniurer; it lightens and thunders, the 2. Brother falls down. 1.
Br: What brother do thou fall?

Sacr: I, and thou to Calypha.

Fall 1. Brother. Enter two furies. Adestes Daemones: away with them,
Go carry them straight to Sacrapantos cell,
There in despair and torture for to dwell;
These are Thenores sons of Thessaly,
That come to seek Delya their sister forth:
But with a potion, I to her have given,
My arts has made her to forget her self.
He remooues a turfe, and shows a light in a glass.
See here the thing which does prolong my life
With this enchantment I do any thing.
And till this fade, my skill shall still endure,
And never none shall break this little glass,
But she that is neither wife, widow, nor maid.
Then cheer thy self, this is thy destiny,
Never to die, but by a dead man's hand. Exeunt.

Enter Eumenides the wandering Knight, and the old man at the cross. Eum: Tell
me Time, tell me just Time,
When shall I Delia see?
When shall I see the loadstar of my life?
When shall my wandering course end with her sight?
Or I but view my hope, my hearts delight.
Father God speed, if you tell fortunes, I pray good father tell me mine.

Old man: Son I do see in thy face,
Thy blessed fortune work apace;
I do perceive that thou have wit,
Beg of thy fate to govern it,
For wisdom governed by advise,
Makes many fortunate and wise.
Bestow thy alms, give more than all,
Till dead men's bones come at thy call:
Farewell my son, dream of no rest,
Til thou repent that thou did best. Exit Old m.

Eum. This man has left me in a Laborinth,
He bids me give more than all,
Till dead men's bones come at thy call:
He bids me dream of no rest,
Till I repent that I do best.

Enter Wiggen, Corobus, Churchwarden and Sexten. VViggen: You may be ashamed,
you whoreson scald Sexton and Churchwarden, if you had any shame in those
shameless faces of yours, to let a poor man lie so long above ground
unburied. A rot on you all, that have no more compassion of a good fellow when
he is gone.


Simon: What would you have us to bury him, and to answer it our selves to
the parrishe?


Sexton: Parish me no parishes, pay me my fees, and let the rest run on in
the quarters accounts, and put it down for one of your good deeds a Gods
name, for I am not one that curiously stands upon merits.


Corobus: You whoreson sodden headed sheepes-face, shall a good fellow do less
service and more honesty to the parish, and will you not when he is dead let
him have Christmas burial.


VViggen: Peace Corebus, assure as Jack was Jack, the frollickst frannion
amongst you, and I VViggen his sweet sworn brother, Jack shall have his
funerals, or some of them shall lie on Gods dear earth for it, that's once.


Churchwa: VViggen I hope thou will do no more then thou dare answer.


VVig: Sir, sir, dare or dare not, more or less, answer or not answer, do
this, or have this.


Sex: Help, help, help, VViggen sets upon the parish with a Pike staff.


Eumenides awakes and comes to them. Eum: Hold thy hands good fellow.


Core: Can you blame him sir, if he take Iacks part against this shake rotten
parish that will not bury Jack.


Eum: Why what was that Jack?


Coreb: Who Jack sir, who our Jack sir? as good a fellow as ever troade upon
Neats leather.


VViggen: Look you sir, he gave four score and nineteen mourning gowns to
the parish when he died, and because he would not make them up a full hundred,
they would not bury him; was not this good dealing?


Churchwar: Oh Lord sir how he lies, he was not worth a half penny, and drunk
out every penny: and now his fellows, his drunken companions, would have us
to bury him at the charge of the parish, and we make many such matches, we may
pull down the steeple, sell the Belles, and thatche the chauncell: he shall
lie above ground till he dance a galliard about the churchyard for Steeuen
Loache.


VViggen: Sic argumentaris domine Loache; and we make many such matches, we may
pull down the steeple, sell the Belles, and thatche the chauncell: in good
time sir, and hang your selves in the Bell ropes when you have done, Domine
oponens praepono tibi hanc questionem, whether will you have the ground broken,
or your pates broken: first, for one of them shall be done presently, and to
begin mine, i will seal it upon your cockescome.


Eum: Hold thy hands, I pray thee good fellow be not too hasty.


Coreb: You Capons face, we shall have you turned out of the parish one of these
days, with never a tatter to your arse, then you are in worse taking then Jack.


Eumen Faith and he is bad enough: this fellow does but the part of a friend,
to seek to bury his friend; how much will bury him?


VViggen: Faith, about some fifteen or sixteen shillings will bestow him
honestly.


Sexton: I even there abouts sir.


Eumen: Here hold it then, and I have left me but one poor three half
pence; now do I remember the words the old man spoke at the cross; bestow
all thou have, and this is all, till dead men's bones comes at thy call, hear
hold it, and so farewell.


VVig: God, and all good, be with you sir; naie you cormorants, i will bestow
one peale of Jack at mine own proper costs and charges.


Coreb: You may thank God the long staff and the bilbowe blade, crossed not
your cockes-combe; well we will to the church style, and have a pot, and so tryll
lyll.


Both: Come lets go. Exeunt.


Fant: But hark you gammer, me thinks this Jack bore a great sway in the
parish.


Old woman: O this Jack was a marvelous fellow, he was but a poor man, but
very well beloned: you shall see anon what this Jack will come to.


Enter the harvest men singing, with women in their hands. Frol: Soft, who have
we here? our amorous harvest stars.


Fant: I, I, let us sit still and let them alone.

Here they begin to sing, the song doubled. Lo here we come a reaping, a
reaping,
To reap our harvest fruit,
And thus we pass the year so long,
And never be we mute. Exit the harvest me^.

Enter Huanebango, and Corebus the clown. Frol: Soft, who have we here?


Old w: O this is a choleric gentleman, all you that love your lives, keep
out of the smell of his two hand sword: now goes he to the coniurer.


Fant: Me thinks the Coniurer should put the fool into a Iugling box.


Huan: Fee, fa, fum, here is the Englishman,
Conquer him that can, came for his lady bright,
To prove himself a knight,
And win her love in fight.

Cor: Who hawe master Bango are you here? hear you, you had best sit down
here, and beg an alms with me.


Huan: Hence base cullion, here is he that commands ingresse and egresse
with his weapon, and will enter at his voluntary whosoever says no.


A voice and flame of fire: Huanebango falls down. Voice: No.


Old w: So with that they kissed, and spoiled the edge of as good a two hand
sword, as ever God put life in; now goes Corebus in, spite of the coniurer.


Enter the Coniurer, and strike Corebus blind. Sacr: Away with him into the
open fields,
To be a ravening pray to Crows and Kites:
And for this villain let him wander up and down
In naught but darkness and eternal night.

Cor: Here have thou slain Hua^ a slashing knight
And robbed poor Corebus of his sight. Exit.

Sacr: Hence villain hence.
Now I have unto Delya given a potion of forgetfulness,
That when she comes she shall not know her Brothers:
Lo where they labor like to Country slaves,
With spade and mattocke on this inchaunted ground.
Now will I call her by another name,
For never shall she know her self again,
Until that Sacrapant has breathd his last.
See where she comes. Enter Delya.
Come hither Delya take this good,
Here hard at hand two slaves do work and dig for gold,
Gore them with this and thou shall have enough.

He gives her a good. Del: Good sir I know not what you mean.

Sacra: She has forgotten to be Delya,
But not forgot the same she should forget:
But I will change her name.
Fair Berecynthia so this Country calls you,
Go ply these strangers wench they dig for gold

Exit Sacrapant. Delya: O heavens! how am I beholding to this fair young man.
But I must ply these strangers to their work.
See where they come.

Enter the two Brothers in their shirts with spades digging. 1. Brother: O
Brother see where Delya is.

2. Brother: O Delya happy are we to see thee here.

Delya: What tell you me of Delya prating swains?
I know no Delya nor know I what you mean,
Ply you your work or else you are like to smart.

1. Brother: Why Delya know thou not thy Brothers here?
We come from Thessalie to seek thee forth,
And thou deceiuest thy self for thou art Delya.

Delya: Yet more of Delya, then take this and smart:
What feign you shifts for to defer your labor?
Work villains work, it is for gold you digg.

2. Br: Peace brother peace, this vild inchanter
Has ravished Delya of her senses clean,
And she forgets that she is Delya.

1. Br: Leave cruel thou to hurt the miserable;
Digg brother digg, for she is hard as steel.
Here they dig and descry the light under a little hill.

2. Br: Stay brother what have thou descride?

Del: Away and touch it not, it is some thing, that my Lord has hidden there.
she couers it again.


Enter Sacrapant. Sacr: Well sed, thou plyest these Pyoners
well, go get you in you laboring slaves.
Come Berecynthia, let us in likewise,
And hear the Nightingale record her notes.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Zantyppa the cursed Daughter to the well, with a pot in her
hand. Zant: Now for a husband, house and home, God send a good one or none I
pray God: My father has sent me to the well for the water of life, and tells
me if I give fair words I shall have a husband. Enter the foul wench to the
well for water with a pot in her hand. But here comes Celanta my sweet
sister, I Will stand by and hear what she says.


Celant: My father has sent me to the well for water, and he tells me if I
speak fair, I shall have a husband and none of the worst: Well though I am
black I am sure all the world will not forsake me, and as the old proverb
is though I am black, I am not the devil.


Zant: Marry gup with a murren, I know wherefore thou speak that, but go
thy ways home as wise as thou camst, or I Will set thee home with a wanion.


Here she strikes her Pitcher against her sisters, and breaks them both and
goes her way. Clant: I think this be the curstest queen in the world, you see
what she is, a little fair, but as proud as the devil, and the veriest vixen
that lives upon Gods earth. Well I Will let her alone, and go home and get
another Pitcher, and for all this get me to the well for water. Exit.


Enter two Furies out of the Coniurers Cell and lays Huanebango by the well of
life. Enter Zantippa with a Pitcher to the Well. Zant: Once again for a
husband, and in faith Celanta I have got the start of you; Belike husbands
grow by the Well side; now my father says I must rule my tongue: why alas
what am I then? a woman without a tongue, is as a soldier without his weapon;
but i will have my water and be gone.


Here she offers to dip her Pitcher in, and a head speaks in the Well. Head:
Gently dip, but not too deep,
For fear you make the golden bird to weep,
Fair maiden white and red,
Stroke me smoothe, and comb my head,
And thou shall have some cockell bread.

Zant: What is this, fair maiden white and red,
Comb me smooth, and stroke my head:
And thou shall have some cockell bread.
Cockell call thou it boy, faith i will give you cockell bread.

She breaks her Pitcher upon his head, then it thunders and lightens, and
Huanebango rises up: Huanebango is deaf and cannot hear. Huan: Phylyda
phylerydos, Pamphylyda floryda flortos,
Dub dud a dub, bounce quoth the guns, with a sulpherous huffe snuff:
Wakte with a wench, pretty peat, pretty love, and my sweet pretty pigsnie;
Just by thy side shall sit surnamed great Huanebango
Safe in my arms will I keep thee, threat Mars or thunder Olympus.

Zant: Foe, what greasy groom have we here? He looks as though he crept
out of the backeside of the well; and speaks like a Drum perished at the West
end.


Huan: O that I might but I may not, woe to my destenie therefore;
Kiss that I claspe but I cannot, tell me my destenie wherefore?

Zant: Whoope now I have my dream, did you never hear so great a wonder as
this? Three blue beans in a blue bladder, rattle bladder rattle.


Huan: I Will now set my countenance and to her in prose, it may be this rim ram
ruff, is too rude an encounter.

Let me fair Lady if you be at leisure, revel with your sweetness, and rail
upon that cowardly Coniurer, that has cast me or congealed me rather into an
unkind sleep and polluted my Carcass.


Zantyppa: Laugh, laugh Zantyppa, thou have thy fortune, a fool and a husband
under one.


Huan: Truly sweet heart as I seem, about some twenty years, the very
April of mine age.


Zantyppa: Why what a prating Ass is this?


Huanebango: Her Coral lips, her crimson chinne,
Her silver teeth so white within:
Her golden locks her rolling eye,
Her pretty parts let them go by:
Hey ho has wounded me,
That I must die this day to see.

Za: By gogs bones thou art a flouting knave, Her Coral lips, her crimson
chinne: ka wilshaw.


Huan: True my own and my own because mine, and mine because mine ha ha:
Above a thousand pounds in possibility, and things fitting thy desire in
possession.


Zan: The Sott thinks I ask of his lands, Lobb be your comfort, and Cuckold
be your destenie: Hear you sir; and if you will have us, you had best say so
betime.


Huan: True sweet heart and will royallize thy progeny with my petigree.
Exeunt omnes.


Enter Eumenides the wandering Knight. Eu: Wretched Eumenides, still unfortunate,
Envied by fortune, and forlorn by Fate;
Here pine and die wretched Eumenides.
Die in the spring, the April of my age?
Here sit thee down, repent what thou have don
I would to God that it were nere begone.

Enter Jack. Jack: You are well overtaken sir.


Eum: Who Is that?


Jack: You are heartily well met sir.


Eum: Forbear I say, who is that which pincheth me?


Jack: Trusting in God good Master Eumenides, that you are in so good health
as all your friends were at the making hereof: God give you God morrow sir,
lack you not a neat handsome and cleanly young Lad, about the age of fifteen
or sixteen years, that can run by your horse, and for a need make your
Mastershippes shoes as black as incke, how say you sir.


Eum: Alas pretty Lad, I know not how to keep my self, and much less a
servant, my pretty boy, my state is so bad.


Jack: Content your self, you shall not be so ill a Master but i will be as
bad a servant: Tut sir I know you though you know not me; Are not you the man
sir, deny it if you can sir, that came from a strange place in the land of
Catita, where Jack a napes flies with his tail in his mouth, to seek out a
Lady as white as snow, and as redd as blood; ha, ha, have I touched you now.


Eum: I think this boy be a spirit,
How know thou all this?

Jack: Tut are not you the man sir, deny it if you can sir, that gave all the
money you had to the burying of a poor man, and but one three-halfe-pence left
in your pursse: Content you sir, I Will serve you that is flat.


Eum: Well my Lad since thou art so impornate, I am content to entertain thee,
not as a servant; but a copartner in my journey. But whither shall we go for I
have not any money more than one bare three halfe-pence.


Jack: Well Master content your self, for if my divination be not out, that
shall be spent at the next Inn or alehouse we come too: for master I know
you are passing hungry; therefore i will go before and provide dinner until that
you come, no doubt but you will come fair and softly after.


Eum: I, go before, i will follow thee.


Jack: But do you hear master, do you know my name?


Eum: No I promise thee not yet.


Jack: Why I am Jack. Exeunt Jack.


Eum: Jack, why be it so then.


Enter the Hosts and Jack, setting meat on the table, and Fiddlers came to
play, Eumenides walks up and down, and will eat no meat. Host: How say you
sir, do you please to sit down?


Eum: Hosts I thank you, I have no great stomach.


Host: Pray sir, what is the reason your master is so strange, does not this
meat please him.


Jack: Yes Hosts, but it is my masters fashion to pay before he eats,
therefore a reckoning good hostess.


Host: Marry shall you sir presently. Exit.


Eum: Why Jack what do thou mean, thou know I have not any money:
therefore sweet Jack tell me what shall I do.


Jack: Well master look in your pursse.


Eum: Why faith it is a folly, for I have no money.


Jack: Why look you master, do so much for me.


Eum: Alas Jack my pursse is full of money.


Jack: Alas, master, does that word belong to this accident? why me thinks I
should have seen you cast away your cloak, and in a brauado daunced a
galliard round about the chamber; why master, your man can teach you more wit
than this, come hostis, cheer up my master.


Hostis: You are heartily welcome: and if it please you to eat of a fat Capon,
a fairer bird, a finer bird, a sweeter bird, a crisper bird, a neater
bird, your worship never eat off.


Eum: Thanks my fine eloquent hostess.


Jack: But hear you master, one word by the way, are you content I shall be
halfes in all you get in your journey?


Eum: I am Jack, here is my hand.


Jack: Enough master, I ask no more.


Eum: Come Hostess receive your money, and I thank you for my good
entertainment.


Host: You are heartily welcome sir.


Eum: Come Jack whether go we now?


Jack: Mary master to the coniurers presently.


Eu: Content Jack: Hostis farewell. Exe. om.


Enter Corebus and Zelanto the foul wench, to the well for water. Coreb: Come
my ducke come: I have now got a wise, thou art fair, art thou not?


Zelan: My Corebus the fairest alive, make no doubt of that.


Cor: Come wench, are we almost at the well.


Zela. I Corebus we are almost at the Well now, i will go fetch some water: sit
down while I dip my pitcher in.


Voice: Gently dip: but not too deep;
For fear you make the goulde^ beard to weep.
A head comes up with ears of Corn, and she combs them in her lap. Fair
maiden white and red,
Comb me smoothe, and stroke my head:
And thou shall have some cockell bread.
Gently dippe, but not too deep,
For fear thou make the goulde^ beard to weep.
Fair maid, white, and read,
Comb me smooth, and stroke my head;
And every hair, a sheaue shall be,
And every sheaue a goulden tree.

A head comes up full of gold, she combs it into her lap. Zelan: Oh see
Corebus I have combd a great deal of gold into may lap, and a great deal of
corn.


Coreb. Well said wench, now we shall have just enough, God send us coiners to
coin our gold: but come shall we go home sweet heart?


Zelan: Nay come Corebus I will lead you.

Coreb: So Corebus things have well hit,
Thou have gotten wealth to mend thy wit. Exit.

Enter Jack and the wandering knight. Jack: Come away master come,

Eum: Go along Jack, i will follow thee, Jack, they say it is good to go cross
legged, and say his prayers backward: how say thou?


Jack: Tut never fear master, let me alone, here sit you still, speak not a
word. And because you shall not be intised with his enchanting speeches; with
this same wool i will stop your ears: and so master sit still, for I must to
the Coniurer. Exit Jack.


Enter the Coniurer to the wandering knight. Sa: How now, what man art thou that
sits so sad
Why do thou gaze upon these stately trees,
Without the leave and will of Sacrapant?
What not a word but mum,
Then Sacrapant thou art betraide.

Enter Jack invisible, and takes off Sacrapants wreath from his head, and his
sword out of his hand. Sac: What hand inuades the head of Sacrapa^t?
What hateful fury does envy my happy state?
Then Sacrapant these are thy latest days,
Alas my veins are numd, my sinews shrink,
My blood is pearst, my breath fleeting away,
And now my timelesse date is come to end:
He in whose life his actions has been so soul,
Now in his death to hell defends his soul.

He dies. Jack: Oh Sir are you gone: now I hope we shall have some other coile.
Now master how like you this; the Coniurer he is dead, and vows never to
trouble us more. Now get you to your fair Lady, and see what you can do with
her: Alas he hears me not all this while; but I will help that.


He pulles the Wool out of his ears. Eum: How now Jack, what news?


Jack: Here master, take this sword and dig with it, at the foot of this
hill.


He digs and spies a light. Eum: How now Jack, what is this?


Jack: Master, without this the Coniurer could do nothing, and so long as this
light lasts, so long does his art endure, and this being out, then does his
art decay.


Eum: Why then Jack I will soon put out this light.


Jack: I master, how?


Eum: Why with a stone i will break the glass, and then blow it out.


Jack: No master you may as soon break the Smiths Anfill, as this little
vyoll; nor the biggest blast that ever Boreas blew, cannot blow out this
little light; but she that is neither maid, wife, nor widow. Master, wind
this horn; and see what will happen.


He winds the horn. Here enters Venelia and breaks the glass, and blows
out the light, and goes in again. Jack: So master, how like you this; this
is she that ran madding in the woods, his betrothed love that keeps the
cross, and now this light being out, all are restored to their former
liberty. And now master to the Lady that you have so long looked for.


He draws a curten, and there Delia sits a sleep. Eum: God speed fair
maid sitting alone there is once.
God speed fair maid; there is twice:
God speed fair maid, that is thrice.

Delia: Not so good sir, for you are by.

Jack: Enough master, she has spoke, now I will leave her with you.


Eum: Thou fairest flower of these western parts:
Whose beauty so reflecteth in my sight,
As does a Crystal mirror in the son:
For thy sweet sake I have crossed the frosen Rhine,
Leaving fair Po, I saild up Danuby,
As far as Saba whose inhansing streams,
Cuts twixt the Tartars and the Russians,
These have I crossed for thee fair Delia:
Then grant me that which I have sude for long.

Del: Thou gentle knight, whose fortune is so good:
To find me out, and set my brothers free,
My faith, my heart, my hand, I give to thee.

Eum: Thanks gentle Madame: but here comes Jack, thank him, for he is the
best friend that we have.


Enter Jack with a head in his hand. Eum: How now Jack, what have thou there?


Jack: Mary master, the head of the coniurer.


Eum: Why Jack that is impossible, he was a young man.


Jack: Ah master, so he deceived them that beheld him: but he was a
miserable, old, and crooked man; though to each man's eye he seemed young and
fresh, for master; this Coniurer took the shape of the old man that kept the
cross: and that old man was in the likeness of the Coniurer. But now
master wind your horn. He winds his horn.


Enter Venelia, the two brothers, and he that was at the cross. Eu: Welcome
Erestus, welcome fair Venelia,
Welcome Thelea, and Kalepha both,
Now have I her that I so long have sought,
So says fair Delia, if we have your consent.

1. Bro: Valiant Eumenides thou well deseruest
To have our favors: so let us rejoice,
That by thy means we are at liberty.
Here may we joy each in others sight,
And this fair Lady have her wandering knight.

Jack: So master, now ye think you have done: but I must have a saying to
you; you know you and I were partners, I to have half in all you got.


Eum: Why so thou shall Jack.


Jack: Why then master draw your sword, part your Lady, let me have half of
her presently.


Eumenid: Why I hope Jack thou do but jest, I promised thee half I got, but
not half my Lady.


Jack: But what else master, have you not gotten her, therefore divide her
straight, for I will have half there is no remedy.


Eumen: Well ere I will falsify my word unto my friend, take her all, here
Jack i will give her thee.


Jack: Nay neither more nor less Master, but even just half.


Eum: Before I will falsify my faith unto my friend, I will divide her, Jack
thou shall have half.


1. Brother: Be not so cruel unto our sister gentle Knight.


2. Brother: O spare fair Delia she deserves no death.


Eum: Content your selves, my word is past to him, therefore prepare thy self
Delya for thou must die.


Delya: Then farewell world, adieu Eumenides.


He offers to strike and Jack stays him. Jack: Stay Master, it is sufficient
I have tried your constancy: Do you now remember since you paid for the
burying of a poor fellow.


Eum: I very well Jack.


Jack: Then Master thank that good deed, for this good turn, and so God be
with you all.


Jack leapes down in the ground. Eum: Jack what art thou gone?
Then farewell Jack.
Come brothers and my beauteous Delya,
Erestus and thy dear Venelia:
We will to Thessalie with joyful hearts.

All: Agreed, we follow thee and Delya.

Exeunt omnes. Fant: What Gammer, a sleep?

Old wom: By the Mas son it is almost day, and my windows shuts at the Cocks
crow.


Frol: Do you hear Gammer, me thinks this Jack bore a great sway amongst
them.


Old wom: O man, this was the ghost of the poor man, that they kept such a
coil to bury, and that makes him to help the wandering knight so much: But
come let us in, we will have a cup of ale and a tossed this morning and so depart.


Fant: Then you have made an end of your tale Gammer?


Old wom: Yes faith: When this was done I took a piece of bread and cheese,
and came my way, and so shall you have too before you go, to your breakefast.


FINIS.
Printed at London by John Danter, for Raph Hancocke, and John Hardy, and are
to be sold at the shop over against Saint Giles his Church without Criplegate.

1595.


