DAT GRATIAM HVMILIBVS God hates the proud, the humble are his care
Hence hills are barren. Valleies fruitful are,



THE VALLEY OF VARIETY: OR, Discourse fitting for the Times, Containing very
Learned and rare Passages out of Antiquity, Philosophy, and History.

Collected for the use of all ingenious spirits, and true lovers of learning.

By Henry Peacham Mr. of Arts, sometime of Trinity College in CAMBRIDGE.

-- inutilis olim
Ne videar vixisse --
Palingen.
LONDON, Printed by M. P. for James Becket, at his Shop at the Inner Temple
Gate in Fleet Street. 1638.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, And truly Noble, HENRY Earl of DOVER, etc.
MY LORD,
I Have been heretofore very much engaged to your Honor, as well for many
noble Courtesies conferred upon me, as your respect, and ever well-wishing
toward me, altogether unworthie, I confess, so great a favor. I must
heereunto add that Duty, wherein I stand obliged unto your Religious and
Honorable COUNTESS, since my last being at your house in Broad-street, for her
really expressed favor to me and mine: As also, to my Lord of Rochford, the
hope of your ancient and renowned Family.

But since I am not able, In Farrag. Epistol^^
Cum tota mea suppellex sit Chartacea, as Erasmus says of himself, To requite
you with any thing but Paper; I offer unto your Honor, these selected
Collections of mine, not altogether (at your hours of leisure) unworthie your
view and perusal, since for ought I know, not any one of them has spoken
English before: beside, they are compact of Rarities, to enable Ingenious and
Schollerly Discourse. But howsoever, such as they are, I humbly present them to
your Honors Patronage (whom I know (as many more bebeside) to be a true lover
of the Church of God, as also of Learning, and all virtuous Parts:) And with
them, my service to your Honor, and my most Noble Lady; who shall ever be

Devoted unto you both, HENRY PEACHAM.

To the Ingenious and Learned READER.
READER whosoever, these are Collections which I have, at leasureable hours,
collected out of Pancirolla and other Authors, having intended a good while
since, to have wholly translated that Book into English; but having little
leisure, and expecting less gain for so great a labor, in these unthankful
times; wherein to be ignorant, is accounted by too many, to be a Gentlemanlike
Quality. I resolved to give the world a taste of the Fruit, before I opened
the Basket; and if what I have done shall not dislike thee, I will proceed, and
go on with the Remainder: which doubtless cannot but (as all Variety does)
please thee, since thou shall see what the Ancients had, which are lost and
unknown of us; and what we have which they never knew. Although I confess,
in this Book I have intermixed many other things for Variety, and pleasures
sake, which hereafter may be Methodically disposed; but as I find this
accepted, so will I proceed.

Thine, H. P.
The Contents of the CHAPTERS.
Chap. I.
WHat to think of the which length of Age, Men lived in former Times, and
shortly after the Creation. Fol. 1.
Chap. II.
Of the Dead Sea. 9
Chap. III.
Of that admirable Alteration or Change, which is every five hundred years, as
well in the Church, as in every Commonwealth: As also of the contrary
Fortunes of certain Kingdoms under Princes of the same Name. 18
Chap. IV.
Of those Locusts, which the Scripture says John Baptist did eat: where
beside, many admirable things are reported of strange and unaccustomed meats.
26
Chap. V.
Of many who having received Poison, have not only miraculously escaped, but
been thereby cured of (else) incurable Diseases. 37
Chap. VI.
Of that Fire which perpetually burns in ancient Monuments. 49
Chap. VII.
Of the strange mixture of Virtue and Vice, in the Natures and Dispositions of
many men. 54
Chap. VIII.
The Vanity of some men's Ambition, in Titles and Honors. 65
Chap. IX.
Of the ancient Triumphs among the Romans. 74
Chap. X.
The extreme Madness, and vain Pride of some great Persons informer Ages. 86
Chap. XI.
Of Cinnamome. 97
Chap. XII.
Of Balsamum. 101
Chap. XIII.
What Studies and Exercises best become Princes. 107
Chap. XIV.
Of incombustible Flax, or which will not consume by Fire. 129
Chap. XV.
Of an artificial kind of guilding amongst the Romans, which they called
Pyropus, as also of Electrum. 133
Chap. XVI.
Of Margaret the Wife of Herman, Earl of Henneberge. 140
Chap. XVII.
Of Glass made Malleable, to be beaten forth every way. 144
Chap. XVIII.
Of Bells. 151
Chap. XIX.
The occasion of the alteration of the Arms of Bohemia. 158
Chap. XX.
A most ancient and pleasant manner of Choosing their Prince in Carinthia. 162
Chap. XXI.
The marveilous simplicity of a Monk, fetched out of his Monastery, to be
crowned a King. 168
Chap. XXII.
A witty, but a ridiculous reply, and vindication of a disgrace. 172
MARCH 10. 1637.

IMPRIMATUR,

GVIL: BRAY.
THE VALLEY OF VARIETY.
CHAP. I.
What to think of the length of Age, which men lived in former times, and
shortly after the Creation.
IT has been a question, What manner of years those were, our Forefathers (in
the holy Scriptures) are said to have lived; as some, seven hundred, others,
eight hundred, and some, nine hundred; as Methuselah; since, years have been
taken diversely. Some have imagined they could not be our Anni solares, as we
account years by the course of the Sun, as being a thing incredible, that the
date of a man's life should extend it self to that length, far beyond the age
of the eldest Oaks that may be found. Some accounted every Summer a year, (as
Pliny reports) and Winter another; Histor. lib. 7. cap. 48.
as also the Arcadians counted their year by three Months; others again,
according to the age of the Moon, as the Egyptians: so some amongst them are
reported to have lived a thousand years. Thus far Pliny.

There are therefore that imagine, Genesis 5. those years are to be understood,
Consisting of 36 days.
that exceed not the (forenamed) Lunarie years, ten whereof make but one of
our Solar years; hereby reckoning, that who are in the Scripture said to have
lived nine hundred years, lived of our years but ninety, every hundred of
those monthly years amounting but to ten of ours. So they believed all that
space of time which is contained in one year, to have been anciently divided
into ten parts, Six times six, or 36.
and every part taken for a year, and every one of these ten parts to have
had, Senarium quadratum, because in six days God finished his work of the
Creation; all which number multiplied by ten, make just twelve Months.

But these conclusions which they think witty, fall out to be most absurd,
they not observing what follows hereupon; for then should Canan, who begat
children when he was aged 70 years, have begotten them when he was but seven
years old. Beside, if we make a year but of six and thirty days, of what
length must the Month be? surely, no more than three days: And how may that
place in Genesis be reconciled, Genes. 6.
where it is said, The flood began the seven and twentieth day of the second
Month? and how will it agree, where it is said, The Arc rested upon the
mountains of A^arat, the seven and twentieth day of the seventh Month.

Let us therefore certainly believe the years then to have been all one with
ours, and that which is spoken of the great Age of those Fathers, not much to
differ from the computation, according to our years. It is again said, that
The Mountains appeared upon the first day of the eleventh Month; therefore
the year consisted of many Months: and that we may not think the Month then
consisted of no more than three days, or thereabouts, observe the seven and
twentieth day is named.

Now, if you would happily know the reason why the Fathers then lived so long,
know there were two causes; first, the Final; then, the Efficient: the Final
causes were; First, increasing the World with people, whereby it might be
replenished, which they could not do, but by living a long time. Secondly,
Arts were to be invented, for they are not found, but by long Experience.
Thirdly, the Worship of God was to be delivered by Tradition, for as yet the
written Word was not. But that could not be in such a variety of people,
except those who received it from God, had been long lived.

The Efficient causes of this their length of life, were I. The singular
Blessings of God, Deuter. 30. I am thy life, and the length of thy days. II.
The nearness in time to the Creation, when the bodies of men were of a
singular, and a most perfect constitution and soundness, and state of Health.
III. The Diet and feeding was far more wholesome before the Flood, then
since. IV. The wits and invention were more accurat and subtle, in searching
and finding out the nature and qualities of all things whereof they had need,
to the sustenance of life, then ours are in these days. For these reasons, I
suppose their lives were of that length.

Neither may we wonder at it, since Heathen Writers testify, That even in
their Times, some thousands of years after the Flood, many lived two hundred,
others three hundred years. Hellanic^^ (cited by Pliny) reports, That in
Aetolia, Plin. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 4^.
many lived till they were two hundred years of age: which Damastes
confirms, while he makes mention of one Pictoreus amongst them, who lived
strong and able of body, till he had fulfilled three hundred years; this says
Pliny.

CHAP. II.
Of the Dead Sea.
THe Sacred Scriptures so sufficiently show us the fearful punishment, and
vengeance of God upon Sodom and Gomorrah, that we need look no farther. But
what the estate of that place (where those famous and noble Cities stood) at
this day is not commonly known, wherefore my intent is, to make Relation of
what we find, as well in Monuments of venerable Antiquity, as by the Report of
Travelers, who in these last times have seen those places.

Then first know, that the whole Tract, The valley of Siddim.
or Country wherein those Cities stood, was called The valley of Siddim, which
was exceedingly fruitful and fertile, insomuch, that it was compared to the
earthly Paradise; and to Egypt, of Countries the most delicate and plentiful.
But this place, so beautified and adorned with such a wonderful richness of
Soil, and all pleasures whatsoever might make glad the heart of man; through
the wickedness of the sinful Inhabitants, is so changed, that after those
Cities and Fields about, were destroyed by fire and brimstone from heaven, the
whole Country (sometime the pleasantest, and most fertile place of the world)
was turned into a most horrid, stinking, and infectious Lake, called even at
this day, Mare mortuum, or The Dead Sea.

The Water hereof is thick, filthy, stinking, most bitter, and salt beyond any^
Sea water whatsoever, wherein no creature lives, or can live; wherefore this
Lake is called, The Dead Sea. The famous River Jordan runs into this Lake,
and is infected, or corrupted by it, insomuch as the Fish of that River shun
this Lake as a deadly poison, and if through the swiftness of the stream,
they are forcibly carried thereinto, they dye presently. No quick or living
thing can be drowned in the same; which Vespasian being desirous to make trial
of, who came purposely in person to see this Lake, he caused some, altogether
unskilful in swimming, to be bound with their hands behind them, and to be
thrown into the Lake, but as it were, repulsed by a certain Spirit of the
water, like fishes, they floated aloft the superficies of the water.

Every fair and Sun-shinie day, it changes the color thrice, and that by
means of the Sunbeams, falling either rightly, or obliquely upon the same,
as at Morning, Noone, and Sunne-set, according to which, it varieth the color.

It yields a certain pitchie substance, called (...), in Latin, Bitumen,
(whence it is called, Lacus Asphaltites) which swimmes upon the top of the Lake
in great abundance, some pieces being in bigness, as great as the body of an
Ox; and it is of such a nature, as if any small Ships come near the place to
fetch part of it away, they are caught, and drawn away by the tenacitie, or
limie catching hold thereof, and not to be loosened or freed again, but by
application of Urine. Cui menses muliebres permixti sunt, says mine Author;
and with this only, the Bitumen is dissolved.

It sends up a most Pestilent Air, in so much, you would think the steame
of Hellfire were underneath it, casting up most poisonous and harmfull
vapors; hereupon the Banks, and the neighbor Mountains are quite barren: if
but an Apple grows thereby, it is by nature such, that it speaks the Anger
of God, and the burning of the place; for without, it is beautiful and red;
but within, nothing but dusty smoke and cinders. A thing to be admired at,
whereof, not only Christians, as Tertullian and Augustine, but also Heathen
Authors make mention of; for thus writes Solinus upon Polyb: (speaking of the
place: There are, says he, two Towns, one called Sodom, another Gomorrah,
where grow Apples, although they carry a show of ripeness, yet can they not be
eaten, for the cover of the outermost rind contains within, an ^ashie sootie
substance, which being touched, though but lightly, yield nothing but smoke
and dust. Also Tacitus in his last book, says, Not far from this place (or
Lake) there are Fields, which they say in times past to have been wonderfully
fruitful, and inhabited with many Cities, but to have been burned by lightning
from Heaven, the marks whereof still remain, and the earth all scorched, to
have utterly lost her natural strength of yielding fruit. For if any thing
there grows of the own accord, or be set, or sown with the hand, and they
grow up into herbs or flowers, still keeping their own forms, yet are they
black, without sap and substance, turning presently, as into ashes. This says
Tacitus.

All which things are so to be weighed and considered of us, that we have
always in remembrance the just judgments of God, and take heed of committing
those sins which drew down the vengeance of God upon Sodom and Gomorrha.
Behold, (says the Prophet Ezechiel) this was the sin of Sodom thy sister,
Eezec. 18.
Pride, Fullness of Bread, Abundance of Idleness; beside, she stretched not
out her hand to the poor and needy. The like in Saint Peter, 2 Pet 2.
God condemned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha, and turned them into ashes,
and has set them up as an example to those who shall live wickedly. Let me
moreover add how Josephus Josephus Antiq. c. 12.
testifies, that in his time the Pillar of Salt, (into which Lots Wife was
turned) was still remaining, and that he saw the same himself. Read the
tenth Chapter of the Book of Wisdom; and for a Conclusion, take this of
Prudentius: Nemo memor Sodomae, quae mundi forma cremandi est
Vt semel e muris gressum promoverit, ore
Post tergum verso, respecte^ funera rerum.


CHAP. III.
Of that admirable Alteration or Change, which is every five hundred years, as
well in the Church, as in every Commonwealth: As also of the contrary
Fortunes of certain Kingdoms under Princes of the same Name.
IT is mavelous, and a remarkable thing in Histories, that at the end of
every five hundred years, there are great Changes and Alterations in States,
whereof I bring you these examples:

The Assyrians possessed Asia five hundred years; afterward the Assyrians
being driven out, the Medes possessed the same. The Kingdom of Athens
continued four hundred ninety years, from Cecrops unto Codrus; from that
time, of a Monarchy, it became a Democracie. As many years flourished the
Commonwealth of the Lacedaemonians, which being brought to a form by Lycurgus,
fell to ruin under Alexander the Great. Five hundred years passed from the
expulsion of the Roman Kings, unto the time of Augustus the Emperor, under
whom was a Monarchy established, when formerly the Roman Common wealth was
mixed of an Aristocracie, and a Democracie. It was about five hundred years,
from the time that Constantine the Great translated the seat of the Empire to
Constantinople, to the time of Charles the Great, under whom the Empire was
divided; and the Roman Eagle, which formerly had but one head, now was allowed
two, and so became a Monster. From the battle of Actium, which assured to
Augustus the Empire of the West, unto Valentinian the last of the Roman
Emperors, are likewise numbered, five hundred years. This was Valentinian the
third, and last Emperor of the West, until Charles the Great, although after
him, many would be called Emperors, albeit they possessed scarce a very small
part of Italy.

Moreover, the Church of God under the Gospel every five hundred years, has
found a great change and alteration. In the first five hundred years, from the
birth of our Savior Christ, the Church shone in her purity, and Discipline
severely exacted, albeit toward the end of this Period, it grew more remiss.
In the next following five hundred years, Falsehood so contended with Truth,
Superstition with sinceretie of the Faith, Ambition in the Clergy, with
Christian Humility; that by degrees crept in, and gathered head, the
Invocation of the Dead, Worshipping of Images, Adoration of the Eucharist,
those dreams of Purgatory, and the Primacie of the Roman Bishops, with the
like.

Then came the third Period, wherein those named abuses and errors, that before
did bud, now grew ripe, yielding unsavourie and bitter fruit; the Authority of
the Emperors abated and vilified, Pardons established and confirmed. The
Apostolical Doctrine of the saving Grace of God, and the Merit of Christ Jesus
little valued; in the room whereof, crept in the Merits of Saints, Works of
Supererogation, Cowles, Rosaries, Beads, Holy water, and other such like,
which were defended and maintained by the Monks, with no less impudency
than impiety; and in this Period the Papacy was at the height.

But in the fourth Period of five hundred years, God respecting, and in mercy
looking down upon his Church, he raised up learned and godly men, who
reducing the Church to her former purity, overthrew the Romish Idolatry, and
bridel^d the Popes Tyranny, as all the world knows.

Thus we see, every five hundred years there has been a change in the
outward, or visible Church of God, although the Elect in all Ages of the
Church, have evermore laid fast hold upon the Rock whereupon they were built,
and founded.

But observe another thing no less wonderful, that is, under Kings and
Princes of the same name, how the fortune and estate of their Kingdoms has
fallen out to have been quite contrary. The Kingdom of the Persians grew up,
and increased under one Darius, under another Darius it was ruined. The
Kingdom of Macedonia was greatly augmented, and indeed grew first famous,
under Phillip the Father of Alexander: the same Kingdom under Phillip the
Father of Perseus came to decay. The Eastern Empire began with Constantine,
and ended with Constantine Palaeologus; that it was truly said, a Constantine
was to that famous and renowned Empire, the Rise, and the Ruin. I could here
allege examples of nearer, and our own times, but it would not be so pleasing.

Surely, the Providence of God governing all things, has set certain bounds
and limits to worldly promotions, and will have nothing to be certain upon
earth; that mindful of our mortal and uncertain estates, we should not be
proud, but always aspire, and seek after that certain Good, wherein is no
mutability, which is God himself.

CHAP. IV.
Of those Locusts, which the Scripture says John Baptist did eat: where
beside, many admirable things are reported of strange and unaccustomed meats.
MAny do wonder what ^he Evangelist S. Matthew might mean, where he says,
Saint John's meat (in the Wilderness) were Locusts; supposing it to have been
a most absurd thing, and in a manner impossible: withal taking the word (...),
which the Evangelist uses, either for the tender tops of Herbs, Crabbes, or
wild Pears, but by their leaves they are far deceived. For no Greek Author
has said, or example can be brought, that ever (...) was taken for any thing
else then a Locust, and so named, as Grammarians and Etymologists say; (...).

But some may say, the nature of man abhors from the eating of Locusts;
indeed no, if the Taste may be judge: but it may be (as also all other meats)
they may be loathed of some; be it so. In the Law of Moses, Levit. 11. 22.
Locusts were allowed of to be eaten, which surely had not been done, except
they had been good, and fitting for meat. The Parthians (as Pliny tells us)
fed upon them, as dainties among their other meats. Also Strabo affirms,
Strabo, lib. 16.
That the Aethiopians lived most upon Locusts. And our Countryman, venerable Bede, Bid de locis San^is. c. 24.
tells us out of Archulphus, who had traveled all Palaestina over, That Locusts
were most common there, being in shape of body small and short, not much unlike
to a man's little finger, which being taken and found among Herbs, and boiled
in Oil, proved excellent meat among the poorer sort.

And they that doubt hereof, will less wonder, when they shall know that the
Egyptians did eat Vipers and Adders, as familiarly as we now adays eat
Ecles. If any make question hereof, let him read Gallen, lib. 3. de aliment.
facultat. The like do our Travelers testify of the Indians at this day.
Beside, Saint Hierome Hieron. Contra ^ovinianum. lib. 2.
affirms, That in Pontus and Phrygia, they usually eat those white Worms
with black heads, that lie in wood, and between the bark of Trees; and that
by Tenants they were presented to the Landlords, as especial dainties, and
some took them in lieu of Rent. And as among us the Pheasant, Moor-cock,
Finch, Mullet, and Rochet, etc. are accounted for delicate dishes; so were
these (...), or Wood-wormes among them. He adds moreover, The Syrians were
wont to eat land Crocodiles; and the Africans, green Lizards. Pliny Plin. l.
17. cap. 24.
in like manner affirms, That the aforesaid Wood, Magots or Worms grew to be
the principal Dish at every riotous and luxurious Feast; and those which bred
in Oaks of the bigger sort, to be the best and daintiest: moreover, says he,
They were kept in Meal to be fed, until such time as they were to be used.
Among others, Dormise were accounted the daintiest meat; here the Laws of the
Censors took order they should not be admitted any ordinary Table, Plin. l. 8.
cap. 57.
no more then shall Fish, or Birds transported out of another Country. Some
liquorish Belly-gods in France, eat of them continually; and rather then they
will want them, they will (says mine Author) throw down Cottages, ^oding. in
Theatro Natura. lib. 3.
and poor men's houses, to make search for them. In Cozumella and Iucatana,
Scaliger Exerci^. 202.
Islands of the East Indies, and other places thereabouts, they fat a kind of
Dogs (which cannot bark) as we do Swine, and eat them. The Ancients also
supposed sucking Whelps to be so clean and pure, that they offered them their
Gods in their sacrifices; and in the Feasts of the Gods, Whelps flesh was
highly esteemed of. Benzo de novo orb. lib. 1. c. 3.
The Parian Indians did not only eat man's flesh, but also (as Apes do) Lice,
Frogs, Worms, and such filthy things. In the country of Mango there are red
Ants (which as we do Crefishes, Scaliger Exer. 196.
or the like) so they eat with Pepper.

The Tartarians eat the Carrion, carcasses of Horses, of Cammels, Asses,
Catts, Dogs, Vadianu^ in Mela^. lib. 3.
yea when they stink, and are full of Maggots; and hold them as dainty, as we
do Venison.

Surely, the reason why we loath many kinds of Food eaten by others, is nothing
else but our opinion, thinking them not fit to be eaten; as we see in our
Europe, certain Countries to affect the eating of Periwinkles, Frogs, fat
Cats, which others cannot abide. The Germans loath to eat of a Slinke (or young
Calfe, cut out of the Cowes belly before it be calved;) but in Princes Courts,
both in Italy and Spain, it is accounted one of the daintiest dishes. And
there are again, that account young Rabbets, before they be kindled, and out of
the damms belly; (as also young sucking ones, the intrals never taken out) to be
of as great esteem: these are called Haurices.

Pliny in his 19 book, c. 36. speaking of Thistles, He meanech Artichocks.
which began then to be eaten, finds great fault, that the strangest things
growing out of the Earth, should serve our riot and gluttony; yea such as
foure-footed Beasts refuse to touch; yet now, these in most placcs, are usual
dishes, pleasing to the taste, and very wholesome. I omit, how above all meats,
the Matrix of a Sow after her pigging, was commended among the old Romans, as
Horace and Martial testify. See further hereof in Pliny, lib. 11. cap. 37.

There are diverse other things from which we abstain, not because they are
not good to be eaten, but because the commodity we receive by them, and the
raritie of them in diet withholds us. Of which sort you may reckon Horses and
Asses flesh, which our common people do loath, as if Nature her self abhorred
them; yet being well dressed and prepared, they often times prove better then
many other meats we commonly feed upon. The Arabians (as also Jews) eat no
Swines flesh, but the flesh of Cammels is their ordinary food. And in some
places (as Saint Hierome testifies) it was esteemed a most heinous offense to
kill a Calfe, not for that it was not allowed for good meat, but because when
it was grown great, it was so many ways useful to man.

What should I say now, of those things which men may be by necessity
compelled to feed upon? Surely, that extreme hunger those of Sancerro felt,
when that Town was besieged, constrained the miserable Inhabitants to eat,
not only Mice and Catts, (which above the rest were dainties) but which is
horrible to relate, they were driven to eat all manner of Leather, as upper
Leathers of Shoes, Gloves, Purses and Girdles, etc. Beasts horns, and Horses
hoofes boiled in water, Straw, that stone which they call in France, Ardes; and
even Man's dung. See the History of this Siege, Anno 1573. In a word, the
Stomach of Man is a monster, which being contained in so little a bulk as his
Body, is able to consume and devour all things.

CHAP. V.
Of many who having received Poison, have not only miraculousl^y escaped, but
been thereby cured of (else) incurable Diseases.
MAny things have been accidentally found out, which allowed of after by Use
and Experience, have become infallible and constant Rules: Of this Galen Galen,
lib. 11. Simpl. Med.
gives us an excellent Example, and most worthy admiration, which was this:

A certain man (says Galen) being extreme sick of a Disease which they call
Elephantiasis, or Leprosy, kept company a good time with some Companions of
his, until one above the rest was infected with the contagion of the Disease:
for he was not to be endured, by reason of the most loathsome stench that
proceeded from his unclean body: beside, he was grown monstrously deformed;
wherefore a Cottage was built for him near the Town, upon a Hill remote from
people, a fair Spring running hard by, and herein this Leper was placed, with
a man attending to bring him victuals, and other necessaries every day.

But about the beginning of the Dog-dayes, sweet Wine being brought in an
earthen pitcher into the Field to the Mowers near the place, he that brought
it, set it not far from them, and went his way. Being gone, and some of them
being thirsty, and having occasion to drink, one takes up the Pitcher, to
pour out the Wine into a great Bowl half full of water, which they mixed
with their Wine, and out falls a drowned Viper from the pitcher into the bowl.
Hereupon the Harvest-men being amazed, let the Wine alone, and drank and
contented themselves with other water: But when they had finished their days
work, and were to go out of the Field, as it were out of pity, they gave to
the poor Leprous man that Wine wherein the Viper was drowned, supposing it
better for him to dye, than to live in that misery. But he, when he had
drunk it, was as it were, miraculously cured: For all that thick and most
loathsome scabbie swelling of the Disease, that as a Coat covered him all over,
fell away from him, like the hard outside of a Crab-fish, or Lobster, new
skin and flesh succeeding underneath in the place, not much unlike that soft
and thin skin of Crab-fishes, when the outward shell is taken away.

Another Example hereof, though upon an unlike occasion, happened in Mysia, a
Town of Asia, not far (says Galen) from the City where I dwell: A certain
man who was extremely leprous, went unto a hot Bath, hoping to find help
thereby. This man had a very fair and handsome young wench to his servant, who
was an arrant -- This wench had many Suitors, some of whom she well affected:
but these being gone, and she having occasion to use water in the house, went
into an out place, or some ruinous shed near to the house, which was full of
Vipers, by chance one of them fell into a pot of Wine, being somewhere
carelessly set, and there was drowned: she thinking to make good use hereof
for her own profit, fills her Master, at his return, a large Cupp of this
Wine, which he drank quite off, and hereby, (as the other before that lived
in the Cottage) was perfectly cured. Hitherto Galen.

Hereby it appears (^s I said before) most true, that many things have been
found out by chance, which afterward being confirmed by Reason and Experience,
have been received gladly into the closet of Aesculapius.

And at this day there is nothing better to cure a Leprosy, then the drinking
of that Wine wherein a Viper has been drowned: If any make doubt hereof, out
best and learned Physicians will soon resolve him.

Moreover, I here observe two remarkable Arguments of Gods divine goodness;
the one is, That there is nothing so ill created by God to punish sinnfull man
withal, whereunto there is not some commodity adjoined. The Viper is the most
venomous creature that is, but yet it is not only good against the Leprosy,
but in Treacle, (which is made of the flesh of Vipers) it is the most excellent
Receipt that is against all poisons. Hereof see Galen, lib. 1. de Antidot. The
other is, (which is also observed by Galen) the Divine Providence oftentimes
disposes of things ill meant by malicious man, to wholesome and good ends;
whereof Ausonius in elegant Verse gives us an excellent Example: Toxica
Zelotyp^, dedit ^xor moecha marito;
Nec satis ad mortem, credidit esse datum.
Miscuit argenti, lethalia pondera, vivi,
Congerat ut celerem, vis geminata necem.
Dividat haec siquis, faciunt discreta venenum,
Antidotum sumet, qui sociata bibet etc.
Ergo inter sese dum noxia pocula certant,
Cessit Lethalis n^xa salutiferae,
Protinus and vacuos alvi petiere recessus.
Lubrica dejectis qui via nota cibis.
Quam pia cura Deum? prodest crudelior uxor,
Et cum fata volunt, bina venena juvant.


That one poison expels and prevails against another, it is so well known
that it were in vain here to go about to prove it. Cantharides are a present
remedy against the biting of a mad Dog; the Scorpion heales his own wounds,
and the Viper (the head and tail being cut off) being beaten and applied,
cures her own biting: insomuch, there is nothing, be it never so bad, but it
contains some profitable goodness in it. Hemlock is a deadly Plant, yet the
juice applied, heales Ignis Sacer, and hot corroding Ulcers, and much asswageth
the Inflammation of the eyes. Nerium, or Rose-laurell, kills Asses, Mules, and
Horses, which shall eat of it; yet being drunken in Wine, it cures those who
are bitten of Serpents. Meconium, the juice and leaves of Poppie, brings the
takers into an everlasting sleep; yet notwithstanding, it helps the most
painful aching, or smarting Diseases. Here is now place and occasion offered,
to show how some Diseases have been proper to some Countries; as the
Elephantiasis unto Egypt, which Lucretius a most ancient Poet witnesses,
saying: Est Elephas morbus qui propt^r flumina Nili,
Gignitur Aeg^pti in medio, neque praeterea usquam
Hac suae tentatur gressus oculique trementes.


Also the swelling in the Throat, or Mentagra, to Asia only; the
Sweating-sicknesse (...), and (...) to the Inhabitants of the North: but now by
the just judgment of God, that same main Leprosy, Elephantiasis, as many
other before named, are common to all Countries in general. But for certain
(if we may believe Pliny) Plin lib. 26.
this Elephantiasis was utterly unknown to Italy, before the time of Pompey
the Great. I might here also speak of the diverse Species, or kinds of Leprosy
which are curable, and which are not; according as Moses has given in charge,
Levit. 23.
to judge between Leprosy and Leprosy: what Lepers for a time were to be
removed, and who were to be by themselves secluded for ever: but I shall find
both place and occasion to speak hereof elsewhere.

CHAP. VI.
Of that Fire which perpetually burns in ancient Monuments.
THere was found in the Territory of Patavium in Italy, In Athreste villula
agri Patavini.
in the memory of our Fathers, a very ancient Monument, wherein were two
Vrnes, a greater and a less, both made of Earth, the bigger contained the
less; now in the lesser was found, a Lamp burning between two Viols, the one
whereof was Gold, the other Silver, and either full of a most pure liquor; by
the benefit of which, Bernardini Scardeo, lib. 1. Antiq. Patavin. in fine.
it was supposed to have burned many years. Surely the most learned, coming
to the Monument, affirmed the same to be that Perpetual Fire, invented by the
wonderful industry of the ancient Philosphers, which would endure so many
years. In which opinion they were confirmed, by Verses written in either Vrne,
which seemed to be of great Antiquity, by their vain.

These were in the bigger Vrne: Plutoni sacrum munus, ne attingite fures;
Ignotum est vobis, hoc quod in ^rbe late^.
Namque elementa gravi, clausit digesta labor,
Vase sub hoc modico, Maximus Olibius:
Adsit faecundo, custos tibi copia cornu,
Ne pretium tanti, depereat laticis.


These were read in the lesser: Abite hinc pessimi fures,
Vos, qui voltis vestris cum oculis emississii^s;
Abite hinc, vestro cum Mercurio petasato, caduce atoque.
Maximus, maximo donum Plutoni, hoc
Sacrum facit.


The like Ludovicus Vives (upon the twenty one book of Saint Augustine, De
Civitate Dei) reports in his time, to have been found in ancient Graves, which
by inscription had burned there, above fifteen hundred years. Moreover, Saint
Augustine himself, in the said book affirms, That in the Temple of Venus,
was a Lamp that never went out; which he supposes to have been done, either
by Art Magical, or by the industry of some man, who had put Lapidem Asbestum,
or the unquenchable burning stone within the said Lamp.

Concerning this Lamp, found burning in Graves, I wonder; First, how by the
help of Art (for they say this Oil is made of Gold) Gold may be resolved into
a fattie substance? Secondly, how the flame should endure so many years?
Thirdly, how within the ground, all Air being excluded? And for a certain, in
our Age, in the time of Pope Paul the third, Pancirol. in libr: rerum
deperditarum.
the Grave of Tullia, Cicero's Daughter was found, wherein was the like Lamp
burning, but as soon as the Air came to it, it presently went out: this Lamp
had there burned, one thousand five hundred years. The like also was found
with us at York^, Some say Constantiu^.
in the Monument, either of Severus the Emperor, or some other of the Ancients
there buried. See Master Camden in his Britannia.

CHAP. VII.
Of the strange mixture of Virtue and Vice, in the Natures and Dispositions of
many men.
THat saying of Plato is most true; Heroical Natures, as they are renowned for
many excellent and commendable Virtues, so are they subject, for the most
part, to as many, and as great Vices. And as Egypt affords as deadly
poisons, together with as ex^ellent Antidotes as any place of the world beside;
so, both much good, and as much evil hang over the heads of the greatest
Common wealths, from these Heroicke great ones: although many heretofore have
proved the same by many examples, it shall not be amiss to acquaint you with
some choice ones, out of the best Historians.

Velleius Paterculus says of Mecoenas, That he was wakefull, provident, and
able to manage his weightiest Affairs: but again, when he got any leisure
from business, he affected his ease, and all manner of loose effeminacie,
beyond any Woman.

Xiphilinus writes of Tiberius, That he was a man endued with many and great
virtues, and (as it were) overwhelmed with vice and villainies, as if alike he
had exercised himself to either. Again, the same Author reports of the
Emperor Otho, where all his life long he had lived wickedly and dissolutely,
he died most honestly, and resigned up his Empire (which he had gotten by
Tyranny and wicked means) in a most glorious and honest manner. And the
Emperor Julian, as Ammianus Marcellinus Ammian. Marcell. lib. 22.
says, By his vicious errors: Obnubilasse gloriae multiplices cursus. Victor
writing of Dioclesian, says, He was a man greatly esteemed, but thus
conditioned; for he was the first that ever ware cloth of Gold, used to tread
upon Silk and Purple, embellished with Pearl and Precious stone: which,
though it were more then did become him, and argued in him a lofty and a proud
Spirit; yet this was nothing in respect of his other carriage: for (next after
Caligula) he was the first that allowed himself to be called, (ridiculously)
Lord and God, and to be adored and sued unto, as unto God himself: (but by and
by, this follows in the same Author) though he was so called, he carried and
bare himself rather like a Father, then a Lordly Tyranne.

And of Theodosius thus writes Suidas, Indeed I admire the inclinations, to
bend so much either way. For when he was void of care and business, he gave
himself up to all manner of pleasures; but when necessity compelled him, and
fear of bondage and subjection possessed him, he took courage, cast of
sloth, and bad adieu to all delights, and underwent all manner of labor, and
used his best diligence; but shortly after, when all danger was past, and he
saw himself free, he followed his pleasure and dissolute living, as before.
And of Tribonianus, says Procopius, He was second to none in the knowledge
of all Sciences and Learning, being of a most sweet and exce^lent disposition:
which vert^^s, (...), the disease of Covetousness very much obscured.

Guicciardine also in the life of Pope Leo the tenth, Lib. 14.
writes thus: There were in that great Prelate, many things, both
praiseworthy, and to be condemned; for having obtained the Papacy, he
deceived mightily the expectation of a great number: for there was in him great
wisdom, but he fell far short of that honesty which all men expected to be
in him.

Of King Henry the eight, says Master Cambden; Fuerunt quidem in illo Rege
magnae virtutes, nec minora vitia, confuso quaedam Temporamento mixta. There
were in King Henry the eight, surely great and many virtues, Arnoldus Ferronus
in Franc. Valesio.
neither fewer vices confusedly mixed each with other.

It is also reported of John de Medicis, that he was a good Soldier, very
venturous in greatest dangers, and of great industry: but great and horrible
vices overclouded those virtues, because he was an horrible, and with unheard
of Oaths, a blasphemer of God and his Saints: and being given to the dishonest
and filthy love of boys, he was set on fire with the flames of Lust; and
often he was heard to break into Atheistical speeches, not fit to be named
amongst Christians.

Folieta Galeazo reports in like manner of Sfortia, Lib. 11. ^. 247. ^.
Duke of Millaine, that he was a very Monster, made up and compact of Virtue
and Vice: for he was eminent and honored for his Magnificence, Liberality,
and Bounty, as well toward his own people, as to Strangers: for the various
and stately Furniture of his House or Court, he exceeded all the Princes of
his time: for he had abundance of massy Plate of every fashion, and for all
uses, as well of Gold as Silver, as Basins, Ewers, drinking Boules, etc.
infinite store of the best Horses he could come by out of all Nations; all
provision for Hunts-men, and Hounds, which yearly stood him in six hundred
thousand Crowns, a great sum at that time. For, besides his large Kennels of
Dogs, there were great open Galleries, wherein, in long ranks, stood all kinds
of Faulcons, and other Hawks upon their perches: and a wonder it was to see
the state and riches of his costly hangings of Gold, Silk and Silver,
embroidered with the Needle, by cunning hand, with devices, and Pictures of the
most cunning Masters. All men, who excelled in Learning or Eloq^ence, he held
in great esteem, and procured them unto him, from all parts, by large and
honorable stipends. Moreover, he honored and loved all honest men, who were
upright, and of good life; on the contrary, he hated and punished all bad
livers, oppressors, blasphemers, etc. he was easy of access, for any might
come freely unto him, and declare their mind: he was very courteous in his
speech and discourse, and a true payer to all men their stipends or wages, for
they never twice demanded the same, but it was ever as sure unto them, as under
lock in their chest, (says Galeazzo.) But alas, fearful vices disgraced and
sullied the face and beauty of these excellent virtues; as beastly lusts, in
deflowring of honest Maids and Matrons, afterward causing them to be
prostituted unto his friends, or followers: his inhumane Cruelty, his
insatiable Cove^ousnesse, and Rapine, ever oppressing his people with new
Levies and payments; which vices drowning his other virtues, brought him into
deadly hatred and contempt among his people. But the cause of this strange
distemperature in the Nature and Dispositions of men, I leave as a depth not
now to be searched into.

CHAP. VIII.
The Vanity of some men's Ambition, in Titles and Honors.
WHen Seneca saw the excess, Epist. ^6.
and abuse of Bathes in Rome, no less witty then truly, he complained,
saying, Postquam munda Balnea inventa sunt, spurciores sunt qui lavant. Since
clean and scowring Bathes were invented, they that wash themselves are become
fowler, Vide Decret. part. 3. de Consecrat. distinct. 1. Canon 44.
and more filthy. Not much unlike was that saying of Pope Boniface; When we
used wooden Chalices, we had golden Priests; but now having golden Chalices,
we have wooden Priests. May not the like be truly said of the Ambition of some
men, concerning their foolish thirsting after Names, Honors and Titles? The
time was, when virtuous, men labored to excel each other by Merit, and
deserving well of their Countries or Common vvealths. The Emperor Trajan
(otherwise a good Prince) was sick of this Disease; who, upon whatsoever he
builded or repaired, would set up a glorious superscription in Honor of
himself; whereupon (says Aurelius Victor) Constantine the Emperor was wont
to call him, Herbam Parietariam, for his so many Titles upon every Wall,
Wal-wort or Pellitorie upon the Wall.
and new houses. Ammianus Marcellinus also compares with Trajan, one
Lampadius, a great person also, who (says Marcellinus) took it ill at any
man's hand, if he did not commend him every time he spet upon the ground;
adding this also, Another Example of his Vanity. Per omnia enim civitatis
membra, etc. In every part of the City, where other great men had bestowed
cost in building, he would set up his own Name, not as a repairer of the
work, but as the chief builder, Quo vitio dicitur laborasse Trajanus, unde
herbam parietinam jocando cognominarunt.

Somewhat a kin to these former follies was that of the Emperor Constantius,
Lib. 16.
reported by the said Author, who many times would send his Letters unto the
Senate, interwoven, and dressed up with Laurel, concerning his notable
Victories, egregiously belying himself, with an hateful bragging (of that he
never did) how he was among the foremost in the battle, how he had obtained
the victory, and taken Captive, Kings kneeling unto him, and craving his
mercy, when he never came at the battle, or durst venture himself there.

Hereunto belong those foolish attributes, the Turks, Persians, and other
Barbarians take unto themselves, who call themselves, Brothers of the Son,
borne before Lucifer; King of Kings, the Scourges of God, as Tamberlane, in a
wicked and frantic kind of Blasphemy. Which kind of madness in Arsaces the
Persian, Fl. Vespasian heartily laughed at (as Xiphilinus mentions) It was a
great sign that Darius his ruin to be at hand, in his proud Embassy unto
Alexander, when by his Ambassador he called himself, The King of Kings, and
Cozen of the Gods, but for Alexander, he called him, his Servant.

Paulus Iovius vvriting of Pompeio Colonna, Bishop of Reatino, says, That when
the said Bishop, by the means of many great personages, was reconciled again,
and brought into favor with the said Pope, whom he had formerly offended: and
that, when they signified so much unto him in a short Letter, in whose
superscription (Bishop of Reatino by chance was left out) he receiving the
Letter, threw it away, and bad the Messenger go seek some other Pompeio, to
whom that Letter was directed.

Very sarcasticall and bitter was that which we read of Francis, the first
King of France, returned to that magnanimous Emperor, and of famous memory,
Charles the fifth; at what time they being at war each with other, when the
Emperor, according to his greatness, writing to the said King, and having
filled up a large space of the Paper with his long style, and imperial Titles
of his Dominions and Territories, belonging to the house of Austria: the French
King very bitingly filled up in answer, as large a space in his Letter, by the
often repetition of France, as Francis the first, King of France, of France of
France, etc. adding withal, That his Kingdom of France was sufficient to
encounter with, and subdue, if need were, all the Emperors Kingdoms and
Provinces: for in times past, petty Kingdoms carried large Titles; as at this
day, how are those Kingdoms esteemed, of Sicilie, Naples, Toledo, Granado,
Sclavonia, Dalmatia, Sardinia, Corsica, Croatia? Many petty Princes have
larger Territories.

To conclude, it was excellently answered, and to be immitated of all moderate
Princes, Aelius Lampridius has left recorded, of Alexander Severus, whom, when
all Titles of Honor and Dignity were heaped upon him, after the Roman
Custom, as well by the Senate as the people; it is reported, that he answered
most modestly, It displeases me much, to assume unto my self, that which
belongs unto others: again, I find my self to be over-laden with your love
and good-wils, for these glorious Names are very burdensome unto me.
Whereupon, the Historian adds his own censure; The Emperor gat more Honor,
in not receiving Titles appertaining to others, then if he had taken them upon
him; and hereby, for ever after he gained to himself the reputation, not
only of a grave and moderate, but of a wise man.

CHAP. IX.
Of the ancient Triumphs among the Romans.
THe first who is reported, ever to have rode in Triumph, was Bachus, after him
in Rome, Romulus, who sending his Captives before him, followed himself after
on foot, after him his whole Army. Tullus Hostilus rode on Horseback; L:
Tarquinius Priscus rode in a Charret of four wheels; M. Curious Camillus was
drawn with four white Horses, whom all after him imitated: The day appointed
for the solemnity of a Triumph, was kept Festival through the whole City,
all the Temples being set wide open, and all the Nobility providing in their
houses the greatest Cheer they could make, insomuch as the whole Army was
abundantly feasted. The whole Senate went unto the gate Capena, in their Robes,
to meet, and entertain the Triumpher, by which Port or Gate, he was to enter
in: afterward they went together into the Capitol, then followed all the
Trumpeters, sounding to the Charge, as if they were presently to fall on upon
the Enemy: after came Charriots laden with the Spoils of the conquered
Enemies; there followed then goodly Statues, and curious Tables of Brass, or
Ivorie. Also Towers, and forms of such Cities as they had taken; also, a
representation of the form, and manner of their fight with their Enemy.
Afterward followed, all the Silver, Brass and Gold, together with Statues,
Tables, Candlesticks, Platters, Dishes, Trenchers, Basins of Gold and Silver
taken from the Enemy. Likewise, Jewels, Purple, costly Garments of cloth of
Gold, with Crowns of Silver and Gold, which were given to the Victor: then all
sorts of Arms taken from the Enemy, as Swords, Spears, Pollaxes, Bucklers,
Brest-plates, Helmets, Tasses, and the like. After were brought the Gifts
bestowed upon the Triumpher, as Gold and Silver brought by some thousands of
people: then came other Trumpeters, whom followed fifty, or about an hundred
Oxen to be sacrificed, with their horns gilded, and Garlands upon their heads;
these Oxen were accompanied by Boys, who carried vessels of Gold and Silver to
be used in the Sacrifice, all the Attendants were clad in Garments of Gold and
Purple, interwoven; then came along the Charriots, laden with the Diademes, and
Arms of those Kings and Princes which were taken Captives. After followed the
Kings and Princes themselves, with their Wives, Children, Brethren, and other
of their kindred and friends. Moreover, others of the Enemies, with their hands
bound behind them, and these being of the Nobler, or better sort, were many
thousands. Then followed the Triumpher himself, sitting in a golden Chariot,
made in the form of a Tower, who was drawn with four white Horses, and clad
in a Robe of Gold and Purple; in his right hand he carried a Laurel bough, in
his left, an Ivorie Scepter; next before him, the Lictors or Marshals, with
bundles of Rods and Axes; on every side of him the Trumpets sounded, and
Musicians sang sweetly to their Harpes, clad in Purple, and wearing Coronets of
Gold upon their heads; amongst whom, one clad in a Garment of Gold reaching to
his feet, breaking scurrilous and bitter jests upon the distressed Prisoners,
made sport to the people.

Many sweet Odours and Perfumes were kindled, and carried about, whilst a
public Officer bearing up in his hands, a Crown of pure Gold, beset with many
rare and precious Gemms, ever and anon uttered this before the Victor; Respice
futura, and hominem te esse c^gita: Consider what will follow, and think how
you are but a man. Wherefore, in the chariot of the Triumpher, there hung up a
little Bell and a Whip, to put him in mind he might one day fall upon such
times, wherein (like a Slave) he might be whipped, or as an Offender, lose his
head; for those who were to be beheaded, had always a little tingling Bell
borne before them, lest, as one polluted and cursed, he might be touched of the
people. Sometimes the Sons and Daughters of the Triumpher rode with their
Father in his Chariot, but the next of his kindred went close by his Horses
sides, and sometimes gat up (as if also they would ride in Triumph) upon their
backs.

When Augustus rode in Triumph, Marcellus rode upon the foremost Horse on the
right hand, and Tiberius on the left: the Triumphers Followers, and the
Shieldbearers followed his Chariot; after all the Captains, with the whole
Army in their order, carried Laurel branches in their hands, and Crowns of
Laurel on their heads; and if any of them had purchased any notable rewards,
(...) Crowns of Gold, Bracelets, Spears, Shields, and the like, they bare
them in their hands, singing Paeans, or Songs of Praise, in honor of the
Triumpher, adding hereto, many ri^^iculous passages.

After that in this pomp they came into the Forum, or the spacious place of the
City, he chose out one Captive, especially, whom destinated to death, he
presently sent to prison. After this, he went up into the Capitol, the whole
Senate, and all the Magistrates accompanying him. Then the execution of the
said Captive being publicly proclaimed, they sacrificed their Bulls,
consecrating certain Spoils unto Jupiter. Afterward they feasted without the
Galleries, or Walks of the Capitol, sitting until the evening: then with
Sagbuts and other Musical Instruments, they accompanied the Triumpher home to
his house, and so they ended this Festival Solemnity. This Triumph lasted two
or three days, especially, if they had gotten many and large Spoils. And thus
we read Titus Flaminius, L: Paulus, C^: Pompeius, and Augustus to have
triumphed. None were allowed this Triumph, except they had put to slight, or
slain five thousand Enemies, and had besides, enlarged the bounds of the
Roman Empire. This Pomp and Solemnity is collected out of Dyonisius
Halicarnasseus, lib. 2. and 5. Valerius Maximus, lib. 2. cap. 8. Josephus de
Bello Iudaico, lib. 7. cap. 24. Plutarch in the life of Paulus Aemilius,
Appian, and others. Those also triumphed, who had won any notable victory by
Sea, the Beakes and Anchors of Ships and ^allies being brought to Rome before.
Now all this Gold, Silver, and other booty gotten in the War, belonged to the
Citizens, and was laid up in the Treasury, only the charges of the Triumph
deducted.

Again, those who had put their Enemies to flight without effusion of blood,
or had overcome Inferiors, as Servants, they had a kind of a boasting
Solemnity; for they rode into the City of Romo on Hors-backe, accompanied
with the Knights, their friends, and the Army, being clad in Gowns of cloth
of Gold, and Purple, sacrificing Sheep only in the Capitol; and this was
called, The lesser Triumph.

Three hundred and fifty Triumphs are reckoned from Romulus unto Bellisarius,
who was the last that triumphed under Justinian, Emperor of Constantinople.

But this custom of riding in Triumph, was allowed but under very few
Emperors, although Triumphall Ornaments were kept for them, as the Laurel,
their Robe, and Ivorie Scepter, which they used when they went abroad in
public.

CHAP. X.
The extreme Madness, and vain Pride of some great Persons in former Ages.
WEll known is that sentence of Plautus, Decent secundas fortunas superbiae;
Pride becomes a prosperous Fortune. But many, the more mighty and potent they
are, so much the more basely and foolishly they abuse their greatness; whereof
I will give you some examples; as Xerxes that most famous Monarch of the
Persians, was in his time, the greatest Prince in the world; so for his
ridiculous folly, he surpassed, and bare away the Palm from all other. Of
whom, thus writes Herodotus: Herodot. lib. 7.
When he heard that the Hellespont from Asia, joined it self to Europe, taking
it in a high disdain, he commanded three hundred blows to be given (by
striking) to the Hellespont, and a pair of Fetters to be cast down into the
bottom of that Sea. And I have heard (says Herodotus) that he sent to brand,
or burn the said Sea with a hot iron; but most true it is, he caused it to be
soundly box'd and beaten, uttering these barbarous and frantic words; Oh
bitter Water, thy King and Lord inflicts this punishment upon thee, because
thou have wronged him who never deserved ill at thy hands: but K. Xerxes in
despite of thee, Libello de cohibenda ^ra^
will turn thee another way; thou see no man sacrifices unto thee, because
thou art a deceitful and bitter stream. Whereto agrees Plutarch, saying,
Xerxes branded the Sea, and extremely beat the same. Moreover, he sent this
Letter and Message to the great Mountain Atho; Divine Atho, thou that touchest
Heaven with thy top, see that thou yeeldest no huge and intractable stones to
hinder my works; ^f thou do, I will dig thee up, and throw thee into the Sea.

The like madness among the Romans, possessed Lucullus, who cast huge stones
into the Sea, and by undermining Mountains, let it into the maine Land:
whereupon, very wittily, Pompey called him, Xerxes togatus. C. Caligula grew
very angry with Heaven, because it blew, and stormed upon certain
Stage Players (whom himself rather imitated, than beheld) and because at a
Feast, he was affrighted with Lightning, he challenged the field of Jupiter,
to fight with him hand to hand, uttering aloud (beholding heaven) that verse of
Homer, (...), that is, Take my life, or else I will have thine. Afterward, when
he saw he could do Jupiter no harm, he would himself Jupiter (as Dio and
Suetonius write in his life) and imitated him in all his lustful actions; for
first he committed Incest with his own Sisters, as did Jupiter with Juno, who
being his Sister, he kept as his Wife: then he followed him in all other his
adulteries and vvhoredomes, imitating him only in his vices, since he could
not in his virtues; so that truly it may be said of him, as Iuvenal (and I
suppose of him) speaks: -- nihil est quod ^redere de se, ^atyra 4.

Non possit, si conlubeat Dis aequa potestas.


This same Monster of Nature also feigned, that he was crowned by the hands of
Victory her self; and that he did court and kiss the Moon, embracing her
at his pleasure; and one day in the presence of Vitellius, he affirmed that
he had carnal knowledge of her: withal asked Vitellius, if he saw him not
when he committed the act? Vitellius wittily and pleasantly replied, No indeed
Sir, you Gods do all within your selves, without the knowledge of Mortals.
This reports Xiphilinus; adding beside, That he made artificial engines to
resemble Thunder, and to cast out fire, that he might in all things resemble
Jupiter. And this History following, Athenaeus, lib. 12. records out of
Theopompus. Cotys, a certain King of Thracia, who for a dissolute life, and
Epicurisme, gave place to no man alive; one time he thought himself worthy, in
marriage to match with Minerva, and was verily persuaded, that the Goddess
would yield unto his lustful desire: there having made a most sumptuous
Banquet, and prepared a most delicate bed in a goodly Chamber, richly furnished
with whatsoever appertaining to State, being well gone in drink, he waited
for the coming of Minerva; but having stayed long for her, and she not
appearing, he sent one of his Guard to see whether she were come into the
Chamber, or no: when he told the King, she was not yet come, the King shot
him to death with Arrows: then sent he another, who brought the same Message,
and him he slew in like manner: then a third went, who being terrified by the
example of his fellows, brought word the Goddess was there, and expected him.
Rhianus a Greek Poet, very ingeniously scoffed this his folly, translated since
by Henricus Stephanus, that famous Scholar and Printer, into Latin, which
were too long to recite.

Lopez de Gomara says, that the Kings of Mexico, when they were consecrated,
or crowned, used to take their Oath after this manner: I swear that the Sun,
during my life, shall hold on his course, shall keep his wonted glory and
brightness, that the Clouds shall send down Rain, the Rivers shall run, and
the Earth shall bring forth all manner of Fruit. These proud Princes should
have done better, and wiser, if they had imitated the example of King Canutus,
the Dane, sometime King of England, as it is reported by Henry of Huntingdon:
who, took off a flattering Par^asite (when he told him, all things through his
Dominions, were at his beck and command) after this manner, Canutus causing a
Chair to be set upon the Sea shore, wherein being set, he said to the Sea,
flowing fast toward him, Thou belongest unto me, and the Land, upon which I
now sit, is mine own; neither is there any whosoever that obeyes me not,
shall escape unpunished: I command thee therefore (thou Sea) that thou come
up no higher into my Land, nor that thou presumest once to wet thy Masters
Legs, or Garments. But the Sea, keeping his ordinary course, without duty or
reverence, washed both his Legs and Gown. He then leaping back, said, Let
all the Inhabitants of the world know, that the power of Kings is frivolous and
vain; neither is there any mortal man worthy the name of a King, but he to
whose beck, Heaven, Earth and Sea, by his laws eternal, are obedient.
Neither did Canutus, after this time, wear a crown.

Extreme was the madness of Attil^s, King of the Goths, (as Olatus writes in
his life) who, after he had overcome Aetius and Thrasimundus his enemies,
uttered this proud saying, That now the Stars were ready to fall before him;
now the earth trembled, and that himself was the Maule, or Hammer of the whole
World: and after he grew to that arrogancy, that he commanded The Scourge of
God to be added to his Title, himself to be so called, and written in all his
Letters and Proclamations whatsoever.

CHAP. XI.
Of Cinnamome.
GAlen writes, lib. 1. Antidot. that in his time., Cinnamome was very rare, and
hard to be found, except in the Storehouses of great Emperors and Princes.
And Pliny reports, That a pound of Cinnamome was vvorth a thousand Denarii,
which is answerable to the value of one hundred and fifty Crowns of our
money. Afterward, when the Woods of Arabia and India were set on fire, and
consumed, it was a great deal dearer. That which the Latins call Cassia
lignea, it is comparable but to the worst sort of Cinnamome, which in Italy
they call Cannella. For indeed, the true Cinnamome is utterly unknown of us;
as also of Xylocinnamome, which is only the Wood of the Cinnamome Tree, but
the true Cinnamome, the Bark thereof.

Of this Cinnamome, you shall find a large description in Pliny, lib. 12. cap.
19. but Solinus more briefly, thus: This shrub grows in a short time, with
low branches, bending downward; it is never above two Else in height; if it
grow up small and slender, it is esteemed the better, that which is thick is
the worser. It is gathered by the Indian Priests, they having first slain
certain beasts for a Sacrifice, which when they have offered, they observe,
that their harvest of this Cinnamome, shall not be before the Sunne-rising, nor
endure after the Sunsetting. Whosoever is Lord of the Soil, or the principal
man, he divides the heaps of the branches, or sticks of the same, gathered
with a Spear, which is consecrated for the same purpose: and a portion of some
handfuls is dedicated to the Sun, which, if it be equally divided, enkindled
by his beams, it presently takes fire, and burns. Thus far Solinus, in
his description of Africa, cap. 39. and 42. Of this Cinnamome, Solomon makes
mention, Proverbs 7. and 17. also Marcian the Civilian, in l. Caesar 16..
Species. ff: de public. and Vectigal, where he notes out of Pliny and
Dioscorides, that the virtue of this Plant was in the Bark of the Tree; and
that in Galens time it was most rare, and not to be found, but in the Closets
of Emperors: hereof is a very precious unguent made, cal^ed Cinnami^um, being
in substance very thick, whose chief commendation is, that the smell hereof
(if you carry it about you) draws any Woman, though passing by you, and
minding other things, to draw near unto you, says Philip Beroaldus upon
Apul^ius, lib. 2. Milesiac. and which is affirmed also by many others.

CHAP. XII.
Of Balsamum.
BAlsamum being more famous by Report, then known, is the juice of a certain
Tree growing in Jury, in the valley of Jericho, like unto a Vine: these Plants
(except counterseit) are not now any where to be found; they say the Turk has
some few in Egypt, from which every year he receives only some few drops
of the Liquor; else are they to be found in no part of the World. For when the
Turks, enemies of all goodness and civilitie, destroyed all the Vineyards in
and about Jericho, withal, they cut down these Plants; for since, they were
never found in that Country, and therefore no true Balsame is brought into
Europe: if happily some there be, it is not worth the speaking of. Yet I have
heard some affirm, there have been some of these Balsame Plants found in the
West Indies, but I much doubt of that: it may be some other Tree, affording a
medicinable Liquor (as there are many) like unto the other. For this aforenamed
true Balsamum, grew no where but in Jury, in the valley of Jericho, in two
large Gardens which belonged only unto the King: as it was like a Vine, so it
was planted like unto our Vines, by setting the slippings into the Earth: but
whereas the Vine had props to guide it, the Balsamum had none. Within three
years after the planting, it brought forth the fruit; the height of it, being
grown, was not fully two Cubits: among all other unguents, for goodness,
Balsamum has the pre-eminence, because also it excels all other for sweetness
of smell; the juice or liquor, is called Opobalsamum.

-- Her suto spirant Opobalsamo collo; says Iuvenal. Xylobalsamum is the Wood
of the body, or of the branch, which the Shops sometimes substituted for the
liquor; the chief virtue is attributed to the Juice; the next, to the Seed;
the third, to the Bark; the least of all, to the Wood. The trial of true
Balsame, is to put it into Milk, which it will presently turn to a curd; and
if any drop chances to fall upon a Garment, it will leave no spot or stain
behind. Dioscorides says, When the Liquor was to be drawn forth, the body was
cut with small claws of iron. Which Claudian also affirms in Epithal:
Palladii; (...). 1. Far is ungib^^ Dioscor. lib. 1. ^. 18.
Gemmatis alii per totum Balsama tectum
Effudere cadis, duro quae saucius ungue
Niliacus pingui desudat vulnere cortex.


Pliny, Solinus and Tacitus, rather affirm the veins of the Tree to be
opened with Glass, a sharp Stone, or with Knives of Bone; averring, the
nature of the Tree cannot abide iron, but presently dies, if you cut it never
so small a depth.

Strabo also affirms this Plant to have been peculiar to the Land of Jury
only: it has the name, Whence Balsamum has the name.
Balsamum, from the Arabian word, Balsamin; that is, The Lord, or Prince of
Oils. And we find it in Exodus, Exodus 30. 23.
to be Aromatum praestantissimum; by this, the Jews gained to themselves great
riches; Lib. 36. de Opobalsamo.
as Iustine, the Epitomizer of Trogus affirms. The place where it grew, was
but two hundred acres of ground, which was with Mountains, like the walls of a
Castle, enclosed round; they sweat out their Balsame but at one certain time
of the year: and one thing is to be admired of the place where these Trees
grow, when all the Country round about (by reason of the nearness of the
Sun) was extremely hot, in this Vale only, the Air was ever temperate and
refreshing, with a shady coolness.

CHAP. XIII.
What Studies and Exercises best become Princes.
AN ancient Historian, writing the life of Galienus the Emperor, says, He
excelled in Poetry, Oratorie, and in all Arts, and it were an hard matter to
collect all his works; which made him famous in his time, as well among Poets
as Rhetoricians. But one thing must be expected from an Emperor, another from
a Poet and an Orator: which passage when I well considered, and having perused
many Hi^^ories, I quickly found what Studies concerned Princes, and what vulgar
persons. And first, I met with that of Livie, concerning Servius Tullius,
writing thus; Inde puerum liberum loco caeptum haberi erudirique artibus,
quibus ingenia ad magna fortunae cultum excitantur^ After that, from a Boy, he
began to be accounted in the rank of his children, and to be instructed in
those Arts, by which good Wits are excited, to be made capable of a great
fortune. And another writes thus of Augustus; He was first exercised in the
way of speaking Greek and Latin, he did endure the travel and labor which
belonged unto service in the War, he learned whatsoever appertained to the
Rule of a Common wealth, or a Kingdom. The like did Agrippina in the education
of Nero her Son. For as we read, she persuaded Claudius to adopt Domitius
Nero her Son; which when she had done, she procured Seneca (who had, Seneca
possessed Land in Essex.
about that time, a great quantity of Land given him, amongst us, lying in
Essex) to teach and instruct him, and to make him fit for Imperial Government.

Now what are these Studies? I will show you in few words. I speak nothing of
Piety and Religion, which the meanest knows to be the Basis, and foundation
of all Princely Education; and without which, all other parts, be they never
so excellent, do but totter and reele: he therefore being first grounded in
the true knowledge of God, and the purity of Christian Religion; I first bring
him to the Rhetoric School, and to learn to be Eloquent: being admonished
hereunto by Lucian, who in his Dialogue, (which he intituleth (...)) does
feign Hercules Ogrisius to draw a mighty company of the common people unto
him, fastened by the cares, unto little Chains which proceeded from his mouth.
By which fiction he means, that a good Prince, by the benefit of Eloquence,
may ea^ily keep his subjects in awe, and order. Musonius in Stobaeus, also
says, It is a most Kingly thing for a Prince, not to be out-gone in ability
of an Eloquent tongue. Neither do I desire, that a Prince (as King James said)
should be a passe-master in Rhetoric and Eloquence, or to sift all Oratorie
for style and figures; it is enough if he but have a proper and ready
sweetness of utterance, lest perhaps, if any should persuade him to be
excellent herein, he might answer his Tutor, as a certain Prince in
Euripides, answered his, (...). Princes are not to be instructed concerning
light matters, but in those things which especially concern the Common wealth.

From Eloquence, I would lead a Prince to the study of Philosophy, not to
those subtle Quiddits, and deep Theoremes, which may make one learned, but
seldom better, and oftentimes worse: For, how many has the subtilties hereof
made plain Atheists; and a Prince ought not to study to be eminent in a
School, but learn to know what may concern the life and safety of his
subjects; wherefore the Theorique part of Philosophy for Recreation sake may
be tasted of, according to that of Neoptolemus, Philosophandum paucis, nam
omnino non placere. And as much is confessed by Apollonius in Philostratus,
where he says: The study of Philosophy in a King or Prince, if it be with
moderation, works in him an admirable Temperature: but overmuch toyling in
the same study, is odious and troublesome, and more sordid then may suite with
the State of a King. Marcus Antoninus Emperor, though he gave himself but
moderately to this study, yet the Name of Antoninus the Philosopher stuck by
him all his life after. Julian the Emperor also was taxed of his best friends,
Ammian. Marcell.
quod nimius circa Philosophorum disputationes esset. But I would have him
versed and well acquainted with those Theoricall Studies which concern the
Mathematiques, after the Example of many great Princes and Monarchs, who have
made singular use hereof: For it is a most fitting and necessary thing, that
a Prince should know the Situation of Countries, people, and their manners;
Kingdoms, and their form of government; Passages, Havens, and to bear them
in memory: and withal, not to be altogether ignorant in Astronomy,
concerning the Heavens and their Motions, Constellations, their names, with
their arising, descending, and the like. This was the study of Julius Caesar
in his Camp, as Lucan testifies: -- Media inter praelia semper,
Stellarum, coelique plagis, superisque vacare,
Soleba^.


Alphonsus the tenth King of Spain, was so given to the study of the
Mathematiques, that he was termed the Astrologer, and from his Name, those
Mathematical Tables, so well known, are called to this day, Alphonsus his
Tables.

Likewise that famous Emperor, whom for his merits of Christendom, may be
justly called a Second Charles the Great, he took such delight in the Study
of the Mathematiques, that even in the midst of his whole Army in his Tent,
sat close at this study, having for that purpose as his Instructor, Turrianus
of Cremona evermore with him. I mean not that I would have Princes, under the
color of Astronomy, give themselves to Astrology, that Fortune-telling, and
groundless profession of Almanack-makers, and quacksalving Emperiques, which
casts Nativities, and necessitates the actions of men, (more then God
himself ever did:) this study is to be avoided of Princes especially,
because it is impious, and will both make them superstitious and cowards. This
deceived Alexander, who when hereby (being both sick in body and mind, vexed
with many cares) he thought to have prevented death, he drew it upon him.
And of this Disease also labored Lewis the Eleventh, as you shall find it
recorded by Philip Commines. To conclude in a word, how far we should wade in
this knowledge, I will make Tullies words mine own; Didici ego (says he)
compertumque habeo Reges and Principes ab Theoreticae Philosophiae subtiliori
studio laudari non solere.

After this first part of Philosophy, I persuade a Prince to the other
Practical, which is Political, or concerning Policy, which to say truth,
ought to be his only study: For this Political part is most employed in
directing Princes in their manner of living, and all those things which
concern the good of the Commonwealth, says a learned Geographer.

I presuppose every Prince to be by Nature apt to take advice and wholesome
counsel: And a Prince being ingenious, and by Nature apt and capable of
understanding, he is to be first grounded in the Rules and Instructions of the
best Politicians that have written, whose Books teach him without affection,
fear, or flattery. Excellent was that saying of Alphonsus King of Arragon,
That his dead Counselors (meaning books) were to him better then his living,
who neither moved by fear, shame, favor, hatred, or any other affection,
would tell him the truth sincerely and plainly. Hereupon the best Authors in
this kind are to be enquired for, and read, after the Example of the most
able, and who ever were famous either in peace or war. Marcus Varro gave to
C. Pompeie when he was first elected Consul, for his instruction, Isagogicum
commentarium de Officio Senatus habendi, as says Agellius. Agell. lib. 14.
cap. 7.


Demetrius Phaleraeus, (as Plutarch says) earnestly persuaded Ptolomy that he
should provide himself of those Books entitled, Commentar^j de Regno. So
Livie, from the first foundation of Rome, makes mention of the Commentaries of
Numa. Xiphilinus of Caesar's Commentaries. Tacitus, of the Register or Account
Book of Augustus. Soranzo, of the Commentaries of Amurath, Emperor of the
Turks. Many Princes left behind them in writing to their Heirs politic
observations, and their Experience for their use and instruction. Read
Xiphilinus, of Augustus Caesar his Will and his wise and thriftie Counsel to
Tiberius and the people of Rome, which were too tedious to insert here; though
one thing herein I will not overpasse: Augustus herein charged them to be
content with what they had already, and by no means they should strive to
enlarge the Bounds of their Empire: for it was both hard getting more; and
gotten, it might endanger the losing of that wc^ they now possessed quietly.

Xiphilinus writes also, that Nero had books, (...). Ammianus Marcellinus
testifies, That Julian read continually a certain Book, which Constantius
wrote with his own hand, when he sent him to study in the University of
Paris. And these kind of Books were called, either Commentarii, Breviaria,
Raetionaria, Instrumenta Imperii; the Graecians call, (...). In these and the
like Books, concerning the Government of a Common wealth, as of Plato,
Aristotle, and Plutarch, left to Posterity; if a Prince be well exercised, he
shall have herein understanding enough.

But I would have him withal, converse with learned men well skilled in this
kind. For (as Seneca says) as those who walk in the Sun (though they go not
out for that purpose) cannot choose but be Sun-burn'd; so he, who is delighted
in the company, and acquaintance of Wise men, and makes use of the same,
cannot choose but partake of some Wisdom. So Scipio Africanus and Polybius and
Panaetius evermore with him; Lucullus had Antiochus, the younger Scipio, either
Laelius; Augustus, Agrippa; and Statilius, Taurus; Nero (as long as he
continued honest) Seneca; Themistocles, Mnesiphilus; Themistocles, Anaxagoras;
Dio, Plato; Philip of Macedon, and Epiman^ndas, Lysias of Tarentum; Alexander,
Aristotle; Cicero, Nigidius; and so of others.

These of the Latins, were called Monitores; of the Graecians, (...), or
Reme^brancers.

Besides, a Prince is not only to have about him, such as are skilled in
humane Learning, but also such as have knowledge in Military Affairs; for a
Prince must be fitted, not only for times of Peace, but of War.

Severus is commended of Capitolinus in these words; It was his custom, if he
was to deal in serious business, and matters of Law, and State, to make
learned, wise, and understanding men of his Counsel, if of matters concerning
War, ancient Soldiers, such as had deserved well, and had experience; who
were skillful of Countries and places, and of fortifications, but especially of
either, who were best read in History: for History and Policy go hand in
hand with either; History declares what has been done, Policy, how justly.
But some Courtier may say, Will you have a Prince to be always poring upon his
Book, and allow him no exercise? Honest and seasonable exercise ought never to
be denied to a Prince. Which Exercises I reckon, to ride and manage a great
Horse, to exercise his Arms, to leap, to hunt, to play at Tennis, and the
like, which may further and confirm his strength.

Sometimes Princes, if they be so pleased, may exercise Mechanical Arts, if
they be not illiberall or base; wherefore Domitian is justly taxed by
Historians, that he took pleasure in killing of Flies, with a small sharp
stick. Moreover, Comm^dus is blamed by Lampridius, because he was skillful in
those things which became not his Imperial dignity, as making of Wooden Cups,
Dancing, Singing, playing the Fool, and using himself to Fencing. Neither are
those Exercises to be allowed of in a Prince, which draw blood, as playing the
Butcher, and to kill Beasts for his recreation, which are Arguments of a cruel
and a bloody mind.

There are certain Mechanical Arts, near a kin to the Liberal, wherein a
Prince may take his pleasure, as Painting, wherein Alexander Serverus, and
Alexander (by the relation of Histories) were excellent. Belonging to this, is
Statuarie or Carving, wherein, Xiphiline and Spartianus report the same Adrian
to have been most skillful. Turning has a share with the other, an Art lately
found out, yet much commended, and allowed of, for Sigismund, that most valiant
and wise K. of Poland is said to have exercised himself much herein.

We read also of many Princes, who have been excellent Goldsmiths;
Collenutius reports, That Manfred of Naples, made a most curious Eagle of
silver, which he ware upon his Helmet. Alphonsus, Duke of Ferrara, could cast
great Pieces of Ordnance, whereof, two he made in the Venetian War, one he
called the Earthquake, the other, Grandiabolo, or the great devil.

Of James the 4th K. of Scots, Buchanan writes, lib. 13. That he had learned,
and studiously practiced, how to cure all manner of wounds perfectly; which
skill was common to most of the Nobility of Scotland, as men accustomed to War
and wounds. Collenutius again reports, That Ferdinand the second, K. of
Naples, was skillful in all Mechanical Arts; neither skillful only, but an
excellent Master in all whatsoever. Rodulph the last Emperor, was a rare
Jeweller, and had great skill in making of Clocks and Watches. Neither in our
days are examples wanting of great Princes and persons, who delight themselves
in these and the like. These be those short Rules which I have out of others,
I confess, prescribed out of many Examples unto Princes; which if they shall
observe, there is no doubt but they shall give their Subjects great hope of
their just and moderate government, and draw their eyes as glorious Mirrors to
admire them; Provided their Teachers, and Counsellor^ be learned and just. For
as Lampridius says, Tantum valet aut ingenii vis, aut eorum qui in Aula
institutores habentur.

CHAP. XIV.
Of incombustible Flax, or which will not consume by Fire.
THere was anciently a kind of Flax, which the Graecians called Asbestinum,
the Latins, Linum vivum: Hereof were made whole pieces of Linen cloth, and
garments, which were not only not consumed by any fire, but cast into the same,
the soil and dirtinesse being consumed and burned away, taken out again, it
became more white then any water could wash it. The bodies of Emperors and
Kings were burned in sheets of this linen, lest the ashes of their Bodies
burned, should mingle with the ashes of the wood. This Flax is esteemed above
all other Flax in the world, Plin. lib. 19. cap. 1.
(says Pliny;) it is hard to be found, and as difficult to be woven, by
reason of the shortness thereof, and being found, in price it equalled the most
excellent Pearls. Nero is reported to have had a linen garment of the same:
but at this day it is not any where to be found; Yet I remember I had given me
by an Arabian, when I lived in Saint Martins Parish in the Fields, twenty
years since, a pretty quantity of a Stuff like Flax, which he ^ad me put
into the fire, but it consumed not; whether it were of this Plane or no, or
that Fla^e of Cyprus, which (...) a Knight of Cyprus (who wrote an History of
Cyprus, Ann^ MDLXVI.) brought to (...), and the fire could not consume it, I
kno^^ not. Now this Flax of Cyprus proceeds from no plant, as our Flax, but
from the stone Amiant^s, which being found in Cyprus, and broken with an
hammer, the earthy dross purged from it, there remains fine hairie threads,
like unto Flax, which are woven into cloth. This Flax was seen in the house
of the said Podo^^^^^ by many men of worth and credit, as Porcachio witnesses,
Tabula 2. Funeralium. Wherefore Line being made of this stone, and
incombustible, Constantine the Emperor ordained that it should ever burn in
lamps in his chapel at Rome: this reports Damasus in the life of Pope
Sylvester. Moreover, Ludovicus Vives, in his Commentaries upon St Aug. de
Civit. Dei. lib. 21. c. 6. says, that he saw lamps at Paris, whose lights
never consumed. Also at Lovaine a Napkin taken from the table at a feast, and
thrown into the fire, and being quite red as a coal, was taken out again,
cooled, and restored to the owner more white then if it had been washed with
all the water and soap in the town. But enough of this subject.

CHAP. XV.
Of an artificial kind of guilding amongst the Romans, which they called
Pyropus, as also of Electrum.
PYropus, is commonly taken for a bigger sort of Rubies, called a Carbuncle,
from the resemblance of a burning coal, but falsely: for Pyropus was, as
Pliny tells us, lib. 34. cap. 8. a kind of Copper, to every ounce of which,
^ixe scruples of gold were added, and so beaten into thin leaves: tops of
Piramids, Towers, and the like, were gilded therewith, which when the beams of
the Sun took hold of, it shone like fire; thence had it the name of Pyropus.
But this Art of making it is utterly lost: so is that metal called Electrum,
which was a composition of gold with a fifth part of silver added thereunto; and
heerewith the Ancients beautified their beds, si^lings, and tables, as Homer
testifies. With Pyropus Stage Players used to guild their Coronets, being
first drawn or beaten into thin sheets or leaves, and after steeped in the gall
of a Bull says Pliny: Plin. l 34. cap. 8.
wherefore our Scholemasters, and ordinary Grammarians may see their error, in
taking Pyropus in Ovid for a Car^uncle, where Ovid des^^^bing the house of the
Sun, says it was, -- sublimibus alta columnis, Metam 2.

Clara micanta auro, flammasque imitante Pyropo.


And that it was no kind of metal, but was to be laid on as we do our
leafe-gold, Propertius will affirm, where he says, Picta nec inducto
fulgeb^t parma Pyropo.

Isidore supposes Electrum Electrum.
was so named, by reason of the brightness from the Sun, called by many Poets
(as Pliny testifies) Elector; whereof there are three kinds: Plin. l 37. cap.
2.
The first proceeds from the fa^ty substance of a Tree, which is a kind of
Bine, and runs down, as we see the Gum upon Cherry Trees, and is hardened
with the coldness of the Air, or the working of the Sea; for when great Tides
flow up into those Islands where it grows, carrying it away, they cast it upon
other Shores, giving the form of roundnesse thereunto, by often rouling the
same. The Ancients called it, Succinum, quod ex arboris, succo distillante
congelasceret. Now from what Tree it falls, it is a question, Aristotle names
not any Tree. Dioscorides says, It is the tears, or distilled humor of
Poplar Trees, growing near to the River Po in Italy; This Electrum is our
Amber.
and being hardened in the Stream, becomes Electrum, which is no other then
our Amber. Ambros: Hexameron. lib. 2. cap. 15.
S. Ambrose says, It is the tear, or dropping of a little low shrub: and true
it is, at the first it is liquid, and runs down as tears from the eyes,
since oftentimes many kinds of small creatures are found buried in Amber, as
Flies, Bees, little Worms, etc. which were entangled in the same when it was
liquid. Martial Marti. l. 4.
has a most elegant Epigramme Epigr. 32.
of a Be enclosed within a piece of Amber: which is, Et latet, and lucet,
Phaetontide condita gutta,
Vt vidcatur Apis nectare clausa suo:
Dignum tantorum, pretium tulit illa laborum;
Credibile est ipsam, sic voluisse mori.


The like, and altogether as good, or better, has the same Poet of a Viper,
buried in the same manner, where he wills Cleopatra, not to esteem so
highly of her royal and stately Monument, when the Viper found a more rich and
magnificient Tomb then her self. I over-passe that Poetical Fable of
Phaeton, who by Li^ghtning, was cast down from his Chariot, into the River
Po, or Eridanns; whose fall, when the Sisters Heliaedes continually wept and
bewailed, they were turned into Poplar Trees: Vnde fluunt lachrymae, Ovid
Mettm. 2. 4.
stillataque sole rigescunt;
De ramis electra novis --


A second sort of this Electrum, is a Met^all which anciently was dug out of
Pits, and deep Ditches, as Isidore reports, perhaps out of Pliny, lib. 33.
cap. 4.

The 3d and last kind, is this artificial Electru^ we spoke of, a quantity of
Gold, mixed with five times as much silver. This Metal, or matter for
Gilding, was highly esteemed from all Antiquity. Homer reports, That the
Palace of Menela^s shone, and glistered with Gold Electrum, Silver and Ivori^.
And at Lindos, an Island belonging to Rhodes, was the Temple of Minerva; to
which Temple, Helen of Troy consecrated, and gave a Cup or Bowl made of this
Electrum, of the just bigness of one of her Papps or Breasts; say Trebellius,
Pollio and Pomp^nius, of Electrum, money anciently was made and coined: so were
also Rings to be worn in ^ares, and upon fingers, says Savaro in Notis ad
Appollinarem, carm. 24.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Margaret the Wife of Herman, Earl of Henneberge.
THis Lady lived in the time of Henry the 3d Emperor, who brought forth at
one birth 365 children, the just number of days in the year; in memory
whereof, not far from Leiden in Holland, in a Village called Lausdunen, there is
yet a fair Table of Marble, which contains the whole History of this
stupendous accident; which, as it there stands engraven upon the Marble, I
will truly relate: for I my self have twice or thrice, when I lived in Holland,
seen the same: these two Verses are engraven uppermost, En tibi monstrosum
nimis, The Epitaph of Margaret, Countess of Henneberge.
and memorabile factum,
Quale ne^ a mundi condition datum.


Margaret the wife of Herman, Earl of Henneberge, and daughter of Florence the
4h Earl of Holland and Zeland, sister of William King of the Romans, and
after Caesar, or Governor of the Empire, and of Alithea, Countess of Henault,
whose Uncle was the Bishop of Vtrecht, and Cousin to the Duke of Brabant, and
the Earl of Thuringia, etc. This Noble Countess being about forty years of
age, upon Easter day, and about nine of the clock in the year of our Lord,
1276. was brought to bed of three hundred sixty and five children, all which
were baptized in two brazen Basins, by Guido the Suffragane of Vtrecht; the
males, how many soever there were of them, were christened by the name of John,
the daughters were al named Elizabeth, who all together with their mother dyed
the same day, and with their mother lie buried in this Church of Losdunen. This
happened by the means of a poor woman, who carried in her arms two children,
who were twins, and both of them males, which the Countess admiring, said,
That she could not have them by one father, and so shook her off in contempt
and scorn. Whereupon this poor woman being much perplexed in her mind,
presenly prayed to God to send her as many children as there were days in the
whole year: which thing beside the course of Nature, in a stupendous and
wonderful manner came to pass, as it is briefly set down and declared in
this Table for a perpetual Memory, testified as well by ancient Manuscripts,
as by many printed Chronicles. The Almighty and great GOD of Heaven hereupon
be feared, honored, and praised from this time forth for evermore.

Amen.
CHAP. XVII.
Of Glass made malleable, to be beaten forth every way.
IT is reported, that in the time of Tiberius the Roman Emperor, there was
invented Glass of that temper, that it would abide the hammer, and be beaten
in length or breadth like lead, and pliable to bend every way like paper; and
that the Inventor hereof was put to death, upon this occasion: When he had
built a most magnificent Palace in Rome, which after the building began to
^inke, and was likely to fall, and Tiberius having paid him for his work,
commanded him to depart, and never to look him in the face again. He shortly
after having invented the way to make Glass Malleable, or to abide the Hammer,
and came to show the same to Tiberius, expecting a reward (as Dio reports) for
his Invention; Dio. l. 57.
His whole Shop, says Pliny, was pulled down, and laid waste, lest Brass,
Gold and Silver should be undervalued in their price and esteem. Others
report, That Tiberius did it out of malice and envy, because he naturally
hated learned, virtuous, and all ingenious men.

More at large, Petronius reports this matter after this manner, saying,
There was a skillful Crafts-man, who made Cups, and vessels of Glass, of that
strength and firmness, that they would no more break, then Pots of Silver and
Gold.

Now when he had made a Vial of this most pure and solid Glass, and thought
the same a Gift worthy to be given to Caesar, (meaning Tiberius) he was
brought with his present before Caesar, who much commended the manner of the
making, and the skillful hand of the Workman; his gift was taken, and his
good will accepted of.

This Workman, more to amaze all the beholders by, and that he might make
himself a farther way into the Emperors favor, took the Glasse-viall again
out of the Emperors hand, and threw it down upon the Pavement, with so great
a force, that had it been made of Gold or Silver, it had been either bruized
or broken. Tiberius heereat, was not only astonished, but waxed very fearful.
The Maker took up his Glass again, which was a little bruized, but no where
broken; as if, says Petronius, the substance of Brass had converted it self
to Glass: then taking a Hammer out of his bosom, he beat out the bruize, and
brought it again into fashion, as a Tinker should beat out a bruized Kettle.

Which being done, he thought that he had purchased Heaven, gaining at once,
Caesar's familiarity and admiration; but it fell out otherwise. For Caesar
demanded, if any other knew the Art of making that kind of Glass, but
himself? He answered, None that he knew. Whereupon Tiberius commanded, That
he should be beheaded; for (quoth he) if this Art were publicly known, Gold
and Silver would be no more esteemed of then Clay.

Coelius Rhodoginus reports also this same History, taxing the vanity of
Tiberius, who was of a crafty and a catching disposition, dissembling, and
making the World believe he would do those things which he never meant, and
what he meant to do, he would not; as seeming angry with those whom he
meant to prefer, and friendly to others, whose throa^s he meant to cut.

As this Glasse-maker, so all great Wits must be working upon new Inventions,
one after another, which indeed is the fuel or food of Wit; which the same
Rhodoginus does elegantly express, l. 29. cap. 16. but as one says, Rara
ingeniorum praemia, rara item and merces. Eumolpus in Petronius, makes also
the same complaint: one asking him the question why he went so poorly
apparelled? for this reason, quoth he, Amor ingenii, neminem unquam divitem
fecit. The love of Wit, (or witty Inventions) never made any man rich. And
afterward he adds, Nescio quomodo bonae mentis soror est paupertas; I know
not how it comes to pass, that Poverty is always the Sister of a virtuous,
or honest mind. And true it is that Apuleius says, In Apolog.
Paupertas est Philosophiae vernacula, Paupertas; or, Poverty is the mother
tongue, or proper language of Philosophy.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Bells.
BElls are imagined to have been invented in the year of our Redemption,
Four hundred, by Paulinus Bishop of Nola. Nola is a Town in Campania, where
Augustus died: they were called Campanae, because they were invented in
Campania: and the lesser Bells, Nolae, from the place where they were made.

The use of Bells is very great; for by the benefit of them, the hours of the
time of the day are heard a far off, whether we lie in our beds, or be
abroad in the fields, or journeying on the way; they tell us the hour of the
day, though we cannot see the clouded Sun. Before these Water-glasses, called
Clepsidrae, were in use and request. Moreover, Bells call us to Divine Service;
they call for help, when houses in Cities, and Towns are on fire; or when
there is any mutiny or uproare; they call the Magistrates of Cities to their
Halls, or common Counsell-house; Scholars in Universities, to Congregations,
and Disputations; Judges to the Hall and Bench. And in a word, they serve, and
help us in all public Actions, and without them, we knew not well what to
do.

But indeed Paulinus, that holy and religious Bishop, did rather reform the
abuse of Bells, then invent them; and taugh^ them to call Christians to the
Church, and to serve God, whereas in former times, their chief use was (as
they then imagined) to chase away Devils, and evil Spirits; they hindered also
Magical Enchantments, as Tibullus, not obscurely notes, when he thus writes:
Cantus and e curr^^ Lunam deducere tentat,
Et faceret si non a^ra repulsa sonen^.


For they believed, that by the tingling of Brass, that the sound of Magical
verses should be hindered from coming up to the Moon; and when she was moved
with these Verses, this sound relieved her: in which sense I take that of
Statius Papinius Thebaid. 6.

-- Attonitis quoties avellitur astris,
Solis opaca soror, procul auxiliantia gentes
Aura crepant, frustraque timent --
Yet I must confess, as now, so in ancient times, when any one dyed, Belles
did ring, and they made Brass to sound; but they did it to the end (as I said
before) they might chase away Devils and Spirits from coming near them.
Bells are rung many times in thunder, to reverberate the infectious Air, which
I am persuaded they do. The like does great Ordnance, shot off as well in
Thunder, as in soultry and close hot weather.

The Laconians, when their King dyed, used to beat upon Kettles, instead of
ringing of Bells. The Africanes, especially those who are Prester John's
Subjects, have Bells made of Stone. The Jews at Funerals used playing upon
Pipes, as it may be gathered out of Math^w 9. which Custom it seemed the
Romans borrowed from the Jews, as appears by Ovid. 1. Tristium.

Tibia funeribus convenit ista meis. The little Bell, which we commonly call,
The Saints Bell, John Pierius uses for an Hieroglyphick, teaching Preachers of
Gods Word, that to the sound of their voice, they should lead their lives
according; else like the Bell, while they call upon others, themselves are
deaf and stupid, alluding whereunto, Beza has this excellent Epigramme: Era
gravi ^unctos, veluti Campana sonore,
Ipsa licet penitus sint sibi surda, cient:
Sic es recta docens alios, perversa sequute,
Quique alijs sapiens, non sapis ipse tibi.


Thus much concerning Bells, and their use.

CHAP. XIX.
The occasion of the alteration of the Arms of Bohemia.
WHen Vladislaus K. of Bohemia took part with Frederick Barbarossa, and very
much assisted him with Men, Munition, and all things necessary for his
Expedition against Millan: Millan being taken, the day after the Emperor had
entered into the City, mounted upon a goodly Courser, in his Imperial Robes,
wearing the Crown which the King of England had sent him, all beset with most
resplendent and prizelesse Jemmes, he entered into the choice Church of the
City, wherein the Arch bishop of Millane said Mass; there taking off his
Crown, he presented it to the King of Bohemia in these words: Vladislaus,
this Crown, and the Honor thereunto belonging, being the gift of my loving
Friend the King of England, appertains by right unto your self: for you have
been both the head and foot of that Victory which now I have obtained.
Moreover, as a perpetual Testimony and Monument of our mutual love and
friendship unto all posterity, give me leave to change your Single black
Eagle into a stern Lion: for a Lion in strength and courage far excels an
Eagle. The King yielded unto him, giving him many thanks. Then by the
Commandment of the Emperor a Painter was sent for, who should draw this Lion
in an Ensign: but hear a merry jest which followed. The Paynter by chance
had so drawn him, that his Tail lay close between his legs, as if he had
had none at all; which the Bohemians observing; and I pray you (quoth they to
the Painter) Where is his tail? this is more like an ill-favored Jack an
apes, then a generous Lion. Hereupon despising this coward-like Lion, they
desired (being much grieved) that they might have their old Eagle again. This
when it was related unto the Emperor, he fell into a great laughter, saying,
It is no hard matter to find a remedy for this, and to please the Bohemians.
Wherefore he caused presently to be new painted, a white Lion, not with one
tail only, but with two, and those fairly aloft, cast over his back: which
remains the Arms of the Bohemians even to this day.

CHAP. XX.
A most ancient and pleasant manner of Choosing their Prince in Carinthia.
IN Carinthia, as often as a new Prince is to be chosen, and to take the
government upon him, they observe a Custom, the like whereof is not in the
world. Not far from the Town of Saint Vitus, in a goodly Valley, are seen
the ruins of an old City, the name whereof Antiquity of Time has abolished.
Not far off, among many large Meadows, is erected a Marble stone: on this
stone a Peasant or Countryman gets up, (which office he has Haereditarie, as
belonging to him and his posterity) at whose right hand stands a lean
black Ox, and an ill-favored Mare of Paramatiae; about this Mare stand a
multitude of people, and all the Husbandmen of the Country.

Then the Prince comes on forward from the other part of the Meadow, all his
Nobles in Purple accompanying him; the Earl of Goritia (who is Steward, and
keeper of the Princes Palace) carries the Banner and Arms of the Country,
runs before between twelve lesser Banners; the other Magistrates follow
after. In all this company, every one goes in an honorable and respectfull
fashion, saving the Prince himself: who goes like a Clown or a Countryman,
and apparrelled accordingly; for he wears an old side-coat, a Plow-mans cap,
high shoes, and a Shepherds hook in his hand; whom, as soon as the other
Countryman upon the stone has espied, he calls out aloud unto him in the
Slavonian tongue, (for the Carinthians are all of them Slavonians) Who is this
whom I epsy coming in that state, and so proud a gate toward me? The
standers by answer, That the Prince of the Country is come. He upon the stone
then replies, What is he? Is he an upright Judge? And seeks the good and
safety of the Country? Is he of a free condition, and worthy of Honor? Is he
a professor and maintainer of the Christian Religion? and will he be a
defender of the same? All then answer together, He is, and will be. I therefore
demand, by what right he can dispossess and stir me from my seat, this
same stone? The Earl of Goritia answers, This place shall be bought of you for
threescore pence, these Cattle shall be yours, (showing him the Ox and the
Mare) besides, you shall have also the Princes apparel, which shortly he will
leave off, your house shall be free, without paying Tribute. Which words being
pronounced, the Countryman upon the stone, gives the Prince a gentle box on
the care, and bids him be a good Judge; then arising, and taking his goodly
beasts with him, he yields his place to the Prince.

The Prince getting up upon the Stone, turns himself round about toward the
people, with his Sword drawn, which he flourishes every way, and over his
head, promising true Justice unto the people. Then they bring him fair water
to drink out of a Countrey-mans Cap, meaning, that he should put down the
drinking, and use of Wine. After this he goes unto a Church dedicated unto
the Blessed Virgin Marie, which stands upon a little Mount not far off,
where solemn Service being finished, he casts off his Country habit,
putting on a princely Robe, and having feasted royally with his Nobles, he
goes again into the aforesaid Meadowe, and there sitting in a Chair of
State, he administers Justice to all that ask it, and disposes of houses and
lands. The Duke of Carinthia had sometime the place of chief Hunts-man of the
Empire, before whom all Controversies amongst Hunters and Wood-men, were
brought and decided.

CHAP. XXI.
The marveilous simplicity of a Monk, fetched out of his Monastery, to be
Crowned a King.
THe Arragonians, who inhabit between the River Iberus, and the kingdom of
Valentia in Spain, who derive their name from the most ancient City
Tarracona, built by Cn: Publius, Scipio's Brother, in the second Punicke War,
chose one Tarrensis, a Noble man for their King; who being possessed of his
Regal Authority, and Dignity, began to abuse his government, and to grow
proud and insolent: so incurring the hatred of his people, he was soon after
by them deprived of his kingdom. Now being cast out of his Throne, when they
could meet with none whom they thought worthy and able to take the charge of
the Crown and government upon him, by the Popes Authority, they took out of
a Monastery, one Ranimiro, a Monk, (a Bastard son of Sanchio Maior's) and
made him King of Arragon and Osea, as Colle^utius will have it; but (
Roderig^es Sanchi^ calls it Osca) crowned in the year One thousand and
seventeene.

This Monk, not accustomed to the Wars, or Military Affairs (as it seemed)
when he was to set forward in an Expedition against the Moors, he was by his
Nobles set upon a goodly great horse in his complete Arms, giving him his
Shield in his left hand, and his Lance in his right: then they gave him the
Bridle; which when he considered, and utterly ignorant how he should use or
carry them, he told them in these words, That both his hands were full, and
desired them that he might take the Bridle in his mouth, which gaping wide he
did: at which words all the Nobility fell on a laughter. But shortly after,
having left off his Monastical simplicity, calling many of his Nobles unto
him, he caused them to be beheaded, adding this witty, though bitter
Sarcasme: Non sa ben la Volpegia, con quien tr^mpegia: The Fox knows no^ with
whom he plays.

CHAP. XXII.
A witty, but a ridiculous reply, and vindication of a disgrace^
ROBERT Duke of Normandy, a witty Prince, and of a pleasant disposition,
coming on a time to Constantinople, to visit Constantine: the Emperor to make
trial of his wit, upon set purpose, commanded Stools to be set about the
Table, when dinner was ready for him and his Company, not above one foot and
an half high. It was done as the Emperor commanded. When the Norman Duke
came to sit down, and found all the stools too low for him and his friends,
suspecting that there was a trick put upon him; he (as he had a ready wit)
purposed to be even with him: for when they were to ^it down, he took his
Cloak, and wrapping it round, made it serve for a Cushio^ (...) make his seat
higher (...) ^^st of his Normans im^^^^^^ him: so then they sat all down; and
having dined, and the Cloth being taken away^ Duke Robert, leaving his cloak
(whereon he fate) behind him, the other of his Nobility and followers did so
likewise. Constantine wondered at it; and when he saw they would be gone in
good earnest, I pray you (quoth (...) Emperor) why do you not take your
Cloakes along with you? Duke Robert^ answered, It is not the fashion in our
Country, when we are invited to a Feast, to carry away the Cushions we sa^e
on^

FINIS.

