A Farewell. Entitled to the famous and fortunate Generals of our English
forces: Sir John Norris and Sir Frauncis Drake Knights, and all their brave and
resolute followers.

Whereunto is annexed: A tale of Troy.

AD LECTOREM.

Parue nec inuidio sine me (liber) ibis ad arma,
Hei mihi, quod domino non licet ire tuo.
Done by George Peele, Master of Arts in Oxforde.

AT LONDON Printed by I. C. and are to be sold by William Wright, at his shop
adjoining to S. Mildreds Church in the Poultrie. Anno. 1589.



Gallia victa dedit flores, inuicta Leones
Anglia: ius bellj in flore, leone suum:
O sic O semper ferat Elizabetha triumphos,
Inclyta Gallorum flore Leone suo.
To the most famous Generalles of our English forces by land and Sea, Sir John
Norris and Sir Frauncis Drake Knights.
YOur virtues famed by your fortunes, and fortunes renowned by your virtues
(thryce honorable Generalles) together with the admiration the world has
worth^ly conceived of your woorthines: have at this time encouraged me, a man
not unknown to many of your brave and forward followers, Captains and
Soldiers, to send my short farewell to our English forces. Whereunto I have
annexed an old Poem of mine own, The tale of Troy. A pleasant dysconrse,
fitly serving to recreate, by the reading the chivalry of England. To whom, as
to your ingenious judgments, I dedicate the same: that good minds enflamed
with honorable reports of their auncestry, may imitate their glory in highest
adventures. And my Countrymen famed through the world for resolution and
fortitude, may march in equipage of honor and Arms, with their glorious and
renowned predicessors the Troyans.

Beseeching God mercifully and miraculously, as hitherto he has done, to
defend fair England, that her Soldiers may in their departure be fortunate,
and in their return tryumphant.

Geo: Peele.

A farewell entitled to the famous and fortunate Generals of our English
forces. etc.
Have done with care my hearts, aborde amain,
With stretching sails to plowe the swelling waves.
Bid Englands shore and Albions chalkie clyffes
Farewell: bid stately Troynouant adiewe,
Where pleasant Thames from Isis silver head
Begins her quiet glide, and ruunes along,
To that brave Bridge the bar that th'warts her course,
Near neighbor to the anncient stony Tower,
The glorious hold that Julius Caesar built:
Change Love for Arms, gyrt to your blades my boys,
Your Rests and Muskets take, take Helm and Targe,
And let God Mars his consort make you mirth,
The roaring Cannon and the brazen Trumpe,
The angry sounding Drum, the whist^ing Fife,
The shrikes of men, the princely coursers ney.
Now veil your bonne^s to your friends at home,
Bid all the lovely british Dames adiewe,
That under many a Standarde well ^duaune'd,
Have bid the sweet allarmes and br^ues of love.
Bid Theaters and proud Tr^gadi^ns,
Bid Mahomets Poo, and mighty Tamburlaine,
King Charlemaine, Tom Stukeley and the rest
Adiewe: to Arms, to Arms, to glorious Arms,
With noble Norris, and victorious Drake,
Under the Sanguine Cross, brave Englands badge,
To (...) religious (...),
And (...) a passage with your conquering (...)
By (...) and Sea: where ever Phe^us eye
Thetern^ll L^^pe of Heau^n sen^es us light:
By (...) Tagus or the western Inde,
Or through the spacious Bay of Portugale,
The w^lthy Ocean maine, the Terrhen sea,
From great Alcides pyllers braunching forth,
Even to the Gulf that leads to lofti^ Roms,
There to deface the pride of Antechrist*
And pull his Paper walls and popery down:
A famous enterprise for Englands strength,
To steel^ your swords on Avarice triple crown,
And cleanse Augeus staules in Italy.
To Arms my fellow Soldiers, Sea and land
Lie open to the voyage you intend:
And sea or land bold Brittons far or near,
Wha^ ever (...) your matchles virtue shapes,
Whether to Europes bounds or Asian plains,
To Affricks shore, or rich America,
Down to the shades of deep Auernus cragges,
Sail on, pursue your honors to your graves:
Heaven is a sacred covering for your heads,
And every Clyma^ virtues Tabernacle.
To Arms, to Arms, to honorable Arms,
Hoyse sails, (...) Anckers up, plowe up the Seas
With flying keeles, plowe up the land with swords,
In Gods name venture on, and let me say
To you my Mates, as Caesar said to his
Striving with Neptunes hills: You hear quoth he,
Caesar, and Caesar's fortune in your ships.
You follow them whose swords succesfull are.
You follow Drake by Sea, the scourge of Spain,
The dreadful Dragon, terror to your foes.
Victorius in his (...) from Inde,
In all his high attempts vnuan q^ished.
(...) follow noble Norrice, whose renown
Won in the f^rtile fields of Belgia,
Spreades by the gates of Europe, to the Courts
Of Christian Kings and heathen Potentates.
You fight for Christ and Englands peereles Queen,
Elizabeth, the wonder of the world.
Over whose throne the enemies of God,
Have thundered erst their vain succesles braues.
O ten times treble happy men that fight,
Under the Cross of Christ and Englands Queen,
And follow such as Drake and Norris are.
All honors do this cause accompany.
All glory on these endless honors waits.
These honors, and this glory shall he send:
Whose honor and whose glory you defend.
Yours. G. P.

The beginning, accidents and end of the war of Troy.
WHilom in Troy Troy.
that ancient noble Town,
Did dwell a King of honor and renown,
Of port, of puisaunce, and mickle fame,
And Priam Priam.
was this mighty princes name
Whom in regard of his triumphant state,
The world as then surnamde the fortunate:
So happy was he for his progeny,
His Queen, his Court, his Children and Country.
Yclypped stately Hecuba Hecuba.
was she,
So fair a creature hardly might you see,
So brave, and of so comely personage,
And long before she tasted fortunes rage,
With twenty sons and daughters, wondrous thing,
This lusty Lady did enrich her King. Priams honors.

Fruit not unlike the Tree whereof they sprung,
The daughters lovely, modest, wise and young.
The sons as does my story well unfold,
All Knights at Arms, gay, gallant, brave and bold,
Of wit and manhood such as might suffice,
To venture on the highest piece of service.
His Peers as loyal to their royal Lord,
As might ne taynted be for deed or word,
His Court presenting to our earthly eyes,
A sky of stars or shyning Paradise.
Thus happy Priam did thou live of yore,
That to thy hap could naught be added more:
Till mong the Gods, I wot not what was he
Eouying tho this happiness to thee,
Or Goddess, or accursed fend below,
Conspyring thy Troyes wrack and overthrow.
Alack that happiness may not long last,
That all these braueries been so brief a blast.
Till one (I say) a venging power or other,
Buz'd in the brain of the unhappy mother,
A dreadful Dream, and as it did befall, Hecuba with Child with Paris.

To Priams Troy, a dream deadly and fatal.
For when the time of Mothers pain drew nie,
And now the load that in her womb did lie
Began to stir, and move with propper strength,
Ready to leave his place, behold at length
She dreams, and gives her Lord to understand, Hecubacs Dream.

That she should soon bring forth a firebrand,
Whose hot and ^lyming flame should grow so great,
That Neptunes Troy it would consume with heat.
And counsel taken of this troublous dream,
The Sooth sayers said, that not swift Sinois stream,
Might serve to quench that fierce devouring fire,
That did this brand against Town of Troy conspire.
Which to prevent, (a pittious tale to tell)
Both Sire and Dame against law and kind rebel,
And that this fear might so be ouer-blowne,
This babe from Troy withouten ruthe is thrown. Paris thrown out of Troy.

But tempted may the gods, not mocked be,
It is thy fate, nor may thou Troy foresee
What must befall, thou may it not foreknoe,
Yet Paris lives, and men him called so.
He lives a sheepheards swayne on Ida hills, Paris a shepherd in Ida.

And breathes a man against Troy and Troyans wills
That threatens fire to Troy, a jolly swain,
And here me list leave Priam and his train.
And tend we Paris (...) another while,
How he can Nymphs and sheepheards trulls beguile.
And pypen songs, and whet his wits on books,
And wrap poor Maids with sweet alluring looks.
So couth he sing his lays among them all,
And tune his pype unto the waters fall,
And wear his coat of gray and lusty green,
That had the fair Oenone Oenone enamoured of Paris.
never seen
His tycing curled hair, his front of Iuorie,
The careless Nymphe had nere been so unhappy.
Then was the time when Flora with her flowers,
Like Iris in her pride and party colors,
Sat in her Summer Summer.
Arbours like a Queen,
And dight the earth in yellow, blew and green.
Then Phaebe began a sollemne hunting make,
A feast for Pallas, Juno, Venus sake. Dianaes feast and hunting. with Pallas,
Juno, and Venus.

And on that Ida where king Pr^ams son
Paris, this lovely sheepheards swayne did won,
A wondrous strife and variance did befall,
Among the goddesses The Goddesses contend.
for a golden ball. Ate throws the ball.

That some fell fury threw among them all.
And fatal was it to this sheepeheards boy
That in his bosom bare the bane of Troy,
To wander by that sacred place alone.
Belike his Nymphe and walking mate was gone.
And there was chosen judge to end this strife, Paris chosen Judge of beauty.

That after lost full many a man his life.
And thus this doubtie daies-man as I reed,
Did crancklie venture on this thankles deed.
Whom Juno Iunoes offer.
first, the great and stately gods,
Entiste with honor of much wealth and riches.
And certes gold has store of eloquence.
Him Pallas eke Pallas offer.
the Queen of sapience,
Tempted with wisdom and with Chivalry.
To win the golden ball bequeathed to beauty.
But neither wealth nor wisdom might him move,
When Venus Venus offer.
began t'encounter him with love.
So led away with over vain conceit,
And surfeyting belike on pleasures bait,
As men are wont to let the better go
And choose the worse, this jolly shepherd lo,
In hope to win the gallant flower of Greece,
Fair Helena that brave and peereles piece,
G^ueth the pryze to Lady Venus grace, Paris gives the ball to Venus.

And ends with endless war this doubtful case.
Ah Paris, had thou had but equal eyes,
Indifferent in bestowing of the pryze,
Thy human wit might have discerned well,
Wherein true beauty of the mind did dwell.
But men must err, because that men they be.
And men with love yblinded cannot see.
Throughout the world the rumor being blown
Of this event: the man was quickly known,
And homewards comes forsooth to luckles Troy, Paris returns (...) Troy from
Ida.

Of yore a sheepheards svvayne, King Priams boy.
And in his breast did bear an vncooth heat,
The strength whereof began to grow so great
As needs Sir Paris must prepare to see,
What might the substance of this shadow be,
That yet his fancy wrought upon so fast,
So furnished with men and ships, at last
To Lacedemon Paris expedicion to Lacedemon.
does this mynnion come,
The winds made way, the sea affoording rome,
In fine, the cut and voyage being short,
This Knight arriues at Menelaus Court. Paris ariues at Menelaus Court

Where such his entertainment was I find,
As justly might content a princely mind.
For she was there to give him welcome thoe,
Who more his inward sense then eye did knoe.
A lusty, brave, and lively Dame was she,
A less well worthy to be Paris fee.
The Queen her self that hight fair Helen^,
Whom yet unseen his thoughts did all obey.
And by the hand she takes her newcome guest,
And gives him entertainment Helen entertaines Paris.
of the best.
Yet stately Troy did floorish in his pride,
And Priam whom no Prince might mate beside
T^ll love and hate together did conspyre,
To waste this Town and Realm with wastfull fire.
The Prince of Troy began eazelie now to see,
How we^l her person with her fame did gree.
When calling on Dame Venus for his due,
The King of Sparta Me^elaus goes from Sparta.
with a lordhe ^rue
Must post from home, and leave his wife forsooth,
To give Sir Paris welcome for his tooth.
Thus Venus first to help Loves policy,
Aduantag'd him with opportunity.
And now as Lovers wont their times epsy,
This Lover can his task full well apply:
And strives to court Paris Courts Melen.
his Mistres cunningly
Whose tender breast the conquering God of Love,
As wild his Da^e, with arrows began to prove,
And found it fit for loves impression.
No sooner was King Menelaus gone,
But Helens heart had taken so great a flame,
As love increast with Paris only name.
And now she began suruay his lovely face, Helen looks on Paris.

And curiously observe each courtly grace.
And after large disputes of right and wrong,
What did to love and womanhoode belong*
Ah that this love will be no better ruled,
Ah that these Lovers nill be better schoold.
After sweet lyn^s that from this strangers pen,
Came swiftly to her reading now and then.
Regard of honor thrown aside by this,
She arms her boldly to this great amiss.
And for her heart was from her body he^^,
To Troy this Helen Helen sails to Troy with Paris.
with her Lover wen^*
Thinking perdie a part contrary kind
Her heart so wrought, her self to stay behind.
And thus has Paris with his cunning caught,
The daint^e Byrd that all so far he sought.
No sooner were they started thus away,
But straight the King, yet all too late a day,
Had news of this unworthy traiterous deed,
And after (says my story) gins to speed^.
But conque^ing Love that has no leaden heelns,
Belike tide wings unto the Troyan^ keeles. (...)

Away flies Paris with his chased pray,
And lands in Troy the gallant Helena.
Whom aged Friam and Queen Hecuba,
With all their noble sons and daughters to
Welcome with royal feasts and much ado.
And every louelit Dame and lusty Knight,
Do pay the Prince such honor as they might.
The Peers, the Princes, and the Lords of Greece,
Touched with the rape of this reproachful piece,
Not suffering such barbarous villainy,
Dishonor to their state and Country.
In fury began the quarrel undertake.
Not all alone for Menelaus sake, The Greeks undertake Menelaus quarrel.

But to rebuke and to avenge beside,
Helens false love, Paris adulterous pride.
Making provision for a lasting war
That wounded all so deep, and yet the skarre
Remains, and will endure from day to day,
That teeth of fretting T^ne shall never were away.
In Aulis Aulis.
gulf they mightily assemble,
Whose power might make the proudest Troy to tremble.
Lord Agamemnon Agamemnon General of the Grecian^.
there among them all,
With Greeks consent was chosen General.
Before this time a while, as I ^an read,
Ulysses by the me^nes Ulysses saynes madness.
of Palumede,
Unhappy man was fetched from It^^ica,
Yet well could counterfeir a cause of stay,
To tarry with his wife Penclope.
But private came must common cause obey.
And though (...) a madness for the nonce,
Yet can Sir Palamedes Palamedes dysciphers him.
all at once
To try his wit, offer his tender son,
Whom while the Sire refusd to ouer-ronne
That played the frantic plow man all in vain,
He roundly brought him to the Argiue train.
That for the hate he harbourd in his head.
Nil cease till this Sir Palamede Vlyss^^ (...)
was dead.
So Peleus noble son, the great Achilles, Achilles hyd by Thetis.

That loth'lie with the Grecians went to seas,
Clad by his Dame in habit of a woman,
Unworthy cowardice of a valiant man.
But that no cowardice this deed can hight*
In him that was approved so good a Knight.
Ulysses Achilles dyscouered by Ulysses.
with his toys and tryfles trim,
Full like a Peddler can discipher him.
The force of Greece and Armies all by this.
For want of wind have houerd long in Aulis. The Greeks ^ayd in Aulis.

What mighty men misdoe, the meaner rue,
So great an ill by lingering does ensue.
Nor was there other help but Iphigen,
That might enforce the winds to blow again.
And will he, nill he, Agamemnon Agamemnon sends for Iphigenia.
must,
If he will termed be a General just,
Dispatch some trusty messenger or page,
Under pretense of love or marriage,
To fetch to Aulis Clytemne^^^^ comes to Aulis.
gulf the Argiue Queen,
To see the spousalles of fair Iphigen.
And Prince Achilles was her lover namde,
But all untowardly this business framd.
For Clytemnestra had espied ere long*
Whereto this subtle message did belong.
In fine, the Virgin flayne in sacrifice, Iphigenia sacri^zed.

The Greeks have wind at will, the waters rise.
How many ills do follow one annoy?
Now merrily sail our Gallant Greokes to Troy.
And scour the seas, and cheerly run forth right,
As shootes a streaming star in winters night, The Greeks arrive at Troy.

Away they fly, their tackling te^t and tight.
Top and top gallant in the brauest sort
And as ye wot, this war and tragic sport
It was for Helena.
King Priam now began easelie understand,
How Greeks with all their power were hard at hand.
And sadly do the peers their Prince advise,
The while in rage Cassandra Cassandr^^^ Co^nsell.
calls and cries.
Render ye Troyans to these madding Greeks,
The Dame that all this expedicion seeks.
And to this battle bruted far by fame,
Great aid of Arms on either party came,
From Tyber, and the quaking Tanais
To Troy, the Queen of Amazons by this,
Penthesilea with her warlike band, (...) in aid of Pryam.

Ariu'd in honor of King Priams land.
And ouer-long it were for me to tell,
In this afflicting war what hap befell.
How many Greeks, how many Troyan Knights,
As Chivalry by kind in love delights.
Upon their helmes their plumes can well advance,
And twist their Ladies coullers in their Lance.
So love does make them bold and venturous,
So hardy was the true Knight Troylus, Troylus.

All for pure love of the unconstant Cresid.
T'encounter with th'unworthy Diomed. Diomede.

But leave I here of Troylus to say,
Whose passions for the raunging Cressida, Creside.

Requires a vollume to unfold at large,
And cunning need he be that takes the charge,
To paint the colloures of that changing piece,
Stain to all Dames of Troy and stately Greece.
And that I may do every man his right,
Sir Paris mounted in his Armor bright,
Pricks forth, and on his helm his Mistres sleeue,
How could that sight but Menelaus grieve.
And now the Greeks, and now the Troyans may,
As pleases Fortune bear away the day.
The times of truce set down by Marshall law,
The Dames of Troy with lovely (...),
The hearts of (...)
The (...) (...)

That night (...) he might his rest enjoy,
So was his (...) gaged whole to Troy:
That now (...) this warrier would,
Or might I (...) no more for love he could*
The Camp complames upon his love and ^^oth,
And charge him with his knighthoode and his oath.
Now rides out Hector, called the scourge of Greeks.
And like the vn^ath'd Panther pryes and seeks
Where he might prove his (...) and ^lorming thus, (...)

He lights upon Ac^^lles friend (...)
When as the great, Achilles ga^ him greet,
And Lion like runs proudly him to meet,
For reskue of his friend as he were wood,
And charging tight his staff in eager mood,
Forgetful of the (...)
As Fawlcon wonts (...) stoop upon her pray.
As Hector had unhorsed Patroch^s tho:
Dispoyling him in field, alas for woe,
Unawares to wreake this (...) of his beleeke,
He slayes a peereles Troyan for a Greek.
And having thus performd this murdrous treason, Achilles kyl^ Hector.

He tryumphes in the spoils of Priams son.
Now began the Gree^ans ^lap their hands for glee,
But blood will blood so ever might it be.
The Troyans glory now began waxen dim,
And cold their hope, since death has seized him,
That gave them hope and happy fortune to.
The Mother Queen withouten more ado,
Began whether wits to wreake this malice done,
And traiterous murder of her va^ant son.
When Hectors death was more then half forgot,
Or at the least dissembled well I wot,
Full (...) g^n this Lady offer make,
That if the Prince Achilles list to take. (...) Polixena to Achilles.

Her daughter fair (...) to spouse,
In Pallas Temple should he make his vows.
And thus the Queen that knew no law of Arms,
Vowde clear to him, and void of further harms.
But when this Greek did little think of guile
To work revenge for Hectors death, the while,
Even in the fatal place, Sir Paris than, Paris wounds Achilles in the ^eele.

With poisoned shaft dispatched the haples man.
And where his Mother Thetis him not hent,
Directly thither was his arrowe sent.
Now lies the great Achilles dead in Troy, Achilles dies.

The Greeks make moan, the Troyans leap for joy.
And Pri^^ does bestow his bloodles bones,
Upon his wretched hartles Mirmidons.
Immediately began a bloody brawle,
Among the Lords and Greekish Captains all,
Touching the Armor of this valiant Knight.
Sir Ajax Contention twixt Ajax and Ulysses for Achilles Armor.
first does claim it as his right,
And then against him the Lord of Ithica,
Thinks for desert to bear the prize away.
And of the twain but one might it enjoy,
And plead they must upon the stronde of Troy
Before the Ships: where Ajax in a heat,
For that the stomach of the man was great:
Lays open to the Greeks his service done,
In their affairs since first this war begone.
And tvvits Ulysses with his cowardice.
But Ajax this for thee may not suffize.
For though the Targe were ouerbig to bear,
And stout Achilles helm unfit to wear
For wise Laertes son: yet policy
That hight indeed the strength of Chivalry,
Was that where of this Knight does cheefely vaunt,
So with his words he began their wits enchaunt:
That when he must conclude and say no more,
A shows the fatal ^igne, (...)
that to the shore.
A stole by night from Troy, and then (quoth he)
Bestow it here ye Greeks if ye nill give it me.
Wherewith he won their hearts and cha^^nde their (...)
And from Sir Ajax got the Marshall prize. Ulysses winnes the Arm^n^*

The man whom wrath and fury (...),
Not able to endure this open shame,
Foulie sought violent means to stint this strife,
And with a deadly stab reau'de his own life.
And now this wastfull war that lasted long,
To Dames of Troy and Greece a tedious wrong,
With hot encounter and unhappy fight,
And have ^ed death of many a hardy Knight.
Began grow to this, that Greeks to bleere the eyes
Of their foreweried ^oes, began denise.
And having built a great unwieldy frame
Much like a Horse, The Troyan^ Horse.
and well ystuft the same
with men of war, they make a subtle shoe,
As though from Troy they homewardment to go,
And raise the ^ioge, and leave the prize behind,
But Gods do know they nothing less do mind.
For as I ween, my History does say,
To Tenedos The Greeks retire to Tenedos.
the Grecians took their way.
An I Will that gave them harbor and abode,
Now leave we there these Greeks to lie at road^*
Amidst this hurly burly and uproar,
King Pria^ sends away young Pollydore, Polydore King Priams son.

With store of treasure, and with mickle mucke,
His youngest son to Thrace, but little lueke
Ensude this deed: sor Polymnestor lo, Polymnestor King of Thrace, murders
Polydore.

The thirst of Priams riches choak^ him so,
A woeful tale as I have heard it told,
Murders this Prince for lucre of his gold.
The subtle Synon Synons treason.
for his villainy,
The noted Author of Troyes tragedy.
When traytrous Greeks had sluncke to Tenedos,
Began with the silly Troyans highly gloze.
And tell a tale p^rdie of little truth,
Although as it befell of mickle ruthe.
And so bewitched King Pria^^ and his Course,
That now at last to Troyans fatal hurt,
In stedde of that might most their states advance,
They gree to hoyse this engine of mischaunce, The Troyan^ re^^eiue the (...)
^uto the town.

And make a breach like fools, and never lin,
Till their own hands had pulde their enemies in.
Thus riot, rape, and vain credulity,
Binnam'd chief Authors of Troyes tragedy.
The monstrous Horse that in his hugie fides,
A traytrous throung of subtle Grecians hides,
Began now discharge his vast and hydeous load,
And silently disperse his strength abroad. Night.

It was the time when midnights sleep and rest,
With quiet pause the town of Troy possessed.
The Greeks forsake the ships and make return,
Now Troy as was foretold began to burn, Troy set on fi^e by the Greeks

And Iliums stately towers to smoke a pace.
The conquering Greeks begin a maine to chase
And follow fast their foes, that unawares
False Synon had betrapped in his snares.
Ah what a piercing sight it was to see,
So brave a town as Troy was said to be,
By quenchlesse fire laid level with the soil,
The Prince and people made the soldiers spoil,
The unhappy Priam mazde with frights and fears,
Seeing his Palace flame about his ears,
Out of his wretched slumber hastlie start:
And weening to have played a young man's part,
Girts to his Arming sword with trembling hand,
But she alas that bare the fatal brand
That firde the town, the most unhappy Queen,
Whose like for wretched hap was never seen.
Said leave my Lord, becomes us not to strive,
Whom would (...) morning Sun ^^ght see alive.
And fly from aid of men to powers (...)
And so with me lay hold on (...) shry^e.
But he whose bloody mind and murdring rage,
Nor law of Gods, nor reverence of age,
Could temper from a deed so tyrann^^s.
Achilles son, the fiercevnbridled Pyrrhns. Pyrrh^s.

His fathers ghost belike entycing him,
With slaughtring hand, with visage pale and dim.
Has hent this aged Pri^^ by the hair,
Like Butcher bent to sley, and even there,
The man that lived so many golden years,
The Lord and Master of such lordly peers,
The King of Troy, the mighty king of Troy,
With cruel iron this cursed Greekish boy
Rids of his life: as whilome he had done
With poysond shaft Paris, old Priams son. Priam (...) the Altar by Pyrrhu^.

Thus souls by swarms does press to Plutoes ^all,
Thus naked Troy, or now not Troy at all.
Done is thy pride, dim is thy glorious gite,
Dead is thy Prince in this unhappy fight.
My pen forbear to write of Hecuba,
That made the glorious Sun his Chariot stay,
And rayning tears his golden face to hide,
For ruth of that did afterward betide,
Since this vn^^phy Queen suruiude the laft;
Till Fortunes spite and malice all was past.
And worn with sorrow, wexen fell and mad. Hecuba mad.

And all the happiness that Priam had,
In his mishaps and bloody funeral,
Was that he savv not yet the end of all.
His daughters ravished, slain in sacrifice,
Astianax Polixena sacrisi. Astyanax.
before his mothers eyes,
The princely babe thrown from the highest tower,
Thus to our deaths there needs but an hour.
Short tale to make, when first the town of Troy
The Greeks had sac^t, to Asias great annoy,
When Pyrrhus had the guilty Paris slain, Paris slain by Pyrrhus.

Lo now at last the Greeks have home again,
With loss of many a Greek and Troyans life
Unhappy Helen, Menalaus wife. Menelaus receives Helen.

The good Aeneas, Aeneas.
whom the Gods beleeke,
Reserved some further better hap to seek,
With old Anchyses, Anchises,
leaves this vvretched Town,
And on the Seas ytossed up and down,
Ariues in Lauine land, when he had seen
The bounty of the famous Carthage Queen. Dido.

Whom driven by fates this wandering Knight deceau'd,
That him and his so royally received.
MY Author says, to honor Helens name,
That through the world has been belide by Fame:
How when the King her pheere was absent thence,
A tale that well may lessen her offense.
Sir Paris took the Town by Arms and skill,
And carried her to Troy against her will.
Whom whether afterward she loved or no,
I cannot tell, but may imagine so.
FINIS.

