THE PERIOD OF Mourning. Disposed into six VISIONS. In Memory of the late
Prince. TOGETHER With Nuptial Hymns, in Honor of this Happy Marriage
between the Great PRINCES, FREDERICK Count Palatine of the RHENE, AND The Most
Excellent, and Abundant President of all VIRTVE and GOODNESS ELIZABETH only
Daughter to our Sovereign, his MAJESTY. Also the manner of the Solemnization
of the Marriage at White Hall, on the 14. of February, being Sunday, and St.
Valentines day. By Henry Peacham, Mr. of Arts.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for John Helm, and are to be sold in Saint
Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and truly Noble-minded, Sir John Swinnerton Knight,
Lord Mayor of the City of London, Sir Thomas Middleton, and Sir John Iolles,
ALDERMEN, his Brethren.
RIght Honorable, and worthy Senators.
IT was an ancient custom, no whit discommendable, among the Ethiopian
Princes, amid their Feasts and Royal Banquets, to have the head of a dead man
laid in Earth, presented the first to the Table; in abundance of Mirth to put
them in mind of Mortality. Though I have ever been a sworn enemy to
Superstition, I seem to imitate them thus far, who unseasonably at the
solemnity of this Royal Marriage, offer again to view the Image of our dead
dear and never to be forgotten Prince, Henry. Affection is liable to none
account, and this Sorrow, to sound hearts can never come out of season, yet thus
much for my self; My love to his excellent virtues, and person, to whom I was
so many ways engaged, drew, some while since these tears to their head, which
encountering with a contrary passion of Joy, for the happy Marriage of his
Most-like Sister the Princess my most gracious Lady; like fire and water
(striving for praedominancie) I was enforced to make both way even to mine own
prejudice. What I have done, my Honorable Lord, in regard of the fidelity the
City has ever borne to the State, the true hearty love you carry in your own
particulars to his Majesty, and the Progeny Royal, and lastly that you are
known out of your Noble and own Natuturall inclination to goodness, to favor
all Learning and Excellency, whereby beyond your praedecessors you gain a
double Honor, I humbly offer up to your Honorable protection: expecting only
Time and Occasion wherein I may really manifest how fast I am tied in Zeal and
dutiful Affection to so worthy a Mayor, and so Honorable a City.

Your Honors and Worships, truly devoted Henry Peacham.

AD AVTHOREM, in Periodum eius, foelicesque, Frederici Comitis PALATINI
Rhenensis, et ELIZABETHae Serenissimae Principis Hymenaos.
FLebilibus mira quod misces art triumphos
Carminibus, miror iure Poema tuum:
In tanto dolor an lusus quis vate requirat?
Tam been qui iungis gaudia cum lachrymis.
Mortuus HENRICUS vitam, plangente CAMOENA,
Viua canente soror, ne moriatur habet.
Obstupui fateor fieri haec contraria somno
Credo equidem Musam sed vigilasse tuam
Vel tu bicipiti haec cepisti insomnia Monte,
Font caballino, vel been mersus eras.
A. S.

To the Muse.
Go Muse, that like Endimion did but dream
of Golden days in thy Dispairefull Night;
And stood'st like Tantale in a Siluer-streame,
That sed thy longing with a false delight:
Open thy dull eyes, and while that others weep,
Say, what thou saw, since thou have been asleep.
And yet had been, had not (Oh Brightest Fair)
Chaste Cynthia with her favors wakened me,
And His dear Love, whose loss I shadow here,
Enforced a task of latest Piety:
Else better far, we had been silent still;
And slept unseen upon a peaceful Hill.
THE PERIOD of Mourning.
I. Vision.
I Saw (me thought) from Cambers hilly shore,
A goodly Arc, as ever eye beheld;
Whose Sails were Silk, and Tackle twined Oar,
That seemed reflected, gloriously to guild
The wave around, while thousand colors fair,
Kept time aloft with every little air.
She Archon hight, for that she had no Peer,
And could command the Ocean with her might:
In whom the Hopes of many thousands were,
But chiefly of the Muse, and Martial sprite^
Brave Man of war she was, from Britain bound,
For new discoueries all that might be found.
And going out, she did beguile the way,
With sound of Trumpet, Shawmes and Cornet shrill,
That filled the shore, and seemed to charm the Sea;
(For winds were ceased, and waves were calm and still.)
Such peales of Thunder, then anon were sent,
As if she would have torn the Firmament.
But suddenly the Day was ouercast,
A tempest hurles the billow to the Sky,
That Cables brake, and having spent her Mast
She fell on Rocks; herewith I heard a cry
Of dying men; who perished on the shelues,
Save some, that knew to swim, and save themselves.
Which when I saw, a stream of Tears I shed,
And said (O GOD) who did commit the sin,
That such a Treasure should be buried
In lowest Grave, as it had never bin?
A fraught wherein we shared every one,
And by whose loss three Kingdoms are undone.
II. VISION.
I Saw a Palm, of body tall and straight,
Upon whose branches Crownets did depend;
But for the top, were kept a cumbrous weight
Of three more great: enough to force it bend,
(For little wot we managing of Realms,
The howerly cares and charge of Diadems.)
And every bough did bloome with fruitful store,
Wherein all kinds of singing Birds did build,
Melodiously rejoicing evermore
In his dear aid, by whom they were vpheld:
And hither often, the shepherd would repair,
If heat did scortch, or cloud accloie the Air.
But at the root, a fearful Serpent lay,
(Whose many mischiefs Time forbids me tell,)
That vndermin'd the Body night and day,
That last, it down with hideous fragor fell,
To grief of all; mine eye did never see,
More hopeful Blossoms, or a fairer Tree.
III. VISION.
A Wood there was, along the Stygian Lake,
Where Night, and everlasting Horror dwell,
Herein a Cave, two hollow Rocks did make,
From whence a Brook as black as Lethe fell:
A common road led thither, with descent
So steep, that none returned that ever went.
It was an uncouth Dungeon, dark and wide,
Where living man nere was, or light had shone,
Save that a little glimmering I espi'de
From rotten sticks, that all about were thrown:
The Bexe and banefull Eugh-tree grew without,
All which a stinking ditch did moate about.
Within, there hung upon the ragged walls
Sculs, shirtes of maile, whose owners had been slain
Escotcheons, Epitaphes of Funerals;
In bottles tears of friends, and Lovers vain:
Spades, Mottockes, models, boltes and bars for strength,
With bones of Giants of a wondrous length.
Beneath, all forms of Monuments were seen,
Whose superscriptions were through age defaced,
And owners long ago consumed clean
But now as coffers were in order placed,
Wherein inditements lay, charms, Dead-mens wills
Popes pardons, pleas, and Pothecaries bills.
In midst there sat a meagre wretch alone,
That had in sorrow both his ei'n outwept,
And was with pine become a Sceleton:
I asked him why that loathsome Cave he kept,
And what he was: my name (quoth he) is Death
Perplexed here, for Henry's loss of breath.
HENRY the good, the great, unware I hit
With deadly dart before the timely day,
For at one near him while I leuel'd it,
That sent more souls then I my self away,
Or fear, or fate the arrow did misguide
That he escaped, and Noblest Henry di'd.
With that, he bad me to retire in have,
For never any came so near his door,
And lived: here-with mine eye a side I cast,
Where stood a glue-pot, Canes and quiuers store,
And on a shelfe, lay many stinking weeds,
Wherewith, I guess, he poisoned arrow heads.
By doubtful tracks away through Brake and Breere,
I left the VVood, and light at l^st did view,
When Death I heard accused every where,
As Theife and Traitor, of the vulgar crew,
For this misdeed, he swear against his will;
For who knew Henry could not mean him ill.
IIII. VISION.
I Saw erewhile, conducted forth by Fame
A Carre Triumphall, all of massy Gold,
And Three of England and that one of Scotland.
four fierce Lions yoaked in the same,
The which a Virgin, lovely to behold,
With gentle rain did guide and show the way,
She Unity.
Vna hight, none else they would obey.
A warlick Impe within was set on high,
Who Phoebus, in his glorious arms out-shone,
Ydrad of all for awful Majesty,
Yet loving, and more loved lived none;
Hight Philocles, whom Fame did thus address
To high designs, which few or none could guess.
But oh uncertain state of all below,
And feeble stay whereon our hopes do rest!
While that I gazed ravished with the show
And heart did leap for joy within my breast,
From Heaven I saw descend a fiery wand
And all to black was turned out of hand.
Carricks white Lions in a field of Red,
His golden Garbes as Chesters Palatine,
The Cornish Beasaunts seldom quartered,
Rothsay with that brave Coat of Leoline,
Which one-day might in field of Mars have flowne,
Before his Hearse were mournful streamers shown.
The gallant Steed that did disdain the bit,
And shook with angry hoof the hollow ground,
His Riders loss lamented over it:
The Soldier with his Drum and Trumpets sound
That beat the March, and blew the furious charge,
Were turned to Singers timing of his Dirge.
The fiery spirit whose aspiring flame
Brake out enkindled at his glorious light
Grew dim and damped, as dying with the same;
The gentle Heart in mourning melted quite,
His Friends and lovers (We) did wear his black
Within the Breast, while others on the Back.
But in the while we have related this,
The Corpse was gone and every thing was past,
That there remained nothing but his Miss,
Which when I saw mine eyes to Heaven I cast,
And said, Oh let me never live I pray,
To feel the grief of such another day.
V. VISION.
I Lay to rest by those two Sister-streames,
That strive with each as seems by their have,
Who to her spouse should take the stately Thames,
(For both into his bosom fall at last;)
Where, one I heard as Thracian Orpheus sing,
With Beast and Bird about him listening.
Come VVoods (quoth he) and Waters lend your sound,
And help us to bemone our Dions death,
Come every Plant that grows upon the ground,
Your fruit or savors to his Hearse bequeath,
Come purple Roses, purest Lillies turn
Your Beauties black, and help a while to mourn.
Come Albion Muses, come sweet Philomel,
Report this news among thy mournful strains,
To greenie Groves the Death of Dion tell,
Ye Shepherds fill here-with the fruitful plains,
At Morn and Even, and say, with Dion dead,
All Music and our Merry days are fled.
Come Albion Muses, come ye silver Swannes
Sing dying and die singing on the banks
Of Isis flood, come wood Musicians
Surround him sleeping in your painted ranckes,
Leave wanton Naiads treading of your rings
And teach your eyes to ouerflow the springs.
Come Albion Muses bid Menalcas sit
With broken reed beside his aged Oak,
And solitary there some dittie fit
That might to tears infernal Dis provoke:
Eternal silence dwell on Dale and hill,
And Herds unkept go wander where you will.
Come Albion Muses, come with Echo mourn
In hollow Rocks and vales, for Dion gone,
Who (like his lips) shall never more return,
A gracious answer called by you upon:
Die flowers, and fall ye fruit unripe from Trees
And cease your toil (the sweetest gone) ye Bees.
Come Albion Muses, never Dolphin wept
More kindly, cast by Neptune on the shore,
Or Memnons Bird with greater sorrow kept
Auroras son, whom still she weepeth ore,
Or grove with plaints of Philomela rung
When Plough-man had bereft her of her young.
Calliope more woeful did not seek,
Her Loved Homer all about the Sea,
Or Venus on her dear Adonis check,
More kisses heaped as he dying lay,
As Albion now who (mother-like) in vain,
Would, spite of Nature, weep him back again.
If in a graden but the Mallow die,
The Daisie, Dill, or Rose, it lives again,
And shoots yearly from his bed on high,
But we endu'de with Reason who are men,
Much fairer, stronger, if we once do fall,
No more on Earth our being have at all.
Much more he would have said but that with grief,
His voice did fail and hand began to slack,
Wherewith approached first of Beasts the chief,
Who in their kinds bewailed Dions lack:
The Birds above, in Trees were set aloft,
Each chattering in his note as Nature taught.
None for precedence strove, that they forgot,
As ill befitting pensiveness of heart,
But as they came in Loving league they sat,
And each to each his sorrow did impart:
For griefs do grow by many bearers weak,
That else the backs of one or two would break
Three Lions white full bitterly did groan,
And wail his absence whom they loved dear,
Aloof the Noble personages of the land whose Crests these are.
Heliconian Horse did moan,
For as the rest he could not come so near.
The Lynx, the Bufle, and the Talbot true,
Did (as they could) their utmost sorrow show.
The Greyhound, Griffon, Tiger, and the Goat,
Two gallant Dragons green, and one of Red,
The Unicorn in his fair Ermine-coate,
The Roebucke, Bore, and Bull, for combat bred:
The Leopard, Wiuerne, Munkey, and the Bear,
The Tiger, Cat, and Porcespine were there.
Of Birds, I saw the Eagle sharp of sight,
The Arabian Phoenix, and the Peacocke gay,
The towering Falcon for the Kings delight,
The Chough, the Raven, and dainty Popingaie,
The Swanne with Pheasaunt fetched from Phasis flood,
And Pelican soar wounded with her brood.
With others numberless both wild and tame,
By flocks that hither in a Moment flew,
But as I near to this assembly came,
Their order, kinds, and colors for to view,
The Man, the Music, Bird, and Beast were gone,
I left to mourn disconsolate alone.
VI. VISION.
I Was conducted by a lovely child,
Whose hair outshone the brightest burning gold,
Of sweet aspect as Maid, and modest mild,
Unto that place where certainly is told,
The souls of such as here had lived well,
Disroab'd of Earth in happiness do dwell.
It was Elisium, a delightful plain,
Where Zephyre makes an everlasting Spring,
And Fruits, and Flowers, do all the year retain
Their taste and beauties, sweetest Birds do sing
In Laurel shades, where coolest silver brooks
Divorce their courses by a thousand crookes.
Within there was a Theater of gold,
Raised on a mount in semicircle wise,
Which stately columns strongly did uphold,
That by ascent did over other rise,
And railde between with Crystal lights that shone
Against the Sun like Rocks of Diamond.
Not Scaurus Scaene might with this same compare,
That eighty thousand could at one time hold,
Nor that of Pompey, nor that wounder rare
Marti. Epi^r. Lib. 1. Epist. 1. Barbara pyramidum, etc.
Vespasian reard, nor that with pouldred gold
Which Nero (as with sand I read bestrew)
And seel'd with silk all starry gilt in blew.
Three rows it had where Princes only sat,
To view their worldly miseries foregone,
Their Kingdoms changes and to contemplate
Their happiness in full fruition:
These lived well, or for the Faith were slain,
Or younglings were who never saw their reign.
Each were in order rancked as they died,
The foremost, Heir apparants of our land,
Whose deaths were by Impresas specifide,
So sweetly limn'd as by an Angels hand.
He was drowned at 17 years of age, coming into England out of Normandy,
and with him his brother Richard, and Richard Earl of Chester, and his brother
O^w^le the Princes Tutor, the Countess of Perch, the Kings daughter named
Mary, and his Niece the Countess of Chester, with many young Noblemen and
Knights, to the number of an 60. persons.
William first Henry's son did give a sea
Enraged, above was written, Cast away.
The son of Stephen Prince Eustace being angry with his Father Stephen for
making peace with Henry Duke of Normandy departed from him, at Bury sittin^
down to dinner feil mad upon the receiving of the first mor^ell.
Eustace next did sit,
Who gave a branch of bitter Hellebore,
Dispayre's not help was scored over it.
Henry, Henry, eldest son of Henry the second, borne in London, was crowned
in his Fathers (...), to the quiet of the Realm as it was thought, but he
rebelled in No^m^ndie, whose pu^t' e^e took against his Father, Lewis King of
France William King of Scots, H^nry Ge^^ffrey, (...) his sons, Robert Earl
of Leicester, Hugh Earl of Chester, etc. (...) toug^^ against his Father, and
after dyed of a Fever, de^iring for ^^uenes^e: his Father sent him his R^^^, in
token he had or given him, which he humbly kissed. He dyed at Martell, and was
buried at Roane, his body wound in those linne^ clothes he was annoin^ed King
in.
the son of second Henry bore
A Phaeton, with this, Too soon I clime,
A King and Rebel in my Fathers time.
Appeared then, in Arms, a goodly Prince
Of swarthy Edward the black Prince, first son to Edward the 3. some make
his name rather from the black days France endured by him then from his
Countenance.
hew, by whom there hung a Lance
Of wondrous length, preserved ever since
He overthrew at Poiteirs John of France:
A Dial his device, the style at One,
And this, No night and yet my day is done.
By him I saw in white a comely Prince Edward who was slain at Tevvksbury:
King Edward the first ^^ote him on the face with his Gauntlet, afterward he
was most cruelly slain, being run through the breast with an a^ming-sword:
His mother Queen Margaret at the same ^^me being taken prisoner, and slain,
John Duke of Somerset, Courtney, E. of D^uonshire, the Lord Wenlocke, etc.
youth,
Upon whose breast appeared a gaping wound
(That would have moved a heart of Flint to ruth)
Wherewith the place was smeared all around.
A withered crimson Rose by him was fixed,
His word, The last, as son of Henry sixth.
A little lower sat two King Edward the fifth, and Richard his Brother, taken
out of Sa^ctuary: Murdered in the Tower: The l^^ly pourtracture of these
Princes came to my hands limned in a Manuscript which was written by Anti^^ ^y
Earl Rivers their Uncle, and given to King Edward the fourth; and this was the
first bo^ke that eu^r was Printed in England (as Master Cambden told me) this
being the ^ame that the Earl gave the King, bound in green Velvet, etc.
beauteous Impes
Of smyling cheer, as fresh as flower in May:
Not Tyndaris fair twins, Plerian Nymphs,
Or Myrrba's Boy so lovely fair as they:
These were the Brother-Princes that in bed
The Tyrant slew and left unburied.
One had a Pillow with his crown thereon,
His Mot, The Price of my eternal rest:
The other gave a Vulture ceasing on
The heart of Titius, with, The Tyrants breast.
Prince Arthur, Prince Arthur married Catharine, Daughter of Ferdinando king of
Spain. By this device the Author seems covertly to show a distaste of our
Princes matching with Spain.
this, above an Orange flower
Though seems the fairest yet the fruit is sower.
The last sat our late HENRY on a Throne
By one degree raised higher then the rest;
About whose brow an heavenly glory shone,
And certain beams appeared from his breast,
Which who so did with nearer eye admire
Were stricken blind, or had their hearts on fire.
Where when I saw that Brow, that Cheek, that Eye,
He left imprinted in Eliza's face,
That lovely cheer and graceful Majesty
In hopeful CHARLES that take their second place.
With Joy surprised to my home before
I bad return, we cared for no more.
FINIS.
A The difference between an Epecide and Epitaph is (as Seru^us teaches) that
the Epicidium is propper to the body while it is unburied the Epitaph
otherwis^; yet our Poets stick not to take one for the other: it has the
Etymon from (...), which is curar^ inferias, says Sca^^ger: in Poet:
EPICEDIVM of the Author.
STay Royal Body ere thou go
To sleep in Mothers arms, the dust:
And let our Tears distilling fast,
Embalmne thy Lovely Limbs the last,
Whom Heaven so dear while here did hold,
It took both Model and the mold
From Nature, least there might remain,
A hope to have his like again:
HENRY too to forward Rose,
HENRY terror to his foes,
HENRY Friends and Fathers stay,
HENRY Sunne-rise of our Day,
HENRY Loadstar of the Arts,
HENRY Loadstone of all hearts.
But now our bud has bid the frost,
And Britain, warlike Arthur lost:
Friends and fathers want their stay,
And ouer-clouded is our day,
This star is fallen from our sight,
And lost with all our compass quite.
Oh loss of losses, grief of grief,
Beyond compassion or relief!
But was our young Josias shot
From Babell, Kings 2. cap. 23. verse. 29.
Egypt ward or not?
His Journey scarsly yet begun,
Or was this deed by Heaven done?
The cause were Earths all Horrid crimes,
Hatched in these faithless fruitless times:
It Is sin has drawn the deluge down
Of all these tears, wherein we drown,
Wherein not only we are d^ent,
But all the Christian continent;
Yea utmost climes and coasts unknown,
Whereto his winged Fleere is flowne,
Whose Pilot while the Master sleeps,
Is sounding of the Northern deepes,
Encountering Icie Mountains, Coasts,
Raked up in Snowes, or bound with frosts:
Who save the Deity divine,
Could say the depth of his design?
As when a Comet does amaze,
The world with it is prodigious blaze,
While in some pitchie night, from North,
Sword brandisht flames it shoots forth,
All ghessing what it might portend,
Or where the effect would fall in the end,
So when this youth in Armor shone,
He was with terror looked upon,
Which way might turn his sword or lance,
To Turk, to Spain, to Room, or France:
But this a Meteor was, no Star
Imperfect mixed as glories are;
Though Belus term himself a God,
And Commodus bear Hermes rod:
Marcellus call in thunder down,
From Heaven, an artificial crown,
Clearchus in his charge bear fire,
Augustus clepe the Sun his Sire,
Domitian his own Mother scorn,
To say of Pallas he was borne,
Yet all are Adams earthy weak,
Adord like Idols till they break;
Become the scorn of Time and Fate,
And objects of the meanest Hate.
By Bodkins greatest Caesar's dead,
A Shepherdess take Cyrus head,
A Weasils bite kills Aristide,
And Lice did punish Herod's pride:
Blind Times ascribing these to be
The Effects of Fate or Destiny
Inevitable; mocking us
With th'Ato'mes of Democritus.
The Soul of this which World we call,
Or Influence Celestial,
It Is no Egyptian Iron Line,
But providence of Power Divine;
Whose high Idaeas are beeings,
And all Essential forms of things,
Disposing of all here below,
Whose ends himself does only know:
Who made a cord of several sin,
To whip us out, or hold us in.
That what Rome of her Titus said
May to late Henry be applied;
That he for his own good is gone,
But for our full affliction:
For whose dear loss, oh let the Towers
Of each heauen-daring crime of ours
Be cast to ground, as Carthage were,
When she her Princes death did hear:
And to express her sorrow more,
Her walls with black quite covered over.
Or with th'Aegyptians let us mourn
Ten times seven days about his Vrne:
Or strew his Hearse with bud and bloome,
As Thetis her Achilles Tomb:
Or crown his Ashes left to us,
As they did of Demetrius:
Or hang, with Athens, Laurel by,
In signal of his Victory,
Triumphing over Sin and Death,
Wherewith we struggle still beneath;
That happy thus, why (fools) do we
With vainest vows solicit thee?
Tears after tears to Heaven send,
That should upon our selves descend?
But rather let thee quiet rest,
Where thou perpetually art blessed:
Then farewell Henry heavenly Iemme,
Adorning new Jerusalem;
Farewell thy Britains broken Shield;
Farewell the Honor of the Field;
Farewell the Joy of King and Mother;
Farewell Eliza's dearest Brother;
Farewell the Church and Learnings prop;
Farewell the arm that held me up;
Farewell the golden days of mirth;
Farewell the best-best Prince of earth;
Farewell. Perforce I cease to mourn,
For tears mine Ink to water turn.
To the buried Prince.
He alludeth to that famous work of Henry the seauenths Chapel, so
contrived, that from every windovv in the same, in the Foundation, a line was
laid to the Kings Grave, and in the same to his heart, as he ordaidained it in
his life.
As from each angle of the Vault
Wherein thou lie, a line is brought
Unto the Kingly founders heart;
So unto thee, from every part,
See how our loves do run by line,
And dead, concenter in thy Shrine.
An Elegiacke EPITAPH upon the untimely death of the hopeful Prince HENRY,
etc. Written by the Author, at the time of his DEATH.
Who ere thou art that passest by,
And can not read for weeping eye
Our interrupted Lines, or speak
For sighs, that swollen heart would break;
Imagine Heavens and Earth reply,
Our Hopes are fallen, and here they Iye:
For Grief her self is stricken dumb,
To see this worthiest worthies toombe,
And Earth to hide from mortal sight
The worlds sole wonder and delight,
The richest Iemme ere Nature wrought
For prizeles form, of purest thought,
For chaste desire, for Churches zeal,
For care and love of common weal;
For manly shape, for active might,
For Courage and Heroique sprit,
For Love of Arms and Heavenly Arts,
For Bounty toward all best deserts:
That even by Tears of yet unborn,
His Marble will be washed and worn:
For living we, though deadly shot,
Stand at the gaze but feel it not.
Oh never land had such a loss
--
But certain soul thou art but gone;
To thy new coronation,
Thy presence Heaven, thy state a Throne
Thy Carpet Stars, to tread upon,
Full glory for a Crown of gold,
Out shining this accursed mold.
For awful Scepter, or thy Rod
A palm; thy friends, the Saints of God:
When Parasite, nor Spangled groom,
With Courtiers vain accloy thy room,
Where Sisters, friends, thy coming greet,
With Himnes and Hallelu iahs sweet.
That from the height of bliss aloft
Thou view'st me thinks our Mansion often:
Brave Hampton checking Heaven with state;
Or Richmond, thy beloved of late,
And bid^st Adieu these heaps of clay,
Cares restles rooms, Innes for a day.
Oh that the Heavens deny it me,
Here loathing life, to follow thee!
But till my death I wear my days
In Zealous tears, and in thy praise,
Since I may never line to see
A Prince, or Henry, like to thee.
FINIS.
SEQVENTIA Doctissimi Amici Carmina, Lachrumarum coronidem, ob elegantiam, and
Autoris singularem in Principis defuncti Pietatem, and Amorem, merito
adposuimus.
POST NENIAS (...) ad Funus diu diu Britannis Lugendum! HENRIC. BRIT. PR. and
Deliciarum.
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
I. S. e Soc. Int. Templi.

EPITAPHIVM, Eodem Auctore.
HIc quis iacet libentius proh! dixeram,
Nisi rettulissent Neniae tot vndique,
Tot vndique and Lessi; malum! Vos Futiles
Exeste sultis. Metus adest ^ Posteris,
Seris Nepotibus, ne Diris male ferant
Liras vouentes, perquam iniquas Principi
Liras! Quis, ast Viator, Illius memor
Esse potis est satis? Sed impares Clar I
Fuere Vates. Quicquid Humanum magis
Impar; quod olim sentient Britannides
Olim nimis, cum grauius eheu! dixerit
Fatum hoc stupendum Gnata temporis. Sed
HAVE, Henrice Princeps, Magne, Semonum Decus, AEETERNVM HAVE.

Corona Principis.
AVreus huic vitae spatium been circulus actae,
Vitaue quae Regni sort beata fuit.
Luncta cruci alterno stant ordine Lilia miscet
An quia diuersus, gaudia nostra dolor?
Gemma animi fuerat Virtus (Henrice) relucens
Quaelibet, antevenis qua probitate tuis.
Vnio (ait) primum sum facta Britannia, in isto
Principe, candidius quo nihil or be fuit.
Indomitas mentis vires Adamantina corda
Ipse Adamas dederas, et didicisse pati.
Quantus eum aether^i cepisset Numinis ardor,
Cerule, nec falsus testis Iaspis eras.
Tempora Smaragdum retulisse virentia Veris,
Rebar, et in multos spem superesse dies:
Deflua flore nouo, fit spes haec Bruma dolorum,
Praeproperam vt necuit dira pruina Rosam.
Sanguine foedatam palmam, spolia ampla, triumphos,
Principis innuerit Martius ille Rubor.
Hucque Amethyste venis de Perside, pallor Iacchi,
Et quam men's illi, sobria, sana fuit.
Nec Chrysolithus abest, ceu quo radiantibus vndis
Splendet opum cumulus, splendet auitus Honos.
Est tuae de coelis Corona^ auream multis^ gemmis insignita^ caetitus S.
Ladis^a^ Hungariae Regi delatam legimus in Annal. Hun. quod ab illis adeo
constanter creditur vt penes quemcunque ea sit pro legitimo Rege haberi debeat.
Vide Hist. Hung. Angl.
Vngaria lata corona,
In coelos rapitur dignior ista Polo.
Pluma triplex principis insigne.
QVam been conuenit sorti tua Symbola Pluma:
Gloria cum fuerat, parua, caduca, leuis.
QVod Pius et prudens armisque animosior esses,
Est tibi Pluma triplex, qua super astra volas.
ICH DIEN. I. Seruio.
SErvijt HENRICUS bis denos circiter annos,
Liber abinde fuit, Ciuis et aethereus.
H. P.
LIterulae nostri communes Nominis, H P.
Quam fero moeroris vos monumenta mei.
Rosa Britannica.
HEnrici Henricus Regis de sanguine Princeps,
Enatusque Rosis, Hinc Rosa vera fuit.
Nascitur ex Veneris Rosa vulnere, vulnera Regni
Reddunt hunc nobis. Hinc Rosa vera fuit.
Infacie roseusque pudor, candore remistus
Casto flore placens. Hinc Rosa vera fuit.
Virtute, ingenio, pollebat viribus, Hostis
Senserit has spinas. Hinc Rosa vera fuit.
Poscebant (Veneres Europae) Tusca, Sabauda,
Rure decus thalamis. Hinc Rosa vera fuit.
Intulit Ambrosios quacunque incessit odores
Numinis afflatus. Hinc Rosa vera fuit.
Coelica mellificos ditabat dona labores
Elargitus opes. Hinc Rosa vera fuit.
Praepropere emicuit, coelique emarcuit ictu,
Solus Honos Hortis. Hinc Rosa vera fuit.
Carduus Scoticus.
TError eram Hostilis viuus, modo, mortuus, Hosti
Vt Ziscae, inijciant nomina sola metum.
Deciauus fuerat mihi flos, folia atque caduca,
Nullaque quae noceat, spina relict a mihi;
Attamen abstineas hostis, radice supersles
Idem vnusque tibi moeror, amaror, inest.
Dum mihi flos teneris loetus rideret agellis,
Illucensque dies aureus omnis adest.
Vndique sollicitat volitan^um turba prccorum,
Et me fucus iners, sedula quoerit apes,
Musca dapem captans, crabro, tuque inuida vespa,
Et fame pressa calex, pictaque papilio.
Deseror emoriens, si quid mihi caul relictum
Aulicus, aut Patris fiscus, Acanthis erit.
Ad Principem defunctum.
SI quot corda tibi firmo iungantur amore,
Principe, cum Domino contumulata forent
Pyramidum moles reticeret Barbara Memphis,
Et Mausolaeo nullus adesset Honos.
Vltima quod moestas fundat mea Musa querelas,
Et minus in cineres officiosus eram:
Obstupui, coelo ( Niobes ceu marmora) laesus,
Dum leuis in luctu garrit vbique dolor.
Epigramata alia.
QVos Henrice tui coepisti vinus amore,
Occidis nimium funere saeue tuo.
Vulnera quanta dedit tua Mors, Henrice Britannis,
Hei mihi vidisses, non fera bella putes.
Ad Lectorem.
MEnse sapit carmen tibi nostrum vt Scombrus Iulo
Lector ais, sletum plus et vbique satis:
Subsi^unt (fateor) Lachrymarum flumina, regno
Intempestiuus non dolor iste venit.
Conscia men's Very Famae mendacia ridet;
Fama loquens Verum, vertitur in lachrymas.
Imminet Henrico morienti nubibus Iris,
Nuntia Iunonis, non fuit illa Dei.
Quod nullo pro ^iere tibi mea carmina cultu,
Nil mirum luctu squalleo et ipse meo.
Nuptial Hymns: IN HONOR OF the Marriage.
1
ALL Fears are fled, and from our Sphaere
The late Eclipse is vanished quite:
And now we entertain the year
With Hymenaeus chaste delight:
Heaven, the first, has thrown away
Her weary weed of mourning hew,
And waits Eliza's Wedding Day
In Starry-spangled Gown of blew.
The Huntresse in her silver Carre,
The Woods again suruaieth now:
And that same bright Idalian Star
Appears on Vespers veiled brow:
Let Earth put on her best array,
Late bathed in eye-distilled showers;
And melt ye bitter Frosts away,
That killed the forward Hope of ours.
Ye highest Hills that harbor Snowes,
And arm your heads with Helmes of Ice,
Be Gardens for the Paphian Rose,
The Lilly, Violet, or De-lis:
Low Valleys let your Plains be spread
With painted Carpets of the Spring,
(Whereon Eliza's foot must tread)
And every where your odours fling.
And tallest Trees, with tender'st Twigs,
Whom Winters-Storme has stripped bare,
Leave off those rimy Periwigs,
And on with your more seemly hair.
Forget ye siluer-paued Floods,
Your wonted rage, and with your sound
Revive the Shores and shady Woods,
That lay in deepest sorrow drowned.
Tell Amphitrite, when you meet,
Eliza, Princess, is a Bride:
And bid her with the News go greet
The farthest Shoares at every Tide;
And as ye wash high towred walls,
With gentle murmr in each ear,
Command these Royal Nuptials
Be solemnized every where.
Let Thracian Boreas keep within,
With Eastern Blasts that crops do kill,
And Auster wetting to the skin;
Be only Zephyre breathing still,
Warm Zephyre to perfume the Air,
And scatter down in silver Showers
A thousand Girlonds for her hair
Of Blossom, Branch, and sweetest flowers.
With Rosemarine, and verdant Bay,
Be wall and window clad in green:
And sorrow on him who this day
In Court a Mourner shall be seen.
Let Music show her best of skill,
Disports beguile the irksome night.
But take my Muse thy ruder Quill,
To paint a while this royal sight:
Proclaiming first from Thames to Rhine
ELIZA Princess Palatine.
2
Nymphs of Sea and Land away,
This, ELIZA'S Wedding day,
Help to dress our gallant Bride
With the treasures that ye hide:
Some bring flowery Coronets,
Roses white, and Violets:
Doris gather from thy Shore
Coral, Crystal, ^mber, store,
Which thy Queen in Bracelets twist
For her Alabaster wrist,
While ye Siluer-footed Girls
Plat her Tresses with your Pearls.
Others from Pactolus stream,
Greet her with a Diadem:
Search in every Rockie Mount
For the Iemmes of most account:
Bring ye Rubies for her Ear,
Diamonds to fill her Hair,
Emrald green and Chrisolite
Bind her Neck more white then white.
On her Breast depending be
The Onyx, friend to Chastity;
Take the rest without their place,
In borders, Sleeves, her Shoes, or Lace.
Nymphs of Niger offer Plumes:
Some your Odors and Perfumes.
Dians Maids more white then milk,
Fit a Roabe of finest Silk:
Dians maids who wont to be
The Honor of Virginity.
Heavens have bestowed their grace,
Her chaste desires, and Angels face.
3.
VRANIAS Son, who dwell'st upon
The fertile top of Helicon,
Chaste Marriage Sovereign, and do lead
The Virgin to her Bridal Bed.
Io Hymen Hymenaeus.
With Marioram begirt they brow,
And take the Called in Latin Flammeum, it was of a yealovvish color, and
worn of the Roman Virgins going to be married, to conceal and hide their
b^ushing and bashfulnes.
Veil of yealow: now
Ye Plutarch says these Torches were of wax, like ours, Plautus only once
mentions one of these vvaxen Lights, but for the most part, they were of
Pine or thorn tree.
Pinie Torches with your light,
To golden day convert the night.
Io Hymen Hymenaeus.
See how like the Cyprian Queen,
ELIZA comes, as when (I ween)
On Ida hill the prize she had
Allotted by the Phrygian Lad.
Io Hymen Hymenaeus.
As Asian Myrtle fresh and fair,
Which Hamadryads with their care,
And duly tending by the floods,
Have taught to ouer-looke the Woods.
Io Hymen Hymenaeus.
Behold how Vesper from the sky
Consents by his twinkling eye;
And Cynthia slayes her Swans to see
The state of this Solemnity.
Io Hymen Hymenaeus.
Wedlock, were it not for thee,
We could nor Child nor Parent see,
Armies Countries to defend,
Or Shepherds hilly Herds to tend.
Io Hymen Hymenaeus.
But Hymen call the Nymph away,
With Torches light the Children stay,
Whose sparks (see how) ascend on hye,
As if there wanted Stars in Sky.
Io Hymen Hymenaeus.
As virgin Vine her Elm does wed,
His Oak the Iuie ouer-spread:
So chaste desires thou ioynst in one,
That disunited were undone.
Io Hymen Hymenaeus.
But see her golden foot has past
The doubted The Bride never used to touch the threshold (which custom is yet
observed in some places of Italy) but very warily pasted over the same, least
charms or some other kind of Witchcraft might be laid under the same, either
to cause debate, or to the hinderance of procreation. By the Threshold, at her
coming home, was set fire and water, which she touched with either hand.
Threshold, and at last
She does approach her Bridall-bed,
Of none save Tyber enuyed.
Io Hymen Hymenaeus.
Chaste Mariage-bed, he sooner tells
The Stars, the Ocean Sand, or shells,
That thinks to number those delights
Wherewith thou shortnest longest nights. Io, etc.

With richest Tyrian Purple spread,
Where her dear Spouse is laid on bed,
Like young Ascanius, or the Lad
Her Love the Queen of Cyprus had: Io, etc.

Young Frederick of Royal Ligne,
Of Cassimiers, who on the Rhine
To none are second said to be,
For Vienna valiantly defended by Phi^^p, Ear^^ Palatine, against Soliman, who
besieged it with 300000. men. An. 1529.
Valor, Bounty, Piety. Io, etc.

Come Bride-maide Venus and undo
The Herculean knot with fingers two,
And take the This girdle was dedicated to Diana, whom the Grecians called
(...), and the Latins Cinxia; it was woven with wool, and knit with a
kind of knot which they called Herculean, in sign of fruitfulnes, which
Virgins vvare, and never was taken away until the first night of their
Marriage, which then the b^^de maid unknit but with two fingers only.
girdle from her wast,
That Virgins must for go at last,
Io Hymen Hymenaeus.
Scatter Nuts at their going to bed were wont to be thrown among children
and those without that do^^; in token (as Scaliger says) of renouncing the
deli^hts of youth and childhood, and undertaking the weighty charge of
household affairs. Diverse other opinions the ancient vvriters have had hereof.
Nuts without the Door,
The Married is a Child no more,
For whosoere a wife has wed,
Has other business in his head.
Io Hymen Hymenaeus.
Where pass ye many an happy night,
Until Lucina brings to light,
An hopeful Prince who may restore,
In part, the loss we had before,
Io Hymen Hymenaeus.
That one day we may live to see,
A Frederick Henry on her knee,
Who might to Europe give her law,
And keep encroaching Hell in awe. Io, etc.

Upon whose Brow may Envy read,
The reconcile of Love and Dread,
And in whose Rosy cheek we see,
His Mothers graceful Modesty, Io, etc.

But Muse of mine we but molest
I doubt, with ruder song their rest,
The Doors are shut, and lights about
Extinct, then time thy flame were out.
Io Hymen Hymenaeus.
4.
THE Idalian Boy no sooner with his Fire,
Had warmed the breast of Honored Casimire:
(That now he leaves the Nymphs along his Rheine,
TO espouse Eliza, with Saint Valentine.)
But smiling at the News, away he hi^de
To Cyprus, where his Mother did abide.
There is a Mount within this sacred I Will,
Right opposite against seauen-headed Nile,
Another way affronting Pharos bright,
That many a mile, the Seaman lends her light:
Here on a plain, to mortal wight unknown,
Where never storm, or bitter blast had blown;
Or candi^d hoare-Frost showed the crusty earth;
But ever May of meriment and mirth.
An hedge the same enuirons all of Gold,
Which Mulciber, for sweet embracements sold
And wanton dalliance, to the Cipryan Dame;
(It Is said) and since she has possessed the same.
Where still the fields with veluet-greene are spread,
And blossoms paint the woods all white and red,
No Bird may perch her on the tender bow
But such for voice as Venus shall allow.
The trees themselves do fall in love with eith^^
As seems by kissing of their tops together:
And softly whispring; when some gentle gale
Chides from the Mountain, through the shady Vale.
Now from a Rock within, two fountains fall,
One sweet, the other, bitter as the gall,
Herein does Cupid often steep his darts,
When his disposed to sever loving hearts.
A thousand Amorets about do play
(Borne of the Nymphs) these only wound, they say,
The common people, Venus darling he,
A^mes at the Gods, and awful Majesty:
And many a Power else in this place is found,
As License, ever hating to be bound,
Wrath, easy to be reconciled and Tears,
Sly Theft, and Pleasure, pale, and ^ocund Fears:
And ouer-head do flutter in the bows
With painted wings, Lies, Pe^iuries and V^wes.
Hence Age is banished. Here is seen besides
The Goddess Court, where always she resides,
This Lemnius built of Gold and rarest ^emmes,
That like a Mount quite hid with Diadems
It seems; where Art and Cost with each contend,
For which the Eye, the Frame should most commend.
Here Cupid down with weary wing did light,
And iocu^d comes into his Mothers sight,
With statefull gate: who from a burnished Throne,
Embraces, with Ambrosian Arms, her Son;
And thus begins; the news my lovely Boy,
And cause of thy arrive, and this new joy?
Have thou again turned Jove into a Cow?
Or w^nton Daphne to a Lawrell-bough?
What Man, or Power immortal, by thy Dart,
Is fallen to ground, that thus revived thou art?
With many a Nectar kiss, mild Love replies,
Our Bowne'er bare away a greater prize:
Knows not the Goddess by the fertile Rheine,
Young Frederick, borne of Imperial Ligne,
Descended from that brave A most valiant Soldier, and Nephew to Charlemaine,
who with his companion O^iuer, was slain upon the Pyranaean Hills, in Ro^^^
valley, or Ro^landi valley, warring against the Infidels. His Horn wherevvith
he called his Soldiers together, and his Svvord are yet to be seen at a
Village in Xanto^gue: of whom, as of the Emperor Charlemaigne the Palsgraue
is lineally descended.
Rolando slain,
And worlds great Worthy, valiant Pipin King of France, the Father of Charolus
Martellus, he begat Pipin the Father of Charlemaigne, auncetour to Count
FREDERICK: I will shortly publish the Pedigree it self, being too long for
this place.
Charle-Maigne.
This hopeful Impe is stricken with our Bow,
We have his Arms, and threefold Shield to show;
Whose ancient Arms was the Lion, which the Hollanders bear, as descended
from the ancient F^an^i. The Roman Empire was divided into two Kingdoms;
the one called Lombardicum, the other Teutonicum: this latter, being indeed
Germany it self, was again subdivided, and governed iure Francon^^ and
Saxonico: that of Saxony stretched it self unto the Balticke-sea; the other
of Franconia contained either side about the Rhine, (...), Franconia East, and
all Bauaria. The Palatinate of the Rhene to make a difference betvveene that of
Saxony, had the beginning in the time of Otho the third Emperor, about the
year of Grace, 985. At what time the seven Electors were ordained at
Qued^^gburge.
Franconias Lion, and this of Otto the Son of Jews Duke of Bauaria, or
rather Bo^aria married Agnes Daughter and Heir of Henry, Count Palatine of the
Rhine in the year 1215. (as says Auen^inus) which was the first uniting of
these noble Houses. Bauaria was sometime a great Kingdom lying one part upon
Hungary, the second upon the Alriatique Sea, the third upon Franconia. Out of
this Family have many worthy Emperors descended, in a manner, by continual
succession, unto our times. The Coat or Arms of Bauaria or Bo^aria is Masculy
Argent and Azure, which had the beginning (as is verily supposed^ at the same
time when Chrixus, Duke of the Boij or Bauarians, took the Capitol of Rome,
whole Soldiers had their Cas^ockes wrought of the same manner and ^o^me,
which Virgil (whose pen vvrote nothing in vain) testifies in the eight
Book of his Ae^^dos, reporting they were suited Sag^^is virgatis: which kind
(says Diod^rus^) were interstincta, and coloribus variegata in testellatam
speciem.
Baueir,
A potent Heir derived from Cassimeir.
Another The third and middlemost, borne by the Palatine, was only white,
till the (...) of Charles the fifth, who bestovved the Pall, or Mound, f^r the
charge upon Frederick the second, Count Pala^ine, in regard it is his office to
deliver it into his h^^d at his Coronation. It is called in Greek, (...), (
Cedrenus) and he that bare it, (...), ( ^^ycas and was usually borne by the
Grecian Emperors. Concerning the Fable, how the form of it was shovvne unto
Pope Benedict in a dicame, I let it pass, as s^^^olous.
Argent only, long they bore,
Till charged by Charles the last, late Emperor,
That as Howsoever it pleases Bo^in li^ de Rep. cap. 9 to (...) at (...)
Princes, in regard of these their dignities at the Emperors Coronation where
he says; Les Electeurs portent le qualit^^ de varlets domestiques, comme
b^utelliers escuters, eschansous de'^ Empereur: The beginning and use hereof is
most honorable and ancient. Nicephorus says, that in the time of Constantine
the great, that the office of Arch- Sewer was assigned to Rossicus a great
Prince, his words be; (...). And whosoever list to see the large privileges
which have been granted Archidapi^er^ S. I. let him read the Golden Bull of
Charles the fourth Emperor.
Arch- Sewer, and By which Bull the senior Electorship is also confirmed to
the Palatine, in these words; Q^^t^es sacrum ^acare continges Imperium
Illustr^s Comes Palatine, S. I. Arch^dapi^er and manus futuri R^gis Romanorum,
in partilus Rheni, and Sue^^^, etc debet esse prou^er. By the same Bull the
Palatine may call the Emperor to his trial (but within the limits of his
own Court) he may redeem, and recall, any alienation made unjustly by the
Emperor, lands pawned or sold, etc. One goes farther, and affirms that ^f
the Emperor be convict of any capital crime, the Palatine himself is to cut
off his head with a golden Axe, upon his Shield but mine Author vvorthily
condemns this as an idle and ridiculous jest.
Elector, this
He bears, save honor, adding naught of his.
What Coast or Country have not heard their Fame?
Or who not loved their ever honored Name?
Yet trembled at from farthest From hence had the Turks their first Original.
Danubie is in a manner the bounds of the Ottomans Empire, upon the West,
whereon stands the famous Vienna in Austria, so valiantly defended by Philip
Count Palatine against Soliman in the time of Charles the fifth, whereof we
have already spoken.
Caspian Sea,
And Scythian Tanais, to the Danubie.
ELIZA' s Name, I know, is not unknown
Unto my Queen, the second unto none,
For beauty, shape of Body, every grace,
That may in earthly Majesty take places;
That were not Venus daily seen of me,
I would have sworn this Princess had been she.
Have Cytherea, Leave thy native Land,
And join them quickly by the Marriage band.
The Queen her Son removing from her lap,
Her hair of wiery gold she tresseth up.
Throws on her Veil, and takes the Girdle chaste,
Wherewith she quiets storms, and every blast,
Allaies the swelling floods, and furious sea;
Whereto full speedily she takes her way:
And here arrived, sends forth a Cupid fair,
Dressed like a Sea-Nymph, with a silver hair:
To search the deep, and bring unto the shore
Some Triton, able to convey her over;
Which if he did perform with nimble speed,
A golden Bow and Shafts should be his meede.
No sooner Love had diu'd into the Maine,
But on the su^ge appeared a wondrous train
Of Sea-gods, Tritons, Nymphs, who equal strove
The foremost who should aid the Queen of Love;
First, Neptune, mounted on a A Fish almost as big as the Whale.
Grampas crowned
With Roses, calmed the Ocean all around:
Palaemon on a Seal with hoary locks,
Begirt with Samphire from the neighbor rocks:
An ugly VVhirlepoole Ner^us bestrides,
With Trident galling often his lazy sides.
Among the Maids she Glaucus hindmost lagges
Upon a Porpose brideled with flagges.
Next Venus comes, with all her beauteous crew,
Whom Dolphins in a shelly Chariot drew.
No Nymph was there but did some gift bestow,
That did in Amphi^rites bosom grow:
Cymothoe brought a girdle passing fair
Of silver, twisted with her Crystal hair.
Young Spathale, apearely Carcanet,
And Clotho Corrall, good as she could get.
Fair Galatea from the Persian Shore,
Strange Iemmes and Flowers, some unknown before,
Which to ELIZA, as their loves they sent,
(Herewith adorning Venus as she went)
Whom when they had conducted to our Them,
And viewed the spacious channel of the same,
Admired our Chalkie Cliffes, suruai'd each pierre,
Out fertile Shores, our Ships, and Harbors here,
They back unto their boundless home do hye;
But in a cloud the Queen ascends the sky,
And takes her way unto the Royal Hall,
Where down, she did no sooner softly fall,
But Clouds were fled that ouer-cast the air,
And Phoebus threw about his golden hair:
Eke Snow-tress'd January (seldom seen)
Upon his brow had got a wreath of green.
Joy was in Court, and iocund mirth possessed
The hearts of all, from greatest to the least,
(Yet knew they not the cause) the windows lay
Bestrow'd with Primrose, Violets, and Bay.
Now children look (quoth she) you banish hence
Affairs of State, ambitious difference,
Complaints, and Faction, melancholy Fears,
All Parsimonie, sighs, and former Tears.
Let Nights in royal banqueting be spent,
Sweet Music, Masks, and joyous merriment.
Now pleasure take her fill; bring Graces Flowers;
With Torches Hymen plant the lofty Towers;
Twine, Concord double Girlonds, Cupids you
Some gather branches from the Myrtle bough.
And guild the roof with waxen lights on high;
Tacke (others) up rich Arras busily;
Some cast about sweet waters; others cleanse
With Myrrh, and best Sabaean Frankincense,
The Curtains; others fit about her Bed,
Or for her foot the floor with Velvet spread.
Which said, into the Chamber of the Bride,
Who lay to rest, she passed vnespide
And secretly instructs her how to love,
Recounting every pleasure she should prove:
And urges that each Creature's borne to be
The Propagator of Posterity.
And now and then, she casts in between,
Their Legends that have faithful Lovers been:
She tells of Dido, and Lucretia chaste,
Camilla, Hero, Thisbe, and the rest,
And many a Book she had at fingers end,
Which for her purpose often she can commend.
Now as the Air began more and more to clear,
The Goddess plainly did at last appear.
Whose burnished hair the goodly room did guild,
And with a sweet Ambrosian odor filled,
That seeing now ELIZA's goodly grace,
Her dainty fingers, and her fairest face:
She stood amazed, and with a Nectar kiss,
She bowed her self, and boldly vtter'd this.
All happiness unto the Princess be,
The Pearl and Mirror of great Brittannie,
For whose dear sake, I this adventure took,
And Paphos with my Cyprus sweet forsook:
Drawn by the Rumor of thy Princely Name,
And pity of the hopeful Frederickes flame,
Though thou were not a Princess by thy birth,
This face deserves the greatest King on Earth,
What hand so fits a Scepter, and what Eye,
Did ever spark with sweeter Majesty,
Thy lips the Roses, whitest neck excells
The mountain snow, and what is whiter else.
With equal temper how the white and red,
(Our callors,) are upon thy cheek dispred,
The fingers of the Morning do not shine,
More pleasing then those beauteous ones of thine,
If Bacchus crowned his Love with many a star,
Why art thou yet uncrowned, fairer far?
Oh Virgin, worthy only not of Rhine,
And that sweet soil, thy Rivers that fall into the Rhene in the Palatinate.
County They were called, Comi^es, or Earls among the Romans who alwai^s
follovved the Emperor in his Court, out of these number were elected the
choicest, and sent to govern sundry Provinces, as Co^^es Afri^^, Tingita^^,
(...) Saxonici, etc. Besides there were others called Comites, Palat^ij qui
tr^^^rant Palati^^, as it were viceroys in the Court of these, Clo^harius,
Sigebert, and other Kings of France had, whom they sent viceroys into
Austrasia, Burgu^die, etc.
Palatine,
(Where Palatine is a name of office, derived not from the Palace in Treuir,
not from a Castle called Die (...) and of old pfaitz greuenstein in the middle
of the Rhene, but of the Emperors Palace whereof they had the charge and
disposing ^^l^^staires of the same, and was immediate next to the Emperors. I
deny not but there have been many Palatines, as the Palatine of T^^yes,
Blo^es, Champaigne, Hungary, H^bspurge, and Tubing: but this is the greatest
and in a manner who has worn out all the rest: of whose family have been
nine or ten famous Emperors, they are lineally descend from Pepin King of
France.
Mose, the Moene, the Nah, and Nicer clear,
With Nectar run against thy coming there)
But of a world, due to those guiftes of thine,
Which (...) thee more then all thy Jewels shine,
This said; about her Iuory neck she hung,
The Nereids tokens which she brought along,
And with a needle curled her lovely hair,
Then Gallant Pearls bestowed at either ear,
And ore her head she threw her Sindon veil,
That far adowne (vpborne by Nymphs) did traile,
By this, without a thousand Virgins stayed,
To lead along to Church the Princely maid,
With heavenly sounds, (in fall of plenteous showers,
Among the crew, of all the sweetest flowers.)
That Cytharea leaves the Virgin now,
And takes her leave with this, or other vow.
Live Royal Pair in peace and sweetest Love,
With all abundance blessed by heaven above,
A thousand kisses bind your hearts together,
Your Arms be weary with embracing either,
And let me live to see between you twain,
A Caesar borne as great as Charlemaine.
FINIS.
Monumenti, Anno superiori In acta Diuum publica relati Formula De Destinatis
Superillustriss. Prr. Frederici V. Com. Palate. ad Rhenum Pr. Elect. S. R. I.
Archidapi^. and Vic. Et Sereniss. D. D. ELIZABETH ae vnicae Potentiss. D. N.
Iacobi Regis, and Chariss. Filiae, Nuptijs.
COnsentes, Socij, Lares, quibusque
Fas est indugredi Iouis Senatum,
Adsint vt numero, monet Mercury; to every school boy he is common for Jove's
messenger. But also his office was to summon the Gods o^ every rank to
Parliament, as you may see in Lucians (...)
Camillus.
Sic iussit Cronius. Frequens Olympo
Consessus Superum. Tonantis ora
Intenti adspiciunt; Relationem
Exspectant. BONA Good Fortune. V. Fest^^ in Scaeua. in steed of Quod bonum
faustum foelixque sit. Which was solemnly used before every matter of much
moment (as we use Good speed, or such like) and especially before motions in
the Senate, by those which proposed Cic. I. de Diuinat. Donat. in Phorm.
Terent. caeterum apud Linium passi^n.
scaeua FAVSTAque (orsus
Adfatur.) Tenerae in suis For our Women (scarce equaled, no where bettered)
Venus may well call our Nation hirs. The Topique star also of London
(Beauties confluence) is the Harp, being of her nature in Astrology, And her
image and name has been ghes'd to be in some British silver comes. Camd. ad
N^mismat. page 71.
Britannis
(Concham quae meruit tenere eandem,
Quae Germen Charitum, Beside the common reasons of Sacrum attributed to great
subjects, our Soueraigns ancestors specially deserve it, for their solemn an
^ointings at their Coronation, which is familiarly known v^uall to them and
some other Princes. But in ours so ancient, that CI^ years since and more it
was common to them, if (...) deceive not, V. cum. in Episi dee^c^d. Brit.
Sacroque Patrum
Regnat Stemmate) Virgini iugalem
Cypri Diua Potens torum rogauit,
Id Tritonia, Juno idem rogauit.
Quid censetis? Erant Opinione
Pleri quam vario, tamen volebant
Consulti simul Ordines Mart Ca^ella, lib. 1. makes so many several Estates
(as it were) among the D^^ties.
Bis octo,
Magnus ter Superis It is (...) how thrice and four times express a
super^^^^e. But also it here respects the Name of our Princess Elizabeth,
which together may signify the Septen^r^ of God. The number vvithall includes
Virginity, and by the ancients was ti^^ed Palla^. Mac. lib. 1. ad some S^^p.
quaterque It was also the name whereby the noble Vestals were alvvaies
ceremoniously called when they were chosen. Agell. Noct. Att^^^. 1. Cap. 12.
and fits (with the other sense) for a Virgins name.
Amatae
Terrestrique Deae vt Deus Both holy and profane authority style great
Princes, Gods. v Psalm. 8^ and saepius al by.
Daretur:
Parcarum in Tabulas refertur. Vrget
(Quis dignus?) Jupiter. Statim rogantur
Terrarum Genij. Suis petendo
Ambit quisque Deam: excipitque Every state or country has been supposed to
have his Topique Governor, as a Ceni^^ or Angel. v Macrob. Sat^rn. 2. cap. 9
Alios. Symmachus. lib. 1. epist 40. vt animae nas^entibus, ita populis satales
Genij diuiduntur. See Paralip. 2. cap. 28. and what true Divines have upon
Daniel. cap. 9.
Praeses
Germanum; Modo Quintus Ille Diuespace interprets Frederique, in old English,
or Dutch.
Dives
Nostris Pace viret, Quirine, The people by Rhine in Steph. (...)
Rhenis
Quoi te Magnanimum dedisle Semen,
Quoi That Apples were as interc ^stion, often, for Love, if you have read any
thing in old Poets you (...) know, and that fi^ting to this purpose, every
aequ^uocation of it may be. That they are proper for Venus to give, ^^audian's
(...) denum Veneris, is testimony, and an old allusion in (...) 2 with many
other. But the verse here alludes also to that golden Apple, Globe, or Ball,
which the Palsgraeues of Rhine bear with an infixt cross in a Scutcheon
pendant to their own coat and that of ^auiere as token of what they carry
at the Emperors Coronation. Following the vulgar, I think of it by name of an
Apple, but certainly it seems it was purposed for a Symbol of the Earth, by
the first inuentor, (which was Justinian 1.) and the Cross upon it
interpreted, Our Saviors passion on the earth, showing, (...), as expressly
Codin in Orig Constant and S^^d. in Iustinian^. 1. that through belief, in the
Cross he became Ruler of the earth. Frederique II first bare it in the
Scutcheon by grant of Charles V. O^ it see more in Marqu^ard. Freh. Orig.
Palate. 1. Cap. 15.
Malum, Cytherea, te venustum,
Quoi dotes Animi liquet Mineruam:
Hau^t est, tam merito Parem Britannam,
Alter, qui cupiat. Pares Amorum
Pulli! quin Generis Pares honor!
Fit discessio. Quotquot id Deorum
Censent vnanimi, nimis Minorum
Antistant numero, qui alid proteruus.
Ceris Fata duint, iubet Senatus.
Perscribunt. Paphie, Cupidinesque
Aethon They are used as for Eros and Anteros by Claudian in Epithalam. Pall.
and Serenae viz for the II. Cupids that make Love mutual.
et Pyrois parate Flammas.
By that name were those pictures titled, which the Gentiles painted for
Tutelary Deities in the poupes of their ships. Europe had it from the
Phaenicians. v. Suid in (...). Fest. in Eur^p. et ibid. Scaliger. quin et
Tz^tz. ad Lycophron. page 11. in (...). And a place of Scripture, Act. Cap 28
Com. 11. may be hereon interpreted But see there Theophilact, who places them
in the Provve. They and their fellows in the verse are all known
Sea-gouernars.
Pattae^i, Gemini, Thetisque Conse
Vestras Nodo operas. Propago Tamae,
Rheni vt fulgeat ampliter And also as proper to the Marriage, Cro^^es were
used to the couple in the Orient^^ Empire, as you may see i^ Theophilact. Sim
^at. Hist. 1. cap. 10. and ibid. Tentanum. Finanz lib. 11. cap. 17. which I
transfer not hither, but with allusion.
Corolla,
Taedam praeferat aut Pro^^^^ Juno is so familiar that none can be ignorant of
her interest in Marriages and for this Passage, -- Dat Juno verenda Vi^^ula,
and insigni geminat concordia tae^^. (...) Syluar I agreeing testimonies are
obuious.
Amica IVNO,
Aut CAIAE (...) by the ancient Roman^ use, was a perpetual name for every
(...), and thee used to salute her husband being first brought to him thus,
(...) ego ca^a. The ^ea^on of it may be enquired in Plutarch. Prob^em R^m. 30.
Valor Epit. de N^m Rat. and else-vvhere. And, ^ho^se is given whether Juno, or
the Brides mother, bear the Light, being in this particular, Both great
Queens: and that, Mothers also did use so, authority is large Scholiast. ad
Apollon. Argonautic. (...). and (...) in Phae^^ssis, with others.
Genetrix. Sient That, the Nuptials should be the day before the I^^creals (i.
the Lycaea) which was a Sacrifice instituted anciently in Rome, and the
chief effect was, that young married women touch'a with a bloody (...) of
Goates-skinne, should be fertile in posterity. The day of that was alvvayes on
the XV. of Xl. February, that is, the XV o^ February with us, which was the
day after this happy Knot. For the Lupercais, Plutarch in R^m^io. Ou^. l. Fast.
II Halicarnass. lib. I. are most particular.
LYCAEA
PANOS postridie, vt Satu fruantur^
Adclamant Superi, PARESHAVETE.
Quis vidit Venerem auspicatiorem?
I. S. e Soc. lnt. Templi.

THE MANNER Of the Solemnization of this Royal Marriage.
THE proceeding was from the Priuie-Chamber through the Presence, and
Guard-Chamber, over the Tarras, through the new-built Room, down into the
utter Court: where, from the Gate all along, up again to the great
Chamber-dore, was a foote-pace made about six foot high, and railed in on
either side, up again to the great Chamber-dore, and so by the way leading to
the Closet, they went down into the Chapel, where the Marriage was
solemnized.

The order of the proceeding was thus: First, came the Palsgraue, attended by
diverse Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen, as well English as Strangers;
himself apparrelled all in white, being Cloth of silver.

Then came the Bride, apparrelled also in white, (Cloth of Silver also) with a
Coronet on her head of Pearl, and her hair disheueled, and hanging down over
her shoulders, lead to the Chapel (as I remember) by the Prince, and the
Earl of Northampton, being Batchelors: (for in coming back she was lead by
my Lord Admiral, and the Duke of Lennox.) And her Train borne by eight or
nine Ladies of Honor: after whom followed the Queens Majesty, with a great
number of Ladies and Gentlewomen.

Then came the Kings Majesty, attended by most of the Nobility of the Land,
and followed by the band of Pensioners, bearing their Axes, and proceeded as
before, into the Chapel.

In the midst whereof was erected a Stage of five degrees, high railed on
each side, and open at either end; the Railes covered with Cloth of Gold: upon
which was solemnized the aforesaid Marriage, which being consummate by my L.
Grace of Canterbury; and a Sermon made by the B. of Bath and Wells, Mr. Garter
Principal King of Arms, published the style of the Prince and Princess, to
this effect:

All Health, Happiness, and Honor be to the High and Mighty Princes,
FREDERICK, by the Grace of God Count Palatine of the Rhine, Arch-Sewer, and
Prince Elector of the holy Empire, Duke of Bauier, The order of the Garter,
whereof the Palgraue is Knight, was here omitted.
and ELIZABETH his Wife, only Daughter to the High, Mighty, and right
Excellent, JAMES, by the Grace of God, King of great Britain, etc.

Which finished: the married Princes returned back the same way they came; but
the Kings Majesty privately, by another way.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
REader, I attribute the name of Casimire in some places to the Palsgraue,
which thou happily may imagine to be the Surname of that Family, which was
but an addition to the Christen-name of some later of the Earls, from the
Marquess of Brandenburge, that Johannes or Frederick Casimire, is no more then
Henry Frederick, John Maria, Petrus Andraeas. or the like: but by reason of the
remarkable worth an^^vertues of those his late Grandsires, I have used it
(...): beside, the nature of the Verse could not admit the Name Frederick, so
often, or so well.

ERRATA.
IN the fourth Hymn for, from Casimire, read, to Casimire: in the Marginall
Notes, for Charolus, read, Carolus. And what else (Reader) thou shall find of
the like nature, let me entreat thee to correct out of thine own judgment,
since mine own leisure served me not to ouer-looke the Proofs so often as I
desired.

Thine assuredly H. P.

FINIS.

