THE HISTORY of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, etc. Numb. 16. Chap.

Applied to the Prelacy Ministry and Church Assemblies of England.

By Mr John Penry, a Martyr of Jesus Christ.

Numb. 16.26. And Moses spoke unto the Congregation, saying, Depart, I pray
you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, least ye
perish in all their sins. Rev. 18.4. And I heard another voice from heaven
say, Go out of Babylon, my people, that ye be not partakers in her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues. Imprinted in the year, 1609.

The Publisher to the Reader.
THere coming to my hands (Christian reader) the copy of this treatise
following, (whereof many copies have passed abroad in writing) I thought good
(weying well the matter undertaken, and the party by whom it was written,) to
publish the same, to the further view of the world. And chiefly for the good of
my country: which all true subjects are bound by all good means to seek and
advance.

The subject of this book, or matter undertaken, is; A declaration of the estate
of the Church and Ministry of Engl. compared with Corah, Dathan, Abiram, their
Tents and conspiracy, against Moses and Aaron, Number. 16. chap. Which therefore
all in whom the true fear of God is, ought carefully to look unto and examine:
For we should try all things, and keep that which is good. And they who never
examine the things charged to be evil and out of order in that Church, must
needs be ignorant, whether their estate therein be good or evil. But if they
consider that ignorance will not excuse them, it behooveth all to take
knowledge: whom I heartily wish to lay aside all partiality, and with
indifferent minds to weigh things well, trying them by the rule of Gods word,
that whatsoever thereby is required of them, they may resolve to do it; although
it turn to the loss of all worldly pleasures and preferments: knowing that we
have here but a short time, and our God has reserved for us a more enduring
substance and richer inheritance in the kingdom of heaven, if in obedience we
submit unto him, and in faith and patience do wayt upon him.

Touching the author, Mr John Penry by name; he was a godly man, learned,
zealous, and of a most Christian carriage and courage: and ( as he In his
Apology.
says of himself) borne and bred in the mountains of Wales. And well known it
is, that with all godly care and labor he endeavored to have the Gospel
preached and planted among his poor countrymen, whose case he greatly pitied
and had compassion of, in that they wanted the means of salvation among them.
After all this, God using him as a further instrument for the more clear
manifestation of the truth; he was hardly entreated, imprisoned, condemned and
executed; and so suffered Martyrdom for the name of Christ. Being adjudged at
the Kings bench by Sir John Popham Knight, Lord chief Justice of England, and
the rest of the Judges there assembled, the 25. of the 5. month called May, and
executed at Thomas a Waterings by London, the 29. of the same month, in the
year of our Lord, 1593.

And here let the Reader observe, that he was not executed the next day after
the judgment, as it was expected; nor the second, nor third day after; but
when men least looked for the same, then was he brought forth being at dynner
(as I have heard) by a warrant under the hands of the John Whitgift.
Archbishop of Canterbury, and of Sir John Puckering Knight, Lord Keeper of the
great seal, and Sir John Popham aforesaid, being then Lord chief Justice of
England, and the matter being carried after a close manner, was sodeinly
conveyed to the place of execution; where he was as hastily bereaved of his
life, and not suffered (though he desired it) to make declaration of his faith
toward God, or of his allegiance to her Majesty. Which m^ner of dealing I
thought good to note here by the way, that it might be known, and esteemed of
all according as it deserves.

Furthermore concerning this treatise, whether he had finished the whole, or was
taken and intercepted, when he had thus far proceeded in it, or what he would
further have done about it, I know not. Wherefore if others have more of it,
they shall do well to impart it to the world, as I have done this which came to
my hands. In the mean time I wish all to make good use of this part now
printed, and they unto whose hands it shall come, to enterteyn it as a poor
Orphane, who is left as it were Fatherles, by the authors untimely death,
procured by the Prelates: who as unclean spirits like frogs (croaking about
Kings Courts) do stir up the Magistrates and Rulers of the earth, Rev. 16.13.14.
to make war against Gods Saints. Whereas these should rather hearken to
that which God speaks unto them in his word saying, Be wise now therefore, ye
Kings: be learned, ye Judges of the earth: Serve the Lord in fear and rejoice
in trembling: Kiss the son, least he be angry, and ye perish in the way,
when his wrath shall suddenly burn. Blessed are all they that trust in him.
Psalm. 2.10.11.12.

THE HISTORY OF CORAH etc. Numb. 16. chap. Applied to the Church Assemblies of
England.
IT is certain and apparent that this age cannot in any wise brook to have the
truth manifested and spoken in the same, except it be by piece meals: So that
if ever it were said to the Seers, See not, and to the prophets, prophecy not
unto us right things, Isa. 30.10.
but speak flatteries, prophecy errors, depart out of the way, go aside out of
the path, cause the holy one of Jsraell to cease, fom us, the very same is now
said and stood unto in these miserable days: nay those that would be reconed
our leaders our eyes our guides, are now become the men of Anathoth, and say
plainly, Jer. 11.21.
prophecy not in the name of the Lord, that thou die not by our hands.

All estates and sorts of men, high and low, have reasons why to reject the
truth, why to condemn it, why to tread it under foot, and to persecute the
same. It is not pleasant, it is odious, it is offensive, it is hard, knotty,
uncivil, proud, hauty, and what not? It is not pleasant, because it draws men
into incouveniences, it reproves them to their faces, discovers their evil
walking: it in dangereth those that profess the same: it carries but a mean
trayn after it. It is odious and offensive, for the same causes: It is uncivil,
proud and haughty, because it will correct and reform all: it will alter states:
it regards not the years, learning, credit, wisdom, and estimation of those
that stand against it, but goes about to bring all under foot, and to make
them all to stoop unto it, or else threatens to break the^ like a potters
vessel: it will not be silent at their commandment, but contrary wise
enforces them to flee her presence, and not to have a word to speak that they
dare stand unto while she is in place.

These and such like are the causes why the truth of God is so meanly attended
upon, and utterly cast off among men in our days: for what reason is there (as
men usually conclude) that those who in the estimation of the most, are
learned, godly, religious etc. should have their practices reproved and
themselves condemned as violaters of the Lords moral commandments, seeing they
are especially deemed to urge the observatio^ of them?

As an answer to all these frivolous cavils of fesh and blood, I oppose once
for all THE WORD OF GOD and the truth thereof, whereby I doubt not but to stop
the mouth of proud flesh, and to press the same with the mace of Gods
judgments for evermore, except they embrace and obey the truth.

And therefore I do here in the presence of God and his Angels charge the^
whosoever they be into whose hands this present treatise shall come, that they
presume not to suffer the former cavils to have passage out of their lips, as
being reasons of any force, why the truth of God should be beaten back,
smothered and kept in, because men do account the same to be mean, odious,
offensive, stern, proud, etc. For why should not all the world lay their hand
upon their mouths, when the GOD OF HEAVEN speaks, and labor to frame
themselves and their affections meet to receive his truth, and to be obedient
to the same? Shall proud men reject it, because it derogateth from their
ruinous credit? Shall they seek to keep it under, because they will not come
under the line and direction of the same? Shall that be accounted odious, which
is most amiable, most bewtifull, to be desired above fine gold, Job. 28.19.
yea of more value then the Topaz of Aethiopia or the most pure wedge of the
gold of Ophir, and that only because vain men hate to be reformed by it?
Shall that be accounted proud, offensive, and haughty, whereat none possibly
can stumble but proud scribes and pharisees, or ignorant and worldly minded
Disciples, who will not stick to say to the Lord himself, that his sayings are
hard and who can hear them? Nay let vain men labor to have the ear of the
learned, that they may break in pieces their turning away, to their shame and
confusion of face, their hard entreaty of the truth and those that profess the
same, by revilings, slanders, imprisonments etc. to their everlasting
perdition, without the Lords great mercy in turning them unto him, which I
earnestly wish them.

And as the whole truth oppugned in these days, is in the eyes men of the
nature and quality before mentioned, so is this in particular, for the
clearing whereof I am to deal at this present.

The point is,

That it is unlawful for any of what estate, sex, degree, and condition soever
they be, to communicate in any action of religion, as in hearing truth taught,
in receiving the Sacraments, praying, etc. Within any of the publik meetings of
the Land, as now they stand by Law:

And therefore that this present Parliament etc.

The reasons of the first degree alleged to prove the contrary will be these,
namely that the assertion is traitorous, seditious, schismatical: that it is
Brownisme, that it is odious, offensive etc. that it condemns the doings of
the children of God, and the practices of the most notable servants of Christ:
accuses them all this while to have erred and gone astray: that it crosses
the judgment of reformed Churches; who are better persuaded of the asse^blies
of the land: that excellent and famous men saw not this: that they were of an
other mind etc.

But what is all this to the truth? is it any new thing to see the truth
arraigned, indighted, condemned, and executed for treason and sedition, though
never convinced of the same? We consider not whether kingdoms and states be so
out of order as that the truth cannot come to light, but it will be accounted
traitorous among them, The only thing that we especially respect is, whether
it be truth or not, the which being found, hold it we must, defend it we must,
whatsoever account man's corruption makes thereof. And therefore here is no more
said against it, but what in all ages has been falsely uttered against the
truth. Falsey I say, because no truth can be traitorous unto the state of any
Prince or Potentate. And as unto this in particular, it shall be found to carry
undoubted stability with it, for the upholding of her MAJESTY'S crown,
authority, privileges, preheminences within all her Realms and Dominions, and
to be accompanied with the allowance of her Royal Laws, if it might have the
particular benefit of them.

Touching the crime of Brownisme, Schism, etc. It is an unconscionable
slander, for truth holds of no creature, it is derived only from that head
in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden, that is from
JESUS CHRIST: yet this I know to be the usual badge of the truth, to be called
after the names of men, to be accounted schismatical, that thereby the hearts of
the simple may be alienated from the same. And Satan in this latter age has
been a mervelous cunning Rhetoricia^ this way, there has been no truth brought
to light, but he ha^h taken pains to paint it out for Zwinglianisme Luther
anisme, Calvinisme, Brownisme, etc.

Odious and offensive it has been already granted to be, only in their eyes
who refuse to be guided by the line and rule of the Master builder: whereas
otherwise it is precious unto them, that labor to square themselves and their
actions according to the pattern of the holy sanctuary and temple.

And to pretend against the truth, that it condemns the doings of men, is
nothing else but a manifest testimony that truth is truth: who must bear rule,
and bring all into order: yea let all men in the world be liars, and let the
Lord in this truth of his ordinances be justified and prevail. 2 Samuel 11.17.
and 12.9.11.
David is a godly man, he is the sweet singer of Israel, a man according to
Gods own heart, well esteemed of, well reputed: may he therefore do what he will?
may he continue in sin, and must not the light reproove him? Peter is the
notable ambassador of Jesus Christ, Gal. 2.11.14.
a great instrument and furtherer of the truth: but may he therefore claim
liberty not to be withstood to his face in his hypocrisy? If this could be
once granted, that the credit of men might cover their open breach of Gods
law, and their continuance therein, it were but vain to bring the truth to
light. Nay let the credit of the captains of the congregation be hanged
against the sun, rather then their place estimation and the good opinion
which men have received of them should defend the whoring of the people with
the daughters of Moab, Number. 28.4.
especially their spiritual whordome with the ordinances of Antichrist, and
their proud rejecting of Jesus Christ.

Touching reformed Churches, we are to walk by the line of the word, and not
after the judgments of men: When they have answered swered the reasons set
down in this treatise, and have learned aright in what sta^e the assemblies of
the land do stand, we will give some better doom unto their opinions. In the
mean time we have a sure word of the Prophets, whereunto all those are to give
ear, 2 Pet. 1.19.
who purpose to follow the light of the true day starr. If men speak not
according to this word, but wilfully run from the light thereof, to see what
cloak they may have from Churches or men to cover their nakedness, we must needs
tell them with the holy Prophet, that they do this, Isa. 8.20.
because there is not a glimse of light in them: And that they do not suffer
themselves to be tried by the light of the word, because their works are in
darkness. The case is marveilous strange, that we having the written word of God
at home, and the things accused by the same to be out of order, present before
our eyes, shall run from the word, and from common sense, so far also from
home, to ask the judgments of men, in that case which on the one side they
know not aright, and therefore cannot pronounce an equal sentence thereof, yea
when their judgments are gotten, there is no more had but the conclusions of
men against the direct warrant of the word. The hierarchy has so long time
fought with this weapon, as it is a wonderful case that those who have dulled
the edge thereof by the buckler of the word, are not ashamed to take it up
themselves. But what shift can there be so mean that Satan will not use, for the
covering of his shifting polluted merchandise? Yet is he and his utterly
besides the mark if they think that we regard the persons of men in this truth
which we have in hand. Nay, if they were Angels from heaven, accursed be they,
if they go about in the least point to seduce us from the truth and word of
Jesus Christ our Master.

In whose behalf at this instant, I do here in his presence before heaven and
earth, arraigne and convince the whole parish-assemblies of this Land, and the
members thereof, as traitors and conspiring with Antichrist against his Majesty,
and consequently as being such at this present, as from whom every member of
CHRIST is to separate himself under pain of Gods everlasting wrath.

Wherefore hearken ye o heavens, and hear thou o earth, and let posterity bear
witness (seeing this age stops her ears) that I accuse these
parish-assemblies of being guilty of a greater conspiracy against the Majesty
of Jesus Christ, then that of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram was against Moses: And
therefore also of being in danger of the Lords indignation in a more fearful
sort the^ were those who abode with Corah and his company. The case with Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram was thus.

There were three especial prerogatives belonging unto the sons of Israel,
Genesis 49.3.4. 1 Chronicles. 5.
I. the kingdom. 2. the birthright. 3. the holy office of the Priesthood.
Reuben the first borne should have been excellent in some of these, as the
Spirit of God records, had he not defiled his fathers bed, but for this his
sin he lost his preferment. Symeon being the next, lost the same in like
manner for his slaughter of the Schecemites, in such sort as he was dispersed
in Jacob and scattered in Israel, having never any proper tribe or inheritance
after their own name. Levi being a brother in mischief with him was also
scattered: yet the Lord in mercy vouchsafed him the dignity of the Priesthood,
1 Chronicles. 5.1.
as he did the Kingdom unto Judah, and the Birthright unto Joseph, who had two
tribes, and so a double portion amongst the children of his people.

Now at the coming out of Egypt, Moses (by the commandment of God I know)
conveyed both the kingdom (that is the chief power of the civil authority)
as also the priesthood, unto his own fathers house. And in regard of the
priesthood he established it for ever in the line of Aaron his brother by a
covenant of salt. And to this purpose enacted that not only the whole tribe of
Levi, even Gershom the elder brother and his sons should be under the
jurisdiction and commandment of Aaron and his sons, in the holy service of
the tabernacle, but also that none (Aaron and his sons excepted) either of
the Levites, Number. 3.10: and 4.10.
or of any other the tribes of Israel, should intermeddle with the holy office
of the priesthood under pain of death.

Hereupon certain famous men of the congregation, Corah of the house of Levi,
Dathan and Abiram of the house of Reuben the first borne, Number. 16.10. and
17.5.8.
with other two hundred and fifty captains of the assembly, even all men of
renown, charged Moses and Aaron of collusio^ and evil dealing with the Lords
people, in that they had transferred the priesthood unto their fathers house
without warrant: and so the Lord was feign to decide the controversy between
them, not only by his judgments upon the chief conspirators and such as abode
in their tents, but also by the budding of Aarons rod.

Now touching the controversy between Moses and Corah, it was not whether the
God of Israel was to be served or not, for Corah and his company granted that
as well as Moses: It was not whether foreign Idolatry should be brought into
the house of Israel, for that would Corah and his company withstand as well as
Moses: briefly, it was not concerning any fundamental point of religion (as
men now use to speak) but only touching those offices, Number. 16.10.
and those officers whereby the worship of God was to be performed: even
touching the Priests office, as Moses says.

In regard of the persons, it may seem to be something tolerable, they were all
of them members of the true visible Church before their conspiracy: all famous
men in the congregation: 1 Chon. 6.39.37.38.
And Corah in particular brought up his children in the fear of God in such
measure as they will have a famous name in the Church for evermore, Number. 26.11.
as being those who consented not unto their fathers sins, and therefore also
perished not with them, but were afterward employed in the holy offices.

Well, the case of Corah being thus tolerable in the judgment of flesh and
blood, yet was it utterly unlawful for any man, either to preach the truth, or
to hear the truth taught within their tents. And therefore much more unlawful
to preach the same, or to hear the same taught within any of the assemblies of
England this day: Because all these assemblies are not within the tents, that
is under the jurisdiction, and of the conspiracy which Corah, Dathan and
Abiram raised against Moses: but within the tents, that is, under the power,
and of the conspiracy which the members, and officers of Antichrist have
raised against Christ Jesus the son of God: And that it may be seen that I
speak the truth, I appeal to the consciences of all men in this place, whether
all the Parish-assemblies of England are not, yea and continue in subjection
unto these offices of the Antichristian kingdom, namely, unto an Archbishop, a
Lord bishop, a Chancellor, an Archdeacon, a Commissary, an Off^ciall, and an
other Priest at the least, that is either a Parson, a Vicar, or a Curate. Now
touching the conspiracy whereof these men are guilty, I do again appeal unto
the consciences of all men, whether it be not greater presumption, for Lord
Archbishops, Bishops, Chancellors, Co^missaries, Archdeacons, etc. to say unto
Christ Jesus, that he takes too much upon him, in a peaceable kingdom, to
appoint by what offices and officers he should be served, then for Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram to say, Moses and Aaron you take too much upon you.

I know it must needs be granted to be greater: for shall they be accounted
rebels that break Moses his law, the violaters whereof died without mercy under
two or three witnesses: and will it not be adjudged much more heinous thus to
rebel against the son of God? The Spirit of God says, yea: because this man,
to wit, Heb. 3.3.
Jesus Christ is worthy of more honor then Moses. And he that breaks his
Law, (especially) enters into conspiracy against him, is a far greater
traitor, then he that rises against the ordinances of Moses.

The conclusion then is evident, that the conspiracy of the Archbishops and
Bishops of this land against Christ Jesus, whereby they being foreign Officers
and strangers from the house of God, by virtue of their Offices, do yet
presume to arrogate the government of his house into their own hands, and to
take up weapons against him and his servants that would restore him into his
own possession, are greater Rebels, and guilty of a greater sin against the
Majesty of God, then were Corah, Dathan, and Abiram and their company: And
that those who continue, and have ecclesiastical authority and jurisdiction,
are guilty of an high sin, and to expect a more fearful hand of God over
them, then those who remained in the tents of Corah Dathan and Abiram.

If it be here objected that these Romish Locusts and their guard do not say
that Christ takes too much upon himself, in going about to plant what Offices
he thinks meet in his own house, they mend not themselves, for he that
hears you, hears me, says Christ Jesus, and he that despises his word,
rejects him: and again, Corah did not profess himself to rise against the
God of Israel, yet says Moses unto him, Thou and all thy company are gathered
together against the Lord, for what is Aaron that ye murmr against him? So
say we unto this Romish train, ye and your abettors are gathered together this
day against Jesus Christ, and have wrested the Scepter out of his hand: as for
us that oppose our selves against you in our Masters quarrel, what are we that
ye should thus molest and persecute us?

If any man shall plead ignorance for them, and say, that they see not what
they do in these things: we answer, that the question is not what they know,
but what they do. They have had sufficient time to learn now these 34 years
and upward, wherein they have continued and increased their rebellion, and their
practices against CHRIST JESUS and his Saints: Let them put on armor, and
pitch a field against her MAJESTY, molest and persequute her subjects, despise
her proclamations, and imprison to the death her faithfullest servants: and see
whether pleading ignorance will cover their attempts. Much less will it serve
their turn in this case: And if they are ignorant, then speak they evil of,
and persequute that which they know not, and so are in a fearful case. But
Corah and his company living in a time of smaller light, having also some more
reasons to cover their attempts (as before has, and again shall be briefly
touched) might plead ignorance better then our Prelacy and Preisthood may do.

Wherefore either it must be said that men may conspire against JESUS CHRIST
without controlment, whereas this could not be done under and against Moses,
without the danger of a fore recompense of Gods wrath, Or else it must be
granted that the conspiracy of our Prelates must be far greater then that
of Corah Dathan and Abiram was, which can in no wise be denied, both because it
aymeth at the same point, that Corahs did, namely at the outward offices of the
house of God (to speak nothing here of the will worship and false
administrations, wherein these Romish Offices are employed in the assemblies of
this Land) and also in as much as it is against Jesus Christ the Son, whereas
the gainsaying of Corah withstood but the ordinances appointed by Moses the
servant.

And therefore also it follows, that seeing the assemblies of this Land cannot
be drawn to leave the tents of these wicked men, but continue in the wilful
and obstinate defense of this their doing, it follows (I say) that they are
also guilty of a greater conspiracy, then those were that abode in the tents
of Corah.

What these parish assemblies will be able to say for themselves I know not: for
it is out of controversy true, that all of them are at the commandment and
under the jurisdiction of these Antichristian Captains. They receive no
Ministry, but what they allow, what they make, what has authority from
them: They receive no worship, and manner of serving the true God but what
these Romish Apollyons are content shall be over them. Nay, they are wholly their
subjects, and at their call and commandment, in every thing that apperteyneth
unto the outward worship of the Lord. When this gainsaying generation grants
the Parish a preaching Priest, they have a Preacher: when they deny the same,
they must be content with reading. Not to be long in a known case, what can
there be done in these assemblies, which the Prelates are not content to
tolerate and allow? Nay what power has the Parish or their Priest, to
establish any thing there, but what they derive from their Ordinary?

And as to the most Parishes in this Land, and Priests that serve in them, they
professedly mainteyn this conspiracy. Some few preaching Priests or Deacons,
and some small number of the Parish, I grant to be here and there which
pretend a desire to have this conspiracy dissolved, but these are nothing to
the general state of the Land. And these in the mean time are also themselves
the chief vpholders of this conspiracy, holding it lawful (contrary to the
express inhibition of the word) for themselves and all others to continue
within these tents, in such sort as they are become the chiefest mainteyners of
this Rebellion, and the egerest pursuers of those that leave the same. For if
any man shall accuse either them, or these famous Captains the Archbishops, and
Lordbishops, Priests, Archdeacons etc. to be an Antichristian band risen up
against Jesus Christ, and therefore such as from whose assemblies every servant
of Christ is to sever himself: these preachers, and other people presently band
themselves against him for a Schismatic, and a Brownist. And they will leave no
weapon vnhandeled, no means unassayed, either of abusing the word, or of fair
speaking, slandering reviling, etc until (if possibly by that furniture they
may)they have turned him into those tents again, the which they can prove to be
Schems, whereunto the Lord has promised to persuade Japheth to enter, and not
Corahs or Antichrists, from the which and out of the which he calls his
people by a loud voice, saying, Number. 16.26. 2 Cor. 6.16.17.
Depart now from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing that is
theirs, least you perish in all their sins. And, Come out from among them,
separate your selves, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you says
the Lord. For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? what
communion has light with darkness? what concord has Christ with Belial? Or
what part has the believer with the infidel? So that if we consider these
people, although they are nothing to the assemblies of the Land, behold a
company of conspirators as well as the rest, even those who are as much subject
unto the controlment, and no less under the jurisdiction of Lord Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacons, Chancellors, then any other of the land: and as to their
meetings, they are the same with all the rest of the ignorant sort, who are
members as well as they.

And here, we are not to regard whether men be desirous to be out of the tents
of Corah, because they had rather ioyn with Moses, or fear the Lord wrath that
is like to ensue upon that wicked habitatio^ but whether they continue there or
not. If they continue there, then may we say unto them, that they shall perish
in all their sins. They must needs touch their uncleanness, they must have
fellowship, nay stoup and yield reverence and obeisance unto the unrighteous
ordinances of Antichrist, which are laid and imposed on them in steed of the
ordinances of Jesus Christ. They appear at their Courts, pay and bring their
fees, to kindle and mainteyn that fire upon Baals altar, which otherwise would
be easily quenched. They join in prayer, hearing, sacraments, and every other
action, whereby the conspirators pollute the religion of Christ, so that they
are not separated from, they are the same with, they come not out from among
these Rebels. They confessing them selves to be light, have communion and
fellowship with these most unclean ordinances of the kingdom of darkness,
which they should withstand, gainsay, reprove, and avoid, though with the peril
of their lives. They participate, they communicate with the Ordinances of the
unbelieving Antichristian race: nay with the Ordinances of Devils, though they
confess themselves to be believers: The Ordinances of Devils (I say) for all
the inventions of the kingdom of Antichrist, all the members and officers of
that child of perdition, as Archbishops, Lord bishops, Chancellors,
Commissaries, Archdeacons, Priests, Officials, and their jurisdictions, were
invented by the mighty power of Satan, as the Apostle teaches us. They say
they are Christ's, and yet join themselves with the ordinances of Belial, are
subject unto him, and at his commandment in his said ordinances. And therefore
let them say what they will, these also, who would be otherwise accounted, join
light and darkness together, righteousness and unrighteousness, Christ and Belial,
and consequently are united in the same band of Rebellion, and conspiracy
against Christ Jesus, with these forenamed leaders. Whereupon it follows that
the whole asse^blies of the land and every member of them, do not only continue
within these Antichristian tabernacles that are pitched up against Jesus
Christ, that is, under the jurisdiction and at the commandment, direction, and
government of those Maisterful Rebels and conspirators, the Lord Archbishops,
and Bishops, Priests, Chancellors of the Land, but also are found to carry
armor against Jesus Christ and his members under the banner of these foresaid
Rebels.

Yet the question here is not so much whether a Levite or any other of the
children of Israel agreing with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram in consent and
action, might remain within their tents, as, whether any, disliking the
conspiracy, might yet abide in that rebellious camp, upon some other respect
or purpose: it is answered, no: seeing the Lord absolutely commands all to
depart. So that it would not serve a Levite to say, I may here preach the
truth: Corah and his company are brethren, they profess the true Religion:
they err in no fundamental point: the matter of their oversight is rather in
manners, then in doctrine: Though it were in doctrine, yet is it only touching
the outward offices of the house of God: Corah thinks it much that he and his
should be made perpetual servants, unto Aaron and his sonns: There are many
famous men of his judgment, even two hundred and fifty Captains of the
Congregation: The most of the people are of the same mind, and alas should
these want teaching? They have conceived such a deep impression of hatred
against Moses and Aaron, that as yet they will not be gotten to come under their
tents though they should die for it: The whole assembly of the Lords people both
one and other think much that Moses should establish both the Scepter and the
Preistood in his own fathers house: Number. 16.13.14.
Especially Dathan and Abiram the sons of Reuben the first borne cannot brook
this: All of them charge Moses very heavily of breach of promise, of seducing
the^ by fair words to come out of Egypt, that he might be made a Lord and
ruler over them: He promised them inherita^ces of fields and vineyards, and
thereby brought them out for a land that flows with milk and honey, and yet
behold they are all this while in a barren and fearful wilderness, where they
can get neither bread to eat, nor yet water to drink for themselves and their
cattle: Far be it that we should judge all these to be reprobates that are of
this mind. Many of them are known to be good souls and to carry a good heart
to the glory of God. The time was when Moses himself was not of that mind,
that he would have none to sacrifice but Aaron and his sons: Nay we would
have been glad all of us when we were in Egypt, to have had but half the
liberty and quietness to serve our God, that we may have within the tents of
Corah: we may teach the whole substance of the truth there, yea and that also
which concerns the outward Offices, so that we do it wisely and discreetly.
It is an hard matter therefore for us to leave our places here, and the good
which we may do unto Gods glory by instructing the people. For alas should
these perish for want of instructers? Or shall they be taught by none but such
as Corah would thrust over them, if we give place? How then shall the poor
people be instructed? If we shall continue a while among them, we doubt not but
in short space to draw al of the^ again to Moses and Aaron, and to restore the
true callings and functions among them. Here may a substance of a calling be
had, for we are Levites, the people are the sons of Iaakob, they are no
Idolaters. When their heat wherein they are now carried against Moses and Aaron
is somewhat better allaied, we doubt not but to accomplish this among them,
though as yet it were folly to urge any such matter: we have other points
enough wherein to teach the people.

These I say, and such like purposes would not stand a Levite in any stead to
color his abode among these conspirators, nay he might be assured that Gods
judgments would seize upon him in a moment, if he abide the coming thereof.
And yet the Priests or Preachers of our time, can allege no other reasons why
they will continue to teach under this false hierarchy, and at the
appointment, and direction thereof, then the former which I have set down. And
if they could not be of force to color the abiding within the tents of Corah,
much less shall they bear out the continuance within the tents of these
conspirators which have risen up against Christ Jesus, and will not permit him
to reign in his Ordinances. For the Proclamation is as clear against the
continuance within and under the Antichristian Dominions, as it was against the
abode within Corahs tents. And therefore except men think that they may presume
to attempt that against Jesus Christ which they durst not undertake against
Moses, their presumption is highly prodigious, who dare under the shadow of the
forenamed fig leaves exercise a Ministry (as they account it) under the
jurisdiction, and by the appointment of the forenamed Antichristian generation,
over these poor, miserable, seduced captives, which they keep within their
conspiring host.

They will say, that the Prelates ar brethren, that they hold the substance of
Religion, that they have many of their judgment that are none of the worst
men, that many of them teach the truth in the greatest and weightiest points of
religion. Why? so might be said of Corah. They will say, they may teach the
foundations and grounds of religion under them, even preach Christ Jesus
truly. How true they say this, shall be afterward touched: but so they might
within the tents of Corah. Briefly they can allege nothing for themselves this
way, but what has been already set down, in the behalf of Corahs gainsaying.

Again, touching the continuance of the miserable people of the Land within
these Antichristian assemblies, although their case be more to be pitied, then
their Pharisaicall leaders: yet can they say nothing for themselves also, but
what an Israelite of Corahs conspiracy might allege. The word they have, the
sacraments they have, corruptly they will grant: so might it be said of Corahs
te^ts. But we demand of them, whether they have the same within these
assemblies who with Archbishops and Bishops have conspired to keep out Christ
Jesus in his Ordinances? or else in those meetings where the son of God does
reign in his own order, It is a plain case, that they have these things in
the gaynsaying assemblies. For as before I have said and as all the world does
know, all the assemblies of this Land do professedly continue members of this
outrageous conspiracy against the son of God. And as for the Preachers
themselves, there are none of the^ but they bear office, within this rebellious
band, and make up the number of the co^spirators themselves. What should I say,
bear office? Nay they are but servants and vassals among these co^spiring
Rebels. And whatsoever they do in these assemblies, it is no more then what
those forenamed Abaddons will give them leave. For it is well known that there
is not a preaching Priest or Deacon in the land, but he is an underling to an
Archbishop, a Lordbishop, a Chancellor, a Commissarie, an Archdeacon, etc. and
that he can preach no otherwise, instruct his Parishioners no otherwise, take
no other order with them, then those his forenamed Masters will give him leave.
They may every one of them send for any Parish-preacher in the land, cite him,
control him, censure him, and he dares not but obey under pain of being dumb
and speechless, if they list to charge him under such a penalty. And is he not
a servant then?

Let it not be here objected, that there are some Abbey parishes, Celles,
Nunneries, Frieries etc where a Preacher may be exempted from the jurisdiction
of his Ordinary, by virtue of some old Romish privilege: for these are nothing
to the whole case of the land. And there is none of these but the Arch-prelates
know well enough how to bring them under the subjection, and at the
commandment of the meanest Commissary and Archdeacon in the Land. Whereby
their Romish privilege can stand them in no stead. And are they not servants
then? Nay all the forenamed Officers have more to do within any Parish in the
land, for censuring, suspending, excommunicating, then the Parish preacher
has: for he is an underling unto them all, yea a Churchwarden has more to do
in many things with his Parishioners, then he has. And is he not a servant
then? Nay has he not his office, his flock, and the work of his Ministry
according to the direction manner and custom of these Tents, and no otherwise
then these tents will bear the same? It cannot be denied. Does he not then bear
Office within this conspiring band, and make up the number of these Rebels? Yea
this is the only use that is made of the best teaching in the land at this
day, that it keeps the poor people within these tabernacles of the Roman
hierarchy, who otherwise (were it not for these Teachers) would utterly reject
this Antichristian yoke. And therefore a shame it is to speak of the teaching of
these times, seeing it is apparanr to be one of the greatest baits whereby the
poor deluded people of the land that have any heart unto religion, are kept
within the forenamed Rebellious host. And therefore the whole land, and all the
assemblies thereof are over justly charged of being guilty of a greater
rebellion against the Majesty of Jesus Christ, then those fearful Rebels
were, which abode within the tents of Corah.

If it be here demanded what the people should do, we say that they should
follow the counsel of the holy Ghost, who says unto them, Depart from the
Tents of these wicked men, And, Come out from among them my people, and touch
none unclean thing, and I will receiv you. And again, Go out of her my people,
that ye be not partak^rs of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues.

And here I would know what it is that keeps them here: If they say, the word
and sacraments, they are answered again, that they traffic in other
merchandise of Antichrists mere invention besides these. For they go unto
Corahs own Courts, and are at Abaddons commandment, in the things which he
himself has invented, as well as in those points wherein he turns himself
into an Angel of light, and becomes like the Minister of righteousness. And if
it be for the Word and Sacraments only, that they remain, then I trust they
will hold it unlawful for them selves, or for any other to communicate in the
merchandise which is merely whoorish and Antichristian, as resorting to the
Prelates Courts to be censured by them, comunicating with them etc. It is the
Priest only or the Deacon that administreth the word and the Sacraments. If
they continue within these tents only for the love that they have unto these
things, then I trust they will have nothing to do with the Lord Archbishop, the
Lordbishop, the Commissarie, Chancellor, Archdeacon, Official etc. and their
traffic they bring with them. Let them withdraw themselves from under their
jurisdiction, and they shall see how long they can have quietness within these
tents.

But if they think (as it is the practice of all) that they may also be at the
commandment of these forenamed Corahs, Dathans and Abirams, then have they
nothing to cover their wicked hypocrisy, but they must be enforced to confess
that they are not persuaded in their consciences, but that they may be members
of those assemblies which conspire against Christ Jesus: Whereas they durst not
presume to continue within the tents of those that assembled themselves against
Moses the servant. And so they rest in undoubted expectation of a more
fearful judgment against them, then fell upon those that would not depart
from the Tents of Corah Dathan and Abiram.

And what they speak of the word and sacraments, is before answered, in as much
as they of Corahs conspiracy might as well have stayed within their tents for
these respects, as they may within the assemblies of England. And the point is
not what they may have in these assemblies, but whether they may stay there or
not, whatsoever is there to be found? We say, they ought not to stay. They
seem not to deny it, in that they bring no reason out of the word to prove the
lawfulnes of their abode there, but only reason from that which they may have
there. Whereas first they should prove, that they may stay in a co^spiring and
pestilent asse^bly, before they tell us what it is that they may have in the
same. They are simply instructed in the truth which is according to godliness,
that have not as yet learned that the whorish synagogues are decked with many
of the Jewels that belong to the true spouse.

But touching the word and Sacraments, which they seem to possess there, I say
that within the tents of Corah, though the Levites do teach the truth and
administer circumcision, yet is not this that truth or that circumcision which
has the promise annexed unto them, and therefore not that truth or those
sacraments wherewith any of the children of God may participate as long as they
are administered in that gainsaying Assembly. Let those truths which they
teach and those sacraments which they administer be brought out of these wicked
tents, and brought before the Lords Tabernacle as he commands: and then are
they to be received, to be embraced, and accounted more precious then much fine
gold, and sweeter then the honey, or the honey comb: Otherwise the Saints of God
are not to taste of them. Not that they should reject the truth at any time, but
that they may not be deceived by an abused truth and an abused ordinance to
pollute the holy things of God, and to violate the commandments of Jesus
Christ.

The like is to be said of the truth taught, and the Sacraments administered in
the assemblies of this Land: they are abused truths, abused Sacraments, even
such truths, and such Sacraments, as whereby Satan would draw us to be of the
conspiracy which is raised up and mainteyned here against Jesus Christ. They
are such truths and such Sacraments, as are within the tents, that is, under
the jurisdiction of the kingdom of Antichrist, administered only unto such, as
will receive the marks and badge of that kingdom, and unto none other. For he
that will not confess himself even by his deeds to be a member of that
assembly wherein an Archbishop is an Officer, a Lord Bishop is an Officer, a
Chancellor is an officer, an Archdeacon is an Officer, a Co^missary is an
Officer, a Priest is an Officer, etc. he cannot receive them. And these abused
truths and Sacraments are by the unspeakable subtlety of Satan retained in
these synagogues, to the end that they may be made a bait to draw men, and a
grin to ensnare them to be subject unto Antichrist in these his Ordinances
before named.

And therefore whereas men and women do pretend that they have the word and
Sacraments here, it is but the net of delusion which they weave to catch their
own souls and to keep themselves subject unto Satan. For it is not a bare
truth, and a bare Sacrament that we are to seek after, but a truth, and a
sacrament that has the warrant of the word with it. But as the outward man
lives not by bread, but by the word and promise of God that sanctifies bread
unto his use, So does not the inward man of the soul live only by the truth
made known, or by the Sacraments administered, but much more by the word and
promise of GOD, which make these effectual when they are administered according
to the ordinances of GOD. Thieves and robbers are fed we know to their sacietie
with the bread of violence and robbery, but they have no warrant of the word
to eat any such bread. So I know that the truth of God may be taught, and the
Sacraments administered (I mean the sacraments which he appointed and none
other,) among those which are fallen away from him, which have conspired
against him. And the people of these assemblies may esteem of them, and think
themselves highly favored, that they have them, and yet in the mean time have
they no warrant that any such truths or Sacraments will be sanctified unto them,
and so no warrant to receive them.

And therefore when we speak of the word and sacraments, we must first of all
lay down the promises of God and the commandment of God, whereby we may assure
our own souls that this word and these sacraments, are sanctified unto us. Be
it then that the word and sacraments may be had in the assemblies of this land,
yet is not that the point that we call in question, but whether this word, and
these sacraments may be had here according to the ordinances of God or not:
otherwise we must not receive them, we must refuse them, not that we are at any
time to reject and refuse the holy things of God, but that we are to reject the
abuse of them, and to take heed that in receiving of them, we be not drawn to
break Gods ordinances. For when we cannot possess the word and the sacraments
without sin, we must not do evil, that is, break the Law of our God, that
good may come unto us thereof. The word is taught in the tents of Corah,
circumcision is administered there, it is not to be heard, not to be received,
and why? because they who administer the same are a company of conspirators
against the God of Israel, at the least they are in those tents whereof the Lord
has said, Come not near the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of
theirs, least ye be partakers in all their sins.

The case is the same with the assemblies of this land: the truth is taught
there, the sacraments ar administered, or rather profaned, we will in no wise
communicate with them, because these things are done within the Tents not of
Corah, but of the Officers and members of the kingdom of Antichrist, which say
that Christ Jesus takes too much upon him if he will go about to appoint by
what Offices his own house and Church should be ruled. They are under their
jurisdictions and their Offices of whom the Lord has said unto us, Come out
from among them and touch no unclean thing, for what communion has the light
of my word with the Tents of mine enemies, the purity of my Sacraments, with
those polluted caves and dens. So that from these things this Argument does
arise:

It is at the least as unlawful, if not much more for any to communicate in the
word and sacraments, or in any other action of religion, within the tents of
the Kingdom of Antichrist, as within the tents of Corah Dathan and Abiram.

But to communicate in any of the Parish-assemblies of England is to
communicate within the tents, that is, under the jurisdiction of the Kingdom
of Antichrist.

And therefore as unlawful, or rather much more to communicate in the actions of
Religion, within these assemblies then it was within the tents of Corah, Dathan
and Abiram.

What will be here called into question, I know not: if the first men think the
tents of Corah were to be approached unto, the case would be shameful, and the
ignorance not to be heard, seeing the Lord has plainly inhibited the same, as
has been set down. And if this were once granted, then has the Lord
appointed his Ordinances, and his Ministry in vain, and without cause, seeing
men may of their own heads appoint what Ministry they think meet, and
continue under the same. Neither let it be here said that the conspiracy of
Corah prevailed not, or that there were not many that agreed thereunto. For
first as touching the la^t^r point, the whole congregation were so affected
toward these factious rebels, that the next day after the Lord had exercised
his fearful judgments upon them, the whole congregation (I say) accused Moses
and Aaron that they had slain the Lords people, meaning Corah and his company,
and fourteen thousand of the people were consumed for this their murmuring,
which shows what hearts they bare unto Corah, and how likely he was to prevail
with the whole rebellious host, had not the Lord by his judgments from heaven
stayed the iniquity. His conspiracy continued not I grant, and yet a
greater, that is the conspiracy of Antichrist against Christ Jesus has
continued now for many years. And the Lord has set Corahs overthrowe for a
sign unto the rebellious children, (especially unto the Co^spirators that are
risen up against Christ Jesus,) that their ruin and fall shall be in a moment,
when they little exspect the same. It is not to be doubted but it would have
prevailed and continued (such was the working of Satan in the hearts of that
murmuring host) had not the Lord stayed it by the present stream of his
fiery indignation.

Neither is the conspiracy of Antichrist and his members to be thought more
tolerable then that of Corahs, because the Lord pleads not against the same
with his visible judgments from heaven, as he did against the other, but we
are rather to learn, that what the Lord effected under the Law by his visible
judgments, or other outward means being the rudiments of the world, as the
Apostle calls the things of this nature, the very same does the Lord
accomplish under the Gospel against the son of Perdition and his body by the
spirit of his mouth, that is, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
by his mighty word and the operation thereof. And therefore although he
overthrew and dissolved that most fearful conspiracy of Corah Dathan and
Abiram by the arm of his dreadful judgments in a moment, yet far be it
that we should think the conspiracy of the members of Antichrist against the
right heir of the house of David, to be less displeasing in the sight of God,
because in some measure he does and of a long time has with held the hand of
his outward judgments from the same, as having determined utterly to consume
and abolish that Apostaticall body, by no other special means then by the
brightness of his appearing and coming in the Ministry of his Gospel.

And therefore the Proposition abides firm and sure, that if it was unlawful
for any to communicate in the Actions of religion within the tents of Corah, it
is much more unlawful for any to do so within and under the tents of
Antichrist, the great and high enemy of Jesus Christ. For may we not have any
communion with them and their Tabernacles who say, Moses and Aaron, you take
too much upon you: and may we have fellowship with that camp who has pitched
a field against Jesus Christ? and bear both Prince and people in hand that he
takes too much upon him, in appointing who shall approach to minister in his
presence under the civil authority of a Christian Prince? Could not the
children of God have any sanctified use of the Tents of Corah: and may they
have the same of the tabernacles of Antichrist which are invented and ordained
to the overthrow of the prerogative of Jesus, who is God over all blessed for
evermore? This were nothing but to account Moses to be the Lord, that is, to be
esteemed, reverenced, and had in estimation; and to reckon Christ Jesus
execrable, that is, base, contemptible, and mean, such as whose laws and
ordinances may be violated, cast of, and trodden under foot with less peril
then Moses his might, which no man speaking by the Spirit of God can hold and
avouch.

As to the Assumption, That the Parish assemblies of England are under the
jurisdiction of the kingdom of Antichrist: For the proof we are to set down
these grounds: First that this manner of regiment by Archbishops, Lordbishops,
Chancellors, Archdeacons, Commissaries, is not any civil constitution, but an
ecclesiastical, as all men know. For their Courts are spiritual Courts, and
they spiritual Lords, and spiritual Rulers, deriving their offices in deed
from that Spirit that rules in the air. Next, being ecclesiastical, they
belong either unto the true Church of Christ, or to some malignant synagogue:
but not to the true Church of CHRIST, for we know that the LORD when he
furnished his body with all the members meet for the same, and bestowed all the
Offices thereon, wherewith it was at any time to be endued unto his second
coming, appointed no such offices therein as these Locusts are. Besides, they
are a mere superfluous and cursed addition unto the Testament of Jesus Christ,
as all men that ever read the old and new Testament do know. For there are no
such Officers, or such offices mentioned therein. And therefore they are the
Tares which Satan the enemy of Jesus Christ sowed and brought forth, even the
plants which the Lord God has not planted, and so must be and shall be rooted
out of his vineyard: Yea they are no other the^ the Locusts that came out of
the bottomless pit upon the opening thereof by that darkened star, Rev. 9.3.
unto whom the key of the same pit was committed. Thirdly, belonging unto the
malignant Church, they apperteyn either unto the heathenish Pagan religion, or
unto the assembly of Antichrist that great Traitor and enemy of Jesus Christ:
But not unto the heathen religion, for there are no such Offices, Officers, and
form of regiment to be found among them.

Wherefore they do belong unto no other body ecclesiastical or civil, but
only unto that apostaticall kingdom which arose up, and still continues under
the name of Christ Jesus, that is, the kingdom of Antichrist. We are able to
show them their original with our finger, and also all the world will bear us
witness that the Pope left them here to keep possession for him, when at the
beginning of her Majesty's reign he was thrown out with the rest of his guard,
the Cardinals, Abbots, Priors, Monks, Friars, etc. Further all societies both
ecclesiastical and civil can be perfect without these Offices, and this form
of Regiment, save only that right and well ordered society of the man of
sin and his members. For the Church of Christ may be perfect and absolute
without these Egyptian grasshoppers: the civil Magistracy may be perfect
without them: so may the heathen idolatry too: But as for the host of the
Roman Antichrist, it shall be altogether imperfect, maimed and wanting the chief
members thereof, if it want Lord Archbishops and Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons,
Chancellors, Commissaries, Officialls, to speak nothing in this place of
Preistes and Deacons, and so of Chapleines, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Canons,
Prebendes, Singing men, Queristers, Virgiers, which are conspicuous marks
whereby the beast is known, the name and number of his name made up and
accomplished.

Wherefore the conclusion is evident, that to communicate in any action of
religion within any of the Parish assemblies of this land is to communicate and
be a member within the Tents, that is, under the jurisdiction, power, and
authority of the kingdom of that Roman Antichrist the direct enemy of Jesus
Christ, and so to be in a more fearful case, and in greater danger of the
Lords wrath, then those who remained within the Tents of Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram.

Now to come to your Honors of this high Court of Parliament, I take heaven
and earth to witness against you this day, that I have here on the behalf of my
master the Lord Jesus Christ co^menced a true action against the
Parish-assemblies of this Land, even such as you cannot deny to be true. For
ye cannot deny the Assemblies of the Land to be subject unto the forenamed
officers, and form of Regiment, which being ecclesiastical, and not civil,
as I have declared, the very light of common sense and experience does show
unto you apperteine and belong not unto the Church of Christ, nor unto any
heathen Idolatry, but only unto the kingdom of Babell, that band of graven
Images and sea of Idolatry. And would you have us to continue in Babell, seeing
our God calls us out of the same by a mighty voice? telling us that he
makes no other account of any that continue within these Territory, but as of
those that are become poisoned Dragons, unclean and polluted noisome fowls,
and such as have communion and fellowship with Devils: Threatening utter ruin
unto us and our souls for evermore, if we shall any longer abide within these
wicked bands. Nay will you of this Parliament suffer this cursed Jericho to
stand any longer? will you suffer these te^ts to be pitched? this host of
Co^spirators to be maintained any longer within this Island, against Jesus
Christ and his Saints? Nay will you your selves continue any longer within
this rebellious camp, and not rather set these Midianitish Tents on fire, and
throw your selves down and these Rebellious Capteines also before the feet of
JESUS CHRIST the true Captayn of the Lords host?

For (my Lords, and you the rest of this honorable assembly,) I am so far
from doubting whether I and my brethren have done amiss in leaving these
Parishes of the Land, that I dare arrest your Honors and all others for
conspiring against the glory of the son of God, and so against your own
salvation, whosoever you be that will presume any longer to continue members of
these disordered rebellious synagogues: And therefore do here, for the discharge
of my duty toward the Lord, and you whom he has placed in authority over
me, require you to be so far from following the humor of Adoni-bezek and the
rest of his proud confederates in making war against us the poor Gibeonites
(who daring no longer to stand out against the living God, have thrown our
selves down at his feet that our souls might live) as you will also take the
same course with us. For questionless you shall find it true, Act. 3.22. Deuteronomy.
18.19. with Esa. 60.12.
that that Nation and that Person which will not hear and be obedient unto
this Prophet, and this King which the Lord has raised up to sit upon the
throne of David, and to rule the same, shall be cut of from among his people.
And touching the kingdom and the government, which his father has given unto
him, it cannot be transferred unto another people, but it will break and
destroy all the kingdoms that stand against it, Dan. 2.44.
and it shall stand for evermore.

Wherefore (my Lords) if you purpose to set up a kingdom for him, I do here in
his name charge you to be so far from enacting any thing against us in this
present Parliament, who now oppose our selves unto the forenamed Rebels, as you
will decree in his behalf at the least as much as Nebuchad-netser and Darius
being heathen Princes did establish: Dan. 6.26.
And that is, that in all the Dominions of this her Majesty's Kingdom, all men
of what estate and condition soever they be, tremble fear before the God of
Queen Elizabeth, because he is the living God which remains for ever, and his
kingdom shall not perish, his Dominion shall be everlasting; and that whosoever
shall wilfully and wittinglie speak any blasphemy, (much more, if they shall
presume to take armor against him as this gainesaying generation now does)
shall be drawn in pieces, and their houses be made a sinck. Know my Lords, that
if you shall do otherwise these heathen Kings will accuse you in the day of
the Lord: and take heed that none of your acts and statutes be found written
with the blood of the Saints. For great Babylon and her warriors, Corah and
his mainteiners, shall come to remembrance, and the Lord will reward them
according unto their deeds.

And as in the former respects I call your Honors to record with me, so also
herein I beseech you to testify the truth on my behalf, that I make an utter
separation between her Majesty's Civil Authority and the Ecclesiastical
jurisdictio^ of these Corahs, these Dathans, these Abirams. The which I set
down, because we can no sooner account the false Ministry of the Romish
Church to be Antichristian as it is, but evil disposed unco^scionable men
will be ready to selander us that we account her MAJESTY'S authority to be so
too: as though her Majesty's power were ecclesiastical and not civil, or that
this Romish band were Princes by their authority. What kings and Princes do
establish is one thing, their Authority and power whereby they do this, is
another. They may of oversight or otherwise set up the power of Satan by
mainteyning false religion, worship, ordinances etc. Yet their Power, that is,
their Civil Authority whereby, they do this, is the Ordinance of God, though
herein they highly abuse the same, and shall answer for it without their
repentance.

Her majesty, and this high Court of Parliament, has hitherto established
this Ecclesiastical regiment of the Kingdom of Antichrist, and this band of
Conspiratours against the Majesty of Jesus Christ, but this Conspiracy is one
thing, the authority whereby the same is established is another. The
Conspiracy and the Offices there of are wholly from Satan, from the Dragon, from
the beast, from the false prophet, out of whole mouths these frogs issued;
and so to be rejected. The Civil authority of her MAJESTY and the Parliament
whereby this treachery (of oversight I trust) is upheld, is the holy ordinance
of GOD, (notwithstanding it fails herein) and therefore to be embraced, to be
obeyed, and had in reverence: yet are they betimes to redress the abuse,
before the Lord break forth upon us in his wrath.

And the Ordinances of Antichrist established by the lawful civil authority,
do yet continue Antichristian and unlawful. Because false religion, and false
ordinances Retain their Nature by what power soever they be established. The
breach of Gods Law is the same by whom soever it be countenanced, enacted,
commanded. The statutes of Omry, the manner of the house of Ahab, the Damascene
Altar, are still Idolatrous monuments and constitutions, by whomsoever they be
enacted, though by Ezekiah, Josiah, or by any other the Godly Princes of Judah.
And therefore the pretense which some allege, contrary (I fear me) to the
light of their own knowledge, to cover their submission unto the forenamed
Antichristian ordinances; that Archbishops, and Bishops, Chancellors,
Commissaries etc. which her Majesty's Laws do allow, are become civil
constitutions and not ecclesiastical, is altogether vain and frivolous.

For first no part of Popery was ever imposed upon us to be received of any
the subjects of this Land, but what her Majesty's Predecessors the Kings and
Princes of this Land did by Law enact among their Subjectes.

Again, her Majesty does establish this as an ecclesiastical power, and not
as any civil. Thirdly being an Antichristian Constitution in it self, the
power of man enacting the same cannot make it to be otherwise. Breifely, Mass,
or any their Heathen Ordinances being enacted by Civil authority may by this
reason be frequented also, as being a civil thing, and not any Antichristian
ordinance. And therefore men cannot better themselves by this iugling.

This whole Antichristian band in the time of Popery, did not only withstand
Jesus Christ in the poinct of the outward offices, being the extremity of
Corahs sin, but also denied him the preferment to lodge any wise in the
hearts of any men within these Tents. Nay these Tents in those days were
nothing else but a receptacle of all the inventions which Satan could devise
for the dishonor of Jesus Christ.

In consideration whereof, her Majesty, and the state thought they had done
well that they emptied those tents of the greatest part of the fearful ab
hominations remaining in them, overthrewe some of them, as the Papacy, the
Cardinalship, Monkery, etc. and planted the most of the vessels of the house of
God, that is the greatest part of the doctrine of the truth in them: but the
Tents and the Conspiracy still remain in as direct a sort against the glory
of God as that of Corah was; Nay by all this clensing and emptying (although we
unfeighnedly praise our God for the same, and confess it to have been a great
work) they have not as yet brought them into that purity, and that soundnes
of Religion, that the Tents of Corah were in, as it will easily appear unto
any that will consider, that Corah strove with Moses but touching the Office of
the Priesthood only, whereas these men overthrowe the whole face of the Church
of Christ, persecute the Truth, and maintain publikly many horrible sins
(whereat Corah would have blushed,) as the Idoll-preisthood, non-residencie,
the descending of Christ into Hell after he gave up the ghost upon the Cross,
and had said All was finished.

But touching the Authority of the civil power and particularly of her right
excellent Majesty; I am in this place, for the stopping of all sclaunderous
mouths, who have or would report otherwise of me, enforced to set down what I
hold and believe according to the word of God.

I do therefore here acknowledge her Mejesties Sovereigntie and regal
Authority to be the Ordinance of the God of Heaven, whereunto all persons
without exception within her Realms and Dominions are to be subject and to
yield obedience in the Lord, not only for fear of punishment, but even for
conscience sake, because her forenamed authority and power, is derived from
the King of Kings, even the Lord Jesus, who has all power in heaven and earth
in his own hands.

I do also avouch that no foreign power, Prince, potentate, or state has,
or possibly can have, any authority, within the Territories of her dominions,
over any person, or in any cause, save only what by special grant he deriveth
from her, and her Royal Laws.

Her foresaid authority I acknowledge to stretch it self, not only ever all
persons, within her Dominions, but also over all causes as well ecclesiastical
as civil in such sort, as nothing is to be established among her subjects,
either in ecclesiastical or civil causes, publikl, or privately, but what
belongs unto her power to correct, order, and enact according unto the
written word of God, and the rules of common equide and justice. So that, it
does no whit infringe her royal power and authority, to deny that she has any
warrant, any power, any sword, granted her of God to establish either false
Religion, false and Antichristian ordinances, or yet any other unwarrantable,
or unjust constitution.

Yet, if of oversight she has imposed any such thing upon her subjects, and
inflicted a penalty upon them for not obeying that whereto they cannot yield
any submissio^ without the breach of Gods law, I hold it to be the duty of
private men to suller patiently the stroke of her sword, and in no wise to
withstand the power thereof, either by open force, or secret practices, but
only to betake themselves and their cause unto the Lord God, earnestly desiring
him, to pass by her oversight, and to incline her heart and hand to embrace
and mainteyue his truth, and to suppress all falsehood, violence, and
oppression.

Now if her Majesty and this high Court, require of us that we resort unto the
public assemblies of the land, and so to enter (as has been showed) into the
tents of the Antichristian band, and continue therein: I answer again, that
this is against the written word of God, and therefore that her Majesty has no
power, no authority from the Lord to require this at our hands. We are
punished for it: we answer again that the sword is given for our wealth, and
not for our hurt, that it ought not to be drawn against us for well doing: yet
we patiently, and quietly bear the stroke, we dare not resist, we dare not
rebel against the Powers; Nay, we entreat our God day and night for the
prosperity of her Majesty's crown, desiring him in mercy to pass by this
blemish of her government, and not to lay it to her charge; earnestly craving
that her eyes and the eyes of your Honors may be opened to see our innocence,
and the truth wherein we stand, admonishing both Her, and you, that although we
for our parts know our selves bound even in nature to pacify the hard dealing
of our Prince and country toward us by suffering, and bearing of their
injuries, as we would do our parents, that yet the Lord God who judges without
respect of persons, is an avenger of al such things.

In respect whereof, we dare notbut endeavor to the uttermost of our power to
pull her and you from this consuming fire of his judgments that hang over your
heads even for the maintenance of this Antichristian merchandise within this
Land, much more for pursuing us, that will not trafique and intermedle with the
said wares.

Hitherto I have showed the Parish-assemblies of the Land, to be of a most
fearful conspiracy, against Jesus Christ, and therefore to be dissolved by
your Honors, and avoided in the mean time, by all the Servants of Christ. But
I would this pre-eminence, that these foreign Romish Captains have over
them, were the only thing which makes them unclean unto the Saints of God.
Their case in the next place then is now to be considered, for the understanding
whereof I am to set down these grounds following.

1. That as the Lord has appointed his word and truth to be taught, his
Sacraments to be administered, and the holy Order appointed by himself to be
kept in his house and body; so he has ordained a Power and authority, that
is, certain offices, by virtue whereof these things are to be done.

2. Next, that Christ Jesus, being the head of his Church, has ill fulness of
power, pre-eminence and authority dwelling in himself, in such sort as his body
and spouse is to submit her self unto no power in religion save only unto that
power which is derived from him that is her head. So that, as the Church is to
receive no doctrines, no sacraments, no order, but what the Lord has anpointed
to be in his house; so also he has forbidden his said Church to receive and
be subject unto any power and authority save only unto the power which is
derived from the head thereof. For it is no less derogatory unto the Majesty of
Christ Jesus for the Church to submit her self unto the power of another head,
though conveighing the truth with it, then to receive the false doctrines and
false sacraments of some other Religion or God.

3. Thirdly, that Satan in bringing the mystery of iniquity to light, and in
advancing the son of perdition into his chair of pestilence, did not only
appoint false Sacraments, false worship, but also a false head, and a false
power, that is, false Offices, by virtue whereof, both those things were to be
done, as also the Lords true institutions and ordinances were to be violated in
the Antichristian Synagogue.

4. That those who preach the truth, administer the sacraments of baptism, and
the Lords supper, and none other, by virtue of any of the false offices
invented and retained in the kingdom of the Roman Antichrist, derive their
power whereby they do these things from Antichrist and not from Christ Jesus.
And therefore that such working by virtue of a false power is not to be received
of the church of Christ.

Now to come to the Parish-assemblies of this land, admit that ARCH BISHOPS,
LORD BISHOPS etc. bare no such rule and authority over them as now they do, and
that there were none but Preachers in them, yet we demand of these Preachers
by what authority they preach, baptize etc, that is, we demand what office
they have so to do? whether this office of theirs be an office derived from
Chirst Jesus, or a power left here by Antichrist. I say, that whatsoever they
do, they do the same by virtue of an Antichristian power, office, and calling,
and none other, That is, they do it either as they are Deacons, Priests, or as
having a privileged immunitie, license, and dispensation counterveyling a
Deaconry or a Preisthood. I add this privileged License, because some one
among ten thousand (it may be) being neither Priest nor Deacon, by virtue of a
License from his Ordinary does serve a cure. Yet (if there be any such) they
are not capable of any charge, and what they do, they do it by this power of
the beast. And here because I deal in a matter of fact, I call but day light,
and common sense to decide this whole controversy which is contained in these
two points.

1. Whether at the expelling of the Pope out of this Land, by her Majesty's
saves, the Popish offices of Priests and Deacons were expelled also out of the
Parish-assemblies, or retained? 2. Whether at the same time, or sithence, any
of the true offices of the Church of Christ, were instituted and ordained in
the Parish-assemblies of the Land?
The case is clear, that the Popish offices, of Priests and Deacons were
retained, and that the offices of Christ's kingdom were not restored. And it is
by virtue of the Popish offices of the Preisthood, and Deaconrie, that the
whole worship of God is performed, or rather polluted, and profaned in all the
Assemblies of this Land: for the proof whereof, I call not only her
Majesty, her laws, and this high Court of Parliament to witness, but also the
chiefest mainteiners of the parish-Assemblies, namely, the forwardest Preachers
of the Land, who in times past confessed (whatsoever they do now) that the
offices of Christ were not planted, and therefore labored to her Majesty, and
the Parliament to have them established in the parish assemblies.

In regard of her Majesty's laws, the case is clear, that the State then
being led by the sight of our fathers in king Edwards days, accounted the
popish Church to be the Church of Christ, though corrupt, popish offices of
Bishops, Preistes, and Deacons to be the offices of the Church of Christ, and
therefore retained them, for so we find it set down in the book of ordering
Bishops and Preistes made in King Edwardes time, and established by her
Majestes Laws, as the ground and rule whence, and according to the which all
the Ministerial offices of the parish meetings, yea of the whole Land must be
squared. The book says,

That it is evident to all men diligently reading the holy Scripture, and the
ancient authors, In the Preface.
that from the Apostles time there have been these orders of Ministers in the
Church of Christ, Bishops, Preistes, and Deacons. And therefore (says the
book) to the intent that these orders should be still continued, reverentlie
used, and esteemedin the Church of England it is requisite that no man (not
being at that present, Bishop, Priest, or Deacon) should execute any of them,
except he be tried, examined, and admitted, according to this book.

Again, no man in this Land can take a spiritual living, either Parsonage,
Vicarage, Curatship, but by virtue of this Preisthood, Deaconrie, or a Popish
license equivalent unto this Preisthood, so that if a Preacher be beneficed,
the same day that he denies his license, his Preisthood, his Deaconrie, is he
also deprived ipso facto if it please his Ordinary, and another may presently
conveigh himself into his living if it were worth millions of gold. Nay
whosoever he be that will cast of these Popish orders, he is but a mere lay or
private man, and so not capable of any office in any of the assemblies of
this land: for so her Majesty's laws, to wit, the foresaid book does conclude,
that these offices were evermore had in that reverend estimation that no man by
his own private authority might presume to execute any of them, and
consequently, that all men should be called to the order of the Preisthood,
Deaconrie, Prelacie, according as this book does allow. He that is made a
Minister in some reformed Church beyond the Seas, is not capable of the Cure of
a parish assembly in this land, except he shall receive a Deaconrie, and a
Preisthood after the order of our land, and yet he that receives orders in
Rome is correspondent, and answerable unto the pattern of our Deaconrie and
Preisthood, and so capable to buy and sell, that is, to execute any public
function.

They are known cases, that he who received his Preisthood or Deaconry in King
Henry the 8 his days, is a Priest and a Deacon under King Edward, Queen
Marie, and Queen Elisabeth, by virtue of the same orders, and he preaches (if
he can preach) being licensed thereunto, in King Henry, King Edward, Queen
Marie, and Queen Elisabeth their days, by virtue of the same Preisthood: for
the office is the same, as both the book, and every man for the most part,
does account it. He that has received but primam tonsuram, in King Henry the
VIII. or Queen Mary's days, being the first stepp of this abominable order,
may by law perform those things under her Majesty which no lay man (as they
call him) must presume to take in hand. This case being clear and apparent, if
it be now demanded, why we will not hear the truth taught by the preachers
of the land, why we will not receive the Sacraments at their hands, we answer,
that this we refuse to do, because we must not submit or consciences, our
souls and bodies, being the temples of the holy Ghost, to be wrought upon, to
be sat in, unto any power in religion, save only unto the power which is
derived from our head Jesus Christ: We answer that our head and Master having
all power dwelling in him, has this peculiar interest in us being his members,
that he only must sit in our Consciences by his ordinances. This interest of
his he will not communicate with any creature, and therefore we dare not
though we should suffer a thousand deaths, to transfer the same unto any,
save unto himself alone, and to join with the popish assemblies of the Land.
If the preachers do seek I ESVS CHRIST and his honor by their preaching, they
will begin first with a lawful calling and office, they will derive their power
from him by virtue of the offices that he ordained in his word. When they shall
do this, and walk according to the doctrine which is according unto godliness,
we will be the most willing to join with them, the most glad to hear them,
and to communicate with them, and every way to reverence them as the Ministers
of Jesus Christ. In the mean time, let them not wonder that we hold this for
undoubted truth, namely,

That whosoever he be that sits in the temple of God, that is, works upon
the consciences of men, by virtue of an Antichristian power, office, and
calling, he is an Antichristian Minister, whatsoever truth he brings with
him.

The truth which such Ministers do teach, is but the bait whereby Satan in his
mystical delusion and powerful subtilties hides the false power, by means
whereof he in his ordinances rules over those that otherwise would yield him
no subjection, none obedience. When he cannot utter his ordinances by
falsehood, he is glad to make them away by means of the truth.

And he rules in the consciences of men, not only by false doctrine, but also
by his false power and ordinances. His kingdom of darkness consists not
only in the lies, and false doctrine and worship which he has coined, but
also in the false and Antichristian ordinances which he has invented for the
ruling of his Idolatrous den. And therefore the children and Saints of God
avoid both the one, and the other. We owe him none obedience in either of them:
and far be it, even far be it, I say, that we should sin so
treacherously against our Lord and Master, and so greivouslie against our
own souls to be subject unto Satan in either of them, seeing by the most
precious blood of Christ Jesus, and by the power of his cross and resurrection
we have been set free from all spiritual bondage whatsoever.

Satan could not reign in this land, by these his forenamed ordinances, if he
brought not truth with him, and it is no marveil that he brings truth unto
us, rather then lose his kingdom. He can transform himself we know into an
Angel of light, but we must not receiv him or his mercha^dise, what glass
soever he casts over them; or in what weed soever he cloth himself.

And therefore let it not be thought wonderful, that we reject that
preaching, those Sacraments, and those Ministers, that by their preaching,
ministry, and sacraments would dravve our consciences to be subject unto the
power of Satan.

Nay rather we may vvonder with astonishment how they dare presume to
minister before Jesus Christ, in the garments, weeds, and offices of the
Locustes of the bottomless pit: how they dare press to offer before the God of
Israel, being strangers from the Tabernacle by virtue of their office. It was
a positive law under Moses, that the stranger not being of the line of Aaron,
yea, or not called to the holy office, that would intermedle with the office
of the Priest, should die the death for it. Much more if he were an Eckronitish
or an Ashdodean Priest in his office. And is not this man vvorthie of more
honor then Moses? his ordinances to be yet more reverenced then Moses his
were? Oh then what a fearful presumption is it for the Preachers of this land
(I speak nothing all this while of the Idol-readers, the Prelates, the
Co^missaries, the Chancellors, the Deanes, the Archdeacons etc) to take his
word in their mouths, his Sacraments in their hands, and to minister in his
sight being not Ashdodeans, or Eckronitish, but Antichristian Priests (which is
more horrible) by virtue of their office and calling.

The sensible presidents of Gods fearful judgments upon Corah, and the two
hundred and fifty Captains of the Congregation (being men that held and
taught (such of them as were teachers) as many points of truth, as our
preachers can hold or teach, time and time being counted together. The fretting
and consuming leprosy of K. Vzziah are written for their instruction and ours,
that they should not presume to intermedle with the holy things of God,
especially by virtue of a false and Antichristian office.

If it be here said that we have nothing to do what office they have, so they
preach the truth, I answer that this is it which Satan would have, to wit, that
his ordinances, his power, his Ministry, should be received of us without any
scruple or doubt what we do thereby. Grant him this once, and he will soon
overthrow all religion. I have showed before, that a good conscience will
begin with a lawful calling and office, especially in this holy work; and
therefore if men have not forgotten to be ashamed, let them not use this
graceless uncolourable shift any longer to justify their uneven walking. For
if their outvvard office and calling will not abide the fire of the word, they
are but wolves and usurpers whosoever they be. And if they be ashamed or think
themselves too good to derive their office, authority, and power from Jesus
Christ, the Church of Christ and every member thereof ought to be ashamed and
afraid to receive them; Nay the Church cannot receive them, without high
treason against the head thereof Christ Jesus, unto whose power alone we must
submit our selves, for we have none other head but him, and therefore will
acknowledge no other power but his to have authority to work upon our
consciences.

They know what penalty was to be executed upon him under Moses, that spoke in
the name of other Gods unto that people: how dare they then go about to thrust
us away from the Lord our God who has redeemed us from the power of the grave,
and to bring us into subjection unto the ordinances of that godless Mauzzim?
Do they not know, that, that Christ is not a true Christ but an Antichrist
whatsoever truth he teaches, whatsoever miracles he works, which cannot
prove his outward office and calling unto us out of the written word of God?
What Ministers then can they be but Antichristian, whose office and calling
cannot derive the genealogy thereof out of the same book of the written
undoubted verity?

Christ Jesus tells us that the Scriptures are they which testify of him,
that his power even to preach; and not his preaching only, is, in the very
conscience of his adversaries from heaven and not from men; He took not the
honor of his office unto him self, but he that said unto him this day have I
begotten thee, gave it him, as the Apostle teaches. John Baptist confirms
his office out of the written word, namely, that he was that voice of him that
cries in the wilderness, whereof the Prophet Isay had foretold the Church. The
holy Apostles confirm their office out of the written word. For they will not
only prove that they preach nothing but the truth, administer no sacraments
save the true sacraments only, but also will show that they derive the power
and authority to do this from him who has all power in his hand, that is from
Jesus; who did not only instruct them what truth the Church was to receive,
but also gave them a Commission to do the same from his own mouth in saying Go
ye therefore etc. Nay they durst not presume to choose any to supply the
room of Judas among them, except they had been able to bring the warrant of
the written word for their ground, that an office was void in the house of God,
and that another was to supply that room. Paul the Apostle is able to prove
his office unto us out of many places of the written word. The Spirit of God
testifies that he is an Apostle of Jesus Christ not at his own hand, but by
the will of God. What will the Preachers of our time then say for them selves,
why they should not do the like? Many of them go about to deceive them selves
and the simple people by the place of Paul, Ye are the seal of mine
Apostleship. We have called many (say they). But by virtue of what office, say
we. If they allege, we have nothing to do to examine that, truth, nay common
sense will answer them, that then they are wicked intruders; that they are
Lawless thieves; that they are false Prophets; nay that they are Anabaptists,
and that we may know them by this bitter presumptuous fruit which comes out
of their mouths. For will they presume to take the word of Jesus Christ in
their mouths, to intermedle with his Sacraments, to rule in his house; and will
they not show us how they come in, by what office they do these things? will
they under pretense of an inward power, brag of an outward office, nay exempt
themselves from the charge of of an office in the house of God, under the veil
of their outward gifts; and so break into the same, in steed of entering in at
the door? We detest their Anabaptistrie. But to answer the word abused by
them, Paul was an Apostle, and had his office thereunto, before ever he saw the
Corinthians, yea, he had his office from Jesus Christ before ever he preached.
This office of his he proves unto us by the written word, although he was in
no wise to receive the same his office from the Church. Now if the Corinthians
or any other whom he had called unto the obedience of the Gospel should by the
instigation of the false Apostles call his office into question, under the
pretense that they knew not whether he spoke true in affirming that Christ with
his own mouth appointed him thereunto, because he was not able to produce any
witnesses of this Commission given as the rest of the Apostles were; Paul
answers this, that they were an evident seal of his office; and as touching
any calling from men, he was not to receive it. They were (I say) the seal of
his Apostleship. For he was made conspicuous amongst them, by signs, by
wonders, by doing of miracles, They were by his Ministry endued with the
gifts of healing, of miracles, of prophecy, of strange tongues, and in these
things inferiors unto no Church. So that although they would not believe his
testimony of him self, and the witness which Luke in the written word gives
of him; yet these most excellent, rare, and supernatural gifts wherewith he
had furnished them, were a sufficient seal unto their consciences that he was
the great Apostle of Jesus Christ. Other witnesses of his office was he to
bring none, besides his own testimony warranted by the written word, and the
great power of the Spirit accompanying his Ministry in a powerful sort. For
a calling unto this office of his by the Church was he to receive none.

Now, are the Ministers of our Parishes Apostles? When saw they Jesus Christ
then? when spoke he with them? what miracle can they work, what strange tongues
which they studied not can they spoke? whom have they healed? whom have they
endued with these rare gifts? why take they the polluted calling of the
Preisthood, or Deaconry from men? If they be not Apostles, they must not only
show us their gifts, but also what office they have in the Church to execute
the same. Think they to refuse and cast of the calling and order of God in his
Church, by bragging of their operations? If they think themselves bound to take
an office of the Church, as their Preisthood shows they do, why will they not
have us to turn over the book of their genealogy, that we may see whether
they be of that line of Aaron, or of the house of Corah? Whereas they brag of
calling and opening the eyes of any, I would learn whereto they have called
them? to be Christians? to the Church of Christ? they will not (I hope) say
that the people were unchristianed Panims; that the Parishes were no Churches,
before they came among them. Whence then have they called the people? out of
the tents of Corah? out of the kingdom of Antichrist? why, both they and their
people continue their still. And if they say they have taught them many
truethes, which they knew not; so may the Papist-preachers say too.

And if they have furnished them with any of the gifts of the Spirit, they do
thereby but deck and adorn a strumpet in steed of the true spouse of Christ,
with the Iewel^ of the spouse. And therefore if they wrought any knowledge in
their people, let that be manifested by bringing them out of these Conspiring
Tents, and presenting them before the door of the true tabernacle of Jesus
Christ. As to themselves, if they will be the Ministers of righteousness, let them
not fly the light, but prove their office out of the written word. For are they
disciples and will they be greater then their Master? Are they servantes, and
will they be greater then their Lord; Shall we yield unto them that lawless
unwrittn prerogative, which our head and Master would not claim at our
hands; nay which we durst not yield unto him? that is, shall we receive them,
having no warrant of the scripture, no Commission from God to come unto us?
They preach, they say, and they administer the Sacraments: be it so. But we
demand of them by what power they do these things. If by a power, that is, by
virtue of an Office coming from heaven, let them show it as our Lord and
master Christ Jesus did. If by a power coming from men; or from the
bottomless pit; our Savior Christ tells us, nay even the book of Ordination
and her Majesty's Laws tell us, that they are thieves and robbers, and they
come unto us in the name and by the power of another God whom we know not and
will not acknowledge. And the Lord by his Prophet says unto us with amighty
voice, I have not sent these Prophets, and yet they ran, I have not spoken
unto them, and yet they Prophecy. They preach the truth, they say, and
administer the sacraments. Be it so; but have they taken the honor unto
themselves, or has it ben given unto them by him who only has power to say,
This day or at such a time have I given thee honor and holy office of the
Ministry in my Church?

If they can name us the time and show us the office, we will believe them, we
will embrace them; otherwise we say unto them that no man takes this honor
unto himself but he that is called of God as was Aaron, that is no man taking
it, can have it; for many would take it, steal it etc. if so they might come by
the same. This folly, this presumption, this collusion should not be heard of
in Israel.

They preach, and baptize, they say. We demand who sent them, who said Go, unto
them? If Jesus Christ, let them show their commission from him, that he has
said unto them as he did to the Apostles, Go ye therefore etc. If Antichrist by
virtue of an office in his body has said unto them, Go ye therefore, etc. they
have power in deed to preach, and to administer the Sacraments, unto such as
confess themselves to be under that head. But for our selves, we refuse him
and all his power, his members, his Officers. If Antichrist says unto any, All
power over the assemblies of this Land is committed unto me, and because many
of the people would withdraw themselves from my jurisdiction, if they had not
the truth taught unto them, Go ye therefore and preach, that by means of
your preaching, they may remain within my Tents: Shall we receive such
Preachers? God forbid. And yet such are all the preachers of this Land. Shall
Antichrist say Go, and shall we say Come, unto them? Shall they derive their
power from another head, then from Christ Jesus, and shall we be in subjecttion
unto them?

They say, that they are the Ministers of Jesus Christ: but we demand by whose
will, by whose commaudement, by whose ordinance? whether by the will of God, by
the commandment of God, by the ordinance of God; or by the will, commandment,
and ordinance of the man of sin that child of perdition? Their office which
they have, the people over whom they are, the tents where they minister, the
jurisdiction under which the submit themselves, the parties by whom, the place
where, the time when, the ordinance whereby they are made, will easily decide
this controversy, and prove unto their faces that they are limbs of that body
in regard of their office (I speak not of the men's persons as touching the
Lords election) which shall be destroyed for evermore. And here it is to be
observed, that when we speak unto these preachers of their office, they
presently run to the execution thereof, and prove themselves to have an
office, because they perform those things which apperteyne unto that office.
As if an intruding Judge or Justice being demanded by her Majesty, or her
Counsel, by what authority he sat upon the lives and deaths of malefactors,
by what authority he discharged out his warrants to call in and to restreine
ryotous and vagrant persons, should answer, that he did nothing, but what was
behoofull and needful for the state: which shows not his authority power
and office whereby he intermedleth with these things, but rather gives
evidence against himself, that he is a lawless intruder, and so in danger of
the penalty of her laws and her high displeasure. The like is the course of
these preachers.

A stranger busieth himself in the Princes Court in those things which are
needful to be done about the Princes royal person, or otherwise. The Prince
espieth him, and demands who placed him in office, how he durst presume to
come in presence, especially so near unto the chair of state without special
leave and license: The stranger answers, that he does nothing but what is
meet, lawful, and alloweable to be done, and as for his office, the Prince is
not to respect that, seeing no evil is committed, whatsoever it may be was
purposed to be done, or how dangerous soever the president would be unto the
Princes royal state and person. And shall he be tolerated that presumes after
this sort against his Prince? questionless no. Intolerable then, is their
presumption whosoever they be, who think that this manner of dealing will stand
alloweable before the Prince of Princes. Offer it now unto thy Prince (says
Malachie speaking of any unmeet service) and see whether he will accept
thereof. See whether a Prince will be content that he should be attended upon
early and late, by no other officers then the known guard of the enemy; in
the Liverie, and under the badge of the professed enemy: no, no. For although
these might for a time do some faithful service, yet might the Prince be day
and night in just fear of treachery, which at the length they would be assured
to effect. Nay there were no reason (if they would serve the Prince) but they
should also cast of the badge and liverie of his enemy, and conform themselves
according to the will and direction, and be known by the cognizance of the
Prince in whose service they should seem to be employed. We know the Prelacie,
Preisthood, and Deaconrie of old to have betrayed the glory of God. We know
that they were appointed for none other purpose then to dishonor Jesus Christ.
We have late experience how trecherously they forsook the truth, and
persecuted the same after King Edwards days (we speak nothing of the present
conspiracy wherein they stand) And should we now commit the salvation of our
souls, the truth of God, the holy vessels of the sanctuary, the watch and ward
of the holy city, unto so pernicious, faithles, and treacherous a generation,
which will be overthrowen whenever the Lord does recover his, and cannot stand
but by keeping him out of his right? If they mean to serve Jesus Christ, let
them enter into his house, and not continue in the pavilion of his enemy; let
them cast off their Antichristian cognizance and office, and derive their
office from him. In the mean time, let them learn that the office whatsoever
it be, and the execution thereof are so distinguished and severed asunder, that
the one of them cannot possibly be the other. He may have a lawful office both
in the Church and common wealth that never executed the same, as dying the same
hour that he receives it, or otherwise. The Apostles had their office in the
Mount, and so were true Officers by virtue thereof before ever they executed
their office, in preaching, baptising, etc. And if preaching and the
administration of the sacraments be the office of the Preachers of this Land, I
marvel what they will have the execution of their office to be. If preaching
be their office, what Office have they when they preach not? What office have
the dumb Ministers that cannot preach? The point is so gross and savoureth of
such gross ignorance, as it is wonderful that those who are ready to object
their want of learning unto their adversaries, and to claim interest in so
large a portion thereof unto themselves, are not ashamed of bewraying their
weakness in this sort. For if preaching be their office, why are they Deacons,
why are they Priests, why have they licenses to preach? Why preach they not,
when their Preisthood, Deaconrie, and Licenses are gone? If preaching be their
Office, what call they the execution thereof, as I have said? It will serve them
in no stead to deny themselves to have the Popish Office of the Priesthood or
Deaconrie, in as much as they profess more truths then will be professedly
tolerated in Popery. Because this confirms not their office, but the
execution thereof to be diverse from that of the Popish preisthood. The office of
Bishops, Priests, Deacons as has been said, were not changed under her
Majesty, because they were thought to be the offices of the Church of Christ.
The true offices were not restored for the same cause. And therefore common
experience will convince the vain sophistry of men in going about to prove
those offices to be diverse, which neither were altered, nor yet once thought
to need any change or alteration. Nay, experience will not only teach us that
our Priests have the same office with the popish sacrificers, but also show
that they have many other things belonging vnt^ them, which apperteyn unto
none, save unto the

Thus much of the Copy I had, more of it I knew not where to have; whether it
was finished or not, before his death, I know not; for he was apprehended,
adjudged, and executed, for witnessing of the truth of Christ: (howsoever any
other thing was pretended against him:) and (as I have heard) while he was
about writing of this treatise.


