THE READY WAY TO GOOD WORKS, OR, A Treatise of CHARITY, wherein, besides many
other things, is showed how we may be always ready and prepared both in
affection and action to give cheerfully to the poor and to pious uses never
heretofore published.

BY RICHARD BERNARD, Rector of the Parish of Barcombe in Sommerset-shire.

PROVE. 28. 27. He that gives to the Poor shall not lack, but he that
hides his eyes, shall have many a curse. Si non vacat omnes paginas
scripturarum evolvere, tene Charitatem and in ea invenies omnem scientiam Aug.
de Temp. Sermon. 39. LONDON, Printed by Felyx Kyngston, and are to be sold by
Edward Blackmore, at the sign of the Angel in Paul's Churchyard. 1635.

TO THE WORTHILY HONORED SIR JOHN WRAY, Knight Baronet, and to his virtuous
LADY, all true happiness here and in Heaven.
Noble Sir,
LEt none marvel, or think it strange, that I have made my worthy choice of
you to Patrenize this Tractate of Charity. For who ever tasted more deeply,
than my self; of the Charitable liberality, and singular bounty of that right
Honorable Lady, the Lady Francis, Countess of Warwick Dowager lately
deceafed, who first sent me unto, and planted me in the Universitie. How
bountiful likewise was the hand of that Noble Lady Isabell, the Lady Darcy, to
many, and to me in particular, while my abode was in those parts, with my
loving Parishioners at Workesop. I cannot but commemorate so transcendent
goodness of these your Right honorable Ants to you, so Nobly minded friends
toward me, imitating therein your worthy Father, and your blessed Mother,
Sister to that my honorable good Lord, The right Reverend Father in God, James
the Lord Bishop of Winchester, who when he was Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells,
sent for me into these parts, where now I dwell, not by solicitation of
friends, but only out of his former rememberance of me in Cambridge, where he
was then to me a liberal and memorable Benefactor. Give me leave thus to make
mention of these honorable Personages, and to prefixe theirs and your names,
and the memory of you all before this (it may be) my last work, that so I
may leave behind me, when I am gone to my long home, a deserved and true
testimony of my unfaigned thankfulness, and my very high esteem (which was
and is due from me) of and unto those Noble Families of the Mountagues, and
Wrayes, of both which you are so happily descended. I shall not need to
commend the Subject matter of this Treatise to you: The very name of Charity
is Lodestone like, the grace lovely, and the fruit most delectable: its
honorable among men, and the reward of it in Heaven among the Saints
unspeakeable.

Accept it (Sir) as now its presented unto you, I beseech you, and let your
charitable practice both grace it, and therein comfort me, as it will your
self abundantly, so shall I hold my labor fully recompensed, and will ever
acknowledge my self yours (worthy Sir) in the Bond of all serviceabe duties
to be commanded

RICH. BERNARD.
Barcombe, Oct. 18. 1634. in Sommersetshire,
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, GEORGE STROUD Esquire, and WILLIAM his brother, the
reward of well doing.
Worthy brethren,
GIve me leave to speak unto you in this title and appellation. All that know
you, know that I speak the Truth, and that the hand of Gods Divine Providence
has been very open unto you, and crowned you with the abundance of his
blessings. In steed of an Epistle to the Reader: I am bold to entreat you in
special to be the Readers. I did perceive by that late conference that I had
with you, that you love not to have your mercies magnified and proclaimed
before others, much less before your own selves: you would not have the left
hand know, what the right hand does, nor any Trumpet to be blown at the
distribution of your Alms. You do well to follow the good advice and Precept
of the Son of God. But your work of Piety, in providing for men's souls;
and that other of Charity, in relieving the bodies of the truly indigent and
penurious together with the education and instruction of poor men's Children,
(all which you have done in the place of your Nativitie, knowing right well
that Charity ought to begin at home.) I say, these real practices, and
visible expressions of your Christianity, are so obvious to the eye and view
of this your Native Country, that they can no more be hid, than the Sun at
Noonday. I hope this my labor and discourse of Almes-giving will not any way
cool the fervor of your Charitable affections; but rather animate and inflame
you to the practice of more good deeds, and good duties, and to a further
proficiencie in the School of grace. There are many strong and demonstrative
arguments, treasured up in this Treatise, which if soberly, and seriously
considered, may serve as so many keen spurs, and sharpened pricks to
quicken and provoke you, to love, and to good works: I have found it with many
happily successful, especially in that my Counsel of laying aside weakly
every Lords Day: for the performance of which duty, I did principally set my
hand to this work. It is the readiest way that I find prescribed by the
Wisdom of the Holy Ghost to be largely liberal, and chearefully Charitable:
my old eyes have been well helped by the Transcriber, one now residing with
me, unto whose hopefulnesse, I wish answerable happiness. I well know, that
truth has native beauty and brightness of her self, and needs not any
adventitious and borrowed adornations to tender her worth to such as love her,
but because comely attire will not be unbeseeming a body of it self
beautiful: therefore though it fit not to let this admired Grace of Charity
to come forth unclothed, bare and naked But with some decent and comely
ornament befitting her Glory. If you now (Gentlemen) will be pleased kindly
to accept it, I shall hold my self beholden to you therein; but you, in
performance of the duty, much more unto God, the fountain of all our good; To
whose blessing I commend you, and all yours, and this my work to your
charitable reading, and charitable practice.

Barcomb. Oct. 20. Your worships to be commanded, RICH. BERNARD

A TABLE OF THE principal heads, and contents of this ensuing Treatise.
CHAP. 1. THe introduction to the ensuing discourse, and of the duty of
ministers in this work of charity. page 1. CHAP. 2. Who they be that are to
show mercy: and here first of the rich men page 14. CHAP. 3. Those that live in
a mean estate are to give to the poor. page 31. CHAP. 4. Such as labor for
their living, and maintain themselves and their families by the sweat of their
brows, are not exempted from Almes-giving. page 40. CHAP. 5. Widows are to
do good works. page 51. CHAP. 6. Wives, if rightly qualified are bound to be
charitable. page 60. CHAP. 7. The more religious are to be more charitable.
page 86. CHAP. 8. What is to be learned of them, who will enter into the trade
of Almes-giving, and how they are to be qualified. 93. CHAP. 9. Quickening
motives to stir up the hard-hearted, and slack-handed Christians to
charitable practices. page 118. CHAP. 10. How to be prepared in affection to
do good works. page, 190. CHAP. 11. How to be always ready and prepared in
action to do works of mercy. page 204. ibid. When to lay aside. page 221.
ibid. How to lay aside. 226. ibid. Certain objections cleared and resolved.
page 227. 228. 229. 230.
CHAP. 12. The matter of our bounty, of what we must give. page 231. CHAP. 13.
The true manner of almes-giving, with its necessary adjuncts, and requisite
conditions. page 239 CHAP. 14. The season and time of almesgiving, when we are
to give. page 256. CHAP. 15. The quantity of our alms. page 266. CHAP. 16. The
right ends of giving, and how true-hearted Nathanaels differ in their charity
from rotten-hearted worldlings. p. 274. CHAP. 17. Men must not only learn to
do good works, but to mainetaine good works for necessary uses. page 286.
CHAP. 18. The various kinds of good works, and wherein particularly they
consist, and here a word or two touching works of morality, and of works of
piety, or spiritual almesgiving at large. page 300. CHAP. 19. Of corporal
almes-giving, and works of mercy which tend to the relief of the body, and
outward estate. page 349. CHAP. 20. The right object of charity, and to whom
mercy is to be showed. page 388. CHAP. 21. What order is to be observed in our
almes-giving. page 396. CHAP. 22. To whom we ought not to give. page 411. CHAP.
23 Of the unmerciful who they be, and of the miseries of the merciless. page
422. CHAP. 24. All such objections as have been, or may be made by merciless
and uncharitable wretches, are fully cleared and resolved. page 434.
THE READY WAY TO GOOD WORKS.
CHAP. I. Of the introduction to the ensuing discourse, and of the duty of
Ministers in the act of Charity.
AS it greatly concerns all Gods trusty Ambassadors and faithful Ministers
to divide the Word of Truth aright, to provoke and stir up their hearers to
the conscionable practice of every holy duty, which shall be commended or
commanded unto them from the sacred writings either of Prophets or Apostles; So
it very much behooves them with much zealous earnestnes, and sanctified
eloquence to press upon their consciences the duties of Charity, and to
train them up in almes-giving and good Works, those much neglected and
unbeaten paths of Christianity. Psalm. 37. 21, 26. and 41. 1, 2. and 112. 5, 9.
David that royal and sweet^ singing Prophet frequently delivered and repeated
the doctrine and duties of Charity: So did Prove. 22. 9. and 19. 17. and 28. 27.
Solomon his wise Son: So did the Prophet Esai. 32. 7.
Esaias chapter 58. from verse 6. to verse 12. John Baptist exhorts seriously
hereunto. Luke 3. 11. Luke 11. 42. and 12. 33 Matthew. 19. 25. and 5. 42 1 John
3. 17. Jam. 2. 13. Gal. 2. 10. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 8. 7. and 9. 5. Heb. 13.
16 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18.
Our blessed Savior often commands and charge his Disciple to give alms,
to be liberal minded, and merciful to the poor All the Apostles likewise did
harp upon the same string, and with their united and concurrent exhortations
zealouslie endeavored to break in pieces the flintie hearts of men, and to
thaw their frozen and congealed bowels into streams of pity and compassion.
Saint Paul was very frequent in this subject, and with much vehemency of
spirit, he often presses the practice of Charity in most of his Epistles,
putting the same Auditors in mind again and again of the same duty, as
being a lesson never to be unlearned and forgotten, but worthy to be imprinted
with a pen of Iron, or the point of a Diamond in the everlasting tables of
their hearts: He charge Timothy also to urge this so commendable and
necessary a doctrine upon his Hearers, that as they did abound in temporal
blessings, and worldly wealth, they might also be rich in good works. In this
point we have the practice, consent, and unanimous approbation of learned
Fathers. Saint Austin, Jerome, Prosper, and Saint Chrysostom, who in their
famous books and renowned writings have zealously endeavored with their most
sanctified and heavenly eloquence, to persuade and incite Christians to the
conscionable and careful practice of Works of Mercy, Pity, and Compassion.

Now we that are Dispensers of the Mysteries of the Gospel must go before
others, not in precept only, but also in example; we must confirm by
practice what in Doctrine we teach: therefore we that are Preachers of
Charity must be practizers thereof our selves: the latter is most effectual
of the two to win men's affections. Good Works have as loud a voice as good
words. And Ille praedicat solum viva voce, qui praed^cat and vita and voce.
he preaches with a lively voice, who preaches both with life and voice. That
is no true, but a painted star which gives no light, and that is no real,
but a counterfeit fire that gives a fair color, but affords no heat: So he
may be accounted only the empty shadow and mere picture of a Minister (for
he merits nothing less than the appellation of an Ambassador, of an Angel,
of a Star) who does not enlighten others in the ways of well-doing, by the
beams of his good works, and by the light of his own charitable practices,
and expressions of liberality to inflame them with the same
tender-heartednesse, and bowels of Compassion. Though the Sun and Moon those
more resplendent and admirable Creatures, by reason of their exceeding
brightness bear away the glory the one of the day, the other of the night,
yet there is never a little star in the firmament, but does in some measure
and proportion contribute to enlighten the Heavens: So likewise ought it to be
among the sublunarie Stars, the Ministers and Ambassadors of Christ; Though
some are more eminent in grace and place than other some, and they may, nay
they ought to be more illustrious and resplendent in good works, yet there is
some light and influence required and expected from us all. We must chiefly
remember to reach forth our helping hands to the poor, and to communicate to
their necessities according to our several abilities, and their present wants
and exigencies. We are placed in the Church militant as the upper wheels in a
Jacke, if we stand still, and do nothing, what progress or motion can be
expected from the people in any good duties. It were a wise course, if we would
imitate our Savior Christ, and make him our pattern in this, and all the
other actions and passages of our life: As he taught others to be charitable,
so he led them the way by his own example, he kept a Bag out of which he was
wont to distribute something to the poor, Ioh. 13. 29. albeit he himself in
respect of his temporal and worldly state and condition was deeply poor and
penurious, he being not so much as owner of a poor Cottage, as man, who as
Matt. 8. 20.
God was the great Landlord of the whole world, nay if we peruse the Gospel
of Saint Luke well, we shall find that he sometimes lived of the Charity and
benevolence of holy and religious women, Luke 8. 3. If we descend from the
Master to the Scholars, we shall find Barnabas an Apostolical man wonderfully
addicted to works of mercy, Act. 4. 37. and Saint Paul propounding unto
Timothy his own example, life, and conversation, his gifts and spiritual
indowments, thereby to stir him up to the like virtues, and to encourage him
in Well-doing, among the Catalogue of his graces, enumerates and reckons up his
Charity, as a sweet flower in the Garland of his Goodness, 2 Timothy 3. 10. nay
else where he is bold to affirm, that with his own hands he ministered unto
his own necessities, and to those that were with him, Act. 20. 34. Now it
remains that we regulate and fashion our lives by the examples of these
Saints, let us do and teach as Christ did, preach and practice as the Apostles
did, for if we do confirm and strengthen our good words by good works, and
add good doings to good sayings, we shall be able to stop the barking mouths
of all gainsayers, prevent the fleshly reasonings of carnal men, utterly take
away all those excuses, pretexts, and subterfuges, whereby the crafty
worldlings are wont to privilege themselves from the practice of this duty.
And hereby we may be emboldned to press the exercise of this Grace the more
boldly, and to commend our selves the more freely to the Consciences of our
Auditory, when they know we are not like sounding brass or tinckling Cimbals,
clouds without water, stars without light, or like empty vessels which sound
loudest, but that we have open hands, as well as open mouths, and that we
adorn our high Calling and Profession with a suitable Conversation.

Having thus made way to our words by our own works, we may cherish and
entertain the greater hope, that we shall prevail with our hearers, who in
general cannot but much applaud and highly extol almesdeeds, and works of
mercy: There are none of the sons or daughters of Adam of so depraved
natures and inhumane Constitutions, but will put their seal of verbal
approbation to any charitable action, and willingly confess, ore tenus, that
is a gracious practice, and well-pleasing to God and man, to supply the defects
of the needy, to refresh the bowels of the hungry, to clothe the backs of the
naked, and to commiserate the several necessities of all distressed and
helpelesse Christians: therefore such Ministers as have charitable hearts, and
withal charitable hands (for they be the men who get great advantage above
others in the prosecution of this point) let them address themselves, with
much zeal and contention of Spirit, to ply their Auditory, with extraordinary
importunity, and upon their verbal approbation, to exhort and stir them up
with strong Reasons, and demonstrative arguments to charitable works, to drive
them out of the strong holds of their withholding and strait handednesse into
real actions, and public and private expressions of their love, and
tender-heartednesse, toward their comfortless and needy brethren.

It Is well we have their general allowance and consent, for thereupon may we
proceed to a more particular application, and urge the present execution, and
personal performance of this duty, which is generally neglected of most sorts
of men, even now in this clear and glorious Sunshine of the Gospel. Who
would imagine that these warm and redoubled beams of the word should not be
able to thaw and resolve the icie congealed, and frozen hearts of covetous
Earth-wormes, and carnal worldlings into melting affections of love, and
compassion; but that we know, that clay will wax more obdurate, and the
harder in the brightest sunneshine, and that the Adamants, which naturally all
men bear about in their bosoms are not easily turned into flesh and bowels
of mercy.

It is able to extract even tears of blood from a sympathizing soul to see
how estranged men's hearts are from all piety and pity, how opposite they are
to goodness, how careless and regardlesse of the miseries of others; and yet
they falsely conceive, and unreasonably presume that Heaven gates shall
preparedly be set open, that infinite treasures of mercy shall be provided for
them, that God will accept and admit them to his kingdom, though they lived
never so brutishly like Canniballs here on earth, extorting from one,
persecuting another, slandering, reviling, and injuring others, eating up Gods
people as it were bread. This is a most cunning device, and horrible fallacy of
Satan whereby he infatuates (...) prisoners, which are fast tied (...) bound
with their own goll^^ fetters, and labors, to perwade them that good wishes
(...) wouldings without actual ^^formances, that benevolence without
beneficence will serve be turn to excuse them before God, and to qualify and
prepare him for the Kingdom of Heaven. Alas, how grossly do men bless
themselves in their cursed and crooked courses, flatter and d^^ude their poor
souls in their evil ways: all those fair hopes which they entertain
concerning their Spiritual happiness and eternal welfare hereafter are but
mere dreams, vain fancies, groundless conjectures and presumptuous, for
that dreadful Doom and bitter sentence of eternal confusion which Saint
James delivers is their Jam. 2. 15.
portion, and shall light upon their heads one day: He shall have Judgment
without mercy who shows no mercy: as it may appear by the parable of Dives
and Lazarus, and is further confirmed by those condemnatorie and irrevocable
words of our Savior Christ: Mat. 25. 41, 42, 43.
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, for your hard-heartednesse, and
deficiencie in the duties of Charity. To the meditation of which Doom I
commend all uncharitable and merciless persons.

CHAP. II. Of such as are to show mercy; and here first of the rich men.
MOst men now a days frame and fancy a Religion to their own liking,
pleasing to the flesh, and suitable to their own ends. They make God all of
Mercy, as if he had no Justice to revenge, and root out all rebels, and the
way to Heaven far brother and easier than God has made it, falsely and
groundlessely thinking with themselves, if they walk on a constant foot pace,
in a luke warm profession and unzealous outward form of Christianity, and
keep themselves free from those grosser and most notorious abominations, which
are wont to rage and reign abroad in the world, that then their case is good
enough for Heaven, though they were never acquainted with the true power of
Godliness, never trained up in the duties and practices of Charity, never
instructed in the mysteries of Salvation or a conscionable course of Holiness
and Sanctity in their lives and conversations. Such Pharisees as these will
quickly be discovered and unmasked, if it be their happiness (they would
count it a Torment) to live under a conscionable Ministry, which will chalk
out unto them a more narrow, and strait path to walk in, and let them know
that they must pass through many difficulties, indignities, obloquies, and
oppositions, that they must be at great cost and charges before they can enter
into life and immortality. Now when they shall hear of hating of father and
mother, of pulling out of right eyes, of cutting off right hands for Christ's
sake, when they perceive that that they must be at great cost and expenses for
Religion, that they must consecrate some portion of their beloved Mammon to
good uses, sell their livings (if need be) and give to the poor, then they
begin to shrink back, to distaste those (in their apprehension) unnecessary
courses, and willingly they would wind themselves out, though not from an
empty external cold and ordinary profession, yet from all cost and charges
for Religion. Thus they would go a nearer and easier way to Heaven than other
men, and at a cheaper rate. The Prophet David was not of this mind, he
disdained to serve God at another man's cost and 2 Samuel 24 24.
To offer up burnt offerings unto the Lord his God of that which cost him
nothing: and indeed that man who with an illuminated eye does Spiritually
discern the goodness of Gods ways, the Beauty of Christ's Face, and the
riches of his Kingdom, and from the bottom of his feeling and believing heart
does earnestly desire to taste of his goodness, to partake of his Image, and
to be clothed with his righteousness and holiness, without which no man
shall ever see the Lord; he will not think the money in his purse, the jewels
in his closset, the parents of his body, the children of his flesh, the blood
in his veins, the heart in his breast, so dear unto him, but that he will
part with all, (if need so require) and Christ so command him. Now he that
will give his life, his wife, his children, and all, or any thing that he has
for Christ's sake, will with much alacrity and readidinesse of mind condescend
to feed Christ's hungry members with his superfluous crum's, and to allot out
some portion of his wealth, and worldly substance for the poor, and to
charitable uses.

That men must be charitable and communicate to others in their distresses and
calamities, is a truth as undeniable and evident, as any contained in the book
of God: Luke 11. 41
Give alms (says Christ) of such things as you have. 1 Cor. 16 2.
Let every one (says the Apostle) lay aside as God shall prosper him; The
precept is universal, there is no immunitie ^r evasion for any: Saint John
makes love and charity toward our brethren the best and clearest evidence of
Gods love unto us, and ours unto him: 1 John 3. 17. 1 John 8. 20
Who so has this worlds goods, and sees his brother has need, and shuts
up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?
Whosoever has a power and ability, upon him there is laid a heavy charge and
necessity of giving; Zech. 7. 9
Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts saying, execute true Judgment and show mercy
and compassion every one to his brother.

Now for the distinct understanding and clearer explication of this point,
observe that all sorts of persons in respect of their outward and worldly state
may be reduced into these five ranks. There are three degrees of rich men.
First, Rich in superfluity. Secondly, Rich in competencie. Thirdly, Rich in
mediocritie: living in a golden mean betwee^ plenty and penury. The poor^
likewise are of two sorts. First Poor in necessity. Secondly Poor in
extremity. Those that are extremely poor and needy, and are sunk down to
the lowest degree of misery (as a distressed and wretched Lazarus) are only
exempted from releeving others, except it be in such an extraordinary case as
that of the widow of Sarepts, who was commanded 1 King. 17 9. 15.
by the Lord to releeve and succor the Prophet Eliah, albeit she had but a
very little provision for herself, and her son, and could not subsist many
days longer. To these may be added such as have money and means, and wealth
enough, but little or no wit, discretion and understanding to manage their
estates, or rationally to distribute to others necessities, as the childish,
foolish frantic, and the like. All ^he other four sorts, come with^n the
compass of Gods Commandment, and are bound to show mercy.

Such as live in superfluity: ^hese in the Scriptures are called 2 King. 15 20.
mighty men of wealth, of great estate, Eccles. 1. 16. They are said to
possess Psalm. 49. 6. and 52. 7.
multitude of riches, abundance of wealth, great Pro. 16. 8.
revenues: Of this rank and station were those rich men, which the Evangelist
makes mention of, whom Christ saw Luke 21. 1. 4.
casting their gifts into the Treasury.

Such as live in a full competencie: Genesis 33. 9
Esau said to his brother) a sufficiency of all desirable temporal
blessings, though not such an infinite and overflowing superabundance as the
other: To this rank may those welthy men be referred, who in the Luke 14. 8.
Gospe^ are called rich neighbors. Bo^ these sorts of rich men are deeply
obliged to be liberal minde^ and open-handed to the poor^

1. These have a positive command from the mouth of ou^ blessed Savior so to
do, Luk 12. 33. who himself for ou^ sakes was pleased to bow the Heavens, and
come down from his glorious Palace upon this miserable earth, to descend so
low as to the unglorifying and exinanition of himself, to confer and bestow
all the excellencies, felicities, privileges, and prerogatives of his Kingdom
upon miserable wretches, and desperate fugitives, who had joined in combination
with his deadly enemies to rebel and fight against him. Now can any rich man
be so monstrously ungrateful and barbarously merciless as to kick at, and
sling off from this duty, enjoined by so Gracious and Merciful a Savior, or
to grumble to communicate some portion of their superfluous substance (which
too many can well spare and spend upon Hounds and Hawks, and Horses, and many
other sensual pleasures and delights) to Christ's needy members and distressed
servants.

2. The Apostle imposes a strict and severe charge upon them, that they ought
to do good, To be rich in good works, to be ready to distribute, willing to
communicate: 1 Timothy 6. 18.

3. Let them consider and remember, that God who commanded them to Deuteronomy. 15. 7.
Open their hands wide to the poor, to lend him sufficient for his need, in
that which he wants, and not to linger, procrastinate, and defer their
liberality over till to Prove. 3. 27, ^8.
morrow, is their great benefactor, that only heaps and Cumulates upon them
all those blessings which they plentifully 1 Timothy 6. 17. Deuteronomy. 8. 18. Genesis 31.
16
enjoy, that they are but stewards in his stead to disburse, impart and lay
them out according to the wants and necessities of his poor people. For says
a S. Leo. Ser 5. de collectis.
Father Has terrenas and corporeas facultates, Deus non magis possidendas quam
dispensandas commisit, and most certainly he will one day summon them to his
dreadful Tribunal, and require them to give a Luke 16.
strict and exact account of their stewardship.

4. Let them be pleased to take this one thing into their remembrance, and
serious consideration that that which they possess and glory in as in their
own, is called by the Holy Ghost Luke 16. 12
another man's. The poor have a kind of interest in the rich man's wealth, Non
jus proprietatis sed charitatis, he has a share in them, though he may not
be his own carver. Mark what evidence Solomon brings to clear this truth:
Withold not good from the owners thereof, or as some translations render it,
from those to whom it is due, Proverbs, 3. 27. and here you must by Owner
understand the poor, for he speaks not here of restitution, or distributive
Justice, but of giving alms, and refreshment unto the poor, verse 28. Saint
In Psalm. 147.
Austin has a pregnant saying to this purpose. Divitis superflua pauperisunt
necessaria; aliena retinet, qui ista tenet: Those things which are superfluous
to the rich are necessary for the poor, and he that withholds them keeps
that which is none of his own. Alms which in the Greek is (...) and
according to that Etymoligie signifies pity, in the Hebrew and Syriack
tongue is called righteousness, as if it were by right due to the poor.

5. Rich men in that Petition: Give us this day our daily bread, pray for the
poor as well as for themselves, and therefore when God crowns them with a
plentiful Cornu-copiae of earthly favors, if they be not ready and forward
to supply the wants of Christ's penurious and hungry members, they do but
mock God in so praying, and so provoke him to just wrath and indignation
against them.

6. They must remember that riches and worldly wealth are unstable, mutable,
and very 1 Timothy 6. 17. 18.
uncertain, that though they have an existence, yet they are in substance
compared by Prove. 23. 5.
Solomon to a Non Entity, to a thing which is not, that they have Eagles Et 27.
24.
wings, and when men have most need of them, they may fly away, and prove but
fugitive servants. They are of no solidity and duration, like a Meteor they may
quickly be extinguished, or like a heap of dust, they may soon be
dissipated, or like brittle earth they may moulder and crumble away by little
and by little into nothing. Riches may either be taken away from the Owners as
Jobs were, or the Owners from their riches as the rich Mat. 12. 20. 21.
fool in the Gospel, who had laid up treasures for himself and was not rich
toward God.

7. As graceless poor men are double poor, distressed in body, and
distressed in soul, and therefore of all men that breath on Gods Earth, most
forlorn and miserable; So merciful gracious and liberal rich men, are double
rich, rich in wealth, and rich in good 1 Timothy 6. 18.
works, they lay up treasures in earth, and Matthew. 6. 20.
treasures in Heaven also, so that they may truly be accounted the most
blessed and happy men that ever the Sun saw.

8. And lastly, to kindle in men's breasts melting affections of love and
pity, and to excite and moove the wealthy of the world to mercifulness and
good works, let them reflect and cast back their eyes upon the lively
examples of rich and liberal Saints, as Job, Cornelius and others who lived in
former ages, and were recorded by the Holy Ghost for their instruction and
admonition, or let them tread in the steps or imitate the practices of the
Christian Emperor Tiberius the second, who was most bountiful and beneficent
to the poor, confidently affirming, that the treasure could not be exhausted,
while there were poor to be releeved, and captives to be redeemed, and indeed
God by rare accidents (as the History reports) did beyond all credit and
imagination supply him with treasures unexpected. The Heathen Emperor Titus
Iespasian might make many Christians to blush, and to stand amazed at his
magnificence and liberality; He was (as the Recordans super coenam quod nihil
cuiquam toto die praestitisset, memorabilem illam multoque laudatam vocem
edidit: Amicidiens perdidi. Suet. lib. 8. de Tit. vespas.
Historian truly describes him) by nature benevolous, full of clemency and much
addicted to works of Mercy, and upon a time remembering that he had not given
any thing that day to the poor, brake forth into these memorable words: Amici,
diem perdidi, this day I have utterly lost. If these be too far fetched and
borrowed, let examples in our own nation and kingdom, of which we have had
as great a plenty, as any little corner or angle of the World ever brought
forth; I say, let our Native examples which are obvious to our eyes, provoke
and animate others, who abound in the same wealth to the practice of the same
duty. Our age has not been so sterill and barren, but that it has yielded
many liberal Corneliusses, whose names are still fresh in our memories, and
shall be immortalized for their public acts of Bounty and beneficence. Many
are fallen asleep who have commended their same unto posterity by their
liberality, many as yet are alive amongst us, who are so many living
Wellsprings, and blessed Fountains of pity and compassion, from whence
abundance of comfort, and refreshment is daily derived and conveyed unto the
hungry, thirsty, and languishing members of Christ. Of these examples in
their proper place in this following Treatise.

CHAP. III. Such as live in a mean estate are to give to the Poor.
THE third rank of men are such as live in a mediocritie, neither eminently
rich, nor miserably poor, having a sufficiency whereby to subsist, and to
support themselves in regard of necessity of life, but sometimes in respect of
the necessity and exigence of their state, stand in need of some foreign
aid and borrowed assistance and supportation from the forenamed more able and
wealthy persons, who to keep themselves out of the claws and paper-ginnes of
the usurious and Eagle-fisted Worldlings, are bound out of Charity to lend
them somewhat to uphold them in their honest courses and calling. To this rank
may be reduced all those who have some small Tenement, Cottage and a little
Stock, or an honest Trade to live by: These as well as the former are to be
ready and willing to help and assist those that are poorer than themselves,
their neighbors of an inferior and more dejected condition, whether they be
poor in necessity, or poor in extremity.

For first, they have according to that speech of the Apostle, (...).
mundanum victum, 1 John 3. 17. the worlds good though not (as the two former
sorts) the riches and goods of the world, and therefore Saint John most
evidently declares that these ought to put on bowels of compassion, and to
give Alm's correspondent to their quality and condition. Secondly, our
gracious Lord and Master imposes a strict charge upon men to give: He says
not distribut somewhat to the poor, out of the treasures in your clossets, or
the superfluity of your rents, and revenues, but Luke 11. 41.
rather give alms of such things as you have, that is according to your power
and abilities: And to prevent the shifts and covetous policies of carnal
wretches, least, when they have turned all their gold and silver into houses,
horses, lands and livings, they might pretend that for the present they are not
provided with money to do this or that good work, our Savior Christ tells
them, that they must Luke 12. 33.
sell their possessions, that so they might have whereof to communicate unto
others upon some urgent and extraordinary occasions. 3. Of this rank were
those men which are recorded by Saint Luke for their eternal memory, who
voluntarily sold their Act. 2. 45 and 4. 34.
lands and possessions, and brought the prices thereof, and laid them at the
Apostles feet, to dispose thereof, and to make distribution, according as
every man's need did require, and some such were many of the Corinthians, as
appears by the words of the Apostle, who willed them to give of that which
they had, 2 Cor. 8. 11, 12.
for if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has, and not according to that he has not: and further he tells them that he
verse. 13.
intends not to have them over much burdened, and others eased, which speeches
plainly demonstrate, that they were no wealthy great ones, not above the
sphere of mediocritie, but rather of the meaner sort of persons, and yet these
the Apostle exhorts or rather 1 Cor. 16. 2.
commands to be liberal, and to separate something for the poor and pious
uses. Fourthly, Let these consider how ready they are of their own accord, or
at the requests of others, freely to spare and spend many an idle penny to
satisfy their own pleasures, or to acquire the credit and reputation of a
good fellow. Oh why should not Gods sacred Command prevail so much with them,
as to make them propense and forward for a good conscience sake, and for Gods
sake to spare some pittance for the releiving and sustaining of those whose
miseries are manifest, and the apparent Objects of every ones compassion. This
would be no spending but a Prove. 19. 17.
lending, no laying out but a Luk, 12. 33.
laying up, a treasuring up of incorruptible bags of wealth in the Heavens,
far above the reach and violation of time, moths, or thieves. Lastly, the good
Samaritane, of that wine and oil and money and other necessaries, which he had
provided for himself (though travelers have as much reason to keep their
money as any) imparted a portion to the wounded man, who was so mangled by the
thieves, for his comfort and sustentation. Now our Saviors inference and
conclusion from this parable is this, Luke 10. 37. Object.
Go thou and do likewise.

This sort of mean men will peradventure plead for themselves, and say, that
the Law provideth for the necessity and extremity of the poor, to save them
this care and cost.

1. Suppose the Law by its Authorizers of the Law, thus to provide for the
relieving of the poor, yet if thou do no more than the Law compels thee to
do, thou have not so much as a dram of pity within thee; for that is
scarce charity, when by humane compulsion or importunity men give unto the
poor, but when out of an unfeigned love to God, and a tender and simpathizing
affection toward their Brethren, they freely distribute to the several
necessities of comfortless Christians. Secondly, It is one thing for man's law
to make provision (as also does the Deuteronomy. 15. Lev. 25.
Law of God) for the poor, and another thing to have this Statute faithfully
executed, and the hearts of men charitably disposed, sufficiently to supply the
wants, and succor the distresses of all those that lie groaning under the
unsupportable burden of poverty, sickness or any other calamity. It Is too
well known that there is lamentable neglect of many miserable poor people for
all the good provision of the Law, through the merciless cruelty, and
intolerable frozen hartednesse of covetous and carnal worldlings. Thirdly,
The Law provides not a salve for every sore, a supply for every man's want; I
could reckon up a whole catalogue of good works which are neither mentioned nor
commanded by the Law. As viz. to lend freely, to raise up undone and ruinated
men, to pity some painful and laborious persons, who have a greater charge
than they are able by their industry to sustain: To train up docile and
ingenious poor children in learning at the School: To redeem Captives, and
free poor Prisoners laid up sometimes for small and improper debts: To be
liberal to honest poor couples marrying in the fear of God, and other such
like works of mercy there are to which men are not compelled by any humane
constitution, and therefore ought to be voluntarily inclined out of their
compassionate, and Charitable dispositions.

CHAP. IIII. That such as labor for their living are to be Charitable.
THE fourth sort of men before mentioned, who minister to their own
necessities by the sweat of their brows, and the labor of their own hands,
and may truly be accounted poor men, even these are to show mercy and
compassion sometimes to a Lazarus, to those that are poorer than themselves,
and in doleful extremity: there is a precept for them as well as for the Rich
Ephesians. 4. 28.
Let him (says Saint Paul) that stole, steal no more, but rather let him
labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give
to him that needs. The Apostle here imposes a heavy charge upon
day-labourers, mechaniks and such as live only upon their manual trades, and
bodily endeavors, of their little to give a little to those that are
extremely needy and miserable: as for instance to the lame, blind, sick, old
and decrepit, and to such who are so deficient and impotent in their senses and
members, that they cannot work or apply themselves to any Calling: When John
Baptist was Preaching unto the people the Baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins, among other passages of his Sermon he delivered this
terrible Doctrine, that Luke 3. 9.
every tree which brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into
the fire. When they heard him thus speaking of hewingoff, and burning, the
people asked him saying, What shall verse. 10.
we do then: He answers and says unto them, He that has verse. 11.
two Coats, let him impart to him that has none, and he that has meat let
him do likewise: hereby teaching us this Lesson, that though we are poor in
necessity, yet we ought to contribute to those who are poor in extremity.

We want not examples and noble Presidents for the clearing of this truth,
many that have benne poor in state, have benne rich in good works: Our
Savior Christ was no rich man, he had no Matthew. 8. 20.
habitation to dwell in of his own, no livings or lands, or large revenues,
but the hands of others Luke 8. 3, 4.
ministered unto him, yet he was not forgetful of the poor but Joh. 13. 29.
gave bountifully unto them. Now the poor are to take up Christ's cross, and
to follow him in his troubles and afflictions, in his ways and ordinances, in
his life and conversation, in his actions and charitable practices. The
Apostles had neither Act. 3. 6.
Silver not Gold but such as they had they gave to the Creeple which lay at the
gave of the Temple. The poor widow in the depth of her poverty did Mark. 12.
42. 44.
cast her two mites into the Treasury, which was all that she had, even all
her living. The 1 Kin. 17. 11. 15.
woman of Sarepta, a poor widow also, having but a little Oil in a cruse, and
a handful of Meal in a barrel, which could serve her and her son not above
a meal or two, made thereof a Cake to feed and sustain the Prophet Eliah.
The Macedonians were brought to a very low state and condition, and yet they
communicated willingly and liberally to the poor distressed Saints at
Jerusalem, and as the Apostle says in a 2 Cor. 8. 2, 3.
great trial of affliction, their deep poverty abounded unto the riches of
their liberality. At this present day there be many who are liberal to their
power, yea, and beyond their power are willing of themselves to relieve others.
We have a notable President in a virtuous Maid, dwelling in a Market town in
Dorcetshire who is so transcendently devoted to Charity and works of mercy,
that though she has but twenty pounds stock and her own handy labor to
live upon and to raise the materials of her bounty, yet by her dexterity in
Spinning thread, and her assiduitie at the Distaffe, and Gods blessing on her
endeavors, she is able and does yearly consecrate and devote five pounds to
Pious and Charitable uses. Such precious flowers grows not in every garden.

Now for the Encouragement of such as out of their own corporal labors, and
difficult acquisitions can find in their hearts to be liberal and bountiful,
and are ready to conform to these notable and most excellent patterns, let
them take these things into their thoughts and meditations. First, that these
examples are not left to posterity for admiration, but for Imitation as we may
collect out of that precept of the Prince and Savior of the world Luke 16. 37.
Go thou and do likewise. These Heb. 12. 1.
Clouds of witnesses wherewith we are compassed round about should direct and
teach us, as the Cloud did the Israelites in the true way and path of
Blessedness which leads directly unto the spiritual and heavenly Canaan.
Secondly, that the only end which they must aim at in all their actions,
employments and Corpore all sweatings and endeavors, is not to uphold their
own families, and to mainetaine themselves and their dependants but to Ephesians.
4. 28.
relieve and sustain their needy and oppressed neighbors, and this is a thing
that few men dream of. Thirdly, That in so giving, they do perform a double
duty both most acceptable and well pleasing to the Lord: First, in that they
labor to support the weak and feeble members of Christ with their bounty and
beneficence: And secondly, in that they earnestly endeavor as much as in them
lies, by the flame and light of their pious actions to thaw and dissolve the
frozen hearts of rich and churlish Nabals, and to Ephesians. 10. 24.
provoke them unto Love, and to good works: or if by their zeal, and
forwardness they can nothing move others nor squeeze any water out of those
flints, not a drop of pity from these hardened Adamants, yet if nature be
not also quite extinct as well as grace, they cannot but make them ashamed of
themselves, and leave them the more excuselesse before God. Fourthly, that
thou, who art a poor man, but yet a charitable Christian, do evidently
express a far greater measure of strong and unfeined faith in Gods promises,
of sincere obedience to his Commandments, and of hearty love and compassion
toward thy needy brethren, then those who out of their abundance give largly,
and multiply their contributions daily toward the poor. To believe when the
face of God shines upon men with sensible refreshing, and in the glorious
noonetide of prosperity to sing sweetly, and to testify their thankfulness
unto the Lord, by parting with this or that superfluous and superabundant
portion to the needy is no such great matter. But then to believe when his
shining countenance is eclipsed, and in the blackest midnight of adversity to
cleave and adhere close unto Christ, than to be willing to communicate, and of
a little to part with a little, this is a most excellent act of faith, and
argues a strong confidence and dependence upon Gods providence. Fifthly, let
them consider that that small pittance, which they give with a cheerful
mind, may affect their souls with more comfort and consolation, then the
great ones can suck out of their more plentiful doles and Almsdeeds.

1. Because their acceptance with God shall be according to that they have,
and not according to that they have not, 2 Cor. 8 12. 2. Because he principally
looks to the will the first moover, and master wheel in all spiritual
works, such as the will is, such is the service, and such is the gift: God
more respects the invisible readiness, and inward inclinations of the soul,
than the visible and external performances of the body, the integrity and
sincerity of the the heart, before the bounty of the hand: Animi qualitas,
(says a learned man) potius spectatur quam El^emosinae quantitas. And this is
the reason the Widows two Mites were so kindly accepted, and honored with the
high Mark. 12. 43, 44.
approbation of our blessed Savior: She gave all that she had, and she gave
it with all her heart, and though she were deeply poor, yet she was richly
liberal: and undoubtedly if there be a willing Nihil ditius bona voluntate
offertur Deo.
mind, there will be as certain an acceptance of the poor man's penny as of
the rich man's pound.

6. Do thou poor man consider, how God has infinitely honored the poor
Widow for her two Mites; full little did she think thus to be registered in
Christ's Gospel, and to be talked of all the world over for that small
contribution and (in a common apprehension.) contemptible Almes-deed: And
forget not the reward of the Widow of Sarepta for her charitable cherishing of
the poor Prophet, the Lord did greatly recompense her, he preserved her from
famine and the consequent effect thereof, a pale-faced living death: He 1 Kin.
17. 16.
continued and increased her food, and daily bread by his miraculous
benediction: He caused the Prophet to reside and sojourne with her many
months, to feed her soul with Spiritual things, as she had his body with
carnal; And besides all this, when her dear and only son was fallen sick and
dyed, the Lord instrume^tally verse. 22.
by the Prophet restored him to life again, Thus gracious and merciful was
God to the poor Widow, for her tender respect and cheerful releeving of the
distressed Prophet. Lastly, for thy comfort ponder with thy self, that thy
mercifulness bears witness unto thy soul, that thou do tread in the
steps of thy Savior, who though he dis-inriched himself for thy sake, and
became voluntarily poor, yet omitted not this duty of Charity, but was very
bountiful to the poor: that thou art a Child of thy merciful Father in
heaven, whom thou art Luke 6. 36. Ephesians. 5. 1. a Matt. 25. 34.
commanded herein to imitate: and that at the day of a Judgment thou shall be
unspeakab^y rewarded and crowned with the inestimable riches of his heavenly
glory with felicities, joys, and pleasures, more innunumerable then the Stars
in the firmament, even for ever and ever.

CHAP. V. That Widows are to do good Works.
LEast the former discourse should be misapplyed, and that which has been
delivered, should seem to be spoken only of Men, Fathers, and Masters of
Families, etc. I thought it fit and pertinent to let you understand, that women
are not to be excepted or exempted from a seasonable ministering unto the
corporal necessities of the needy, but they ought also to put on bowels of
compassion as well as other graces, and as well as men. And in the first place
of Widows, that they are to be merciful and charitable to the poor shall
be made manifest and clear, both by the light of Reason, and multiplicity of
examples very pregnant to this purpose in the holy Scriptures. You have before
heard of the renouned bounty and liberality of those two Widows mentioned in
Mark, 12. 44. and 1 King. 17. 11. 15. whose names are celebrated, and
eternized in the Heavens, and shall last and continue here on earth as long as
the Sun and Moon endures. They have more fellows and followers recorded in
the Book of life. In the Acts of the Apostles we find one Tabitha, by
interpretation, Dorcas, a memorable Act. 9. 36.
woman, who was full of good works and Almes-deedes which she did; This
blessed Matron, when she was dead, was restored to life again, by the Prayers
and Ministry of Saint verse. 40.
Peter, she being the first, that after Christ's ascension was honored with
such a miraculous resurrection: Thus graciously dealt the Lord with this
merciful widow, that by her rare example she might breath fresh life,
encouragement, and alacrity into the breasts of the rest of her Sex and
Condition, in ages to come, to follow her in the way of well doing, in good
works and Almsdeeds. To these may be added Luke 10. 40. Joh. 12. 3.
Martha, who with so much care and respect entertained Christ, Luke 8. 2. 3.
Mary Magdalen and Susanna, who were widows, or unmarried Maids, for there
is no mention made of any husbands they ever had: and further, it is said that
they ministered to Christ of their substance, and in this Garland of gracious
and merciful widows will we knit up those other sweet smelling flowers,
Phebe, who was a Romans 16. 1. 2. verse. 6.
succourer of the Saints, and Marie nominated by the Apostle in Rom 16. 6. and
that honorable 2 John 1.
Lady to whom Saint John wrote. In ancient times there were many charitable
widows, as we may read frequently in Saint Jeroms Epistles: and these times
wherein we live, have been very fruitful in the like examples of religious
and virtuous Matrons, and women of all degrees, who have testified the truth of
their love unto, and the infallibility and soundness of their faith in
Christ, by obedience unto his Will, and expression of pity and compassion
unto his naked and needy members: we have our Tabithaes, Phebees, and elect
Ladies, who have lodged strangers, releeved the afflicted, diligently followed
every good work, widows indeed, and well reported of for good works, as
Saint 1 Timothy 2. 10.
Paul would have them to be. And good reason is there, why they should address
themselves to a constant discharge of this noble duty of Charity, and
seriously study to honor and glorify God by their bounty and liberality:
for the Lord in a high measure honors them by vouchsafing to be their husband
to cherish and Jer. 49. 11
preserve their fatherless children, their Protector, refuge and Asylum on
whom to trust and depend in their desolate and mournful condition; by bearing
a watchful eye over them, and providing Deuteronomy. 10. 18. Exodus 22. 22.
Laws for the protecting, comforting, and sustaining of them. Secondly, let
them ponder and meditate on the forenamed examples: me thinks when they hear
or read of the high commendation and wonderful acceptance of the poor
widows two mites in the Gospel, Luke 21. 3.
how others have been infinitely remunerated for those small crum's of Comfort
which they have bestowed willingly and chearefully unto the Saints of God, they
should not choose if there were any spark of zeal in their bosoms, but be
presently inflamed to the serious and joyful obedience of the same precept,
and to the practice of the same duty. The Lord doubtless might have sent the
Prophet Eliah, to men in Israel, who could have sustained him, in his
extremity with less loss to themselves, and more abundant nutriment, but he
made special choice of the widow of Sareptha, for his Hostess and blessed
succourer, that hereby he might let us know, that he expects mercy and good
works from poor widows, and that by this excellent pattern and example,
others of the same rank and sex might be animated and encouraged to
liberality and charitablenesse. It well becomes (says the Apostle) 1 Timothy
2. 9. 10.
women professing godliness to put on modest apparel, shamefastness, and
sobriety, and to adorn themselves not with gold or pearls, or costly attire,
or broidered hair and curled locks, but with the precious and royal garment
of good works. Charity is a Jewel which they ought to hang up in the ears
of their souls, as well as men, they profess the same faith, and why should
they not produce the same fruits? They look for the same price, and why should
they not run the same race? they expect the same Kingdom, and Crown of
immortality and why should they not fight the same good fight, finish the same
course, and conform to the same precepts? They presume and are confident that
they have the same Savior, that they are of the number of his chosen flock,
of his redeemed, purified, sanctified peculiar people, why then should they not
be Tit. 2. 14.
zealous of good works, The widows pitiful heart? and bountiful hands are
Heb. 13. 16.
Sacrifices with which God is well pleased (for that place is to be applied to
such weak and infirm vessels, as well as to others of the stronger sex) how
then can they hope to be privileged from the practice of this grace, or what
can be by them with color and countenance pretended to excuse them for the
omission and neglect of this duty? They are subject to no husbands as formerly
they have been, but free from all conjugall ties and obligations: They are
their own Masters, and not other men's wives; what they enjoy is their own,
and they may freely dispose thereof as they please: and therefore those
precepts concerning liberality and mercifulness to the poor, which in
general are commanded unto men, do as deeply oblige and bind them also, and
lie upon them with an heavy necessity. As therefore they hope to be Pet 3. 7.
Heirs with men of the same grace, of life, and to partake of those promises
in the Gospel made unto Charitable and merciful Christians, let them by their
1 Timothy 6. 18. verse. 19.
readiness to distribute, and willingness to communicate to others wants, lay
up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that
they may lay hold on Eternal life.

CHAP. VI. That wives are to do good works.
ALbeit the case be far otherwise with the wife, than with the widow, in
regard she has lost her propriety in her own body, goods and worldly
substance, and is incorporated into another body, whereunto she is
subordinate and inferior, not the head; yet for all this she is still bound to
be charitable. First, in affection and disposition of heart, as being a
Christian woman hewed out of the same rock of mankind, redeemed with the same
blood, a member of the same mystical body, sensible of the same infirmities
and distresses, and beautified with the same inward gifts of the Holy Ghost,
faith, hope and charity, as other Saints are. She may be, nay she must be
ever charitably minded, though she cannot always be as openhanded as she
please, and yet we find in the Scriptures, that many wives had both hearts,
and hands too, to give to the poor. Such were the good 2 King. 4. 10.
Shunamite, the honorable Luke 8. 3.
Joanna, Herod's stewards wife, wise 1 Samuel 25.
Abigaile, the bountiful wife of a churlish Naball, women more renowned and
Nobilitas animi sola est atque unica virtus: Juven. Sat. 8.
ennobled by their graces, than their places, wealth or pedigree, and such a
one was that Prove. 31. 10. 20.
Virtuous wife, which Solomon describes so largely in his Proverbs, and
preferres far above Gemmes or Rubies: So that then you see wives should not
only be charitable in affection or intention, but also in action, as far as
it might stand with Gods glory; the rules of religion, and their husbands
abilities.

1. The grace of Charity, wheresoever it is (and it ought to be in a wife, as
well as in a husband, there is an equal capacity of that grace both in the
one and in the other, and the Holy Ghost in the free dispensation and effusion
of his saving gifts, respects no places, persons or Sexes) is a predominant and
operative grace, and will outwardly show it self: It will inflame the whole
man to the exercise of goodness, employ every sense and member in a charitable
business, set the heart open, the bowels open, the ears open, the eyes open,
and the hands open to the comfortless and needy Christians. There may be a
Sun without light, as soon as a truly and feelingly charitable soul
without real testimonies and evidences thereof toward the extremely miserable
and distressed brethren.

2. For the better encouragement of them to this duty, let them remember that
there are many examples recorded in the Scriptures for their instruction, and
imitation. The Apostle speaking of the choice of a widow, describes her by her
life past when she was a wife, and sets down that she must be such a one as
has been the 1 Timothy 5. 9. 10.
wife of one Husband, well reported of for good works, a bringer up of
Children, a lodger of strangers, a releever of the afflicted, etc. And 1 Timothy
2. 9 10.
elsewhere speaking of wives and married women concludes that they ought to
abound in this grace also.

3. They are made heirs with 1 Pet. 3. 7.
their husbands together of the same grace of life and glory, and why should
they not partake with them of the grace of charity as the 2 Cor. 8. 6, 7.
Apostle calls it. They may enjoy, embrace and follow the Ministry of the
Word, Act. 21. 5. and why should they not practice these general Christian
duties commended and commanded by the same Word? They are Gods workmanship as
well as men created in Christ Ephesians. 2. 10.
Jesus unto good works, and ought they not then to walk in them, and to be
zealous of the same? If any therefore falsely conceive that women, quatenus
wives, may be excepted and exempted from liberality and almes-giving, they
grossly deceive themselves, for with what comfort can they look Christ Matthew.
25.
in the face at the last day, if they never fed, or clothed, or visited him in
his members here on earth: And further I must let them know that Matrimony was
insticuted to be a bridle for sin, and not to be a hindrance or obstacle in
religion and pious performances.

But that wives may give, will not (I suppose) be denied or gaine-said by any,
yet that none might be mistaken in this matter, here next we are to consider
and lay down a few rules and necessary observations in this point of wives
almes-giving. First, what wives are fit to give. Secondly, whereof they may
give. Thirdly, how they ought to carry and demean themselves in giving. For
the first, you must know that all are not of capacity, understanding, and
discretion to distribute judiciously and religiously to the truly miserable,
some of that Sex are such brainlesse, heartlesse, careless, creatures, that
they have neither a will to give, nor a hand to work, nor a wit to discerue
between the unworthie conditions and true wants of the distressed. Therefore
for the clearing and resolution of all doubts, and the preventing of all cavils
and needless questions, we will reduce wives into two ranks, whereof some are
sufficiently qualified and fit to give, and others not. Wives unfit to give are
such as these.

1. The woman who is destitute of wisdom and discretion characterized by
Solomon in the Proverbs and set out by these Prove. 19. 3. and 11. 22.
Epithets, foolish, simple, indiscreete, knowing nothing: for as it is said of
a foolish man, that he will Prove. 21. 20.
spend up the oil and treasure of the wise, so much more truly may it be said
concerning a foolish woman, who is so far from maintaining or supporting a
house or family, that she contrarily Pro. 14. 1.
plucketh it down with her hands.

2. The clamorous and contentious wife who unreasonably disturbes the ears of
her husband with her intemperate tongue, and fearfully so distempers the Air
where she lives, with strange noises and clamors, till at the length she
raises storms and tempests of bitterness, brawling and unnatural
combustions, such a Prove. 19. 13. and 27. 15
woman is compared by the wise man to a continual dropping upon a very rainie
day, which will force her husband out of his house. Zantippe when she had
soundly cudgelled Socrates with her tongue, at length drove him quite out of
doors, so will such a scolding wife quickly make an honest man weary of his
own lodging: for it is Prove. 21. 19.
better, and a man will rather choose to dwell in the wilderness with Wolves
and Lions, than with such a stinging Viper and wrathful senseless Bedlam. Who
can expect good works from such a one to other men, who cannot afford good
words to her own husband and second self?

3. The prodigal and wastefull wife, for she will soon bring a consumption
upon her husbands state, undermine the foundation of his house by sin and
sensuality, and utterly ruinate herself and her posterity: for she is
Prodiga non sentit pereuntem foemina censum, ac velut exhaust^ redivivus
pullulet arca nummus -- and non unquam reputat quanti fihi gaudia constant
Juven. Sat. 6.
insensible of all imminent misery, improvident for the future, and careless
and regardlesse of his or her own credit, profit or reputation.

4. The idle wife for as Prove. 18. 9.
Solomon calls an idle man the brother, so may she be termed the sister of a
waster; she that will not work, must not eat herself, much less should she
be a carver of victuals unto others.

5. The wife that makes her husband ashamed by her lewdness, rudeness,
imperiousness, pride, sensuality, and vaine-gloriousnesse: for such a wife is
as rottenness to his bones, an intolerable torment and torture, and heavy
vexation to his heart.

6. The faithless and adulterous wife, for she has violated the sacred bonds
of wedlock, ^ustly deprived herself of that affection, liberty, and
privilege, which once was due unto her, and freely conferred upon her from her
husband, she may not be purse-bearer or meddle with his estate and substance,
honor is more fit for a fool, than such an office for a Strumpet. Juven.
Quid enim Venus ebria curat? So much concerning wives unqualified and unfit to
give. They that are fit to give and may, nay must be admitted to the practice
of this Heavenly duty, are to be qualified like the good wife described Prove.
31. 10
by Solomon in the Proverbs. First, she must be a wife that is a good woman,
Prove. 11. 16. prudent, Prove. 19. 14. a crown to her husband, virtuous, Prove.
12. 4. that is furnished with strength and sufficient abilities for the
fruitful discharge of all family duties. Secondly, a wife on whom the husband
may depend and safely trust in: verse. 11. 3. A wife that is provident in
preparing work aforehand wherein to employ the household, that seeks wool
and flax, and works willingly with her hands: verse. 13. 27. That in her own
person is painful and industrious (if need be) and labor to enrich her
husband, and to augment his wealth and world^ substance, verse. 16. 24. 4. A w^
that opens her mouth wi^ wisdom, and in whose tong^ is the law of
kindness, verse. 26* Lastly, a wife that knows how and when to stretch forth
he^ hand to the poor, and to minister comfort and help to the needy, verse.
20. What Naba^ will hinder or prohibit a wise thus rarely qualified from
giving to the poor, from lending to the Lord. Nay, suppose she be not of that
exactness and eminency, and crowned with the concurrent perfections of all
those gifts and graces of which that Sex is capable: If she have not all the
perfections, but the requisite degrees of those virtues, which will in some
measure qualify her, if she has but providence to get or keep, and prudence
to give, doubtless she may conscionably address herself to the constant
practice of liberality and almes-giving.

Now in the next place we are to make inquiry, of what wives are to give:
without controversy a wife may give and communicate to others.

1. Of that which is her own, and wholly appropriated to her self and her
own special use: Now in that she may be said to have a personal propriety.
First, which was legally reserved by her self or her friends to her own
private use before her Marriage: This portion the Husband may not meddle with
nor interdict her from distributing it according as she please. Secondly,
which her parents, brethren, or affectionate acquaintance freely bestow upon
her after Marriage, unwitting to her Husband either to supply her private
wants, or to evidence the constancy of their love, toward her. Thirdly, what
the husband freely confers upon her as an annuitie, fee, vailes, rents, set
stipend, and the like, which are made over and commended to her own discretion
and arbitrarie disposing.

2. Of that which is her Husbands, but then she must be sure of his consent
and approbation which is twofold. First, either general and implicit, and
this extends not farther then to those things with which she is be trusted, as
being her Husbands Steward within doors to 1 Timothy 5. 14.
guide the house at home, to order and execute domestical businesses in the
family; this implicit consent is granted by his silence, when he is not
ignorant of her practices, and liberal expenses, and yet lovingly convives
hereat, not disallowing or reprooving her charitable acts. Secondly, or else
particular Numb. 30. 7.
and explicit, when he gives her authority by word of mouth to communicate to
the necessities of the poor. The implicit and silent consent may be a
sufficient warrant for her only in small matters, but in affairs of more
weight and consequence his particular express allowance must be had: As for
instance the good Shunamite entertained and refreshed the Prophet with bread,
and such things as she had by virtue of her Husbands general and implicit
approbation, 2 King. 4. 8. But when she resolved to build a chamber, and to
provide other necessaries and conveniences for Elisha, then she acquaints him
with her intent, and entreats him to accomplish her desire, and to condescend
to a particular and express consent, 2 King. 4. 10. Thus yo^ have heard how
Wives may give with their Husbands consent and approbation.

But now imagine he grant i^ not of his own accord, neithe^ the one nor the
other, then it very much concerns her to labo^^ by all importunate entreaties,
and sweet compellations to procure it, and not presumptuously (...) take upon
her to dispose of al^ things as she pleases, because she intends or pretends
Charity and good works. First, for God has appointed him to be Head and
Master, Ephesians. 5. 23. an^ though she be more wise an^ Charitable than her
husband yet she has no warrant out o^ Gods Word to justle him out o^ that
rank and station wherein Gods providence and All-seeing wisdom has placed
him in. Secondly, Her desire is to be subject unto him, Genesis 3. 16. Thirdly,
Her conscience will reap the more comfort from the good actions she does while
she submits to Gods Ordinance, and observes all the circumstances which are
requisite to every good work, it must be done after a right manner as well as
to a right end. Fourthly, Godly women have sought their husbands approbation,
as did the Shunamite in the forenamed case. Fifthly, Our laws, (the which
wives must make conscience to obey in this point) do curb and restrain
married Wives from giving in many things, of which read Doctor page 172. 174.
Gouge of the duty of Wives. Some men knowing this to be their prerogative,
that the Scepter is placed in their hands, and that their Wives are bound by
Gods Law to submit to their manly spirits, and riper judgments, may perchance
out of their earthlinesse, and intolerable worldly-mindednesse, which is the
very cut-throte of all Charity and liberality, take the advantage and
unconscionablely stand off, and refuse to give their consents unto their wives
pious efflagitations and entreaties.

But here by the way then I must let the Husband know, that it is unlawful for
him to deny any lawful petition especially tendered unto him from the wife of
his own bosom.

1. At the day of his marriage he gave her a right and interest in his wealth
and temporal possessions, solemnly making them over unto her in this form of
speech: With all my worldly goods I thee indow, whence we may infer that as
he stands bound by promise to afford al^ things requisite and necessary for
her body and outward estate and condition, so likewise in Charity he is much
more obliged to allot her those things which may conduce unto the eternal good
and safety of her soul.

2. He must remember that his wife is a Christian as well as himself, that
she has a soul to be saved, sanctified, purified, and beautified with good
works, as well as he, why then should he not afford her a large and liberal
allowance, that so she might practice good duties, and exercise her faith,
love, and charity, by releeving and sustaining the poor.

3. We find in the Scriptures that men of a right noble and ingenuous
disposition scorned to stand upon such trifles, to confine their dear wives to
any 2 King. 4. Luke 8.
pinching allowance. The Shunamites husband did easily give way unto her, so
did Chuza Herod's steward to his wife Joanna, so did the husband described in
the Proverbs to his virtuous and Prove. 31. 11. 28.
industrious good wife: and therefore he ought not to be averse and inexorable
in this case, but tractable and flexible in a matter of such conscience and
consequence: Let the husband take heed he play not the part of a churlish
Nabal, lest that for his hard-heartednesse he be turned into a stone.

4. It will kindle a great deal of true love in the heart of a religious wife,
and cause her to fasten a constant and everlasting affection upon her husband,
when she perceives that he more respects her spiritual, than his own
temporal welfare, and that he loves her soul better than his own earthly
dross.

Lastly his free and unconstrained approbation of his wives liberality is a
clear evidence of his own open-heartednesse, whereas on the contrary his
stubborn drawing back, and inflexible inexorablenesse in a case of such
piety and conscience would but expose him to a censure of uncharitableness,
and a suspicion of niggardliness for crossing his wives petitions, and damming
up the fountain of her charity with foul terms and churlish answers as
the Genesis 26. 15.
Philistines did Abraham's wels with earth. The husband and wife should go hand
in hand to Heaven, and further one another in the way of weldoing. Let him take
heed then he clip not the wings of her charitable affections, by his covetous,
churlish, and cutting denials.

May the wife give of that which is her husbands at no time, nor upon any
occasion without either his express or implicit consent?

Doubtless in some cases

1. When the Husband is grown foolish, blockish, stupid or lunaticke, void of
judgment or understanding, utterly unqualified and indisposed for the managing
of his estate.

2. When by reason of his natural weaknesses, diseases and impotencie of old
age he is feign to bid farewell to the world, and commend all domestical
affairs and worldly businesses to the wives care and providence.

3. When the husband is long absent from home, and detained in remote or
foreign countries by virtue of his calling and necessary employments or
negotiation, as it is a frequent case with Merchants, Mariners, Soldiers, and
such like.

4. When she by her own handie-labour and industriousnesse maintains her
husband and the whole family, and bears a watchful eye over all businesses
both within doors and without: In all these cases the Government seems to
be cast upon her; The greatest burden upon the weaker vessel.

5. When the wife is a wise Abigail, and the husband a stony and prodigiously
covetous Nabal; who would rather draw a just deserved confusion on his soul
body and substance, then minister any comfort even unto a David in his
affliction.

6. And lastly, she may be liberal unto the poor, without warrant from her
husband, in a case of true necessity and extremity, when present relief upon
point of perishing is required either for back, belly, or lodging. Ambrose
Pasce fame morientem, si non pavisti, occidisti, feed him that is ready to
starve, if thou do not, thou art not his brother, but his butcher. It seems
by Abigails words, that had she met with David's messengers, she would have
satisfied his expectation, and furnished him with all sorts of victuals without
Nabals approbation, 1 Samuel 25. 25. And indeed God will sometimes and in some
cases dispense with his own Ordinances, and the rules which he has imposed
on his creatures to observe; as he did in the like case of extreme hunger,
Matthew. 12. 3. 4. 7.

And in these and the like cases she must look to proceed.

1. Ever as a wife, as not having a supreme and absolute power of her self,
but a borrowed and subordinate authority from her husband, not as if she were
sole lord and master, but only a faithful steward, and disburser of his
estate and worldly wealth. The law of our land tieth wives with an inhibition,
that they may not usurp a free and uncontrollable administration and disposing
of their husbands goods as they please: and the consideration hereof should
serve to make them to be quiet and submissive, and to sit down humbly
contented with their allotted portion.

2. As a Christian wife, if God has blessed her with a tenderhearted and
well-conditioned husband, then it highly concerns her to return the greater
praise unto the Lord, and a larger measure of conjugall affection unto the
husband, and with the more cheereful alacrity and willingness to submit and
yield unto his desires and reasonable commands. But and if she unhappily meet
with a man of a dogged disposition, churlish nature, inflexible spirit, one who
is utterly averse from any good works; why then she must improove to the
uttermost all her wit and discretion to alter and reclaim him, and ply the
throne of grace with extraordinary importunity of prayer for his reformation
and conversion.

Lastly, this question may be made whether it does nothing concern Children
and Servants to give as well as Fathers and Masters?

As for hired Servants, who shall be offered. It would not be amiss
certainly thus to initiate them into the ways of Salvation, and to season
them in their tender years with such holy and heavenly practices and
instructions. Natura tenacissimi sumus little qua rudibus annis percepimus. We
are (says a most eloquent Orator) most tenacious Quint. orat: institut. lib.
1. cap. 1. Sapor quo nova imbuas durat: n^c lanarum colores quibus simplex ille
Candor mutatus est, elui possunt ibid.
and retentive of those things which we learned in our rude and tender age: and
woolles (says the same Author) hardly lose those colors in which they were
first well dyed: So it will be a difficult thing to relinquish and surcease
from the practice of those virtues in the which at the first we were well
habituated and instructed. Nay, the real acts of Charity by the frequent
reiteration of them will be so firmly radicated in our young and tender
memories, that in riper years they will be as so many Mementoes to us to put
us in mind to be still so doing, and it will something sticke^ in the
conscience of man to consider with himself, how he has Apostatized and fallen
from his primitive goodness, and that it is a very dangerous and fearful
thing to be a young Saint and an old devil.

CHAP. VII. The more Religious we are the more Charitable we should be.
AS all those that put on but the vizor and glory in the bare name and title
of Christianity cannot but externally conform to some common rules and
directions of the Word in some measure to Charitable practices: so more
specially all serious and real Christians, and faithful believers must
chiefly learn to maintain good Tit. 3. 8. 14.
works for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful branches seeing they
are truly implanted into so fruitful a Vine. They that are seasoned and
enlivened with the Spiritual vigor of saving grace, that make more than a
Laodicean profession of Jesus Christ, that are transported and inflamed with
more than an ordinary zeal for holiness and religion: these I say be the men
whom it principally concerns to be most forward and frequent in these duties
of Charity.

1. Because what Saints soever in the holy Scriptures are renowned for their
piety and devotion, they are also highly commended for their Charity as may be
seen in Psalm. 37. 21. 26. Where the righteous man is honored with the
appellation and title of a merciful man. And in Psalm. 1 12. 1, 2, 3, 4. Where
the blessed man, the faithful, upright, gracious, and the good man is said to
be full of compassion, to show mercy in lending, in dispersing, in
communicating and giving to the poor, verse. 5. 9. We have many examples in
the Book of God, every one whereof like a several^ ^^nne will give sufficient
light and luster to this point. Job was a just and a God-fearing man, Job 1. 1.
and he was also a very merciful man, Job 31. 16. Cornelius was full of
devotion Act. 10. 2. Act. 2. 41. 42. 45. Act. 4. 32. 34. 35. 36.
and as full of compassion. The primitive Christians were full of piety and as
full of pity, and overflowing in bowels of mercy.

2. They must not shelter themselves under the external form and shadow of
godliness (as too to many counterfeites and mere superficial Christians do
at this day) but ought to walk in the power and strength of godliness and
religion, which (if it be that which is pure and undefiled) teaches them to
visit the Fatherless and the Widows as well as to keep Jam. 1. 27.
themselves unspotted of the world.

3. The Apostle would have such as abound in faith, in knowledge, in utterance,
diligence and 2 Cor. 8. 7.
the like heavenly and supernatural perfections and abilities to abound in
this grace of Charity also.

4. It is the best evidence and 2 Cor. 8. 8. 1 Timothy 1. 5.
surest proof of the sincerity of their love, of their pure heart, good
Conscience and Faith unfeined. The incessant ebullition and overflowing of the
streams of water plainly demonstrates that there is a fountain in the Rock.
So visible performances and the outward practices of charitable duties testify
to the world and a man's own Conscience that there is Grace in the heart.

5. If by a saveing and lively faith thou art once really implanted into
Christ, presently thou have this prerogative conferd on thee to become the
adopted Son of God, Joh. 1. 12. And therefore it very much behooves thee then to
walk as a Child of God, and to remember this one maine duty to be merciful
as thy heavenly Father is merciful, Luke 6. 36.

6. And lastly, we are all of us exhorted by the Apostle to provoke unto love,
and to good Heb. 10. 24.
works, and mutually to encourage one another in the blessed ways of
Salvation, then much more ought the truly religious and zealous who are crowned
with a more abundant knowledge and plenty of Grace and goodness, to direct and
usher others along in the paths of holiness by their precedencie in in
well-doing. Where much is given, much is required. There is more heat and light
to be expected from the Sun and Moon, then a blazing Meteor, or the
obscurer Stars. If any therefore glory in the outward profession of
Christianity, in public or private devotions their exact conformity to all
outward practices of piety, and fail in this so much honored duty of
Almes-giving, their devotion and pious pretenses are nothing worth: Hear a
most eloquent and reverend Mr. Boulton in his general directions, p. 262.
Divines censure concerning such Gospellers: If the world has locked up thy
heart, and congealed the bowels of thy compassion toward the poor, let the
blaze of thy profession shine never so fair, manage the heartlesse
representations of external holiness never so demurely, keep the times and
taskes of daily duties with never so much austeritie, nay though thou be able
to amaze weaker Christians with some affected streams and artificial
fervencie in prayer, for all this, if the holy heat of brotherly love does not
warm thy heart, and upon occasion work affectionately and effectually, I dare
say thou art rotten at the heart root, there is no true love of God in thee,
no grace, no hope of Salvation: let that terrible and flaming place against all
covetous Pharisees, 1 John 3. 17. dissolutely frozen-heartednesse this way, and
enlarge thy bowels of pity toward the poor brethren of Jesus Christ, or
else never look hereafter to look him in the face with comfort, or to find
mercy at that day. For that dreadful sentence Go ye cursed, etc. which
breathes out nothing else but everlastingly tormenting flames, eternal
vengeance, horrors unspeakeable, flashes and lightnings, and furies and
vexation, and trembling past all imagination, shall one day be executed upon
the reprobates for the neglect and wilful omission of this noble duty and
most gainefull Eleemosyna ars omnium quaestuosissima. Chrysostom.
art of Almes-giving.

CHAP. VIII. What is to be learned of them who do good Works, and how they
are to be qualified.
IT is a general mistake and common error among men, they think any
voluntary contribution, every sinister refreshing of the needy to be an
unquestionable Almesdeed, that all sorts of givers are ipso facto merciful and
charitable persons, and that their heartlesse doles and offerings are accepted
of God, though they themselves walk on in their own cursed and crooked
courses, and live according to the fashion of this evil world, mere strangers
to the power and practice of true piety and godliness. Therefore it will not
be amiss for me to teach, and others to learn how to do a good work. Now
it may be learned two manner of ways, by the Gospel, and by the Law: First
by the Gospel which teaches us

1. To have an eye and to Matt. 3. 17.
look unto Christ in whom only God is pacified and well pleased, and by whom
all things that by reason of sin were at ods, are again reconciled between
the guilty creature and the angry Judge.

2. To reflect back upon our own persons, and seriously to consider what
interest we have in Christ Jesus, and his meritorious purchase, that so we
may be assured that our sacrifices will send up a sweet smell, and pleasant
savor into the nostrils of the Almighty.

3. To look there be grace in us, as our faith ( without which it is
impossible to please God) unfeigned Heb. 11. 6.
love, brotherly kindness, humility, patience, and other spiritual abilities
and qualifications. For you must know that the Gospel by the Synergie and
cooperation of the Spirit does inlighten the understanding, refine the nature,
change the conditions, batter into pieces the stony heart, plant saving
graces, and sow the seed of immortality in the soul, and then when it is thus
well pruned, harrowed, tempered, and sanctified by the Word, it brings forth
plentifully the fruits of good works. So then you see we must first view the
faces of our souls in the pure glass of the Gospel, whether they bear any
conformity with the Image of Christ, whether they be adorned and beautified
with the Graces of the Holy Ghost, before we can assure our selves that our
works are truly good, and saving acceptable to the Lord.

4. To look unto our lives and conversations: Charity, a pure heart, and a
good conscience, are ever near neighbors, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
and lodge close together, and no man can dole charitably to the poor, that
does not deal conscionably with his neighbor. The same tree cannot naturally
bring forth sweet and bitter, sound and rotten fruits together: So likewise
the same man cannot be a liberal giver to the poor, and an unconstionable
couzner of his brother. There must be a Spiritual harmony and uniformitie
between all our actions, a conformity in them with the pure precepts of God,
and then we may boldly conclude the infallibility of a good work. None I am
sure are in the Scriptures commended for their mercifulness and almsdeeds,
but such as are otherwise described by other saving and eminent graces and good
parts. Revolve and consider with your selves the manifold Job. 1. 1. Act. 10.
1. Phil. 5. 7. Act. 4. and 11. 24.
examples which are obvious to your observation, both in the old and new
Testament, and you shall find this truth as clear and evident as the
noonday.

5. The Gospel teaches us Nehem. 13 22.
to look ever to Gods mercy in Christ, and not to our own merit in any work
we do: for do what we can, we can do but our duty, still we are but
unprofitable servants: One little dead fly will spoil a whole box of precious
ointment, so one dram of merit will mar the best action, and greatest good
work. Thus learn we a good work from the Gospel.

2. From the Law which teaches us. First, that we must do a good work from
the love of God, 1 John 3. 17. this the Law instructs us in the first place,
and so our Savior Christ enformeth us, and therefore Matthew. 22. 38.
whenever we intend a good work, our chiefest care must be to see that it
may consist with true holiness, and that it is not contrary and repugnant
unto the honor, glory, and worship of the living and eternal God. If any
pretended good work tend to the erection of idolatry, to the maintenance and
supportation of false worships and religions, or be any way derogatorie to the
Name of the Lord, that work is directly condemned by the Law as full of sin
and obliquitie.

2. That we must do a good work from the love of our selves unto our
neighbors, Matthew. 19. 19.
whom we are commanded to love as our own selves: and here special heed must
be taken; that the good work stand with the preservation of our own and our
neighbors dignity, innocence, chastity, equity, and verity, according as
the rules of the second table bind and direct us. For our Savior Christ
sharply reproves the Jews for there Corban, because a gift with Matt. 15. 6.
contempt or neglect of ones duty to his parents and superiors is no way
tolerable or allowable. He laid the spacious and famous foundation of
Christs-Church in Oxford, which king Henry the eigth enriched with many goodly
revenues.
Cardinal Woolsey laid a fair foundation for a good work, but his ego and
rex meus marred all the building. It was a point of prodigious pride, and
intolerable arrogancy for the subject to enthrone himself above the king, and
to raise his own honor and reputation upon the ruin of his Sovereigns
dignity.

Lastly, the goodness and acceptance of a work is lost and quite marred, if it
be incompatible with innocence, equity, or verity, any way injurious or
offensive 1 Cor. 13.
to any, for Charity is a friend to innocence and right, an utter enemy to
deceit, untruth, and fraudulent dealing. It never wrongs any, but rather
suffers, covers and palliates multitudes of undeserved and dishonorable
injuries. From all this that has been spoken may we learn easily to confute
the erroneous and selfe-deceiving conceits of those men who imagine.

1. That the very act of giving The first error confuted.
is a truly charitable work, as if God more respected the hand than the heart:
this is prodigious folly and a strong delusion of Satan. Does not the Apostle
in plain words tell us, that a man may give his body to be burned, and all his
goods to the 1 Cor. 13. 3.
poor, and yet have not a spark Non passio sed causa facit martyrem.
of true charity. It Is not the passion, but the good cause that makes a
martyr: So it is not the action, but the good heart that makes a charitable man.
The Arislo. li. 2. Eth. cap. 4.
Philosopher does put some difference between the external act, and internal
habit, between justa agere and just agere, gramaticum proferre, and
gramatice loqui: An unjust man may do just things, and yet not justly from the
habit of Justice: and * (...) ibid.
an arrant dunce may pronounce a good grammatical speech, and eloquent oration
by chance, or by the help of another man, and yet not speak grammatically,
out of the true knowledge of that Art and science: So many a churl and
covetous niggard may perform many external good actions, and seeming
charitable works, and yet not do them charitably, from the habit and
internal inherent grace of Charity. This is a flower that grows not
ordinarily in every Garden: It is a supernatural and infused, not acquired
habit, and never comes into the heart till it be planted there by the
immediate finger of the Holy Ghost. Now do not many by giving a piece of bread
at their doors, or a penny now and then out of their purses, conceive that
they are really charitable Christians? though they were never acquainted with
the habit of charity, a 1 Timothy 1. 5.
pure heart, good conscience and faith unfeigned, yes certainly, and these be
the men, who as I conceive most grossly deceive themselves. For we are to
know that the outward opus operatum the external work wrought may arise and
proceed from somewhat else than Charity, As

1. From the poor man's importunity and incessant obs^c^ations which sometimes
will extort a gift and extract some natural compassion from the most
flintie-hearted wretch Luke 18. 4. 5.
who neither fears God, nor regards man.

2. From a spice of vainglory Matthew. 6. 3.
and self-love to purchase the praise and popular applause of the world, as
Hypocrites do.

3. From fear of public shame and disreputation, lest he be censured of his
neighbors for a very churlish merciless man, one of great lands, revenewes,
and possessions, but a covetous earth-worme, and a starver or murderer of the
poor, by his unconscionable, cruel, and uncharitable dealings.

4. From an humane and natural pity and compassion upon some remarkable
spectacle of woe and misery, which cannot but work sometimes upon the most
obdurate heart.

5. From a sinister respect unto the person of the poor: As when a man singles
out the objects of his mercy, this kins-man or that worke-man, because these
will be the trumpetters of his liberality, blaze abroad his Almsdeeds, and
procure him some respect, glory, and reputation in the world.

6. From a groundless conceit of meriting Heaven, this is the poison that
invenomes and infecteth some of the good actions of the Papists, and makes them
to be odious and abominable in the sight of the Almighty. Thus you see there
be many false grounds on which most men build their good works: They are but
sandy foundations and therefore the superstructions cannot be lasting.

Now the true saving grace of Charity, which is a ray of the Divine Majesty,
a pure beam of the Sun of righteousness, is firmly grounded on the dear
love of God revealed in the face of Jesus Christ to every truly humble and
brokenhearted sinner, it warmes the Christians heart with a Heavenly and holy
heat of impartial affection toward all the naked and needy members of
Christ: It teaches him to hate father and mother in case they be Remoraes and
pull-backes from Heaven, to cleave close unto the flock of Gods faithful
Saints and Servants to relieve them, love them, live and dye with them. This is
Charity indeed.

2. That all kinds of givers The second error confuted.
are Charitable persons, this is as full of absurdity as the former: for a
truly Charitable man must be a good man, a gracious man, a righteous man, as
the Plalmist intitleth him: he must be holy Psalm. 112. Col. 1. 12. Matthew. 25.
34.
and beloved, and one of the blessed of the Father, as Christ calls all the
merciful at the last day. Therefore those men's external works of Mercy and
Almsdeeds can never find acceptance with God, who

1. Either lie wittingly and wilfully in those reigning iniquities which are
clean contrary and repugnant to true Charity as envy, pride, malice,
unquenchable desire of reveng, implacable hatred, contention, etc. Charity can
never take up her lodging in the heart till these devils be dispossessed,
these captain and domineering abominations be dethroned, captivated, and cast
out of doors.

2. Or wallow and persevere in such hellish courses and cursed practices as are
quite opposite to the life of Charity, as usury, extortion, briberie,
unconscionable and cruel dealing, secret undermining, circumvention, and
politic overreaching of the simple and unsuspicious brethren, or in other
gross and notorious sinfulness, drunkenness, adultery, gluttony, or the
like: Charity that Lady and royal Queen of Graces scorns the company of such
feinds of hell, and is ever waited on with these undefiled and heavenly
handmaids, with meekness, humility, brotherly kindness, patience, sobriety,
and the like train of sweet and amiable creatures of the holy Ghost. She
rejoices not (says the Apostle) in iniquity, but only 1 Cor. 13. 6.
in the truth: She suffers not a man to make a sport of sin, to boast,
glory, and impudently to triumph in the contrivances and public executions of
foul enormities, and execrable villainies, but rather puts a bridle upon
corrupt and rebellious nature, moderates the passions, qualifies the
Affections, confines and rules the thoughts and cogitations, and works a
gracious cheerfulness and delectation in the inner man to walk in the paths
of piety, and narrow ways of Gods Commandments. The Patrons of riot and
excess, the great maintainers of hospitality and strong supporters of
intemperance, and the conventicles of goodfellowship, may perchance relieve a
multitude of lawless vagabonds, lazy beggars and idle droanes at their
doors, yet for all this, these their public demonstrations of bountifulness,
are but vanishing flashes, and false fires, not the real expressions of a
Charitable heart.

And here thirdly, let me discover The third error discovered and confuted.
a fearful deceit, whereby not only living but dying men grosely delude
themselves, and the less judicious and weaker Christians. There be many who
all their lives long play the devils in usurious practices, oppressions and
unconscionable griping, and raise up huge Babells of honor, and vast
mountains of wealth, by most ungodly and unjustifiable courses, and when pale
Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas regumque turres. Horace: lib.
1. od: 4.
death knockes at the doors of their stately Palaces, and summons them to take
their last farewell of the world, and to hold up their hands at the bar of Gods
Justice, then they begin to put on some charitable thoughts and late
resolution, to give some small legacy to the poor at their death, which they
most basely stole from them all their life long. This is not the best charity
to give a thing when a man can keep it no longer, and like a fatted swine to
feed those being dead, which in his life time he grunted at, reviled, scorned,
and contemned. Many never feed the poor with their bread, till they feed the
worms with their carcases, they are almost alike charitable both to the one,
and to the other: for had it been in their power to have kept their bodies from
the grave, certainly they would yet longer have deceived the worms, and could
they yet longer have enjoied and locked up fast their earthly dross in their
coffers, they would still (it is to be feared) have coozend and starved their
poor Christian brethren.

Let the men of this world then, slaves of lust, masters of sinful pastimes
and pleasures idolizers of dirt and clay, carnal, covetous, irreligious
earthwormes and the rest, which may be reduced to this predicament, take these
things into their consideration.

1. That being in the flesh, and nothing but a mere body of sin or chaos of
filth and corruption, they cannot perform any one duty in a right manner Vide
Roger in Art. 13.
that may be savingly acceptable to the Lord: All their best actions, even
their fastings, almesdeeds, sacrificing unto God, etc. have the nature of sin,
and some intrinsecall pravitie in them (according to the general confession of
our Church of England) and therefore they stink in the nostrils of the
Almighty, and are very odious and loathsome unto him.

2. They are naked and destitute of the Spirit of Sanctification, and the grace
of unfeigned and justifing faith, which should mortify the deeds of the flesh,
purify the heart, incorporate Romans 8. 11. Act. 15. 9. Romans 8. 9.
them into Christ, and carry them through this present world with spiritual
wisdom, and an unblameable conversation. Now Heb. 11. 6.
having not the Spirit of God, they are none of Christ's flock, they cannot
challenge any of his promises, nor lay any claim to his Kingdom, and
Inheritance, and wanting the grace of saving faith, they can never do any thing
which God will accept or reward: for without faith, it is impossible to please
him.

3. That as long as they continue such Psalm. 5. 5.
workers of vanity, and artificers of sin, God does detest, Pro. 13. 5.
loath, nay hate them; he cannot endure that they should take his Word into
their mouths, that they should Esai. 1. 12. 13.
tread his Courts, or intrude into his Assemblies and Congregations: Their
prayers and Prove. 15. 8. 21. and 10. 3.
sacrifices are so far from acceptance, that they are an abomination unto
him. He nothing values but disregardeth and rejects all their good works and
Almes-deedes as the fruitless leaves of barren fig trees, for Matthew. 7. 18
and 12. 33
it is not possible that good fruits should grow in such rotten and corrupt
trees.

Therefore let not men of such defiled consciences, crooked courses, and
heathnish conversations falsely suppose that they can so easily make God amends
for all former abuses and transgressions, and that they can so soon cover and
palliate their fore passed licentiousness and lewdness with a few rotten
rags of heartlesse almsdeeds. For the hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees
could give alms as liberally as any, and yet they were the cruellest pack of
blood-thirstie Hell Hounds that with open mouth, and implacable rage did hunt
and pursue the blessed Messiah and Savior of the world. A bloody Joab, a proud
Abner, 1 Cron. 26 28.
an envious, malicious, and persecuting Saul could dedicate some thing to God
and holy uses, and yet were all confounded and cut off in the end. The sayings
of some famous writers are so pertinent and pregnant for this purpose, that I
cannot omit them, Nullus in alium misericors esse potest, qui prave vivendo in
se non est misericors. etc. Isidor. lib. 3. de Summo bono.
one says, no man can be merciful to another, who by a wicked life is
merciless to himself. Charity begins at home first, and therefore how can
he be good to another that is an enemy to himself, or love his neighbor,
that cannot love himself: And further the same Author goes on and assures us,
that if any willingly wallow and continue in his sins, none of his evil
deeds can be pardoned and expiated by his Alms.

Another says, they verily who Sane qui sceleratissime vivunt nec curant talem
vitam moresque corrigere, etc. Aug. Euch. ad Laurentium.
live lewdly and licentiously, not caring to reform such their life and
conditions, although they ceasenot to give many alms while they live thus
wickedly, they do but vainly flatter themselv's. He that will give alms in due
order must begin at home, and first serve himself, for says the same
Father, whosoever thou art that leadest a lewd life, return and go home into
thy conscience, and there thou shall find a poor hunger starven soul, give
it some bread, bestow an alms upon that: if thou neglect to do that, give as
much as thou will otherwise, the tenth of thy estate, the half, yea, nine
parts and reserve but one unto thy self, it is nothing profitable, because
thou art poor and releevest not thy self.

Therefore if thou would reap true comfort to thy soul from thy bounty
and liberality, labor earnestly to reform thy ways, to mortify the earthly
members, to strangle thy corruptions, to abound in the work of the Lord, and
to furnish thy self with the rich confluence of all supernatural and saving
graces of the Holy Ghost, be merciful with Job, but a just man also, a fearer
of God, and an eschewer of evil: Be full of compassion with Barnabas the
son of consolation, and be also as full of piety and devotion: with blessed
Zacheus be charitable to the poor, but withal prove thy self to be a true
child of Abraham, and if any way injurious, be likewise with him a maker of
restitution. 1 Phil 7.
Refresh with Philemon the bowels of the Saints, but withal thou must be a m
believer in Christ, and a lover of the Saints, else it is but in vain to glory
in thy liberality.

Therefore such as wilfully persist and contumaciously run on in the ways of
their own hearts, and securely nuzzell themselves in their uncleanness, and
filt hie abominations, are in a most deplored and miserable Jam. 2. 13 Matthew.
25. 41.
state and condition. If they give no Alms at all, nor here show any mercy,
then they are sure to find no mercy hereafter, but to perish everlastingly:
And if they do never so many outward good works, yet they shall not be
accepted; what then is to be done will you say, or what course may be taken
for the prevention of this misery. I know no better advise than that of S.
Peter, Repent and be converted, Act. 3. 19.
that thy sins may bablotted out. Leave off bearing arms any longer against
the Majesty of Heaven: cast down thy self humbly at Christ's feet, consecrate
and resign thy self, soul and body wholly to his mercy, and to the
obedience of his Will, resolve hereafter to walk in his narrow ways and
unbeaten paths, follow the directions of his Word, and willingly submit unto
his Spiritual government, and then Give in the Name of Christ, and look for
a blessed acceptance.

CHAP. IX. Of motivs to Charity, and to Works.
ALL men naturally as they descend from the loins of Adam are of an earthy,
lumpish, and depraved constitution, very unapt, indisposed and insufficient for
the performance of any heavenly business and religious good work, and
together with the pestilent and hereditarie contagion of original sin which
is ever propagated to posterity, we receive also from the womb hard hearts,
and congealed bowels toward the needy, naked, and penurious members of Christ
Jesus.

Therefore to rouse up thy dead spirit, to animate and quicken thee to the
performance of every good duty and charitable work, and to inflame thy frozen
heart, with true and fervent love toward thy afflicted and distressed
brethren, hearken diligently a while to these following Reasons, these
convincing and demonstrative arguments, ponder I pray you seriously the weight
and validity of them and address thy self effectually to this holy practice,
and negotiation in the heavenly trade of Almes-giving, provide for thy soul in
another world: Be zealous Tit. 2. 14.
of good works.

1. Reasons drawn from God as our Father.
HE that does not so much desire to be accounted, as indeed and really to be
good and gracious, must set before his eyes as the pattern of his imitation,
God himself the sole Author of all grace and goodness, and the wel-spring of
bliss and immortality, and primarily from him fetch arguments to induce and
stir him up to the speedy practice of every good duty and especially to the
works of Charity.

1. He that by an all-commaunding power, and unquestionable authority rules
both men and Angels, and both the least and greatest creatures that are
existent either in heaven, earth, or hell, he I say it is that strictly
imposes this necessary duty upon us, and exacteth and requires the certain
performance and execution thereof at our hands: I command thee (says the-Lord)
thou shall open thy hand wide to thy poor and needy Brother, Deuteronomy. 15. 11.
Show mercy and compassiou every one to his Brother, Zach. 7. 9. And this
well-pleasing and best accepted sacrifice of Almes-giving we are exhorted never
to forget and neglect, Heb. 13. 16.

2. As God out of his greatness commands us, so of his goodness he commends
himself unto us as an unerring pattern for our imitation that we should
tread in his steps, and conform our selves to his most glorious image and
likeness as far as it is possible for mortal creatures to follow, and
immitate their immortal Creator.

1. A Father of the Fatherless, and Judge of Widows is God in his most holy
habitation, Psalm. 68. 5. and a refuge for the oppressed in the needful time
of trouble, Psalm. 9. 9. He does not despise nor abhor the affliction of the
afflicted, Psalm. 22. 24. He delivers the poor and needy, Psalm. 72. 12.
and is their present help in trouble, Psalm. 46. 1. He gives raiment to the
naked, Deuteronomy. 10. 18. food to the hungry, Psalm. 146. 7. and provides them
corn, Psalm. 65. 9. and of his tender goodness prepares for the poor,
Psalm. 68. 10. And herein if God be our Father, and we his truly adopted
sons, we as sons, are commanded to imitate him as our heavenly Father. Be
ye followers of God as dear children (says the Apostle,) Ephesians. 5. 7. and be
ye merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful (says our Savior,) Luke 6.
36.

2. That we might not fail in our obedience, nor come short of the practice
of this much honored duty of Almes-giving, he crowns us with abundance of
temporal blessings, and first gives to our selves, before he commands us to
give to others. It Is not within the compass and reach of a man's own power and
ability to rise and grow rich, to render himself remarkable in the eyes of
the world, and to greaten his posterity (although I confess most men to the
high dishonor of their Maker, sacrifice altogether to their own nets, and
look down only upon second causes) but this is from God, Deuteronomy. 8. 17. 18.
It Is God that alone and only gives to all, life and breath, and all things,
Act. 17. 25. 1. Tim. 6. 17. It Is he that makes the earth plentiful, and the
Clouds to drop fatness, Psalm. 65. 9. 12. It Is he that bestow's on us our
corn, wine, oil, silver and gold, Hos. 2. 8. Lastly, what we have is from
him, and our increase is his blessing, Genesis 26. 12. Lev. 25. 25. Thus we have
Gods own precept, his own example, and his own blessings in great plenty to
provoke us to be merciful and tenderhearted, and open-handed to the poor.

3. Having thus sufficiently furnished and prepared us for liberality by the
free effusion and inundation of his temporal blessings, he does not, neither
can he ask of us any thing but what is already his own, and what we at any
time give to the needy, we give it not de proprio, of our own proper treasure
and substance, but of the Lords abundance. David ingeniously acknowledges so
much, 1 Cron. 29. 14. 16. If then we should grumble and grudge to repair to
God by releeving the distressed, what formerly he has liberally collated on
us, were it not a piece of most prodigious unthankefulnesse, and abominable
ingratitude? yes certainly, to this purpose hear what a learned Father
writes, Da de quo dederat tibi Deus, ipse te divitem fecit, ergo redd^ illi
quod suum est, Give of what has been given thee of God, 'twas he that
enriched thee, and enabled thee to give, therefore repine not to give or lend
him something back again, which is already his own.

4. Consider after what manner, measure, and proportion, he has enjoined us to
dispense and distribute his good blessings, we must give accordingly as he
has prospered us, 1 Cor. 16. 2. So then in our liberality and charitable
contributions we must ever have an eye unto Gods bountiful hand, and
continuing providence, according to which he would have us to regulate and
proportionate all our pious and charitable actions. If God has given thee but
a modicum, some little small and (in thy carnal conceit) almost indivisible
portion, then he requires and expects that thou should give but a little: But
if thy temporal talents be many, thy purse heavy, thy Barnes full, and thy
wine and oil increased, it is requisite that thou should give much, where
much is given. But the thing that I would have you take special notice of, is
this, God commands neither impossibilities or difficulties, he is no hard
Taske-master, as the Egyptians were to the Israelites. In what measure and
degree he is good and gracious, liberal and compassionate unto us,
accordingly would he have us to be charitable unto others: first, he blesses
and prospers, after, enjoynes us to communicate: Oh the bottomless and
unfathomeable depth of the goodness and bountifulness of the Lord, thus to
prepare, incite and invite us to works of pity, piety, and liberality.

5. And lastly, let us consider seriously with our selves that the same
omnipotent, and all-sufficient hand which gives us all that ever we had or
have, can in a moment, if we prove ungrateful and unthankefull to the giver,
and merciless and uncharitable to our neighbors take quite away all from us
again: The Lord can, if once he begin to withdraw his blessings, easily
make all our labors, worldly employments, and endeavors to come to nothing, he
can quickly over-turne all our foolish plots and policies, and everlastingly
blast our hopes and desires for ever rising or growing rich in the world, he
can cause us, to sow Hag. 1. 6.
and to bring back few or no sheaves with us, to eat and not to have enough,
to drink, and yet to be thirsty, to wear clothes, and yet not to be warm,
to earne wages, and then to put it in a bag full of holes, nay if a man had an
infinite ocean of Gemmes, and unvaluable Jewels, many silver Mines and golden
Mountains, if Gods curse be upon all this Substance, it will all by little
and little and insensiblely almost crumble and moulder away into nothing, and
feasting Dives may soon become a fasting Lazarus: and so the Lord may send us
to beg of others, as he has sent others to beg of us. God is not engaged,
or obliged to any mortal man, that he should accumulate and heap his favors
and blessings more upon one than another (there is an equality) of desert in
the King, and in the Subject, in the richest and in the poorest; it is only his
free love and good will makes the difference: wherefore if thou have climbed up
to the height of humane happiness, overtop'd thy poor neighbor in outward and
worldly greatness, and now like the Eagle sit aloft pruneing thy stately
feathers in the glorious Sunshine of prosperity, remember Lazarus is thy
brother, think upon his affliction and penury as if they were thine own, and
praise the Lord that thou have whereof to give, and do not stand in need to
receive.

2. Reasons from Jesus Christ.
IN the next place if we reflect and cast our eyes from God the Father, on God
the Son our most dear and most blessed Savior, if our hearts were composed
and made all of Iron and Adamant, yet they could not but be thawed presently
into overflowing streams and full torrents of pity and compassion toward
Gods poor afflicted and penurious people.

1. He is our great and gracious Lord and Master, and himself by his own
mouth lays a strict charge upon all his Disciples and Professors of his Name
to be merciful to give Alms of such things as we have, Luke 11. 41. to give
to him that asks, beggeth or would borrow, and not to turn away our faces
from him, Matthew. 5. 42. yea with such vehemency and eagerness does he press
this most admirable and Heavenly duty, that rather than a man should not have
whereof to give, he commands him to sell what he has, and to give Alms, Luke
12. 33.

2. As he commands with much Power and Authority, so also he has been
pleased with great meekness and humility to propose himself as a pattern
for our direction. He was moved with compassion toward the weary, fainting,
and tired multitudes, that did daily flock after him, Matthew. 9. 36. to the
sick and diseased, Matthew. 1. 4. 14 Mark. 1. 41. to the hungry, Matthew. 15. 32.
and lastly, to the poor, to whom he was wont to give liberally, John 13. 29.
though he himself was without house and harbor of his own, Matthew. 8. 10. and
lived of be nevolence, and the bountiful contributions of the Saints, Luke 8.
3. Thus you see he did not only in a sense degrade and unglorifie himself
that he might exalt and invest us with the glorious robes of Immortality and
bliss, but for our sakes also be became poor, that we through his poverty
might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. Now if any man presume to entitle himself by
that Sacred name of a Christian, and hopes ever to rest with God on his Holy
hill, and to reign with Christ eternally in the highest Heavens for ever and
ever; Let him deny himself, take up his cross, tread in his steps, conform
himself to his most pure and holy Image, and likeness, let him be Holy as
he is Holy, patient as he is patient, merciful as he is merciful, humble
as he was humble, compassionate and tenderhearted, as he was compassionate to
all his weak and needy followers, for even hereunto are we called, and Christ
has left us an example that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21.

3. To put us in remembrance to commiserate the extremities and distresses-of
our needy and distressed brethren, our wise and gracious Savior has taught us
in our invocation and daily calling upon his and our father, not to beg
bodily nutriment, and corporal sustenance only for our selves alone, but for
them also, the form and manner of our prayer is this, Give us this day our
daily bread, there we pray for those necessaries which concur to support and
preserve not our own only, but also our poor neighbors natural being and
existence, and we should but mock the Almighty, and provoke him to just wrath
and indignation against us, if we with our lips should beg daily bread for
our poor and hungry brother, and in our hearts resolve and determine to starve
him by deteining, and keeping back that portion which God of purpose bestowed
upon us, as for our own, so also for our neighbors necessary refreshment and
sustentation.

4. He has of his wonderful, infinite, and ineffable bounty and compassion
reconciled us to his Father, appeased his wrath, satisfied his Justice,
Justified our persons and victoriously triumphed over death, hell and the
grave, that we might not only be made his peculiar people, redeemed from all
iniquity, and purified unto himself, but also zealous of good works. Tit. 2.
14. It Is true I confess, we should contend and labor for faith, hope,
patience, humility and the like graces, all which do deck and adorn the soul
of a christian, as so many several diamonds with an Angelical and unmatchable
beauty, and resplendent brightness, but charity is the supreme, royal, and
noblest grace, and principally to be aim date for she gives light and luster to
all the rest, and crown's the christians heart with most unspeakeable joy and
sweetness, with most infinite and transcendent splendour, and lightsomnesse, and
were it not so that there is a necessary co^catenation and inseparable society
of all saving graces, and none goes alone: but is ever attended and waited on
by the rest. I would boldly affirm that though thou had an Angels tongue, a
Scraphicall voice, a Prophetical spirit, the patience of Job, the wisdom of
Solomon, the integrity of David, Sampsons strength and Joshuahs Courage, and
resolution, yet I say for all this if thou had no Charity, thy hopes were
but worme-eaten, thy faith but a rotten opinion, or a brazen confidence, thou
were in the judgment of an Apostle, but saunding brass, a tinkling Cymball,
or a mere nothing: See the prelation and eminency of Charity in the 1. Epi.
Cor. 1. 3. cap. 5. Me thinks the very considration that Christ Jesus at his
second and glorious coming shall crown thee, according to thy charitablenesse,
or condemn thee according to thy cruelty, and mercilessenesse, should be a
strong motive and keen spur, to quicken and prick thee forward to works of
mercy: for most certainly according as thou have fed, clothed, visited and
refreshed Christ in his poor and distressed members, so shall thou be
adjudged and sentenced, either to life or death, heaven or hell: no pity here
to the poor members, no mercy there from the head: and if now here on earth
thou have played the Canniball, in eating up Gods people like bread, in
deteyning their due portions, and mercilessely trampling the poor people of
the Lord under the foul feet of pride and contempt assuredly Jesus Christ
will come one day before thou art aware of, and like a Lion Hos. 13. 8.
roaring for his prey, or as a Bear bereaved of her whelps, he will rent the
Caul of thy heart, and tear thee in pieces when there is none to help, and
in his implacable fury, and inexorable indignation, he will everlastingly
condemn thee, and send thee with a curse to hell, for not feeding or clothing
him in his needy, naked, and afflicted members. Mat. 25.

3. Reasons from God the holy Ghost.
IT will not, I suppose, be amiss to the two first persons God the father, and
God the son, to add the asseveration and undeniable evidence of the third, God
the holy ghost, who sithence in his all-seeing and inserutable wisdom, has
been pleased to make use of the pens and tongues of Prophets and Apostles, in
the publishing and promulgation of the law and gospel, does severely bind us
to the performance of every duty, which either Prophets or Apostles have
commanded or commended unto us: for all Scripture is of divine inspiration. 2.
Timo. 3. 16. and holy men spoke as they were moved by the holy ghost. 2. Pet:
1. 25. Therefore whatsoever we find in the holy Scriptures enjoined by them, we
are to esteem with reverence, and subscribe to, as the very precepts and
ordinances of the holy spirit: So then it were a point of intolerable
contumacy, and Diabolical presumption to contemn and disregard those sacred
directions for charity and works of mercy, prescribed and set down by the
never erring penmen of holy writ, either by Solomon Cast thy bread upon the
waters, for thou shall find it after many days. Eccles. 11. 1. 2. etc. or by
Moses, Thou shall not harden thy heart nor shut thy hand from thy poor
brother. Deuteronomy: 1. 5. 7. or by St. Paul, on the first day of the week let every
one lay by him in store, etc. 1. Cor. 16. 1. 2. or by any other Pro. 3. 27.
Esaias. 58. 7. Ezekiel. 8. 7. Romans 12. 8. 2 Cor. 8. 11 2. Cor. 9. 7. 1. Tim. 6. 17
Heb. 13. 1. 2 Col. 3. 12. 14.
Prophet or Apostle. Wherefore as thou will not by any means grieve that holy
Spirit, Which only and alone is able to seal up thy soul against the day of
thy perfect Redemption, do not stop and obture thy cares against his sweet
charms, and most blessed precepts, and instructions unto Works of Mercy.

2. Whatsoever holy duty the Spirit of God commands, that, the same Spirit
gives the elect and regenerate ability and grace to perform and accomplish.
By a secret and insensible operation and heavenly influence it works and
implants the noble grace of Charity in the Garden of the Soul. ( For love is a
fruit of the Spirit. God: 5. 22) and seasons and qualifies the heart of every
truly charitable Cornelius, with the habit of mercy, compassion, and
fellowfeeling tenderness, and then afterward exacts and expects the the
external acts, as the real evidences and demonstrative testimonies of the
invisible and internal inherent Grace of Charity. And it is well worth your
best observation, that what persons soever the Holy Ghost sanctified unto
salvation, and cannonized Saints here on earth, the same he crowned and
adorned especially with the unvaluable Jewel of Charity, and the sweet
smelling garland of charitable works. And wheresoever in the bible you read
the character of a holy man, you shall be sure to find also charity fairly
described in the Catalogue of his graces. Job was a perfect man and upright man
Job. 1. 1. and he was a charitable man, Job: 30. 25. and 31. 16. 17. 20.
Cornelius was a devout man, but he gave much alms. Acts. 10. 3. Saint Paul
was a faithful servant and invincible champion of Jesus Christ, but he
certifies Timothy of his charity. 2. Tim. 3. 10. Barnabas was a good man and
full of the Holy Ghost. Act. 11. 24. but a wonderful charitable man, Act. 4.
36, 37. and if you desire more examples for the fuller clearing of the truth of
our assertion, you may read how pity and piety, Sincerity and charity,
graciousnesse and tender-heartednesse mutually embraced and kissed each other:
in Zacheus Luke 19. in the Macedonians. 2, Cor. 8. 2. 5. in the Corinthians. 2.
Cor. 8. 7. 10. and 19. 13. in the Converts, and faithful believers when
Christianity was first planted by Apostolical labor and industry. Act. 4. 34.
And lastly in what heart soever the blessed Spirit of God ever created any
saving gifts and graces, it ever certainly warmed and inflamed it also with
true love, pity, and compassion toward Christ's needy and afflicted members.
Without the participation and happy fruition of Charity, the same spirit
assures us, that all other gifts and graces, moral perfections, Charismata
sine Charitate nihil sunt. Par.
and natural indowments whatsoever are but as nothing. 1. Cor. 13. that there
is no love of God in that man, who shuts up his bowels of compassion from
the poor. 1. Joh, 3. 17. and finally that fearful condemnation, judgment,
and mercilessenesse shall be his reward, and certain wages who has showed noe
mercy. Jam. 2. 13.

4. Reasons from the Poor and distressed persons.
Such as with tender and pitiful eyes, Psalm. 41. 1.
consider, look on and lay to heart (for so much the word implies) the
temporal wants and calamities of the poor, and Lazarus his lamentable and
deplored estate and condition cannot choose but condole, and sympathine with
afflicted Joseph, and be moved to present pity and commiseration: For

1. He is thy neighbor whom thou art strictly commanded to show mercy unto,
Luke 10. 37. and to love as thy self, Matthew. 22. 39. Now what way can thou
better testify thy love and fellow-feeling affection toward him then by
supplying his present necessities, and by preventing his future miseries.

2. He is made of the same mould, hewed out of the same to the thou wast, nay,
he is thine Esai. 58.
own flesh (as the Prophet speaks) for we are all made but of our blood, Act.
17. 26. and now thou might be reputed an unnatural, mad, and distracted
Bedlam, if thou should willingly and wittingly suffer thine own flesh and
members to freeze with cold, and thy belly and bowels to pine and languish with
hunger, when thou have beth sufficiency of clothes and induments, and
abundance of food, variety of cordials, and dainty dishes lying moulding at
home in thy plentiful Panary.

3. The Lord himself, who in his own infinite nature is incomprehensible and
invisible, See Down. page 204. of saint Ang. Worcester.
presents himself in a manner visible to our eyes in the person of the poor
Christian, and lovingly entreats us by their mouths, to lend him something of
what he has formerly conferred on us, for he that gives to the poor,
lends to the Lord, Prove. 19. 17. Now what most monstrous madness and
intolerable ingratitude were it to refuse to repaie back to him a penny, who
has bestowed on us a pound, who gave us all that we have, or ever are like to
have, and who can again, if he please, quickly by just right and authority
take away all again, and make our cursed winged wealth to fly swiftly away
like the Eagle, or to melt away on a sudden, as the unseasonable snow against
the heat of the burning and powerful Sun: Wherefore, know this, that
whatsoever thou possessest is none of thine own, but Gods: thou art but his
Steward to disburse and expend it when, where, and to whom he bids thee, hear
how Saint Austine brings in Christ speaking: Da Aug. de ver. Domini.
mihi de co quod dedi tibi, de meo quaro and mihinon donas? Da and reddo;
habuisti me largitorem, facito debitorem: Give me says Christ something of
that I have given unto thee, I ask but mine own, and will thou not give?
Give, and I will restore, thou have found me a free Giver, and now make me to
become thy debtor.

4. Thy poor and needy brother has some kind of right and title, unto that
part of thy Substance which thou can without any detriment and inconveniencie
spare, to releeve, succor, and support him in his inevitable necessities, and
most desperate extremities. I say, although he cannot jure proprietatis, yet
jure charitatis, he may lay just claim to some part of thy temporal
substance: wise Prove. 3. 27.
Solomon is of the same opinion and evidently affirms, that it is the poor
man's due, and he is the owner of that good which we can do unto him, to
which purpose, hear the unanimous consent of the ancient Fathers: It is the
bread of the hungry (says Saint Basil,) which mouldeth in Est panis fa melici
que^ tu tenes, nudi tunica, quam tu in conclavi conservas, etc. Basil.
thy Bing or Cubbord: It is the Coat of the naked, which hangs useless in
thy Wardrop, they are the shoes of him that goes barefoote, which lies
rotting by thee in thy Chamber: It is the silver of the needy, which lies
rusting in thy Chests, and so many thou do rob, and injure, as thou can and
do not releeve in their wants and miseries. And another Ambrose in Lucanum.
says, that it is alike faulty and blameworthy to take from the right
owners, and to deny necessaries to the poor when we have abundance: And
therefore I must let thee know, that thou spoylest so many of their goods, as
thou deniest relief unto, when thou art able to give it. This may, I confess,
seem a Paradoxe to usurious, covetous, and hardhearted earth-wormes, who being
themselves stark drunk with the pleasant wine of outward happiness, and
worldly prosperity, have neither sense nor sight of the poor man's misery:
but it is a truth, as evident and clear, as the Sun at noone, to all
true-hearted and charitable Christians: for if the hungry have no true right
unto the rich man's food, how could the Disciples when they were pinched with
extreme hunger pluck and Matthew. 12. 1.
eat the ears of corn, without sinning against God, and immediate damage
and injury against man? Or how could it be lawful, for a poor hungry man, in
case of necessity, to enter into his neighbors Vineyard, and there to eat
grapes his fill, if God had not given him leave, and unquestionable license and
authority so to do by his own mouth, Deuteronomy. 23. 24.

5. Consider, that the poorest creeple, and blindest Bartimeus that sits
groaning, sighing, and sobbing in his contemptible and much neglected Cabin,
has with thee the same Father, (both so call God) the same elder Brother Jesus
Christ; the same Mother the Church of God, he is a member of the same mystical
body thou art, an heir unto the same Crown, a partaker of the same promises,
bought with the same price of Christ's dearest and most precious blood, baptized
with the same Baptism, admitted to the same Covenant of Grace, invited to sit
at the same Communion Table, to taste and feed on the same Spiritual food
with thee; and although he be in thy proud estimation, but an Abject, a base
forsaken destitute dunghill companion, and thou will take no notice of such a
woeful spectacle here on earth, yet he shall be thy equal, if not superior, a
companion with Angels, a Co-heire whith Christ, and shine like the brightest
Cherub in the Kingdom of Heaven. For God that impartial Judge, and
Non-respecter of persons, no less loves an upright and religious Job on the
durtie dunghill, than the stateliest Solomon ruling uncontroleablely in his
golden Throne: nay, if thou be a contemner of the ways of Godliness, a
Patron of profaneness, an Idolizer of thine own too much admired
Greatness, and a churlish Nabal toward needy and helpless Christians; I
say, thy poor and now much neglected brother may there find most certain
admission, and gracious acceptance, where thou shall have but cold
entertainment, little respect, nay, a cutting answer, a most terrible and
grievous objurgation, Go thou cursed, etc. I pray you weigh and consider that
most excellent Parable in the Gospel, was not once poor scabbed and ulcerous
Lazarus royally feasted Luke 16.
by the Angels of Heaven in Abraham's bosom, when Epicurizing Dives lay rosting
in Hell flames, there most dolefully gaping and calling for a drop of cold
water, and yet could not obtain it?

6. And lastly, remember to lay a side all proud and contemptuous thoughts, and
never look upon a poor man with a neglective eye, or supercilious and
frowning countenance, for thou art his superior but only in externals, in
visible, mutable, and fugitive vanities. Perhaps thou may have more gilded
durte at home in thy coffers, many more Vineyards, Houses, and Farms,
Visitants, Followers, Dependants, etc. But all these may forsake thee, or thou
must them. He may equalize thee in Spiritual and Heavenly wealth, and
Celestial substance in grace and goodness, chastity, and temperance, and in
the internal, invisible, and never fading beauty, indowments and perfections
of the soul: nay, there is an equality between the richest and the poorest
both at their coming into the world; (for both came naked) and at their going
out, (for naked they shall both return again) and after death, both alike
shall be dissolved into a piece of clay, or lump of dirt. And lastly, at the
day of Judgment, when all nations, and Revel. 7. 9.
tongues, and kindreds, and people, shall rise and appear before the Lamb,
there shall be no difference or inequallirie at all. Dives then shall not come
forth clothed with his robes, nor Lazarus with his rags, but all alike shall
hold up their hands, to be judged and rewarded according to their deserts.
Wherefore let none be puffed up with their temporary happiness, nor
transported beyond themselves with an imaginary and groundless admiration of
their own greatness: Let none, I say, neglect and contemn those poor
afflicted Saints for whom Christ died, and shed his blood as plentifully and
meritoriously as for the greatest and imperious Monarchs: For at the last
great and dreadful day of the appearance of Jesus Christ, men shall be
accepted and rewarded not according to their greatness, but their goodness,
not according to their outward felicity, pomp, and worldly gloriousness, but
according to their pity, piety, mercy, loving kindness, charity, and
tender-heartednesse, Matthew. 25.

5. Motive from the person of the Giver.
LEt those that are of ability to give, recollect their wandering thoughts a
little while, and sit down and ruminate soberly on these things.

Thou have perhaps, scraped together as much temporary and worldly pelf and
treasures, as a reasonable creature can desire; thou aboundest perchance, in
great honors, much wealth, and magnificence of state: Sed unde habeas, quaero?
But I pray thee, whence had thou all these good gifts and blessings? From
God, I hope, thou will say, Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
Who gave thee power to get wealth, and has blessed thee in the city, and in
the field, in the Deuteronomy. 28. 3. 4. 5.
fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy ground, in thy basket and
storehouses, and all that thou have put thine hand unto, and thus he has
granted thy petition, and given thee abundance of daily bread. Remember now
then, that as the poor man begs of thee, so thou have often begged of another.
Jam sumus ergo pares, might he say, two Beggars are well met together, only
here is the difference: Thou art a rich beggar, and he a poor beggar; Thou
make thy petition unto God only, he unto thee a man. Thou find by
experience that God answers thy petitions, and gives to thee sometimes without
asking: and wilt not thou bestow something on the poor at his importunate
obsecration and entreatie? Take heed, lest, as thou art deaf unto the
petitions of thy brother, God turn his Face away from thee, and shut up his
bowels of loving kindness in displeasure.

Consider further, that though thou art perchance, man's creditor, yet thou art
Gods debtor; before men thou seem to be Luke 16. 12.
an absolute owner of thy goods, but thou art not so before the Lord, thou art
but a steward of 1. Pet. 4. 10.
his manifold gifts and graces, and one day thou must be strictly accomptable
for the expense and employment of every talent, and the smallest mite.

Again it is a truth most certain, and undeniable, that all rich men are
substituted by God Matthew. 6.
to be his Overseers of the poor, he that by the eye of his providence Ps.
147. 9.
watches over the sparrowes, and sustaineth the young ravens that call upon
him, doubtless will tenderly respect, sustain, and provide for the poor and
his needy Saints and Servants. Let not therefore rich men be careless of
those, whom God so much cares for. As our Overseers which are appointed in all
parishes are our eyes, and hands, and feet to visit, relieve, and supply the
necessities of the poor: so should all rich men, who are Gods chosen
Overseers, Job. 29. 14. 15. 1 Cor. 16. 2
be with holy Job, eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, and a father to
the poor. But if this be not an office great enough for them, and answereable
to their expectations, let them thank God that he has made them his
lord-treasurers, to receive in his royal revennues, and to lay up in store for
the maintenance, and supportation of the public weal of the poor.

Lastly, ponder well with thy felfe that gracious saying of Jesus Christ: It is
a more blessed Act. 20. 35.
thing to give then to receive. Worthy receivers, doubtless shall be blessed,
yet liberal givers shall be happier in a far higher degree: for the good we
do unto the poor is more beneficial to us, then our gift can be to them,
just contrary to the opinion of the world, and graceless men, who take as much
pleasure in feeding hawks and hounds with Gods portion, as in relieving the
poor, and think that to be quite lost which they bestow to good uses. We sow
only carnal and corporal things, but we reap spiritual comforts, we give
that which is temporal and receive that which is eternal: we confer a few
rags or crumbes of comfort upon them, they return back again in recompense
Act. 10. 5. (...).
their prayers and blessings: they receive but the favor and bounty of a man,
we the benediction and mercy of God: our alms is accepted of them, and we and
it of our gracious Redeemer, into whose glorious habitation our charitable
actions ascend up before hand to be a memorial before God, or as the word
carries it, to be a standing monument and remembrance, of us for ever in his
presence, whither our own persons shall one day be translated, there to be
crowned with those Joys and felicities which he has so largely promised in
his Gospel.

6. Reasons from riches themselves.
Nothing does so much retard, and withold men back from the cheerful
practice of these duties of charity, as their love of riches, and vain
confidence in their treasures, gold, silver, and other excrements of the earth:
We should remember that we are forbidden by a Prophet and an Apostle, either
to trust in them, or to set our hearts upon them. Psalm. 62. 10. 1. Tim^. 6. 17.
And indeed it were a point of much madness, and transcendent folly, to depend
on such false friends, and broken reeds, who will certainly one day leave us
in the mite. For there is nothing but mutability, deceitfulness, and 1. Timo.
6. 17.
uncertaintie in Pro. 23. 15. and 27. 24
Eagle winged wealth, they can stand a man in no stead in evil times, Eze. 7.
19. Pro. 11. 4.
nor deliver him in the day of wrath: he that enjoyes them, holds but a snow
ball in his hand, and when he has scraped them together, he has labored all
the while, to gather but a heap of dust, which a few drops of water will
quickly lick up, and a blast of wind overturne and disperse in a moment. Psa.
39. 6.
He that heapeth them, knows not who shall gather them. They are apt to Matt.
13.
choke and extinguish grace, and the holy seed of the Word, to tire the
spirit, and dull the understanding, harden the heart, and that which is worst
of all, to Mark. 10. 23.
bar the soul out of Heaven: they bring much Eccles. 4. 8. and 5. 13.
coffeehouse, torment, vexation, and great hurt sometimes to the unhappy
owners: in a word, man's life (says Christ) consists not in the Luke. 12. 15.
20. 21.
abundance of those things which he does enjoy, and he is registered in the
Gospel for a notorious fool that hoarded up wealth for himself, and was not
rich toward God.

Seeing therefore there is no cause why we should affect riches, or put any
confidence in such watery bubbles, fugitive Eagles, sading flowers, and slippery
sands, let us learn to use them well, and to dispose of them in a right manner
to the relief of the poor, Gods glory, and our own souls consolation.
Healthful potions may be extracted out of hurtful simples: So may much good
and spiritual joy out of earthly dross, Luke. 16. 9
and unrighteous Mammon.

7. Reasons from the Creatures of God.
IF we cast but our eyes (and if we have any, we cannot choose) into the
voluminous book of the Creatures, thence we may learn a lesson of charity,
and by the consideration of their mutual contributions one upon an other, we
cannot but be moved unto pity and commiseration. The heavens and those
Celestial bodies communicate their influence to all sublunarie bodies. The
sun sends down his radiant and lively beams to warm and enlive the cold
and inanimate earth, the clouds, those bottles of heaven drop down their
fatness, and dissolve themselves into sweet showers, and dewes to refresh the
schorched heat and the parched and barren soil. The over flowing rivers fill
up the dry diches and empty holes: The root treasureth not up the sap for it
self, but seasonably diffuseth it into every twig and branch of the tree, that
all may blossom and flourish together. The manured and tilled field, receives
and nourishes the seed in its bowels, that it may return multiplicity of
increase unto the poor laborious husbandman. The unnatural cuckoo that Gentle
woman-like bird conceives and lays her eggs in another birds nest, and will
not take the pains to hatch and 1. King. 17. 4. 6.
bring them up, and yet this bastard offspring will the hedg-sparrow cherish and
relieve, that it die not. The ravens which are more apt to pick out a man's
eyes, then to do him any good, at Gods bidding minister corporal food and
nutriment to the Prophet Elijah in his want. Hereby giving us to understand,
that it is our duty, at Gods command to relieve and sustain those that are
ready to perish. What shall I speak here, of the sweet Harmony of the body
natural, and the reciprocal and mutual offices of the sympathizing members,
which are ever ready and nimble to succor and supply the wants and necessities
one of another. Let the consideration of these things teach us, that are the
noblest creatures that breath on Gods earth, and the living members of the
mystical body, to be willing to distribute to the wants and necessities one
of another.

8. Reasons from our Communion and fellowship one with another,
COmmunion is nothing else but a common union one with another, whereby we
become tenderly affected with the same object, and sensible either of the same
good, or the same evil that may befall us. So that wheresoever there is this
fellowship and society, there cannot but be a fellow-feeling and sympathy: now
this fellowship and communion is 3. fold.

1. Natural, as we are all originally hewed out of the same Act. 17. 26.
rock, made of the same cloth (for nothing but the sheeres go between)
descended from the same blood, and branches of the same Stock of mankind, and
in this respect thou art bound to relieve any distressed poor wretch
whatsoever in, case of true extremity. Perhaps thy poor neighbor may be, or
has been a careless loose-liver, an idle droane, or some other ways
impudently rebellious and opposite to God. Notwithstanding if need so require,
thou must succor him, Non quiapeccator, sed quia homo, because he is a man,
not as he is a sinner: thou must take pity on his nature though not on his
notoriousnesse: for herein thou art but a supporter of the common state of
humanity, David we read was compassionate to the wearied and 1. Sam. 30. 11.
Luke. 10.
almost famished Egyptian, so was the liberal Samaritane to the man that had
fallen among Thieves. So then if humanity be such Motive and spur unto mercy,
then much more should Affinity, and most of all consanguinitie, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
Ruth. 2. 20.
as Paul teaches by Doctrine, and good Boaz by practice towads Ruth and old
Naomi.

2. Political, as we are the members of one Commonweal and body politic,
and in this regard should we be induced to commiserate the distresses, and
calamities of disconsolate men. All well governed Commonweales have ever been
careful herein, and our state has taken special order for the relief of the
poor; And indeed it is a great honor unto a kingdom, by prudence and policy
to cure and care for the ulcerous and impotent feet, as well as to maintain
and defend the honor and glory of the Head. The Lord himself that made choice
of Israel only for his peculiar Nation, and by his Wisdom and providence
brought them and planted them in Canaan, most graciously provided for the poor
amongst them in establishing Laws for their continual help and sustentation
many ways; no Nation or people under Heaven had ever the like.

1. They were allowed the Lev. 19. 10.
gleanings of the fields and vineyards, Lev. 23. 22.
and it was not lawful for the rich to make clean riddance, and to rake the
fields over again and again as now they do; as if they would starve not
only the poor, but the very sparrowes also. If any had forgotten Ruth. 2. 2. 3.
a sheafe behind them, they were not to return back to fetch it, It was a
portion for the stranger, the fatherless and the Deuteronomy. 24. 20. 21.
widow. Every third year there was a tithe to be laid aside, both for the
Levite and the poor, Deuteronomy. 14. 28. 29. and 26. 12. Every seventh year all
the fruits and profits of the Fields, Vineyards and Olives were common to the
rich and to the poor: and this was also a year of release, no debts could or
ought to be exacted, Deuteronomy. 15. 1. 2. 4.
but the creditours were freely to remit them, that there might be no beggar
in Israel. Now if question be made whether this discharging of debts might not
much endamage their Godw. Moses and Aaron. lib. 3. cap. 9.
estates, if they did lend, or harden their hearts not to lend: one makes
answer for me, it could no way be prejudicial or hurtful unto them, for
this is a most infallible Maxim, No man is a loser by serving God. Again,
Every fiftieth year was the year of Jubilee, and at this time, those that were
grown poor, and fallen into decay, if they had sold any Lands and Tenements,
they Levit. 25. 36. 37.
were to receive back again their ancient possessions. This year was also a
year of general release and liberty. Lastly, besides these Laws political,
the moral Law tied them to exercise works of mercy and to lend freely (and not
upon usury) as it now binds us. Our statute Laws concerning usury do by no
means allow of the sin, but curb and restrain men, that they might not be
so wicked as otherwise they would be.

3. The third and best kind of fellowship we have one with another is
Christian communion as we are the Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 27.
members in particular, making up one mystical body whereof he is the Head.
This should be the most inflaming motive to quicken us to the performance of
our Spiritual and corporal charitable duties one to another. This is the
truest, heartiest, and best accepted charity, when we are persuaded to give to
the poor, not because he is a cozen or a kinseman, or a servant, etc. but
because he is united with us in the same body, to the same head, because he is
a sheep of the same fold, a child of the same father, a member of the same
body, as we are. This is properly Phile. 7. Gal. 6. 10.
the refreshing of the bowels of the Saints, a doing of good unto all, but
especially to the household of faith. This was the charity of the Saints in the
primitive Act. 2. 45. 4. 32. 37. and 11. 28.
Church after the first preaching of the Gospel, and large effusion of the
holy Ghost. This consideration of the poor, in relation to Christ, moved the
Macedonians and other Christian Gentiles to send relief to the 2. Cor. 8.
poor Saints in Judaea. Thus you see it behooves us to be bountiful and open
handed in this 3. fold rrespect. 1 in regard of our natural fellowship as we
are men. 2. in respect of our political communion, as we are sociable moral
men. 3. im respect of our Christian communion as we are the peculiar and
redeemed people of the Lord. Do good we must unto all, unto the state of
humanity, unto the state politic, but chiefly unto the state of
Christianity. The first is for man's sake, the second for the kings sake, but
the last is for Christ's sake, who will one day be our liberal play master and
rewarden. Mat. 25.

9. Reasons from the nature, excellency, acts, titles and benefits of Charity.
1. THere is a very large description of the nature of charity by sixteen
particular properties in 1. Cor. 13. 1. 4, 5, 6. and there we find likewise a
high commendation and prelation of it, before all other supernatural habites,
and spiritual indowments. It is preferred before a Seraphicall tongue, a
Prophetical spirit, a bottomless understanding, and accurate 1 Cor. 13.
infight into all mysteries: before hope, a justifying, or a wonder-working
faith, (in regard of its duration and perpetuity) charity never fails, but
whether there be Prophecies, they shall fail, and whether there be tongues,
they shall cease, and whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish, faith
likewise and hope shall one day cease, by the presence, and full enjoyment of
Christ, but love accompanies a man into heaven and is not nullified, but
perfected in the life to come. Thus as Arist. eth. lib. 2.
Prudence obteines the highest place among all cardinal moral virtues: So
does Charity right well deserve the chiefest and principal seat among all
cardinal spiritual graces. There is yet more honor than this attributed in
the Gospel unto this renowned and royal virtue. It Is preferred before all
outward ceremonial observances, before a willing subjection to ver. 3.
martyrdom, and a free parting with a man's whole estate, before all the other
moral duties of the second table, as Mat. 19. 21.
appears by the speech of our Savior Christ unto the rich yongman, who when
he thought himself, as absolute and exact a man as might be, yet lacked one
thing to make him perfect, and that was charity, and distribution of his
wealth to the poor. It Is preferred before Pro. 21. 13.
prayer and invocation upon the Lord, for if we be deaf to the cries of the
poor, God will stop his ears against our supplications. Before bare hearing
of the word, without conscionable practice of it, for there were many such
unprofitable Eze. 33. 31.
hearers in Ezekiels days and in our Savior Christ's time, who shall be
excluded and shut out of heaven, before Esa. ^ 8. 6.
fasting, and a superstitious maceration of the flesh, before Hos. 6. 6.
Sacrifice and burnt offerings, before Mich. 6. 6.
thousands of rams and ten thousands of rivers of oil: to do justly, to love
mercy, and to walk humbly be things that the Lord requires and delights in,
Heb. 13. 16.
To do good and communicate is the sacrifice with which God is, well pleased.
Thou in giving art the priest, the poor the altar, thy alms the Phil. 4. 18.
acceptable Sacrifice and sweet odor unto God. Again it is preferred before the
strickt and superstitious observation of the Sabbath: for when the disciples,
who through extremity of hunger did pluck some ears of corn, and rubbed them
in the hands, were accused thereof by the Pharisees, our Savior Christ finds
no fault with them, but accounts them innocent and guiltless, and returns
back this answer, Mat 12. 1. 7.
I will have mercy and not Sacrifice. Lastly at the day of judgment, not our
profession of Christ, not our believing, or hearing, or reading, or meditating
on the Word, or fasting days, or our holy and heavenvenly colloquies, and
conferences, (all which are the rich ornaments of a Christian soul) shall then
be spoken of, but our charity Mat. 25.
and mercifulness: unless this grace does usher along all the rest, they can
do a man no service neither shall they find any entertainment or acceptance
at the last day. Now what man that in a right manner, and with a spiritual eye
does discern and behold the beauty and excellency of this so amiable and
honorable grace can choose, but be exceedingly enamoured, and presently
ravished with the love of so transcendent and amiable a Jewel.

2. The consideration of those titles and appellations, wherewith the very acts
of charity are honored should inflame us to the practice of them. They are
called by the holy Ghost, a 2 Cor. 9. 5. 13. and 8. 4. 7.
blessing, grace, Communion, a Phil. 4 18.
Sacrifice and service unto God a sweet savor, a Prove. 19. 17.
lending to the Lord, a Act. 20. 35.
blessed act. Now do thou desire to be blessed in thy doings to abound in
grace and goodness, to be in the communion of Saints, nay would thou become
a creditor to thy Creator, why then lend him something by clothing, feeding,
and relieving the poor.

3. Let us confider and ponder well with our selves the good we do, and
benefits we shall receive by showing Pro. 14. 31. Luke 10. 17. 1 Pet. 2. Job.
29. 13. Pro. 11. 17. Mat. 16. 26.
mercy to our brethren, we honor God, we discharge a good duty hereby, we
grace and adorn our holy profession, we stop the mouths of our adversaries
abroad, and prevent the obloquies of vain men at home, we refresh and make
glad the heart of the distressed, and we do the greatest good unto our own
soul, the safety and preservation whereof is more worth than the gaining of
ten thousand worlds. Nay the benefits which we shall reap and acquire to our
own selves by our charity and liberality are very many, and not more for
number, then great for weight. First we make the Pro. 19. 17. Psa. 18. 25.
Psalm. 41. 1, 2, 3.
all-sufficient Jehovah to become our debtor, and in the mean time for
seasonable repayment we have security enough, a bill of his hand, even his own
written word. 2 We gain him to become merciful to us, to be our attendant in
our sickness, our refuge and Protector against our enemies, and our present
deliverer in time of trouble. 3 By Pro. 3. 3. 4. Pro. 21. 21. and 16. 6. Dan.
4. 27. 2 These. 2. 17.
mercy we may find favor and understanding, life, righteousness, and honor
in the sight of God and man, we procure the purgation and remission of our
iniquities, a freedom from the slavery of sin, much tranquillity and comfort
of mind, much setlednesse and stability of heart, eternal blessedness and
Pro. 3. 3. 4. Pro. 21. 21. and 16. 6. Dan. 4. 27. 2 These. 2. 17. Mat. 5. 7. 2
Cor. 9. 13. 14. 1 John 29. 13. 1 John 3. 17. Jam. 3. 17. Act. 4. 32. 1 John 3.
18. Jam. 2. 15. 16. Gal. 5. 6. Col. 3. 12. Psalm. 1. 12. 4. 5. 9.
felicity in the world to come, and in the mean time the prayers of the poor,
and their grateful thankesgiving unto God for us, and our professed subjection
unto the Gospel of Christ. 4. Hereby we make experiment and true trial of
the truth of our love to God and toward our neighbor, of our wisdom whether
it be from below earthly and sensual, or from above, pure, gentle and
peaceable: of the sincerity of our affections, and our unanimity, whether we
love in tongue and in word only, or indeed or truth: of the purity and
unfeinednesse of our faith, whether it be dead, a mere dream, fancy, or
opinion, or an operative purifying, or lively grace. 5. We gain a great deal
of good reputation with the Lord, for he makes so much of merciful men, that
he is pleased to call them elect, holy and beloved, upright, righteous,
gracious, good, etc. We evidently demonstrate Luke. 6. 36. 2. Cor. 1. 3. Jam.
5. 11. Ephesians. 2. 10. Tit. 2. 14. Col. 1. 10. Mat. 25. 34. Luke. 12. 33. 34.
that we are the true offspring and real children of God, who is the Father
of mercies, and the God of all consolation: that we are his workmanship, the
redeemed and peculiar nation, the blessed of the Father, etc. We should be
proud of these titles, and quickly lifted up, if men should but honor us with
such names, and why should we not be transported with an holy ambition, and a
pious earnestness, and greediness after these celestial honors, which the
Lord will and does certainly confer upon all truly charitable and merciful
men. 6. And lastly, by our laying out to the poor, we lay up for our selves
bags that will never wax old, and treasures in the heavens, which will never
fail, and while we are here on earth sojourners in these fleshly Tabernacles,
we hereby prevent losses in these outward earthly blessings: for says
Isodore, by giving to the poor Terrena servando amittimus, largiendo servamus.
Isiodor.
we preserve our earthly things, and by a covetous hoarding and keeping of
them, we loose them. So then, it can by no means possible endamage a man's
estate to give to the poor, and to lend to the Lord, look how much he lays
out here on earth, by a Bill of Exchange he shall receive much more in the
kingdom of heaven, where he lays up a good 1 Timothy 6.
foundation against the time to come, that he may lay hold on eternal life.
Now let us sum up all in a few words and lay all together: Is charity of such
a pure and undefiled nature, adorned with so glorious and gracious properties,
with so many eminent titles? Is it so beneficial to others and our selves?
such an evidence of our incorporation into Christ? shall it be so infinitely
rewarded at the day of Judgment? Who then will proclaim himself to be such
a notorious fool, as not to embrace so amiable a Virtue, to pray for it, and
cheerfully practice it in his life and conversation.

10. Reasons from Gods large Promises.
IF we for all this yet remain Adamants and inflexible to good duties, Let us
consider the promises which God has made unto us, to provoke us to bounty and
liberality: They are both many and gracious, liberal, free, and innumerable,
and concern both the good of our bodies and the eternal happiness and
welfare Luke 6. 36. 37.
of our souls. If we give unto others, it shall be given unto us again. He
that has a bountiful eye and distributeth his bread to the poor, he shall be
blessed in all those things he puts Deuteronomy. 15. 10. Prou. 11. 24. 25..
his hands unto: The liberal soul shall be madefat, and he that waters,
shall be watered again, and Gods blessing shall be upon his head. If he fear
want, and future penury, the promise is he Prove. 28. 27.
shall never lack. In other tradings men may be undone, but not in this, never
yet was any man a looser, by lending unto the Lord. If Satan with all his
infernal armies and hellish instruments and confederates, which are in the
world, should rise up in arms against him, (as doubtless he will) yet he
shall not be delivered into their Psalm. 41. 1.
hands. If a whole Sea of troubles and afflictions should suddenly break in
upon him, yet like merciful Job he shall escape drowning, and with Jonah come
ver. 3.
safe to land again. If sickness should overtake him, then the Lord will be
his Physician, and Comforter: Or if famine should approach and threaten to slay
him, yet then shall he be fed, His soul shall be satisfied in drought, and
his bones made fat, Psalm. 37. 3.
he shall be like a watered Garden, Esai. 58. 8. 9. 11.
or like a Spring of water, whose waters fail not. If he should fear what
would become of his wife and children after his death, certainly they shall be
blessed, and if need be, highly advanced and promoted, the restorers Matthew.
5. 7. Psalm. 37. 26. Esai. 58. 12.
of paths to dwell in, and raisers up of the famous foundations of many
succeeding generations: assuredly they shall never want any thing that is good.
Mark what the Prophet says, I have been young and now an old, yet have I not
Psalm. 34 10. and 37. 25.
seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging his bread. An Ismael may
be blessed for a good Abraham's sake, an Esau, for an Isaac: much more the
sanctified offspring of such gracious parents: For God is not unrighteous to
forget men's works of Heb. 6. 10.
Mercy, and labor of love, which they have showed in his Name. He has
faithfully promised a repayment, and he cannot but be as good as his Word: And
because none should make any counter-plea of their poverty, he has given us
his Word, that he will graciously accept, and Math. 10. 42.
richly reward that man, which with a sincere heart gives but a cup of cold
water to the needy, and though he do it in secret, yet shall he receive a
public recompense. Now, be not Matthew. 6. 4.
so barbarously inhumane and merciless to thine own soul, as to forsake thy
own mercis, and to judge thy self unworthie of everlasting life, and of thy
part and portion in all these rich and glorious promises by hardening the heart
toward the poor, and failing in these duties of charity. I hope none will
be so prodigiously blasphemous, as to call into question the Truth of Gods
Word and Oracles: why then Prove. 21. 24. Eccles. 11. 1.
do not men scatter, that so they may increase? why do they not cast their
bread upon the waters that so they may find it again? why do they stand off
and refuse to lend unto the Lord, as if he were unfaithful, and would not, or
unable and could not repay them again? Remember he is Just in all his ways,
Omnipotent in all his works, and True in all his sayings, and he will most
certainly honor those that 1 Samuel 2. 30. Prove. 14. 21. 31.
honor him. Now Solomon says, that he who has mercy on the poor, is the
man that honors the Lord, therefore he only shall be crowned with honor
and glory, and all those unspeakable mercies and felicities which are contained
in the Book of Gods promises, who is charitable to the poor.

11. Reasons from the examples of other Charitable men.
Whenever we hear or read of charitably disposed Christians, who have been
Luke 10. 37.
much addicted to liberality, and zealous of good works, is a duty imposed
on us by the command of Christ himself to tread in their steps, to go and
do likewise: It Is not left to our (...).
choice and liberty, to go or not to go, to do or not to do: The words are
spoken imperatively, Abi, and tu fac similiter, Go thou, and do likewise: The
matter is not left to our arbitrary resolution and determination, the Apostle
pressed the example 2 Cor. 9. 2. and 8. 1. 4.
of the Corinthians, and of others in Achia upon the Macedonians, and theirs
again upon them, that like two fires, they might mutually inflame one another,
by the light and heat of their good works; and whatsoever patterns and
presidents in this kind were recorded by the holy Ghost, they were all written
for our admonition and instruction. Remember then Jobs bounty, Cornelius his
Alms, Joseph's care and provision for his father, brethren and their families,
Dorcas her widows Gowns, Charitable Phebees succouring of the Saints, and
the Primitive Christians selling of their possessions for the relief and
maintenance of their Brethren: And if these present times afford us any living
examples, (as indeed they do many) let not our eyes be evil, because they
are good, neither let us enviously traduce, or sinisterly interpret their good
meanings and charitable actions, but rather imitate their bounty and
liberality. Know thou a great man of vast wealth and worldly abilities,
merciful and compassionate, and do thou equalize him in Lands and
Possessions? then go thou and do likewise. Art thou a Tradesman, Merchant,
Minister, rich or poor, of this or that quality or station, and see thou or
hear, that these of thy rank and condition abound in the work of the Lord,
in brotherly kindness and charitablenesse? forget not thy Saviors Precept.
Go thou, and do likewise. More reasons than these, a reasonable man cannot
desire, every word is not confirmed and established, not in the mouth of two or
three, but of a complete Jurie of witnesses: Wherefore above all, let us put on
Charity Col. 3. 14.
according to the exhortation of the Apostle, this is the most beautiful and
resplendent grace, and like a fair and glorious upper Vestment, it must be
clapped upon the other gifts of the holy Ghost. These may serve as necessary and
inward induments to keep the soul warm; but Charity is the outmost garment
that is best and first seen, and renders a man most remarkable and honorable
in the sight of God and man. Faith, hope, and patience, etc. are all together
within us, but Charity frequently manifests it self without us, as the
candle propagateth his light through the horns, and so makes it self
conspicuous. Other Graces benefit our selves only, but Charity like the Sun
is communicative of its light and heat to all: We our selves only are sensible
of the rest of Gods gifts, but our neighbors may feel the operation and
virtue of our charity, and herein we do best resemble our Creator, who
takes abundance of pleasure in mercy and loving kindness. Be merciful,
says Christ, Luke 6. 36.
as your Heavenly Father is merciful. He might as well have required a
conformity to some other of his Attributes, and said thus, be Holy, as he is
Holy; Just, as he is Just, Patient, as he is Patient; but the Precept runs
thus, Be merciful, as he is merciful. To note unto us the necessity of this
grace above the rest, and the public expression of it in our lives and
conversations. To conclude, then take along this Job. 29. 11. 12. Act. 9. 39.
one consideration with you more, that all Charitable persons are honored
alive of men; they are remembered after death, and shall be proclaimed by the
mouth of Christ himself, the Matthew. 25. 34.
Eternally blessed of God the Father. Before the face of Men and Angels at the
day of Judgment. Oh, hardened Adamants, Oh, stupid, senseless, and cursed
Generation of stony Nabals, whom none of these things can moove or persuade to
Charity and good Works.

CHAP. X. How to be prepared in affection to do good Works.
TO do any morally good Action, there must be (according to Aristotle and the
Schoolmen) a concurrence of all requisite and necessary circumstances, and
there be 1. Nota: (...). 2. (...). 3. (...). 4. (...). 5. (...). Arist. Eth.
2. cap. 4.
five adjuncts and marks set down by the Philosopher, according to which, we
may take a true estimate of all moral actions. Among the rest, they must be
done affectionately, willingly, and with a kind of delectation of the mind.
So likewise in the performance of any religious Actions and good works, all
these circumstances must be observed, they must be done in a right manner, to
a right end, and with a ready and willing mind and affection: First, then we
must be prepared in Affection, and then, Secondly, perform in Action.

To be prepared in affection, we must often revolve and meditate upon those
former motives, which are of a very attractive power, to draw the most
Ironhearted worldling, to the practice of good works: we must lay to heart and
obediently stoop to the serious Precepts of God the Father and our blessed
Savior, by considering the great Authority of the Commander, the necessity
of the Duty, the Benefits, Honor, and Utilitie, which will accrue unto us by
the faithful discharge thereof, and the great dishonor we shall do unto God,
and the shame and unavoydable confusion, and disgrace we shall bring unto our
own selves, if we wilfully contemn and omit so gracious and honorable a
practice: We must value and prize the exercise of this grace of love, before
the Col. 3. 14. Romans 13. 10
constant performance of all other moral duties: for this is the bond of
perfection, and the fulfilling of the Law, as the Apostle calls it. We must
repose and without staggering fasten our faith and confidence on those
immutable and everlasting promises which God has made unto all merciful and
charitable minded men: for if we trust in Psalm. 37. 3.
him, we shall certainly be ever doing good, and if we seriously meditate on
those many most sweet and gracious promises mentioned before, and persuade our
selv's that he is All-sufficient, and the God of Truth, that can Ezech. 37. 14.
and will perform what he has spoken, we cannot choose but be ready and
willing to do good works. If we take God on his own Word, believe and set to
our seal that he is true, how is it possible we should ever shut up our
hearts, or withdraw our hands from releeving the poor? We do easily credit
great men for great matters without Bill or Bond, and willingly depend upon
their sufficiency and fidelity, and shall we not much more securely rest on
Gods promises, Matthew 5. 7.
who has not only given us his Word, but the Word of his Son, the Word of his
Servants, Prophets, and Apostles, and not only their bare Words, but their Bills
to show, their Words under unquestionable Handwriting. What, shall we put more
confidence in a worm, in the arm of flesh, in the sons of men, who are but
grass, and whose breath is in their nostrils, than in the Allsufficient and
Eternal God, who never fails nor forsakes those that put their trust in him?
There is no man, I know, but conceives so good an opinion of himself, that he
will boldly protest that he does believe in God, and will be ready to spit in
his face that should tell him the contrary: Thou do well to believe, but do
thou hoard up thy wealth for thy self, and thy posterity only, carke and
care for future times immoderately, never think on the poor brethren, to
releeve or sustain them? Do they beg or would they borrow of thee, and do
thou give them good words only, and tell them that thou can not spare them
that they desire, because thou thy self may lack before thou die, if thou
should be so free hearted? This certainly argues much infidelity and
Atheism ^^ thee, and an independency upon the Lord. Therefore, though thou
say that thou beleevest, yet I will believe that thou do but only say so;
thou art but in a dream, and deludest thy poor soul with a mere fancy, and
moral conjecture, and as far as in thee lies, thou make God a liar, because
thou do not unfeynedly believe this promise That the merciful shall never
lack. To woo then thy affection, and to win thy heart unto this profitable
trade of Almesgiving, thou must have this belief and persuasion, that laying
out to the poor, and laying aside for good uses, is the fairest way to thrive,
and to fare well in the world: Therefore it is Prove. 19. 17. Matthew. 6. 20. Luke
12. 33. 1 Cor. 9. 6. Hos. 10. 12. Luk 6. 38.
compared to londing, hereby noting unto us a certain repayment; to treasuring
up, which is the best way to enrich us; to sowing, which betokens that we
shall have a fruitful Harvest. He that sows bountifully (says the Apostle)
shall reap bountifully, and in what abundant measure we give unto others,
accordingly it shall be given unto us again, good measure, pressed down,
shaken together, and running over. Hope of gain, makes the Merchant willing to
venture his goods on the Seas; and hope of increase and unlawful lucre, makes
the Usurer willing to lend out his rusty and worme-eaten treasure, and why
should not we be as forward and willing to lend unto the Lord, and to sow our
seed on the backs or in the bellies of the poor, sythence we shall receive
back not ten for a hundred, but a hundred for ten, and reap a thousand
fold, even immortality it self, and Life everlasting for ever and ever, in
the World to come.

It Is no such easy matter (as men may think it) to be affectionately
charitable: till we can say as Job could, Did not I weep Job. 30. 25.
for him that was in trouble, was not my soul grieved for the poor? We are
not feelingly affected with the miseries of our brethren, nor insensible enough
of their doleful state and condition. There is indeed, a humane pity, and
natural compassion, which a Heathen man cannot put off sometimes, and upon
some occasions, but the tenderheartednesse, and charitable affection we here
speak of, is not natural, but a Celestial habit, a Creature of the holy
Ghost: And therefore we must labor 1 King. 8. 50.
to put on this Grace by using these prescribed means. First, By praying
frequently and fervently unto God, that he would be pleased to plant the noble
grace of Charity in our hearts, to warm our souls with the Holy heat of
brotherly love, and a tender sensiblenesse of the wants and distresses of the
poor. Charity and tender-heartednesse, and the rest of those rare and precious
Jewels are all, we know the gifts of God, and locked up fast in his Heavenly
closset, Now prayer is the key, and will open the lock to fetch them out, if
there be the hand of Faith to turn it. Therefore pray we must, or no hope of
getting Charity. But what man almost minds this Grace in his prayers and
requests unto God. Give me leave to ask thee Reader, did thou ever beg
such a blessing, or present ever such a Petition unto the Throne of Grace. Lord
give unto me bowels of compassion and a fellowfeeling affection toward my
needy and disconsolate brethren. Bethink thy self a while and call thy self
to rememberance, if not, Oh then besiege Christ's mercy-Seat with redoubled
supplications, and never leave, though thou turnest thy knees into horns, till
thou have importuned and obtained some sparks, some degrees of that virtue,
which will enrich thee everlastingly. Secondly, by applying home to our selves
others miseries, from the apprehension of our own accidentarie wants, and
extremities, which sometimes may unawares and unexpectedly befall us. As for
instance, when we accidentally chance to be from home abroad in the fields
without harbor, to lie occasionally upon some hard bed, to feel cold, hunger,
thirst, etc. to which the richest are sometimes as obnoxious, as the beggar;
then we should make a good construction of these evil occurrents, and take
occasion thereby to consider on the like cases and extremities of those who are
continually almost pinched with cold and hunger and nakedness: And so we
should learn by our own experiences, to sympathize with them and to
commiserate their necessities. Remember says the Apostle, Heb. 13. 3.
them that are in Bonds, as bound with them, and them which suffer adversity,
as being your selves also in the body: When we hear of the persecution and
incarceration of some of the Saints and Servants of God, who are thus maligned
and most undeservedly and basely handled for a good Conscience and the Gospels
sake, we must suppose their case to be our own, and never think upon the
glorious Martyrs of Jesus Christ, but with a present admiration of Gods great
goodness and forbearance toward us, who, when as some of his dearest servants
have swim in bloody Coffins, others ride in Coches of fire to Heaven, has
yet suffered us to go thither as it were on our feather beds. This seasonable
application of afflicted Joseph's wrongs and miseries to our own persons,
certainly is that which God requires, and may be a good motive to work us to
compassion. This was it that drew tears from Jobs eyes in the Sunshine of
prosperity, Job. 30. 25.
and made Nehemiah a Neh. 1. 3. 4. 11.
man of Eminency and Honor to weep, mourn, fast and pray, for the
afflictions of Jerusalem, and to make all possible means to the great Persian
king to comfort his afflicted brethren in Judea. Thirdly, by considering our
neerenesse and proximitie to them, our union and communion with them, as they
are either the sons and daughters of the first Adam, and so they be our bone
and flesh, and fellow brethren: or as they live in the same Domioion under the
same King, and so they be our fellow subjects or fellow-Cittizens; or as they
be the Peculiar flock, and Heavenly offspring of the second Adam, and so they
be our fellow members. These be good means to kindle in us charitable
affections toward them, and to move us to put on bowels of mercy. But none of
these things will serve the turn, if we do not remove one maine obstacle and
impediment, and that is covetousness, that cursed root and fountain of much
mischief and villainy. It Is a most pestilent, abhorred, zeale-deading and
soule-murthering sin, it infatuates and bewitcheth the soul, captivates the
will, distracts the affections, hardneth the heart, and turns it into a piece
of Earth and clay, and makes it altogether as insensible of another man's
misery, as a hardened flint. Therefore if ever we will be prepared in affection
to do works of mercy, we must destroy this Dagon, tumble down this idol out
of the temples of our souls, we must make Mammon our slave and servant, and
not be the servant of Mammon. Now the best way to be rid of this foul Feinde,
and impoysoner of all goodness, is to make God our portion as David did. Psalm.
119. 57.
And this we do when we make him our only refuge and Asylum, desire nothing
but him, seek nothing but him, find all joy and contentment in his mercy,
glory, and goodness, rest in his All-sufficiencie, depend upon his Promises,
and adhere unto him only in all conditions whatsoever. Now we can no way
better evidence that we wholly rely on the Lord, and make him our portion, then
by keeping Psalm. 119. 57.
his Words, by observing his Precepts, and more specially by our liberal
contributions to his naked and needy members.

CHAP. XI How to be always ready and prepared in Action to do good works
of Mercy.
AS no action whether moral, civil, or religious can be accounted virtuous,
without a concurring readiness and willingness of the mind: So no affection
is sound or well grounded, if it does not break forth and manifest it self in
Action. Non satis est, (says one) Benevelle, sed etiam been facere ex bona
voluntate, etc. Now the Apostle instructs us in a To lay aside weekly is a
Christian duty.
ready way how we may be ever prepared at all times upon all occasions,
actually to contribute to any good work, and this is by weekly laying aside so
me portion of our wealth more or less according as God shall prosper us. And
to incite and persuade us hereunto, let us weigh well, and consider these
forcible ensusuing reasons.

1. The practice of laying aside for charitable uses is both prescribed unto us
by the direction of the holy Ghost, and sufficiently warranted unto us, by
Apostolical authority and command in this, 1 Cor. 16. 2. It being a point so
evident and undeniable, that Saint Paul annexed only one reason here, though
in the 2 Cor. 9. 5. 7. he alleges An Apostolical ordinance and command,
says Mr. Perkins in cases of Conscience, 2. b. cap 16. and so not left to our
own will.
more, for the clearing and ratifying of it, supposing there could be none
found so transcendently proud, stubborn, and inflexible, none so merciless,
frozen-hearted, and uncharitable, but would humbly stoop to so Divine a
precept, and Charitable practice.

2. It is a treasuring up unto God, for so the word is in the original (...),
which by holy 2 Cor. 16. 2
practice our Almighty Creator does both command, and expect from, and accept
at our hands. Our souls and bodies he freely gave us, and being lost, and
forfeited to the Devil by Adams disobedience, he again redeemed them, with
both these therefore must we 1 Cor. 6. 20.
glorify him, and he gave us our goods too, and therefore with them also must
we Prove. 3. 9.
honor him, we must use them for, and refer them to his only Glory. It is
said, Matthew. 2. 11. of the Wise men, that when they had found Christ, they
opened their treasures, out of which they presented unto their Savior gifts,
gold, frankincense, and mirrhe. Did those Magi, the first fruits and preludes
of the Gentiles unto God, without any Apostolical direction, or written
precept, provide: treasure for Christ, and shall not we who have both precept,
example, and direction for it out of Gods holy book, provide treasures also,
out of which we may offer unto our Savior gifts, silver, and gold, when good
opportunity shall be offered in his afflicted members.

3. It is a preparation to lend unto the Lord, as by laying up in thy coffer
bags of gold and silver thou do prepare (if an usurer most unlawfully) to
lend to thy neighbors, friends, or acquaintance: so by separation of some part
of thy wealth for good and charitable uses, thou do provide to lend unto the
Lord. When thou have separated it and laid it aside, it is the Lords I confess,
but not yet actually, and really lent: when God shall send some poor and
distressed members of his unto thee, and thou either feed, cloth, or any
other way refresh them, with thy sanctified and consecrated Pro. 19. 17.
riches, then thou may be said to lend unto the Lord. This duty here, is
only a preparing to lend unto him.

4. It is a strong witness and infallible Testimony of thy charitable soul,
whereby God makes experiment and full trial of thy tender-heartednesse, love,
pity, and compassion: the hoarding and laying up of all thy other substance
may serve to bear witness against thee of thy earthlinesse, carking, and Jam.
5. 3.
worldly-mindednesse, but this laying aside will bear witness for thee, of
thy readiness to show mercy, bounty and liberality.

5. It incites, and provokes men forward unto the acts of charity, and makes
them plot and devise how to expend it to Gods glory and their neighbors good,
which is the duty of a liberal man. Esaias. 32. 8. For that which they have
consecrated to good uses, is now no longer their own, either jure
proprietatis, or jure usus, and therefore they desire Consider David's bounty.
1. Chron. 29. 2. and yet his prayer. Psalm. 119. 36.
not to preserve and hoard it up for posterity, as they do their other goods,
but are at all times propense, and ready upon every good and seasonable
occasion, or opportunity to part from it, and to bestow it freely and
cheerfully in charitable works. Thou art by nature covetous, and an
earth-worme, impotent, unwilling, dull, and slow to good works, use then this
duty here prescribed, as a spur to quicken, animate, and prick thee forward.

6. By the practice of this duty, a man excerciseth privately before God his
obedience, his faith, and charity, and suffers not his charitable intentions
to be lost, nor his purpose to do good to come to nothing: but by the
frequent, and constant performance of this Christian duty of laying aside
weekly, he fructifies and thrives in goodness, goes on and grows more and
more, till he aspireth unto the perfection of charity, as in other graces to
the full stature of Christ Jesus. The diffusive and penetrating heat of this
fervent grace of charity does enlive, as it were the stupid soul of a
christian, revive the other infused graces and supernatural habits, and keep
them in perpetual action. For as the upper wheel in a jacke, by its moving
makes all the under wheels to stir also in a circular motion. so the
exercising and agitation of this supreme and most noble grace of charity, sets
a working all inferior graces, as faith, hope, patience, humility etc. and
suffers them not to ware faint, dull, weak and impotent.

7. This is an excellent way to make trial of a man's own heart how much he
affects the world, and how much the word, how much he loves God and how much
Mammon. If thou have congealed, and shut up thy bowels of compassion against
the poor, and thou be a churlish Nabal, covetous, cruel, and frozen-hearted,
then out of a stubborn and proud resolution thou will snuff and fret, and
kick against this duty: but if merciful, loving, and out of a fellow-feeling
affection, sensible of the temporal wants and necessities of thy christian
brethren thou will willingly and thankefully embrace and entertain the very
first motions of so convenient and necessary a direction, to become ready to
any good work.

8. It is a pious and wise training up of thy soul in the most gainefull art
of almes-giving: for so it is called by Saint Chrysostom Eleemosina est ars
quaestuosissima, a saying most gracious, true, and undeniable: for although all
Gods graces shall be wonderfully and unspeakeably rewarded, yet charity at the
day of judgment shall in the first place be accepted, and crowned with the
greatest honor. Mat. 25. 34. 35. etc.

9. Laying aside before hand, prevents all grudging and covetousness. 2 Cor.
9. 5. Herein this second Epistle the Apostle tells the Corinthians, that they
had notice before (in the firstepistle) how they ought to lay aside something
in store by them, that it might be ready, as a matter of bounty and not of
covetousness. By Ad opes honoresque expetendos, ad ambiendam potentiam, ad
cumulandas divitias, ad eas omnes ineptias quae ad mag nificentiam, pompamque
facere videntur conquirendas, furiosa est nostra libido infinita cupiditas.
Calvin Instit. lib. 31. cap. 7. sect 8
nature all men are Eagleclawed, closse-fisted, earthlyminded, and
hard-hearted, and the insatiable canker-worme of covetousness, eats into, and
gnawes upon the hearts of most men, and therefore content not thy self only
with thy good intentions, and perhaps thy conceited ability upon good occasion
to do works of mercy, but put in present practice this duty here prescribed
to further thy intentions, and to prevent all future covetousness, least a
present covetousness seize upon thy soul, and so prevent thy future
charitablenesse. Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit: He that is not fit
for works of mercy to day will be more unfit to morrow.

10. It is a clear evidence of bountifulness and liberality. 2. Cor. 9. 5. 7.
for he that thus lays up aforehand, does it not as one compelled or enforced
either by necessity, law, or importunity, but most freely, lovingly and
bountifully, being moved, and induced thereunto only out of true desire to do
good readily out of a fore-consideration of his duty, and out of a
tenderhearted, and pitiful disposition, and fellow-feeling affection, which
he generally bears to all the penurious and afflicted Saints of God in the
church militant, that may need his help. A Nabal, a Dives, a most merciless
churl, or earth-worme may perchance sometimes communicate and distribute to
the necessities and miseries of poor and distressed people (it being pumped
out of them, and they in a sort compelled, and strongly enforced thereunto,
either by much importunity, or course of law, or some other necessity, or else
peradventure moved thereunto out of the bowels of mere natural compassion,
but without charity which flows from the true love of God in Christ) but none,
but good Christians endewed with faith, love of God, and the true grace of
charity give freely, bountifully, and liberally. The gifts which charitable
minded men give unto the poor, after this prescribed method, are neither
munera hamata nor lapidosa, not hardly extorted by importunate supplication,
neither is there any thing expected back again, but only the hearty prayers
of the poor brethren.

11. It makes men give with cheerfulness, as they ought Romans 12. 8. Thou
can not choose, but dispense and distribute that with much joy and alacrity,
which thou have collected for that purpose so easily, freely, insensibly, and
have intended in laying it apart to bestow most charitably, as soon as a good
occasion is offered to show thy bounty.

12. It makes a certain stock for the Poor, whereas that great abundance,
which otherwise thou have lying by thee is not so properly theirs, but in
suspense only, adplacitum, as thou please, perhaps theirs as the humor may
take thee, perhaps not, for thy deceiveable heart may be changed, and they not
then the better for thy wealth.

13 It is a very wise course to become discreetly merciful, tenderhearted, and
compassionate, because its done with pious premeditation, and with mature
deliberation. For the justification, whereof we want not examples, as the
Corinthians who practiced it, and other Churches in Galatia, 1. Cor. 16. 1. and
the churches in Achaia, and Macedonia. 2. Cor. 9. 2. Moreover, learned and
judicious men, have approved and commended this way to be rationem commodam
exercendae liberalitatis, a most Methus. m. 1 Cor. 16. 2.
convenient and commodious way to put in practice our liberality.

14. This kind of preparing to give, is sincere and secret without all
hypocrisy, irrespective without sinister regard and partiarlity. What this way
is separated and laid aside, is not intenfor some particular persons, but
generally for the common good of the whole body of the church of God, as any
shall stand in need, and for any pious use.

15. We ought not to be less Pro. 24. 27.
provident in this heavenly trade of almes-giving, then worldly and carnal men
are in their ordinary courses of trading: but they for the most part are
careful to provide aforehand something to ly by them in store, that they may
lay it out commodiously when good opportunity shall be offered. Therefore ought
we also in a case far more necessary, and profitable to lay aside some thing
aforehand, that we may be both ready and able to contribute to the distresses
and necessities of Gods poor people, when we shall meet with or find out a
seasonable and good occasion.

16. And lastly, Many little will make a mickle (as the old saying is) many
small portions, this way laid aside and collected will amount to a great Sum.
As for instance, suppose 120 men lay aside but two pence a piece weekly each
one severally, in a year the total will be in computation fifty two pounds,
the which this way may be almost insensibly gathered together to be employed to
charitable and pious uses. Or let us suppose a hundred wealthy persons should
lay aside twelve pence a piece weekly (as easily they might) in one year the
total sum will be 260 pounds, or let us imagine a thousand citizens should
lay aside but a groat a piece weekly, in one year it will amount to the sum
of 866l 13s 4d, what will great sums laid out, 12d, 2s, ten groats, a crown
weekly come to, which wealthy men may do, it would amount to thousands in a
year, by which many good works might easily be performed with joy and
rejoicing.

The Apostle prescribes no certainty what must be laid aside, but let every man
do says he, as God has prospered him. All must lay aside, the rich more, the
poor less, every one somewhat except such as are extremely poor and needy
and sunk down to the very lowest degree of misery.

Let no man object, that this is but a superfluous duty in these days, and in
this kingdom, wherein the needy and distressed are cared for by statute laws
and politic government.

First of all I answer, as in part, I have said before, that the law takes
order for such only as are ready to perish, and extremely miserable.
Secondly, it is one thing for the law to impose, and another thing to have the
same duly executed. Do not many live miserably for all the law? Thirdly, it is
most evident that the general relieving of the poor in every parish,
according to the intention and institution of the law is an act of Charity:
but because most men are rated and necessitated to contribute according to
their abilities, oftentimes against their wills it is no charity in them. For
very few do give this way to the poor freely and cheerfully: Give indeed
they do, but most men in this case unloose their purse strings, as school
boys do their points to be whipped, judge you how willingly and cheerfully.
Lastly the public and ordinary contributions of the parish are not sufficient
to supply the private necessities of all, pauper ubique jacet, every where
almost may a man charitablyminded find many occasions and fit objects of
charity.

There is no rich man, I dare say, but may soon find a poor neighbor
toward whom he may exercise his liberality for whom the law provideth not. I
intend not here for the present to particularize the persons who are worthy of
pity and compassion, besides those whom the law takes no order for: we shall
fully handle this point, when we come to speak concerning the object of
charity.

When to lay aside.
IF inquiry be made by any which might be the most seasonable time to lay
aside for good uses, our answer is made by the Apostle, it must be on the 1
Cor. 16. 2.
first day of the week, no time is comparable to that on the Rev. 1. 10.
Lords day. Now albeit the Apostle only prescribes and commands this day to be
observed before any other and adds no reasons to prove the seasonablenesse and
convenience thereof, yet to give satisfaction, to all curious Querists that
will have reason to support their faith, they may take notice of these. We may
very fitly practice this duty on the first day of the week. The Apostle
enjoined it then for the present necessity of the Church, and it is good
counsel still, though not now to be urged as a necessary duty, but only as a
good means, preparing to the duty.

1. Because it is a special day appointed and separated by God himself for
good works, heavenly duties, and religious services. Though pious actions be
at all times commendable and acceptable, yet on the Lords day they are
accounted most seasonable. In Hom. on 1 Cor.
Aptum est tempus ad benignitatem, prompto et alacri animo exercendam, says
Saint Chrysostom.

2. It is a day of fellowship and of the public meeting of Christ's chosen
flock, and redeemed inheritance, of which, number we evidence and demonstrate
our selves to be, when we consider on the wants, and prepare to contribute to
the necessities and distresses of our feeble, impotent and helpless
fellow members.

3. It is a day of treasuring up for our souls, of hoarding up grace and
spiritual substance 1 Timothy 6. 19. Mat. 9. 20. Luke 12. 33.
for the life to come, wherefore as thou desire to lay up in store a good
foundation for thy self against the time to come, that thou might lay hold
on eternal life, remember the Apostles advice to lay by thee in store upon the
Lords day some portion of thy earthly treasure for the poor and pious uses.
God has allowed thee six days to labor and provide for the body, but the
day called by Saint John. Rev. 1. 10. the Lords day, is the souls faire-day,
or market day, wherein thou must buy tried gold, white raiment, and precious
eye salve. Rev. 3. 18. and other such spiritual necessaries, therefore omit not
this duty of weekly laying aside on Gods holy day for the poor and pious
uses, this is an easy and an excellent way to thrive in heavenly substance,
and to enrich thy self everlastingly, for concerning charity a modern of our
own delivers this divine fancy.

It is a grace, or art to get a living.
By selling land, and to grow rich by giving.
4. It is a day of meditation on Christ and on his benefits, now this act of
laying aside does evidently show and testify, that we are not ungratefully
oblivious of our Saviors dearest favors, mercies and tender compassions, when
we remember, and make ready to relieve the miseries and commiserate the wants
and extremities of his distressed poor members.

5. It is a day of representation of our happy meeting in the kingdom of
heaven, when all wants and penury shall be quite taken away: and hereby we are
put in mind to be ready mutually to communicate each to other, and to supply
one another wantes while we are sojourners here on earth.

6. It is the day of Christ's resurrection, which ought to mind us of our
resurrection at the day of judgment, when our charity shall be highly honored
and most infinitely rewarded. Mat. 25.

7. It is a day of Sequestration, wherein we are to consider what Eze. 20. 12.
and 37. 27. 28. Psa. 147. 19. Lev. 20. 24. 29. Heb. 7. 26.
things God has pepared and set a part for his people, ( viz) a day, a place,
holy laws, and ordinances, yea, and Christ for us, and our selves for his
service, if we be the elect of God, and therefore we ought to be moved to put
somewhat a part for charitable uses on this day, to witness our sound
sequestration in heart from the love of the world.

8. It is a day which requires a comfortable preparation unto the house of God,
and how can we better prepare our selves then by mercy to go to the God of
mercy and compassion, for the Lord makes a faithful promise that he will be
merciful to those that show mercy, Psalm. 18. 25. and will hear their prayers,
Esai. 58. 9.

How to lay aside.
NOw to lay aside wisely, graciously, and religiously, observe these rules.

1. In resolving thus charitably to lay aside, do not purpose or determine any
certain sum, but do as Paul directs and instructs 1 Cor. 16. 2 Luke 11. 41.
thee, according as God has prospered thee, sometimes more, sometimes less,
as a man 2 Cor. 9. 7.
shall purpose in his heart.

2. Having once begun so good a work, never after desist or give over, he
that puts his hand to Gods plough, and looeth back, is not fit for the
Kingdom of God. Remember also the Apostles good caution, Gal. 6. 9.
be not weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall reap if we faint not.

3. Be sure to practice this duty with a fervent and pertinent prayer, in
which observe 5. things.

1. Beg of God acceptance of this thy bounden duty.

2. Pray for strength of faith in his promise, to wit, that the merciful shall
never lack, Prove. 28. 27.

3. Desire God to increase, and to enlarge thy bowels of pity and compassion
toward thy poor brethren.

4. Entreat the Lord to afford unto thee temporal means, whereby thou may
be able to communicate liberally.

5. And lastly, desire thy God to give thee a will to continue on still, and
constantly to persevere in so charitable a work unto thy lives end.

6. And lastly having once laid is aside, take heed thou commit not herein
sacrilege, for that which thou have once thus religiously separated for
charitable works, thou may not employ to thy private uses. Rob not Peter (as
the proverb goes) to pay Paul, but remember to give every one his own, that
which is the poores, give unto the poor, that which is Cesars, give unto
Caesar, and unto God the things that are Gods. To conclude this point, then let
me earnestly desire and entreat every one, whether rich or poor, professing
the Name of Christ, to be pleased according to their power and ability to
follow the Apostles rule, to try themselves, and to train up their hearts in
this most admirable and much honored duty of Almes-giving: Taste, I pray, and
see how good the Lord is, how the holy Ghost will bless you in his prescribed
way, how your souls shall thrive in the practice of charity, and be forwardly
bent unto mercy, pious works, and liberality.

I hope well of the well disposed, and cannot doubt of the forwardness of
those whom grace makes readily prepared to every good work; yet there will
never want too many worldly-minded, who will not only stumble at the blocks
laid in their way by others, but willingly cast rubs of themselves in their
own way likewise to binder their entering into the way of well doing, and to
keep others back with them in their perverse and crooked paths from works of
charity, whose objections I might here set down, and make answers thereto;
but I hope that which is delivered may sufficiently sway with any moderate and
sober spirit, and give full satisfaction to an humble heart, which receives
with meekness the ingrafted Word of God, and is not obstinately and
refractoriously carried away with the prodigious pride of selfe-conceitednesse,
or with the foolish vanity of self-love, the pestilent plagues of brutish and
rebellious spirits, and the most deadly enemies of that most rare and excellent
grace of false-deniall, which effectually humbleath and subjecteth the heart
unto all sincere obedience, and to the speedy performance of all holy services.
The reasons before premised, I say may easily persuade any, that are piously
and charitably disposed before hand to do good.

CHAP. XII. Of what we must give.
ALL actions (as you have heard) must be well circumstantiated, clothed with
all requisite adjuncts and properties, or else they can never be either
morally or religiously good. Therefore we must look unto the matter of our
bounty and liberality, that it be our own goods lawfully given, not
unjustly extorted from any by usutious and wrongful dealings. As we would be
accounted merciful, so should we be found just; and the Prophet tells us, that
the Lord first requires us to do justly, then next to show mercy. Mich. 6. 8.
Job. 31, 20.
Job warmed the poor with the fleece of his, own flock, so (...) must (...)
tuum, says Isaiah thy bread to the hungry, de propria facultate says Austine,
and ^^stis labor^bus. Now that it may be called properly our own, wherein we
have a true right and interest, which we may dispose of as we please, which
(...) do cu^ty by lawful means, by inheritance, just purchase, free gift,
honest labor, or have gotten by an ordinary and conscionable course of
trading.

If then the wealth which we have formerly horded up and Exodus 22. Prove. 6. 31.
and now enjoy were stolen, or unjustly gotten any way, as by violence, craft,
fraud, deceit, by 2 King. 8. 3. 6. 1. These. 4. 6
cunning, overreaching, lying, forswearing, oppression, bribery extortion,
forged cav^lation, by unequal balance, false Deuteronomy. 22. 3.
weights, deceitful measures: If we have enriched our selves by Luke 19.
detaining and withholding that Levit. 6. 2. 5. 2 King. 6. 5. 1 Samuel 12. 3.
Mich. 6. 10. 11. Psalm. 37. 1. Genesis 43. 12 Ezech. 33. 15. and 18. 12 Lev. 25.
14. 17. 27. 2 Samuel 12 6. 1 King. 20. 34. Nehem. 5. 7. 11. 12. Deuteronomy. 23. 18.
which we have found and others lost, or what was committed to our trust,
custody, and improvement in the behalf of others, or what we have borrowed
with a resolution not to repay it, or what we have gotten by overvaluing our
own, and undervaluing our neighbors goods, by gayning advantagiously through
the simplicity and ignorance of unsuspicious and plaine-dealing Christians, by
prevarication and mere tricks of Law, by * usurie and unchristian exaction
from the poor, or by any other sinful and evil way, such unrighteous
treasures and ill gotten goods may not be the matter of our charity and
beneficence, but they must be restored again to the true owners as the quoted
Scriptures do require and command. Goods ill gotten (says a learned man) are
for restitution, not for distribution. Good uses cannot justify things
unjustly gotten, neither can the intention of a good end take away the pravitie
of an evil action: the defect of one circumstance may mar a good work, but
there must be a concurrence of all to make it virtuous and good. Nolite velle
facere eleemosynas de foenore and usuris and injuste acquisitis. Austin.
Pliny that loud trumpeter of Trajans praises, though a heathen man, yet
could tell his Emperor, that the poor were not to be fed like wild beasts
with blood, spoil, and rapine, and that, which was to be * Liberalis dat de
si^^ nec pauperos, ut fera catulos, coede and sanguine nutrit. Plin. Panegyr:
ad Trajanum.
given to them, ought not to be taken away from any others. Selymus the
grand-signeour, that unnatural murderer, and bloody butcher of his own
father, may be a witness to induce and strengthen this truth, for when he was
solicited and persuaded to bestow some of that in charitable works, which was
unjustly gotten from others, he made answer, that ill gotten goods were to
be restored and not to be employed and laid out upon holy and pious uses.
Hence Luke 19. 8
was it that Zacheus resolved to make restitution of that which he had by false
accusation taken away from any man, that so he might be sure to give of that
which was his own unto the poor.

What we give must be that 1 Cor. 16. 2
which God blesses and prospers, now it is not God but the Devil that does
further men in their wicked ways of getting, and in their unconscionable and
unjustifiable courses: What we lend unto the Lord must be by us lawfully
gotten, by honest ways and means, I may not make one glad with my
bountifulness and liberality, and another to grieve through my extreme
oppression, secret cozenage, and more unobserved the every. Non est putinda
cleemosyn^, s^pauperibus dispensetur, quod ex illicitis rebus acquiritur. Our
alms must not only be a work of mercy, but of righteousness, as may be
concluded from the native signification of the word in the original tongue
according to which it is called righteousness. Therefore all depopulating
inclosers, and hardhearted Landlords, that pull down houses and set up
hedges, unpeople towns, and create beggars, that increase their revenues, or
support their pompous state, by racking of rents, intolerable fines, horrible
oppressions, unreasonable forfeitures and exactions, are never to be reputed
truly charitable and bountiful men: well may they make a fair show; feast
their Tennants once a year, flatter themselves, and delude others with their
vainglorious hospitality, which they mainetaine with their poor neighbors
labors, much rapine and cruelty: but in the sight of God all their outward
expressions and bounty and liberality will prove but abominable Sacrifices.
Secondly, all symonists and sacrilegious persons who either sell Spiritual
livings, rob God of his Dues, and the Church of their Tithes, or live only
upon impropriate Parsonages, the truly intended maintenance of the Ministers at
the first, are to be accounted merciless and uncharitable men, for they can
never by their seeming hospitality, or frequent Almes-deedes reconcile
themselves to the offended Jehovah, and wipe away their spiritual blood
guiltiness before the Lord. Thirdly, all such who by wilful ignorance, stupid
carelessenesse, suffer their rotten and unhappie flock to feed in impure and
hurtful pastures, to walk in their own ways and crooked courses while they
themselves in the mean time, but spend their lives and livings in Ezech. 33.
6. Act. 20. 26.
pride, idleness, pleasures, goodfellowship, etc. are to be reputed most
cruel, merciless, and bloody butchers of men's souls: well may they stop the
foolish peoples mouths with a few courteous complements, and a fair outward
show, but they shall never bear away the name of right, liberal, and
charitable men: for is it hot a poor piece of love and charity to feed men's
carcasses with a little earthly and vanishing nutriment, and to starve their
poor fowls which are spiritual and immortal substances. Thus as evil
gotten goods are no good matter for works of Charity, so are they as ill a
foundation for works of Piety; there is no possibility of acceptance for
them, either in the one, or in the other, for the Lord hates robbery for burnt
sacrifice. the hire of a whore and Esai. 61. 8.
the price of a dog are an abomination unto him: and he that Ecclus. 34. 18.
sacrifices a thing wrongfully gotten, his offering is odious, and the gift of
unjust men are not accepted.

CHAP. XIII. Of the manner of giving Alms.
YOu have heard before that give we must, and of that only which is our own,
we must not rob Peter to cloth Paul; our next inquisition shall be into the
right manner of giving, and of distributing to the poor: In all our
Almsdeeds, and liberal contributions we must observe these rules: We must
give,

1. Compassionately, with bowels of mercy and out of a fellow-feeling
Sympathy and sensiblenesse of others miseries: Luke 10. 33.
Thus was the good Samaritane affected, toward the unhappie traveller that
fell among theev's: when he saw him he had compassion Job. 30. 25.
on him: Holy Job was likewise of the same tender and melting disposition, and
Heavenly constitution, he was grieved for the poor, and wept for those that
were in trouble; We must have open bowels as well as Esai. 58. 10.
open hands, and we must draw out our souls (as the Prophet speaks) as well
as our purses to the hungry and afflicted soul.

2. Heartily, according to the praevious purpose and resolution 2 Cor. 9. 7.
Romans 12. 8.
of our souls, in sincerity and simplicity of heart, not in hypocrisy, or
vain glory, thereby to merit or purchase Heaven (as some Papists do) not in
deceit and policy to engage others to us, and to enrich our selves, as some
worldlings do; for (says Saint Jerome) This would not be Ad Nepotianum.
a free giving, but rather a hunting, hawking and Viscatis and hamatis
muneribus non sua promunt, sed aliena corripiunt, Plin. ep. l. h. 9.
fishing to catch with net, hook, and line: We must not give to the poor with
condition or expectation of their work and industry back again; this were
hard dealing indeed to bestow something on their bellies, and to wring it out
again at their brows, to feed the poor Christians as Carriers do their
horses, who give them a free allowance of Provender, only to make them the
more able and strong to labor, and fitter for their own uses.

3. Considerately: Here I mean not so much a worldly consideration Psalm. 41. 1.
of our own estates, families, dependants, etc. These carnal thoughts and
conceits must in comparison be laid aside, but a Christian consideration, and
laying to heart our neighbors wants and miseries: we must not disregard or
pass lightly over the necessities of our brethren, but pry into their
conditions, and watch over them with much eye-fulnes and thought-fulnesse
knowing it to be a most barbarous and inhumane part for any that bears the
face of a man, or title of a Christian, to suffer Christ's members to perish and
pine away through cursed neglect and careless inconsiderateness.

4. Humbly, not with a lofty look, imperious, and supercilious countenance,
but with a lowly spirit, and humble deportment; when I look upon a memberlesse
Cripple, or blind Bartimeus, or ulcerous Lazarus, I must not undervalue him,
but esteem him as my brother, and consider thus with my self; he is but a
beggar of me, as I am a beggar of God, the Lord has made him poor, and a fit
object for my mercy, and the same God has made me rich, and a fit instrument
to succor his misery. Now if I should disdainfully and proudly stop my ears,
and shut my eyes against this my brother in his calamity, well and justly
might I expect a sudden deprivation of my temporal possessions, and so I might
worthily become as indigent and helpelesse, as the poorest soul that wandereth
in the streets.

5. Willingly, (according to the Apostles exhortation) charge the rich, that
they be willing to 1 Timothy 6. 17 18. 2 Cor. 8. 12. and 9. 7. Deuteronomy. 15. 10.
communicate: we must give without grudging or coffeehouse, without any
secret grief or reluctation, for God accepts and respects a willing mind,
and he nothing valueth that alms which is violently squeazed and pumpt out of
us by necessity, or the power of authority, or with much a do wrung from us,
by much clamorousnesse and importunity.

6. Readily, put them in mind Tit. 3. 1. Benignitas properat. Beneficia non
sunt procrastinanda, sed tempestive danda, ut magis prodesse possint Theoph.
Goli. Eth. lib. 4. cap. 1. page 146.
(says Saint Paul to Titus) to be ready to every good work. Delays and
procrastinations in these cases are ever odious, and very dangerous. Say not
(says Solomon) unto thy neighbor go, and come again, and to morrow I will
give, when thou have it by thee: Quod sic defertur, pene aufertur, such a
putting off and deferring of doing good from time to time, either quite wears
out, or else marres the goodness of the action: for being so late performed,
it disgraceth thy benevolence, and almost frustrates the poor of their hopes
and expectations. Qui sic moratur, (says a learned man) proximus est neganti:
There is no great difference between a causeless delay, and a flat denial,
between a tedious lingering, and a present repulse. There were some Quidam
beneficiis suis ex difficultate captant commendationem, gratioresque
accipientibus honores arbitrantur, si prior illos desperatio and taedium
similisque repulsae mora in not. an quandam and pudorem vertisset. Plin pan. ad
Trajanum.
Roman nobles (as Pliny reports) who hunted after an undeserved commendation
by the difficulty of their good turns and falsely imagined that the honors
would be the more welcome to the receivers, if the Supplicants through
frequent delays and tedicusnesse were driven unto despair of obtaining them.
This was but the practice of some Heathens: Christians must learn a better
lesson, and know, that celeritie in giving, graceth greatly the good action.
Qui cito dat, bis dat, a speedy giver, is a double benefactor. As God
communicates to us, so should we to others; he prevents us with his blessings
of goodness, so should we like the inhabitants of Tema Psalm. 21. 3.
prevent the thirsty with water, and the hungry with bread: or as Machii
Barzillai and others Esai. 21. 14. 2 Samuel 17. 28. 29.
made speedy provision for David and his followers when they knew them in
distress: so should we be quick and nimble upon all good occasions to
releeve the poor saints and servants of God in their afflictions and
perplexities, for a (...).
benefit or good turn the swifter it comes, the sweeter it tastes: consider
how any light motion or small entreatie can move too many to waste their time
and moneys in Innes, Tavernes, Alehouses, and such Seminaries of Satan, and
nurceries of uncleanness, in gaming, bowling, carding, dicing, tabling, and
such other fugitive pastimes, you shall see them ready enough to follow such
forbidden courses, and to Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas. Horac.
rush very hastily upon such intolerably abused recreations; Oh why then should
not we be as propense and ready to releeve the poor, serve God, and save our
own souls. Remember that one sentence of Solomon to facilitate thy
liberality: Deferring and putting off makes Prove. 13. 12 19.
the heart sick, but the desire accomplished is sweet to the soul.

7. Chearefully: Let him that shows mercy, do it with Romans 12. 8. 2 Cor. 9.
7.
chearefullnesse and alacrity, for God loves a cheerful giver.

8. Lovingly, and this we must express, first, by a meek and lowely
countenance, which will sweeten the gift, and make way for its better
acceptance, whereas a stern and sour look is an evidence of a covetous and
hardened heart, and as a scarcrow to drive away the poor out of a man's
presence. Even as the nurses sour face demonstrates that she is pained in
giving the child suck of her breasts; so an austere and frowning face,
sufficiently argues that the heart is pained and grieved in giving to the
poor: Wherefore in our actual distributions let us labor to keep a clear
and cheerful countenance, undarkned with any clouds of sadness, and
coffeehouse, that so the poor man may see goodness and courtesy look out
at our eyes, and thereby be encouraged to beg and expect some comfort from
us. Thus Peter and John looked upon the creeple that lay at the gate of the
Temple, which was called Beautiful, Act. 3. 4. 5. Secondly, we must testify
and make it known that we give lovingly by our mild and gentle speeches:
This was Ruth. 2.
Boaz his carriage toward Ruth, he spoke to her very friendly and courteously,
called her my daughter, blessed her in the Name of God, and bountifully
entertained her with good cheer, and good language too. Our alms and actual
bounty 2 Cor. 9. 5.
is called in the original (...), as if it should be given ever with good
words, a benediction or a blessing, as the word is sometimes translated, for
indeed good words, very well become good works, and are as powerful to win
the affections, to merit and oblige the receivers, as the gifts-themselves:
wherefore let us remember to return, if not ever a charitable alms, yet a
Ecclus. 4. 8.
friendly answer: harsh and churlish speeches taste like wormwood to a hungry
soul, and a few bad words may imbitter and disweeten many good actions.

9. Liberally and bountifully, Prove. 11. 24 2 Cor. 9. 6. Deuteronomy. 15. 17
almes-giving is compared sometimes to scattering, and sometimes to sowing, to
denote unto us, that we must (as the precept binds us) open our hands wide to
the poor and needy in the Prove. 21. 26 Act. 10. 2.
land: we must not give pinchingly and sparingly, as if it were a losing, not a
lending to the Lord, but with a liberal heart and as bountiful a hand.
Cornelius gave not only Alms, but much Alms: The poor widow all Luke 21. 4.
that she had, Zacheus half his goods, Barnabas sold all his possessions, and
the Macedonians are highly commended for their 2 Cor. 8.
great bounty and large contributions.

10. Seasonably, while we Gal 6. 10.
have so many motives to mercifulness, such means, materials, objects and
occasions of charity we must be ready to show mercy: if we accept not of the
good of opportunity, we may loose the opportunity of good: who knows whether
he or the poor, shall live till to morrow, whether his wealth shall continue,
and his mountain abide unmovable. If God in his displeasure blow upon a man's
substance, it vanishes away in a moment, this he has done heretofore, and is
able and ready still to do so again, if thou shut up thy bowels of
compassions from the poor, and hoardest up his blessings only for thy private
profit, which he has lent thee to dispose of for the supply and prevention of
public miseries and necessities. The Samaritane did Luke 10. 33.
reach forth his helping hand to the wounded man, as soon as he saw him, he
took the opportunity to succor him in his extremity; so should we without
any demurres presently releeve our poor neighbors, when they stand in need of
our bounty and liberality.

11. Impartially, we must do Matthew. 5. 45. Luke 6. 35. 36.
good unto all, friends or foes, neighbors, or aliens, grateful, or
ungrateful, to these we must show mercy in case of true necessity, but above
and before all, unto the household of faith, the flock of Christ, the redeemed
and peculiar nation, those only happy ones of the earth: we are easily
persuaded, to relieve those whom we love, but to love, to do good unto, (...)
significat and benedicere and benefacere: See Pet. Mart. in. Romans 12. 14. and
(...) est beneficentia. 2 Cor. 9. 6.
to speak well of our enemies that hate us, this is hard and grievous to flesh
and blood: but if we would be holden the Children of the most Highest we must
be merciful as he is merciful, we must love our enemies and relieve them
too, Prove. 25. 21. Romans 12. 20.

12. Religiously, this is a rule and condition which is least observed, or
taken notice of, but of all most requisite, necessary, and graceful to our
Almsdeeds. This religious manner of giving, consists in these five things.
First, to give with respect to Gods commandment, as doing him service, and
testifying obedience unto his Will: this is a great fault among many, who
either give not all though God does enjoyne them, or else give not because he
bids them, but because the poor beg of them. Secondly, to give with relation
unto Gods great mercy toward us, and hereby to testify our thankfulness
unto him, as Zacheus did. Thirdly, in our contributions Luke 19.
to have respect unto the maintenance and advancement of Christian religion,
which teaches us that we must visit the Jam. 1. 27.
fatherless, and widows in their affliction. Fourthly, to aim at Gods glory
in these and all our other actions, we must do good works that others may see
the Matthew. 5. 16.
light of them, and so glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Fifthly, to
deliver our alms with a Christian admonition and exhortation unto piety, new
obedience, equity, sobriety, etc. to encourage those whom we find already
well-disposed, to seek their reformation who are refractorie and perverse in
their courses: Thus shall we be double-Charitable, spiritually to their
souls, and corporally to their bodies. There be many graceless wretches, who
like beasts care only for their bellies (as if they had but sensitive souls
only) and cannot endure that we should do them so much good as to instruct and
chatechize them. These we must most pity, because their case is most
lamentable, they are in a purgatory here already, and without unfeigned
repentance their next step will be into hell. What a happy and glorious work
would it be, if by our good words and charitable works, we could pull one such
helples soul out of his spiritual misery and thraldom, this were indeed a
piece of superlatiue and transcendent charity.

13. And lastly, we must remember to give constantly, we Gal. 6. 9. Eccl. 11.
6.
must not pull back our shoulders from the yoke, nor grow wearyof well doing:
in the morning we must sow our seed, and in the evening not pull back our hand
from the rising of the Sun of our life, till the natural expiration and going
down of the same. As long as there are poor to be relieved, and goods to be
communicated, so long must we still exercise our bounty and liberality, Mat.
26. 11.
for according to Christ's prediction, the poor we shall always have with us,
as long as the world endures, therefore noe hope of any intermission, or
cessation from showing mercy. As God is always helping us, so should we our
helpelesse brethren, Job. 31. 18.
Job was addicted to works of mercy from his youth Act. 6. 1.
up, he never eat his morsells alone, but divided a portion to the fatherless
and the widow. Among the primitive Christians there was a daily ministration
to the wants and necessities of the poor, how then can we hope or desire to
be ever exempted from the performance of this duty? A Christian must resemble
the Sun in the firmament, ever shine, be ever full of the light of good
works: And as the Sun if the sky be clear, seems most glorious and
beautiful at his setting, so should Gods faithful sons and servants be most
resplendent in grace and goodness, and the works of charity when they are old,
as it were a dying and drawing apace to their long home the grave.

CHAP. XIIII. When to give.
TO every thing there is a season, and a Eccl. 3. 1. 17.
time to every purpose, and for every work under the heaven, and every thing
is beautiful only in its time, and therefore fit is it, that we should
observe the signs and nature of the times, the occurrences, and accidents,
misfortunes, and disasters of other men, that so we may not let slip any
seasons or opportunities of doing good: the time of our life, while we have a
temporal being, the time of our wealth, while we have worldly abilities, is
the only and best time to discharge our duties of charity, and to set our
selves to every good work: the righteous Psalm. 37. 26.
man (says the Psalmist) is ever merciful, he never thinks it unfit or
unseasonable to do good or show mercy: but we are more specially to give at
these observable times.

1. Upon the Lords day, according 1 Cor. 16. 2.
to the Apostles prescription and ordination, and that Act. 3. 4. 6. 7.
for the reasons before alleged.

2. When accidently we meet with seasonable occasions Luke 10. 33.
of bountifulness, as Peter and John did, and the good Samaritane, we may not
suffer any son or daughter of Adam to perish through our neglect and
hardheartednesse, if we can support them, be they never so unworthy of
themselves, be they of never so unworthy of themselves, of never so dogged
disposition, and most abhorred conversation, we have incitement from a reverend
divine, so to do. Upon Bolt. gener. directions of walk. p. 258.
point of perishing do good unto the common state of humanity, for in so
doing, thou relievest not his notoriousnesse, but his nature.

3. When we hear where true need is, where Lazarus takes up his lodging, and
now and then, we should visit the sick and distressed, that we might so take
the better notice of their wants, and by our pitiful eyes be the sooner
induced to commiserate and relieve them. Such merciful visiters are sure of a
reward at the last day.

4. When the needy cry and call Mat. 25. 36
unto us for refreshment, and consolation, it is a fearful and dangerous
thing to be a deaf adder either not to hear the charms of the word, or the
pitiful clamours of the needy: who so stops his ears (says Solomon) at
the cry of the poor, he also shall cry Pro. 21. 13.
himself, but shall not be heard.

5. When we have reaped our Lev. 19. 10. and 23. 22.
corn, gathered in our harvest, and filled our storehouses with the plenty of
Gods earthly blessings.

6. When we have prosperously Deuteronomy. 24. 20. 21. Number. 31. 48. 50.
undertaken and finished some businesses in our callings, which the Lord has
blessed, and made gainefull unto us, we do too often sacrifice to our own
nets, and say secretly with our selves by my own wit, and the strength of mine
own arm, have I brought this and this to pass, my power and the might of my
hand has gotten me this wealth But we should remember the Lord our God, that
it is he that gives us power to get wealth. Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
Therefore it gteatly concerns us to employ some part of that substance to his
glory, which we so freely received from his hand of bounty and liberality.

7. When a great and a good man is made poor by the hand of God, and stands
in need of some borrowed aid and assistance, to raise him up again, Jobs
brethren and acquaintance did not only bemoane his case and dejected
condition, and comfort him with good words only, but their compassion was
real as well as verbal, they helped him with their hand, as well as pitied
him with their hearts, every man gave him a piece of money Job. 42. 11.
and every one an earering of gold.

8. Upon solemn days of public rejoicing and thanksgiving unto God for some
memorable deliverance from eminent dangers, bloody persecutions, or any other
grievous calamities. The Jews instituted the feast of Purim, as a day of
gladness, exultation and thanksgiving for their happy deliverance from Hamans
conspiracy, and on this day did they send portions one to another Esther. 9.
19. 22.
and gave gifts to the poor. And we of this kingdom have as great reason to
celebrate and observe for ever the fifth of November after the same manner in
remembrance of that miraculous deliverance of our king and state, from that
diabolical, infernal, hell-bred (I cannot give it names bad enough)
machivilian popish gunpowder treason.

9. Upon days of fasting, and Mat. 6. Act. 10. 20.
humiliation either private or public: our Savior Christ does join fasting
and prayer and alms together in precept, so must we join them together like
Cornelius in practice. Accipiat esuriens Christus, quod jejunans Austin de
temp. ser, 157.
minus accipit Christianus. we must at the least give so much unto the poor as
we do spare, and otherwise would have spent in our own diet: that is but a
covetous and a miserable fast, when men pinch their bellies and reserve for
themselves, what they have saved that day, this is the way to grow rich in the
world, not toward God: Therefore if any at any time afflict their bodies with
fasting, and never refresh the poor Christians with their alms and
liberality, their pretended devotion is worth nothing.

10. When we receive the holy Sacraments and are invited to the Supper of the
Lord, to strengthen and refresh our souls with that precious food, the body
and blood of Christ, (me thinks) we should labor then to show our selves
merciful to others, when we hope to find God merciful unto our selves at
this time to give, was the; practice in the Apostles days, in the days of the
ancient Fathers. It is the use in all reformed churches, at this day, and with
many congregations in our Church.

12, When the Ministers of God upon good occasions and opportunities, exhort
their hearers to some charitable good works. As it is a pastors duty to charge
Gal. 2. 10. 1 Timothy 6. 17. 18. Tit. 3. 8. 14. 2 Cor. 8 and 9. Heb. 13. 17.
the rich to be merciful and ready to distribute: so it is the peoples part
to practice as readily what they hear, and like the Macedonians and
Corinthians to obey their teachers, and to submit unto their exhortations.

13. In times of dearth and scarcity: This was the practice of the primitive
Christians, when Agabus had once foretold them of a great dearth that Act. 11.
28.
should be throughout all the world, presently the disciples of of Antioch,
every man according to his ability determined to send relief unto the
brethren that dwelt in Judea, which also they did and sent it to the Elders by
the hands of Paul and Barnabas. Our English martyr Mr Rogers pinched his own
belly that he might minister some refreshment unto those that were in extreme
poverty, holy Bradford sold his chains, rings and Jewels in time of scarcity
to relieve the needy and distressed Christians. It were to be wished, that all
great ones who are eminent in wealth or authority, would tread in these men's
steps, and reach forth their helping hands to support the poor, and needy in
all times of dearth and scarcity. Let them take good Nehemiah for a pattern,
he Nehe. 5. 7.
took the calamities and grievances of his brethren so to heart that he
rebuked the nobles and rulers for their sakes, reproved them of usury, and
exaction and hard dealing toward their brethren, and he remitted, and abated
much of his own allowance, that he might be the more liberal and bountiful
to the poor people lately returned out of captivity. Some men take the
advantage of such disasterous times, they then make their best market by
receiving of pawnes, buying livings and lands at a low rate, by horrible
exactions, and cruel dealings, these play the canniballs, indeed, they lay
more weight to their already intolerable burden of woe and misery, they
afflict the afflicted, and instead of lifting them out of the ditch, they go
about to cut their throats, and to rid them quickly out of their pain and
misery. Lastly, we should be ready to give to the poor ( when our rates come
to be paid) without grudging, suit of law, or any manner of reluctation: as
good not give at all as unwillingly and churlishly, when a pittance to the
poor is perforce wrung out of thy glewy fingers, it is a compulsory payment, not
an act of mercy or charitable contribution.

CHAP. XV. How much to give.
ALbeit Humane laws and constitutions do ordain and command, that public
rates be made in all parishes for the maintenance of the poor, and so hereby
many are necessitated and enforced according to their known abilities to
contribute something, who otherwise through their hard-heartednesse would do
just nothing at all; And although God likewise in works of piety, rated his
people Israel, Exodus 30. 12. 15. 16. Numb. 18. 18. and 15. and 18.
to be liberal in some cases, as ( viz.) for the atonement of men's souls,
for the maintenance of divine worship of the Levites and Priests, who served
at the Altar, yet never was there such compulsive rules set down by God to be
observed in works of Charity, either under the Law, or under the Gospel.

It Is to hard a matter, and beyond the power and wisdom of any one man to
proportionate other men's alms, to determine of the quantity and measure of
their bounty and to prescribe any certain rules in this case: for herein the
Scripture is silent, and does not particularize any. Circumstances may so vary
and alter, that one rule, will not hold for all; most men's estates are very
different, so are the objects of Charity: As all are not alike rich, so neither
are all alike poor; And again all Charitable actions and good works are not
of like necessity; Therefore we will not presume to tie or oblige men's
consciences to strict Canons in matters so different and undetermined. It will
not be amiss nevertheless, to commend unto your considerations, such general
directions as these.

1. We ought to give as we are able (according to the precept of our Savior
CHRIST) Luke 11. 41.
Give (says he) of that which you have, that is, (according to the Marginall
translation) as you are able. This was the practice of the primitive Disciples,
they resolved and determined to relieve Act. 11. 29.
the poor Saints after their power and abilities. Some have parted with much
as Cornelius, some have given half of their estates as Zacheus did, and one Sr
Thomas Offley who gave half of his estate and two hundred pounds out of the
other half, left unto his son, to be bestowed by his executors in charitable
works: Some have sold all, and given all as Barnabas, the poor Widow and
many others and some in our modern times have given a tenth, we 2 Cor. 9. 7.
want not instances hereof, no not in these our present days: every one is to
give, as God shall move him, and according as he purposes in his heart. 1 Cor.
16. 2.


2. We must give as God has prospered us. As he goes before us, so must we
follow after; our benevolence to others must be according to his benediction to
our selves, we must observe his hand toward us, and so proceed in our
Charity toward our neighbors: our measure to others must be as he metes unto
us, of his little we must give a Act. 10. 2. Mark. 12. 41.
little, of his abundance, a great deal: where much is given, much is expected
and required again: Here is no exaction at all to repay back a little pittance
out of that great portion which was freely and undeservedly collated on us by
Gods bountiful hand, there cannot be a more reasonable request, or a more
easy way of retribution than this, to give according as God has prospered us.

3. We must give in such a measure as our poor brethrens present necessities
shall require, and we our selves would in their cases expect from the hands of
those that should be of our own now flourishing Matthew. 7. 12.
rank and station: do we must unto others, as we would others should do unto
us: as therefore we would (were we in Lazarus his case) beg and require some
crummes of comfort from Dives his Table, so let us remember in our days of
wealth and plenty to give the poor a taste of our dainties, a share of our
abundance.

4. We must (without all controversy) give so much unto hungry and naked
Christians, as we are well able, and willingly content to expend profusely in
Gaming, Dicing, upon Hawks, Horses and Hounds, or any other posting pleasures,
and fugitive pastimes. Let no man call this assertion into question, for it is
a principle so clear and unquestionable, that no man of understanding and
master of his own wits, except he be notoriously shameless, can have the
face to deny it; For is it not a thing altogether very incongruous and
unreasonable, that a company of filthy Ravens, and tamed Eagles should devour
Gods portion, and starve the poor? Or that a nasty kennell of stinking Curres
should be preferred before the Blessed members of Jesus Christ? I could wish,
that these great Masters of pleasures would remember the right honorable
practice of a truly Noble man, who when a friend of his coming to him, and
after other complements betwixt them, desired to see his Hounds, after dinner
carrying him into a Dr Mayer exp. on Jar. pa. 367.
room, where were many poor people relieved, telling him that these were the
hounds wherewith he did hunt after the kingdom of heaven.

5. We must ever give so much as may evidence and demonstrate, Pro. 3. 9.
first, the power of religion, and our conscionable care to honor God with
that substance which we have received from him. 2. The invisible pity, and
melting compassion of our hearts toward the needy. 3. Our love and gratitude
to God for the plentiful effusion and collation of his earthly blessings upon
us. 4. Our trustiness and fidelity in the using, managing, and employment of
those temporal talents which he lent us, to his glory and our neighbors good.
5. Our faith and steadfast relyance upon his promises, which he has faithfully
made unto all compassionate and charitably minded persons. 6. Our contempt and
detestation of the world and the perishing pelf thereof, that our hearts are
not nailed and inseparably glued to earth and earthly things. 7. Our
propensitie and willingness to contribute according to our abilities, 2 Cor.
8. 3.
and our hope and expectation of that unvaluable reward and recompense which is
prepared for, and shall one day crown the heads of all those that by their
mercifulness and brotherly kindness, have laid up a good foundation against 1 Timothy 6. 19. Job. 31. Psalm. 41. 1. 3. Deuteronomy. 15. 10 Psalm. 37. 26. and 41. 13.
the life to come, that they may hold on eternal life. Lastly, we must be so
liberal in giving, that thence we may suck some joy and comfort unto our
souls, which (if we be truly bountiful) we shall most certainly reap at
Gods hand, comfort in afflictions, comfort in sickness, comfort in the works and
operations of our hands, comfort in the hope of Gods blessing upon our children
and posterity, comfort against enemies, comfort against death, when we shall
rest from our labors, and our good works will follow us, Rev. 14. 13. Jam. 2.
13. Mat. 25.
lastly, unutterable comfort, and consolation against, and in the day of
judgment,

CHAP. XVI. Of the ends of giving and how true hearted Nathanaels differ in
their charity from rotten-hearted worldlings.
OF all the circumstances which concur to a good action, the end is the most
prinpall and chiefly observable, this is a general rule, Exitus acta probat,
the end tryes the business; either makes or marres the action which is
undertaken, wherefore before we set our selves to any good work, we must
specially look to the end, that it be answereable in goodness to all the
precedent circumstances. For if we fail herein, let the whole action be
carried never so fairly in the eyes of men, be clothed with never so goodly a
show, and glorious outside, yet in respect of acceptance with God, or true
comfort to the party, it is no better then the cutting off a dogs neck. The
maine ends which all truly religious Christians are to aim at, are such as
these.

1. They set before their eyes Mat. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 12.
principally that universal aim and ultimate end of all our actions and
enterprises, Gods glory, not their own private honor and reputation, as too
too many do, who were never acquainted with a pure and undefiled religion, but
ever mere strangers to the life of saving faith, and the power of true
godliness.

2. They are open-handed to the poor, and bountiful sometimes to the utmost
of their power, or beyond their abilities, to testify their sincere and
unfeined obedience unto the precepts of the Lord, whom, like blessed David,
they set always before Psalm. 16. 9.
their eyes, and to whom they have ever respect in all their works.
Worldly-minded men have never such an aim in any of their distributions, for
how is it possible, that they should give unto the poor in testimony of their
subjection and obedience unto Gods will, whose whole life is nothing else but a
perpetual rebellion and continual trade of sinning against his sacred
Majesty?

3. Another scope, that they have in their almes-giving, is to oppose the
malice of malignant 1 Pet. 2. 5. and 3. 16.
slanderers, to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, and by their well
doing, to make them ashamed, who falsely accuse their good conversations in
Christ. There is a conviction by good works, as well as by good words, and
there is indeed, no better argument to stop the mouths of the enemies of the
Gospel then this, to nonplus them by good works,

4. To provoke one another to love, and to good works, and by the heat and
forwardness Heb. 10. 24.
of their zeal to inflame others to the performance of the same actions, thus
were the Macedonians 2 Cor. 9. 2.
incited and provoked by the practices of the Saints which 1 These. 5. 19.
dwelt in Achaia, and they likewise with the examples of the Macedonians, as
we must not quench the spirit in our selves, so must we, as far as in us
lies, be provokers, and enflamers of the hearts of others unto goodness, and
not labor, as some do, to cast water upon the already dying sparks of zeal
in some, by questioning the warrantablenesse of so unquestionable and
Apostolical courses, Sanderson ser.
There is no truth we know so 1 Cor. 16. 2.
happily innocent, as to maintain it self free from calumny and
misinterpretation: but yet that laying aside weekly is an excellent
preparative unto charity, no man can deny. And therefore if any assault and
oppose this with their fleshly reasonings, and sophistical cauillations, a man
may probably conjecture, that covetousness is the cause of this their hot
contention, and Iam persuaded their consciences do remonstrate and secretly
tell them, that they are so liberal in their tongues, that they may spare
their purses.

5. To supply the wants, refresh the bowels, and make glad the hearts of the
poor, who by the experiment of their ministration, will glorify God for their
professed subjection unto the Gospel of Christ, and return abundant
thanksgiving unto his 2 Cor. 9. 12 13.
goodness for their liberal distributions unto them, and unto all men.

6. To exhilarate and rejoice the hearts of such faithful and laborious
Ministers, who like S. Paul, with all possible industry and carfulness,
endeavor to lead their flocks in the paths of righteousness, and to stir
up their hearers unto charity and good works. For it cannot be, but a matter
of great joy and consolation unto all conscionable and truly charitable
Pastors, when they shall see the bowels of the Saints refreshed by their Phil.
7.
Philemons, for whom they thank God, and cause others 2 Cor. 9. 11
so to do. But some are so far from this pious resolution, Heavenly temper,
and sanctified disposition, that like wicked wretches, they will be utterly
averse from the practice of this Grace, upon set purpose only to cross, vex,
and disquiet their Ministers, who are sent for none other end than to save
them, and to snatch them out of the paw of Satan, and the Hell of sin.

7. To testify to their consciences, and to give good satisfaction to their
own souls, that they are not cozened with copper in stead of pure gold, that
their other graces are not counterfeite, but unfeigned, supernatural, and the
true and undoubted work and gifts of the Holy Ghost. He that is hardly
persuaded to the exercise of charity, has just cause to fear, that he has
no sparks of saving grace, as yet resident and inhabiting within his iron
sides; but if thou can once make it evident unto thy own soul, that
certainly thou bear in thy bosom a melting and compassionate heart, that
thou art furnished, and happily crowned with that perfect and royal grace: Why
then, thou may without any fallacy conclude, that thy faith is unfeyned, thy
heart pure, thy hope strong and unmooveable, thy state and condition
undoubtedly a state of salvation, for by this we know we are translated 1 John
3. 14.
from death to life, because we love the brethren.

Thus you see the regenerate and truly religious Christians have a right aim
and end in all their actions and works of mercy, betwixt whom and the
worldlings there is a very wide and vaste difference, and that in many respects.

1. They differ in the causes, the actual contributions of the godly are
derived and proceed ever from a pure heart, good conscience, says unfeyned,
and the secret and invisible operations 1. Tim. 1. 5.
of the spirit, all which the carnal and natural man wants, and (without Gods
great mercy) is never like to have.

2. They differ in the matter, for the one gives de proprio of that which is
his own, which by his own industry and Gods blessing he has lawfully gotten
Vnde habeat quaerit Nemo sed oportet habere.
or was by way of donation freely conferred and bestowed upon him: the other
never regards how he comes by that he has, whether Jure aut Injuria, by right
or wrong, by hook or crook (as they say) he cares not so he may seem
charitable in giving.

3. They differ in the manner of giving, the one does it with a free heart, and
cheerful spirit, liberally, readily, religiously, conscionably and constantly,
etc. and that in any state and condition whatsoever, in his penury and
mediocritie, as well as in his abundance and superfluity, ever to the utmost
of his ability, and sometimes beyond his power in case of extremity, many
times prevents the poor with his alms, communicates to their necessities
before he be importuned or solicited, yea, sometime before his own turn be
served. But on the contrary, the covetous worldling is a very hold fast of his
earthly treasures, he spares more then needs, gives only in his plenty and
abundance, seldom in his mediocritie, never in his poverty, distributes
likewise but by starts, when the fit takes him, or when he is in such a good
mood (as they say.)

4. They differ much in the time, the one gives seasonablely and most in his
time of life: the other for the most part unseasonably, and most at his death,
when he can keep his wealth Sero medicina paratur.
no longer. The one helps and abates the disease at the first coming, the
other suffers the miseries of the poor to rankle and grow incureable, and then
at his death he thinks to provide a plaster, that will cure all his sins,
and their maladies and soars.

5. There is a difference both in the quality, and quantity of the gift: the
one gives bountifully, that which is good, wholesome, profitable, salutiferous,
and fit for a rich man to give, and poor Christians to receive: The other
gives sparingly the base refuse, and unedible reliqu's, which if not cast upon
the poor, should be given unto the dogs.

6. They differ in the object, in the latitude and extent thereof; The one is a
benefactor unto all enemies and friends, to aged, creeples, the laborious
poor, all sorts of needy and distressed people, but more principally to those
whom he knows to be pious and religious. But the worldling gives eitherhand
over head, to the sturdie rogue, as soon, as to the truly distressed Lazarus,
or to such as have some relation unto, or dependence upon him, or either have,
or shall, some way or other, work it out, and well deserve it: He no more
respects the members of Christ, than the limbs of Satan, and though you may
find him sometimes liberal to his friends, yet never so to his enemies.

Lastly, they differ in the end; The godly have ever in their eye Gods Glory,
and the advancement of true religion, as you have heard before mentioned: but
the unregenerate and carnal man's ends are only worldly, and fleshly; some
hunt after popular applause, and reputation in the Matthew. 6.
world, as Hypocrites do; some aim at merit, the expiation of the guilt of
sin, meritorious acquisition of life everlasting, as the super-arrogant
Papists do: the natural and unrenewed man never sets his eye upon the right
end, and therefore no marvel, if he ever miss his mark, and give to no
purpose.

CHAP. XVII. How to maintain good works.
ITs not enough to begin to do well, we must persevere, or else it had been
better never to have begun: so in the trade of Almes-giving, we must not
only learn to do good works; but also to maintain them, as we are
counseled, or rather commanded by the Apostle, Tit. 3. 8. 14.

Now there be two principal things to be observed before we can be careful to
maintain good works.

1. We must labor to prevent all the occasions and causes of want and penury
in our selves and the diminution or overthrow of our own estates. The causes
hereof most frequently are such as these.

1. Foolishness and an incorrigible stupiditie of mind, for a man that has
no brains to dispose and order his affairs with discretion, will soon spend
up his treasure, and bring quickly his Noble to nine pence (as they say) and
his nine pence to nothing: Prove. 21. 20 and 13. 23.
There is (says Solomon) that is destroyed for want of judgment.

2. Prodigality, which is an immoderate profusion and excessive spending of a
man's substance in pleasures, or pastimes, or any other not necessary things
without any due observation of those circumstances which are requisite to every
morally liberal action. This is a devouring vice and will in a moment eat up a
Dives his fair and unlimited estate. And therefore it is thus truly described
by the moral (...). Arist. Eth. lib. 4.
Philosopher, Prodigality is nothing else but the corruption of a man's
substance, and the destruction of himself.

3. Gluttony and drunkenness the two unsatiable and hungry Harpyes that in
these intemperate times prey upon and devour the souls and bodies, livings,
and lands of many men in this kingdom: He that wilfully wallowes in the
stinking mud of of these swinish sins, he is not only going down apace to
the Lake of Brimstone, but he may be thought to be as good as there already;
if S. Ebrietas est quasi inferni Puteus. de Temp. Sermon. 231.
Austines words will go current, who dares to compare drunkenness to the very
pit of Hell. Neither will these two evils only endamage the soul, but also
quickly ruinate a man's house and posterity, for says the wise man, the
Drunkard and the Glutton (they be two brethren and the natural sons of
Belial) shall come to poverty.

4. Love of sports, gaming, and pastimes, these be the insensible wasters of a
man's wealth and earthly treasures: and this is a most undeniable truth, He
that loves pleasures shall be a poor man, Prove. 21. 17.

5. Idleness, which is the rust and canker of the soul, the devils Cushion,
pillow and chief reposall, the tide-time of temptation, (as it is described by a
reverend Bolton. Genesis direct. pa. 70.
Divine) he, that is troubled with this sin, has little hope to be rich
either in Spiritual or temporal things. Believe it, he that deals Pro. 10.
4. Pro. 6. 11. and 23. 21. Pro. 29. 3 and 5. 10. and 6. 26.
with a slack hand becomes poor, and upon the sluggard, sleepy, and lazy
drone poverty shall come as oue that travaileth and want as an armed man: and
this will be the top of his honor he shall be clothed with rags.

6. Companying with harlots, and frequenting the houses of strange women, for
all haunters of such filthy nurceries do spend their life, blood, marrow,
strength health, wealth, and labors in the house of strangers, and they shall
be brought to a morsel of bread, as we know the Prodigal son was.

7. Hastiness and precipitancie Prove. 21. 5.
in a man's ways and courses: The thoughts of the hasty tend only to want; It Is
a good Memorandum of a humane Writer, festina lent: do nothing rashly, and
with a violent and inconsiderate spirit: Quod cito fit, perit hoc cito, sat
cito, sat been quod fit: That is done soon enough which is done well enough,
things soon done most commonly are ill done: I am sure goods soon gotten, are
soon gonne, so says Solomon, He that Pro. 28. 22. and 20. 21.
makes have to be rich brings poverty in the end, and that inheritance
which is speedily gotten together in the beginning, shall not be blessed in the
end.

8. Unconscionable purchases, Prove. 21. 6. and 13. 11. and 22. 16.
secret rapines, and unlawful acquisitions of a man's substance, by lying,
oppression, deceit, cozenage, usury, unjust gain, fraudulent undermining, or
any other covetous tricks. The Apostle 1 These. 4. 6.
tells us, that the Lord is the auenger of all such foxes and woulfes, who suck
the blood of Prove. 28. 8.
poor Christians, and such an estate certainly shall be dimiminished, and
reduced unto nothing.

Wherefore let us beware of these forenamed vices, as so many cankers,
caterpillars, and unvisible moathes, which will insensibly consume and eat up
our outward estates: Let us accept and embrace this premonition and good
advise, for he that refuses Pro. 13. 18. 25. and 14. 11. 11.
instruction shall be clothed with shame, his house shall be overthrown, and
poverty and confusion shall come upon him.

2. For the maintenance of good works, we must walk in such a way, and take
such a course, as may enable us thereunto.

1. We must live in some calling, honest trade and settled course of life,
wherein we may employ our gifts and time and strength for our own and the
common good: Brethren (says the Apostle) let every man wherein 1 Cor. 7. 24.
he is called therein abide with God: the precept is imperative and
universal, none may be exempted, but all must make choice of some particular
calling wherein to wrlke; There many reasons to move us to this duty: one of
the chiefest of all is, the maintenance of good Works: Let ours learn to
mainetaine good Works: (that is, according Tit. 3. 14.
to the Marginall reading of the Text) let ours profess honest Trades, as if
they were the best and only means, to uphold good works: Life must be
preserved, families maintained, the poor releeved, and this cannot be done
without bread, for that is the staff of life, and bread cannot be gotten
(says an excellent Mr Saundersons ser. 4. ad pop. 373.
Divine) but in a lawful vocation. Tell me, did you ever read of any holy man
in the Scriptures, that lived without a calling? I am sure there was never any
but made conscience of this duty, which was imposed by God upon Adam, and all
his posterity, in these words, in the sweat of thy brewes shall thou Genesis 3. 19.
eat bread.

2. As we must have a Calling, wherein to walk, so must we labor, and with
all diligence abide in that calling, we must not work perfunctorily, or by
starts (as many Taskelabourers do) but constantly, Psalm. 104. 23. Eccles. 9.
10.
and with all our might, neither may we employ our wits, and time, and
strength in what we please, but only in those things Ephesians. 4. 28.
which be good and lawful, (so says Saint Paul) Let him that stole, steal no
more, but rather let him labor, working with his hands the things which is
good. The Thief works with his hands, perhaps as hard as any sometimes, but
the thing is ever evil he goes about: Therefore that is an ungodly and wicked
working, and no way tolerable; the labor which the Apostle requires from us,
(be it either of the brows, or of the brain) Prove. 10. 4. and 14 23. and 13.
4. 11.
must be sanctified and imployd about good things, and such diligence and
industry with Gods blessing makes rich, herein is much profit, and by it
shall a man be made fat.

3. One maine end of all our civil actions, political employments, or
corporeal endeavors in our particular callings, must be, to give to the
poor, Ephesians. 4. 28. This is to labor to maintain good works, a thing which
very few in their paines-taking, seldom, or never dream of. Our Apostle does
not only teach us this duty by precept, but also by his own example; he
labored with his own hands, that he might have whereof to minister to his own
and others necessities, Act. 20. 34.

4. We must order our Affairs Psalm. 112. 5.
with discretion, this is a practice which right well becomes a gracious, good,
and merciful man, and very much enableth him to the constant performance of
Piety, Pity, and compassion.

5. We must be careful and provident, for you must know there is a moderate
and christian providence, as well as an irreligious Prove. 27. 23
carking, and immoderate carfulness; we must look diligently John. 6. 12.
to all our flocks and herds, and gather up all the fragments, that nothing
be lost, and this is a passage that pleases the worldlings to the heart: for
this they will do fast enough of their own accord without any bidding, for
their own profits sake, or out of a greedy desire and ambition to rise and to
grow rich in the world. But it is not so with the Godly, the serious and sober
Christian, he walks in his calling, plies his business, improves his time,
wit, wealth, and state, because God so commands him, and principally for this
end, that he might be the more liberal and able to maintain good works.

6. We must devise liberal things, be as politic to find out good works
and enterprises, as Machiavillians are to invent mischief, and contrive
villainies. As men commonly cast about, how they may thrive and prosper in their
ordinary courses, so ought we to plot and devise with our selves, what might
be the wisest and most convenient way for us to maintain good works and to
thrive in this Heavenly trade of Almes-giving.

7. We must be zealous of Tit. 2. 14.
good works, as all the redeemed and peculiar people of Christ are. We should
affect such holy practices above any temporary felicities; take a great deal
of Spiritual joy and pleasure in multiplying our Almsdeeds, in laying a
strong and unmovable foundation against the life to come: we should be moved
with a pious wrath and indignation against our own slackenesse,
backewardnesse, and other men's hardness of heart, and also with an inward
grief for the same.

Lastly, we must first seek the Kingdom of God and the righteousness
thereof, first we must thirst after saving knowledge, and spiritual
understanding, labor to abound in the work of the Lord, and to hoard up
grace: then we shall not need to fear the want of any temporal and earthly
blessing, but all necessaries (according to the promise) Mat. 6. 33.
for this life, shall be added unto, and cast upon us. Though we may sometimes
be driven to extremity like Job, or fall into some seeming (but not real)
outward miseries, yet we Psalm. 34. 9. 10.
shall never want any thing that is good. Gold sometimes proves to be
pernicious, and no better than rank poison to men's souls, and God in his
mercy therefore takes it away from his children: fullness of bread, and
abundance of his blessings sometimes provoke men unto Lust, and the execution
of uncleanness and many filthy villainies; therefore the Lord sometimes gives
them not to his servants, but diets them like Lazarus, that they might not
surfeit, abuse the creature, or dishonor the Creator: However it may sometimes
go hard (always yet well enough) with some of Gods people in respect of their
outward condition. I am sure there are many fair promises of earthly blessings
made in the Scriptures to those that fear the Lord: Those that return to the
Almighty, that love him, and keep his Commandments, they shall inherit
substance Prove. 8. 21. Job. 22. 24.
the Lord will fill up their treasures, nay, they shall lay up gold as dust,
and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks: So then we see, where to
begin; first, we must labor to be rich toward God, so shall we be sure
(if it stand with Gods Glory, and our good) to be rich in worldly goods, and
rich also in good works: If we well observe these premised rules and
directions, we shall undoubtedly learn to maintain works of mercy for
necessary and profitable uses.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the various kinds of good works, and wherein particularly
they consist, and here a word or two of the works of Morality, and of the
works of Piety at large.
FOr the clearer insight into the present point, we will reduce all virtuous
actions and good works (which in their individuals be innumerable) unto these
heads and species.

1. There are works of morality (as viz.) civil education, and religious
training up of children humble subjection to the Tim. 5. 10. Tit. 3. 1. Romans
13. 1. 2. 3. Tit. 3. 14. Ephesians. 4. 12. Phil. 2. 30.
authority of higher powers, the fruits and passages of a blameless life, and
unreproveable conversation, profession of, and diligent laboring in an honest
trade or calling, the Magistrates seasonable execution of justice, restitution
of ill gotten goods, paying of every one his own, speaking the truth, and such
other actions and works of equity, honesty, and verity. If we be deficient
in these moral duties, there will be no hope or possibility of acceptance
for any of our other good works: If herein we fail, there can neither be any
show or form, (much less any power) of piety, nor any life in our charity
and liberality.

2. There are works of Piety, which directly tend to the worship of God, the
advancement of Religion, the furtherance of the Ministry of the Word, the
salvation of men's souls, and the edifying of the body of Christ, and these we
are in the first place to embrace and practice.

1. Our blessed Savior took this course and observed this method in his
bountifulness and tender compassions: First, he took pity upon men's
souls, Math. 4. 23 24. and 5. 36.
before he meddled with their bodies, he first taught them, then he healed
them, preached unto them, then fed them with the miraculous loaves, he entered
into Zacheus his heart, before he went into his house, and opened the eyes of
Bartimeus his understanding, before he touched the eyes of his body. Secondly,
he commanded his Disciples and Matthew. 6. 33.
followers to seek spiritual things before corporal, Heavenly treasures
before earthly toys and trifles. Thirdly, he rebuked the fleshly hearers of
the Word, who were careful only of their lies, and charged them to hunger
John 6. 26. 27.
after the bread of life, to labor, not for the meat that perishes, but for
that meat which endures unto everlasting life. Fourthly, the first prayer and
petition he commanded his disciples Math. 9. 38
to present unto his father was this, that he would be pleased to send forth
laborers into his Harvest: so tenderly did he regard the welfare of the
peoples souls. Fifthly, he commends Luke 10. 40. 42.
and highly prefers Mary's choice for the soul, before Marthaes care for the
body. Let us remember then to follow the example, practice, and advice of our
blessed Savior; let us be sure to watch over our own, and others souls, and
in a second place over our and their bodies. The one is but the duty of
humanity, the other the most excellent and noble work of christianity.

For, 1. In these our spiritual Almsdeeds, the object of our compassion is
most illustrious man's immortal soul. 2. The work of mercy the more noble and
transcendent by how much it is the more heavenly and supernatural. 3. It ever
proceeds from an illuminated understanding, and a spiritualized heart. that
considers on, and is sensible of a man's spiritual misery: Many covetous
earth-wormes are ready to give to the distressed bodies of the poor, but they
never entertain such a thought as to succor and refresh their Amos. 8. 11. 12.
languishing and hungerstarved souls. 4. The famine of the soul is a far
more fearful plague, then the famine of the body, and therefore it is a more
Melius est animam semper victur a^ verbo vitae resicere, quam ventrem moriturae
carnis terreno pane satiare. Greg.
noble and honorable action to feed the soul with the word, then the body
with bread. Eleemosyna cordis multo major, quam Eleemosyna corporis, the bounty
of the heart is far greater, then the liberality of the hand. A Turk may
refresh me with the one, but none but a good christian Luke. 16. We confess
it is but a parable, yet it evidently denotes unto us the universal confusion
both of soul and body of every uncharitable glutton.
can or will comfort me with the other. 5. I must let the^ know that though
the body be never so well cared for and looked unto, yet if the soul pine away
through spiritual hunger, the body though never so well fatted, is like also
to perish. * Dives was not in hell in his soul only, but as the whole man did
sin, so the whole man was tormented and confounded. The ruin of the soul does
ever bring an unavoidable confusion to the body: even as the fall of the towr
oftentimes batters down and defaces the body of the Church. If the soul fare
well, the body is not like to do amiss, but if that be neglected, and
deprived of its food. the other cannot but perish also. 6. All truly
spiritual gifts tend to the endless salvation of the soul, but the
ministration of corporal and earthly things only to the preservation of the
body: and therefore to prefer the corporal alms, which tend only to the
reparation and upholding of the mud walls of the flesh, before spiritual
liberality, and those works of mercy which concern the eternal safety of the
soul, argues (according to Christ's own words) flat Gentilisme, Math. 6. 32
Jer. 44. 17. 18. Luke 16.
much preposterous madness, and heathenish foolery. It has been the chefest
care of abominable idolaters and gormandizing Epicures to provide plenty of
victuals for the belly, and at this day it is the custom and frequent
practice of vain and vicious men, to carke and care only for perishable food
and nutriment, as if they had sensitive and swinish souls only, which at their
last dissolution would be evacuated and vanish into air or nothing, who sees
not how these men degenerate into bruitishnesse, and how they abase and vilify
their noble and Angellicall natures, wherein they were created by wallowing in
the mire of sensuality and luxury, and by captivating and starving their
immortal souls in the prisons of the flesh.

Let us then in the fear of God play a wiser part, then these notorious fools
do: if we have souls and those immortal too, (according to the acknowledgment
of a hethen man, Tullie in his Tuscul. Quaest.
let us labor, and take a special care, that they may be chatechised,
instructed, comforted, and refreshed with the bread of life, and as we deal
with our selves, so must we do also with our Christian poor brethren, for we
are commanded to love our neighbors, as our selves, and to do to others, as
we would they should do unto us. If we neglect and pass by the safety and
preservation of our own, or our brethrens souls, if we were as full of
almsdeeds, and liberality, as the sea is of water, if we made giving our
ordinary trade and vocation: yet all were just nothing, according to the
forecited saying of that renowned Fac prius Eleemosynam ammae da illi panem,
hanc si pretermittis da quantum vis, etc. Aug. Ench. ad Laur.
Father, first give alms to thy soul, give that beggar some bread, if thou
neglectest this charity, give as much as thou will, the tenth, the half, and
nine parts of thy substance, and reserve but one to thy self, all is to no
purpose, as long as thou art uncharitable and merciless to thy own soul.

Manifold are the ways, causes, and occasions men may find to expend, and lay
out their monyes, livings, lands, or what goods they have for necessary uses,
and the benefit of men's souls, but above all cases and opportunities accept
and embrace these principally, and in the first place.

1. Be ready to give freely and liberally toward the maintenance and
plantation of the ministry in those places, where both men and means are
otherwise wanting and insufficient. We are taught by our Savior Christ to pray
unto God, that he would be pleased to send forth able and worthy laborers into
his harvest: Mat. 9. 39. 13 or. 4. 15. Romans 10. 14 C^os. 8. 11. 12. Pro. 29. 18.
now we must help, not only with our words, but also with our works to
further such a blessed work and heavenly business. Gods ministers we know are
spiritual fathers, to beget us unto Christ, the instruments to implant faith
by the preaching of the word, to build us up, to perfect and edify the body of
Christ, they are his ambassadors, and stand in his stead to reveal the
mysteries of the kingdom, and dispense the heavenly treasures of Christ's
truth, in the Church, and where ministers are wanting, there must needs be
gross ignorance, incredulity, barbarism, a spiritual famine, and a final
confusion, for where there is no knowledge the people perish. Therefore it Pro.
29. 18.
greatly concerns us to lay to heart the imminent miseries of poor ignorant
Protestants, who in the midst of this glorious Sunshine of the Gospel, still
lie involued in the thick clouds of spiritual darkness, superstition, and
ignorance, by reason of the blockishnesse, rudeness, or else the supine
negligence of idle Pastors, whom it would far better become to be keepers of
sheep than to be the Sheapherds of men's souls. It were a right noble
enterprise and work worthy the highest commendation, if by our liberal
contributions, and Christian benevolences we would labor to remove away the
spiritual plague and deadly famine of the word, from our neighboring, and
adjacent Counties or Countries.

There have been and still are many renowned christians, who are this way
wonderfully merciful, not only to the bodies, but to the souls of others,
and of themselves. 1. Some enlarge Worsop in Nottingham shire which was my
first settled place of Residence, for their love and bounty toward me, is
never to be sorgotten.: The Vicar as there is numeratis pecuniis only 121.
per annum, and 31 yearly paid out to the King.
and augment the stipend of their own settled teachers, because their pains
are great, and their livings small, and means short, and slender, by reason of
sacrilegious impropriations, and Church robberies, which are too frequently
perpetrated in many places. The violent stomaches of impropriators (says a
Heil. Gep. 504.
Geographer) has so far devoured that which our Ancestors consecrated to
religious uses, to the glory of God, and the maintenance of the Ministers that
in the whole Province of Connough in Ireland, the stipend of the Jucumbent is
not above forty shillings per annum, in some places but fifteen shillings. And
it were well says a worthy * Divine, if there were not many Mr Reyn. in. Com.
Psa ^ 10. page 480.
places to be found (I dare say in England) wherein dogs and horses, hawks
and hounds grow fat with Gods portion, and the mercenary preacher, when he
grows lean with want, is accused of too much study. Now tell me, is it not a
work well worthy a religious Christian to reach forth a helping hand, and to
support such painful Ministers, whose unhappiness it is to be cast upon
such unrewarded places, and ungrateful persons, who will receive their
spiritual, and not afford them their carnal and temporal things?

2. Some are so liberal handed, and charitably minded, as that they will not
only help to support their own Pastors, but also voluntarily erect and raise
up Preachers at their own private cost and charges: This is practiced in
London, and in many other places, where yet due Tithes by some are paid, as
many of our country rustickes, and covetous russet cotes, and some up start
gentlemen do pay which is with much ado, as if they were either not due, or
undeserved of their painful Parsons or Vicars which is a fault in them,
albeit they can be contented otherwise to contribute out of their other wealth
and substance to the maintenance of the Ministry either at home, or abroad.

3. Some nobly minded this way have given large stipends to settle Preachers
over great, but poor congregations here and there. That worthily honorable
Lady, the Lady Darcy, while she lived was most mercifully disposed and
liberal this way, my knowledge, is experimental, for she was very bountiful
to me, and many other Ministers in her yearly pensions in many free and
unconstrained contributions.

4. Some have given to poor preachers great sums of money for their present
relief and supportation: one Mistress Smith of London gave three hundred
pounds, and one Master Rogers of the company of Leather-sellers one hundred
pounds, Mistress. Venable five thousand pounds, and one See Mr. Shute his
Chorona Charitatis.
Master Fishburne a London Merchant gave to twenty beneficed Ministers, whose
livings were small, four hundred pounds, to twenty unbeneficed Ministers
four hundred pounds more, twenty pounds a piece; He gave to hospitals to the
poor and other good uses, in the whole the sum of ten thousand seven
hundred twenty six pounds, thirteen shillings four pence, besides other
Legacies bestowed one his kindred, friends, and serservants.

As also Sir, John Fenner of Isleworth knight, by his last will gave to the
ten out Parishes of London, Lands of the value of forty pounds per annum to
buy in each parish yearly twenty small Bibles to be distributed to poor young
people for ever, and lands of the value of fifty pounds per annum for relief
of poor sick persons in those parishes, and to four of those parishes he
gave fifty pound a piece in moneys, and to other four of them he gave forty
pound a piece in money for stocks for coals, for the use of the poor in those
parishes.

Also he gave lands of the value of twenty pounds per annum to the Mayor and
Communaltie of London for releasing poor prisoners.

Also he gave to the parish of Isleworth, lands of the value of five pounds
per annum for relief of poor and sick persons there.

Also he gave to Dame Lucy Fenner his wife ten pounds por an during her life
to be distributed to poor sick persons, and to Mistress Marie Tailor, xl. ^.
per an. during her life for the like use.

Also he, gave ten pounds toward the repair of the Cathedral Church of
saint Paul's in London: and a hundredth pounds toward the Library in the Temple
Church London (if it proceed) and 100.l. for buying plate and Carpets for the
Communion Table and use of the Sacrament in that Church for ever.

Also he gave 100.l. toward the finishing of a worke-house for the poor at
Aye in Suffolk, and gave many other both charitable and liberal Legacies to
his poor kindred: as by his Will proved in the Prerogative Court in anno 1633.
appears.

And here I cannot but withal See Docter Willet Ca tal. fol. 1215
grateful remembrance commemorate the much admired bounty and liberality of
my famous benefactor and predecessor Philip Bissa, Doctor in Divinity,
Archdeacon of Taunton, who was a painful labourer in Gods Harvest, a
faithful Preacher of the Word, instant in season 2 Timothy 4. 2.
and out of season: for when by reason of the faintness and debilitie of his
body he could not go, he caused himself to be carried to Church in a chair
as one very desirous to spend every inch of life in his Masters Service, and
willing (if God had so pleased) to expire even in the Pulpit. This reverend
Pastor bought the advowson of Batcombe, to present once only and no more, and
paid for it two hundredth pounds; he had a son of his own, who was both a
Minister and a Master of Arts, afterward a Prebendarie in Bristoll, he had
his two hundred pounds offered him again, was seriously solicited by the
restless importunities of his dearest friends, to dispose of it where they
should desire him, yet for all this still resisting, and conquering himself by
settled denying their requests and petitions, he constantly resolved to bestow
it where God should direct him: Grace being more predominant in him, than
nathrall affection, and the cries of his peoples souls being far more
prevolent, than the solicitations of his friends, he freely made choice of,
and destinated the succeeding incumbent in his life time, and when he sealed
the advouson, he spoke unto his successor and others then present, in these
words, I do this day lay aside Nature, respect of profit, flesh and blood in
thus bestowing as I do my living, only in hope of profitting and edifying my
peoples soul's. After which most memorable and glorious work of Piety, he
lived not above three weeks: This his last act he called his packing penny
between God and him. Stand still reader a little while, and consider seriously
with thy self, is not this noble work of piety, bounty, charity, (for it
is either of them, or rather all the three) worthy to be proclaimed to
posterity by some Seraphicall tongue, and to be imprinted with the point of a
Diamond in the cleerest crystal wall, that all succeeding generations may
see, behold, admire, and imitate this religious, gracious, glorious, and
everlastingly renowned good work. To these mirrours of Charity, we will add
a few more, that both sexes may have their due praise and deserved glory:
Mistress Philip Pit of Creket in Sommersetshire, a gracious, virtuous, and a
religious Maiden, was much addicted to works of mercy to her own painful
Pastor, she gave fifty pounds, and an hundred pounds more to be employed by
two reverend and faithful Ministers of Christ to pious uses, five pounds to
ten poor people, and forty shillings to be distributed at the door, in
toto one hundredth fifty seven pounds. And one Mistress Elizabeth Jurdane, as I
am informed a late widow in Exceter, gave much to pious uses.

2. We should be cheerfully willing and ready to contribute toward the
procurement of a competent, certain, settled and liberal maintenance for the
laborious Clergy. First, because the affections of men are inconstant,
variable, and subject to mutation, and it is not safe to build upon the Sand,
to depend upon the benevolences of the irresolute christians, and the
arbitrary, and pinching allowances of covetous and cruel men. Secondly,
because the more independent the preacher is, the more resolute and courageous
will be be in Gods cause: It is of all the miseries under the heavens, one
and not the least, in some respects, for Gods ministers, which are his
immediate Officers, to be inthralled unto vain and sensual men for their
temporal maintenance and sustentation, to preach for a dinner, a suit of
apparel, for victuals and a small stipend as the young Levite served wicked
Michae Judge. 17. 10.
for here by it comes to pass, that they flatter the people in their wicked
ways, connive at their impieties, and most basely captivate the Word of God
unto the humors and fancies of men. God, we know, has appointed Mat. 10. 10.
them maintenance, and this ought, first, to be competent 1 Cor. 9. 7. 11.
and liberal befitting the honor and dignity of that Person Gal. 6. 6.
whom they represent: The 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18.
Apostle says that they are worthy of double honor, that is (as a learned
Reyn in explic. Psalm. 110.
Divine expounds the words, an Honor of Reverence and an honor of
Maintenance* secondly, it ought to be constant and certain, as long as there
is a Church militant, there must and will be Pastors and Teachers to go in and
out before the people: Therefore it is fit and requisite, that their
maintenance should be immutable and perpetual.

To effect this our forefathers gave, Now the liberal allowances and large
stipends of these famous Benefactors have been minced and pared and most
unlawfully detained by their degenerating and covetous posterity, yet some
again have been so well-affected and piously disposed as to make restitution.
I will give you one instance in this kind, and that shall be Sr John Drake of
Musbury in Devon who out of his noble liberal and Christian disposition has
restored again unto his own Pastor all that which in former times has been
most unlawfully detained.
Tithes and Glebeland, and appointed houses for the Ministers to dwell in: All
which were first allowed and ordained by God, and are now established and
ratified by our own Statute Laws. And if we reflect, and cast back our
eyes, but upon very late times, we shall find many renowned and religious
Christians, who have bin very forward to confer and settle constant stipends
and liberal allowances upon the Glergy. Some have given very largely to this
purpose out of their impropriations, as did that Noble knight Sr Maurice Berkly
(whose memorable and pious fact I cannot pass by in ungrateful silence) the
same stipend is continued and enlarged by his right heir and most worthy son
Sr Charles Berkly who contributes to a Preacher and Curates about eighty
pounds per annum, if not fully a hundred one way or other. Some have lately
given in wholly their impropriate Parsonages, as has that worthy knight Sr
William Dodington, he has restored many Parsonages worth hundreds per annum.
So one Mr Aldersey an Haberdasher in London gave an hundred Marks out of an
impropriation to a Preacher, and twenty pounds to a Minister. Others have given
vast sums of money to be laid out for the buying of Land and settling of
competent means and and revenues and faithful Pastors in some great Parishes
and ignorant congregations. The God of Mercy and all consolation bless and
save their souls, that are thus spiritually merciful; and thus seek the
Salvation of other men's souls, Amen, Amen.

3. It highly concerns us liliberally to contribute toward the maintenance
of Gods public worship and service it self: Now this could not be supported
under the Law without great and extraordinary expenses; their Sacrifices, high
Priests, 1 Cron.
ornaments, Altars, Lavers, Candlesticks, Basins, and other golden Instruments
were so chargeable; yet the Jews were not so sacrilegiously-covetous as to
suffer it to be contemned or neglected through their illiberalitie, and
worldly-mindednesse. In the History of the old Testament we find all sorts of
men good and bad in the Church, and some Gentiles also out of the Church
willing contributaries hereunto, Saul, Joab, and Abner 2 Samuel 6. 17.
dedicated something unto God. David and his son Solomon 1 Kin. 8. 63.
were more liberal this way then any besides: Artaxerxes his Ezra 7. 15, 16.
Counsailers and people offered much silver and gold freely unto the God of
Israel. And Darius Ezra 6. 9, 10.
likewise made a decree for the advancement of the building of the Temple and
for the sacrifices Levit. 22. 21.
and other necessaries which were requisite unto the house of God, The
Israelites willingly offered Ezra 3. 5.
free will offerings for the maintenance of Gods worship, besides those they
were strictly tied unto by the Law.

In popery there was, and still is required great cost and charges to uphold
and maintain their Idolatrous, and fantastical services, which has no other
ground and foundation, than the erroneous conceits, opinions, and inventions of
men, and these their superstitions are they most zealously careful to uphold
and maintain, though with infinite and sometime intolerable expenses. Now our
Religion, and that pure worship and service of God, which we embrace and
maintain in our reformed Churches, is not so chargeable by far, as either
that of the Jews, or this of the Papists: Our chiefest expense consists in the
provision, reparation and preservation of these few things, our Church and
Chancell, a Bible, Commonprayer-bookes, Fontstone, Communion Table, Table
cloth, Surplesse, Pulpit, Pulpitcloth, cushion and bells; the greatest cost of
all is the Priest and the clarke, and these though they be but two persons, are
accounted a heavy charge and intolerable burden in many places. The tribe of
Levi was a very numerous tribe for there Number. 3. 43.
were in Israel 22273 Levites, and of the Priest 8580 and so in the whole
30853, yet they never complained of the multitude, or of the charges they were
at in their support and maintenance. In the Popish Church, besides the Priest
and Clarke, there be innumerable swarms of Vt aluce lucus dictus et est homo
homo pictus, sic a Jesu Jesuita, quem si sapis, semper vita.
Jesuits, (so named per Antiphrasin) Munckes, Friars, Nuns, Hermites,
Anchorites, and I know not how many of several orders. The author of the
Bee-hive of the Romish Church reckons up almost three score, in which were many
thousands maintained. In our reformed Church, we have ordinarily but one in a
parish (less there cannot be) and yet for the most part men grudge and grieve
to maintain that one, and to allow him those tithes, which do belong and are
due unto him ( jure divine) not only by a humane right and concession, but by
divine authority. The Egyptian Priests found better entertainment in the old
Pagan, then some of Gods own ministers do now in the Christian world: they had
a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and when by reason of the Genesis 47. 22
extremity of the famine which bad overspread the land, the Egytians were
compelled to sell their livings and lands, and all that they had, the Priests
land only was not meded with, they were carefully sustained, and looked unto
in those miserable and lamentable times. The Pagan Roman Priests, the
vestal-Virgins and those diabolical votaries, were not only highly honored
and esteemed, but also liberally rewarded and maintained, and will not these
heathens, do you think rise up in judgment against those Christians, who
will not attribute one part of that double honor unto Gods ministers, which is
duo unto them, neither an honor of maintenance, nor an honor of reverence.

4. We should be ever propen so and ready to contribute toward the building,
repairing, enlarging, and be autifying of Churches, those sacred places and
habitacles of the Lord, which are dedicated unto, and set apart for the public
worship and adoration of his holy name. The Israelites when they were in the
wilderness, and had no livings and lands to possess, no houses, or cities to
dwell in, no sooner understood of the preparing and Exodus 35. 21. 29. and 36 5.
6.
building of a Tabernacle, but presently they were so willinghearted, and so
bountiful in bringing gifts and gold offerings unto the Lord, that a
proclamation was made to restrain and inhibite them. Oh how do our exulcerate
age, degenerate from the piety of those ancient times, in which a Proclamation
can 1 Chronicles. 29.
hardly wring and extort any liberal gifts from men's already 1 King. 6. 38.
and 5. 14. 18.
too retentive fingers. It is almost incredible, but that the word of truth
does witness it, what abundant and infinite treasures David (and his princes
and officers by his example and entreaty) did lay up, and prepare with all his
might for the house of his God, the Temple at Jerusalem, the which how great
and glorious it was, you may guess and conjecture by the time it was a
building (which was seven years) and the number of Architects, and workmen,
which were nine-score and three thousand and three hundred persons, when this
Temple was first burnt and ruinated by their enemies, the poor Jews returning
from the Babylonian captivity, began to reedifie it again, etc by the help and
assistance of those 2 mighty Persian potentates, Cyrus, and Darius, did after
some long time completely finish. Neither Esra. 3. and 6.
were they only careful to erect and maintain this glorious Esra. 1, 2, 3.
and 6. 8.
habitation and Sanctuary of the Psalm. 74. 8.
Lord, but we shall read in the Mat. 6. 2. and 23. 34.
Scriptures also of multitude of Synagogues which they built for Acts. 9. 2.
divine worship. Of these there Luke 7. 5.
were in Jerusalem (as a judicious God. Mos. and Aaron, lib. 2. cap. 2. pa. 87.
Antiquary reports out of Sigonius) four hundred and eighty. The Temple of
Jerusalem was as the Cathedral Church, the Synagogues as petty parish Churches
belonging thereunto. Thus we see how bountifully liberal the ancient people of
God were under the Law toward the reparation and building of these places
which were destinated to divine Worship, and not to reverse so far out of
sight, let us look nearer home, and we shall clearly see, that our
forefathers in this our kingdom long since the first Plantation of the Gospel
here, have been very prodigal of their labor and there money too is such
kind of works: As the great Cathedrals, and the thousands of parochial
Churches in this little Island do abundantly testify: And even in these our
days, many among us, have been very free and wonderfully bountiful this way,
We will point at but a few: Master Kendrica a merchant gave a thousand pound:
and Raph Freeman, who died Lord Mayor of London, gave a thousand pound toward
the repair of Saint Paul's: and Sir Paul Pindar is an honorable and a daily
benefactor thereunto. At Witham here by us, Robert Hopton Esquire a religious
Gentleman, has built a fair Chapel adjoining to his house for Gods holy
worship. Sir William Cravon that noble Lord Cra^nu father built a Church at
Burnsall in Yorkshire: So did Sir Th^m^n Freak another in Dorcetshire, Master
Packer a private Gentleman built a third: Some have erected fair chapels, for
Gods Service, all of them are too many to be particularized. Some Churches
have been repaired, as that beautiful Church at Bathe, others augmented and
enlarged, as Saint Clements in London, and Saint Martins in the fields, other
some have been very much rectified and beautified, as some in the forenamed
famous city, some in Bristoll, for which the citizens are worthy greatest
commendations: Many in our country market towns, among the lost in these
principally, Ilmister, S^merton, Brewton, Shepton, M^lla^; and here lot me
commend our own Inhabitants in Batcomb, Croscotthe an adjacent village, the
charge performed by one private man for adding three bells to two before, for
new leading in part, for very fairly beautifying the Church, well near at
three hundredth pound cost, I may not here omit. Sir John Stowel bestowed three
hundredth pound in reedifying and building a Chapel at his own proper charge
in Cutherston near Taunton. Sir John Worstinholme built a Church at his own
charges at Stanmore in Middlesexe. We will not be so envious and injurious to
these benefactors, or to those that have had but a finger in these pious good
works, as to rob them of that praise and commendations which they truly merit:
I am not able to extol them sufficiently, for indeed they deserve a
Panegyricke: But as for those that are able to enlarge and adorn their
Churches, and yet suffer them to remain like Hogsties, or not to use a more
disgraceful phrase) like old rotten and ruinous barnes. I could wish I were
furnished with the wit and faculty of the sharpest Satyrist, that I might with
fit words exagitate and scourge this their impiety and indevotion, and blaze
abroad in the world, the earthlinesse, covetousness, and sacrilege of such
careless and unzealous Christians: Marvel not that I dare call them
sacrilegious persons, he that is accessarie to any villainy, and does not
reveal it, or labor to prevent it, is by the Law accounted as a guilty
Malefactor, and as obnoxious to punishment, as the personal delinquent. So
though impartial time (who will fasten his devouring teeth as soon on the
Sacred Temple, as on undedicated and profane habitations) be the chief
delinquent and commits the sacrilege, yet the inhabitants are in the fault and
most to be blamed, because they see Gods House thus dishonored and defaced by
an incorrigible and unavoydable Church-robber, and yet never take any care to
prevent or repair the ruins. Among all those that are faulty this way, those
rich farmers and Gentlemen are most culpable, who can erect stately ^ edifices
for themselves to dwell in, and let Gods House remain scarce so decent and
beautiful as their kitchins, Stables: or more contemptible outhouses.

5. It is a right honorable and religious work to give liberally toward the
erecting of new, or the reparation and enlargement of old. Colleges and
Seminaries of learning. The Jews that ancient and peculiar people of God were
well disposed this way, as we shall find in the Sacred History of the old
Testament. 2 Kin. 6. 1. 2 Numb. 35. Josua. 21.
There was a College in Jerusalem, 2 Cron. 34. 22. and they had many schools
for the children of the Prophets. All those eight and forty Cities which were
separated by the command of God for the Levit's to dwell in, were as so many
Academies, and receptacles for Scholars where they were educated and brought
up in learning and religion: For their Sinagogues did not only serve for the
Scribes to preach in, but also for others to be taught and instructed in. To
descend from former ages to our own present times: Has not God raised up many
noble and renowned Among the rest I will instance but in one most noble
President, whose not able good works have both swift wings and loud: ongu's to
carry and publish abrod in the world his well deserved praises; and that is
the right Reverend father in God, the liberal, learned, pious, religious, and
unparalleld present Lord B. of Lincoln, who, out of his sincere and true love
to piety, Learning, and Religion, erected a beautiful Chapel in Lincoln
College in Oxford, and two famous Libraries; the one in Westminster, the other
in S, John's College in Cambridge; besides Scholle ships, and Fellowships.
benefactors in this little Corner and Angle of the world, who have been very
careful to erect and maintain all Nurceries of piety and good learning?
Within the compass and space of threescore years (which is not the complete
age of a man) there have been given toward the building and augmenting of
Colleges, Schools, Libraries, and the maintenance of Fellows, Scholars, and
other Students therein, innumerable sums of money. To Cambridge above eighty
eight thousand pounds: To Oxford above ninety thousand pounds, to both, the
sum of one hundred threescore and eight thousand pounds. If this Relation
does transcend the Sphere of any man's credulity and belief, let him but
visit our now most flourishing, unparrelleld, and incomparable Universities,
and the very stones and walls will tell him, that it is a most unquestionable
Truth. So forward have our Ancestors been to advance learning, and to promote
the honor of the Gospel.

6. It is a work no less honorable, than charitable, to contribute toward
the setting up of country schools for the civil education of illitered
youth, and more specially for the training up of poor men's children, who are
not of ability to maintain them at School. It is a point of civilitie for
rich men to train up their own children in knowledge and good literature,
(and Res nulla minoris consta bit patri quam filius. Juven. sat. 7.
yet herein many worldlings are deficient, who will be at greater cost and
charges for the breaking of a colt, then for the education of their sons; but
it is a most excellent act of charity to provide for the instruction and
education of ingenuous and Docill poor children: For first, it keeps them
from idleness that mother-sinne and original iniquity, which does altogether
unqualifie a man for any good Action or Vocation. Secondly, it prevents much
mischief and vanity, which most commonly is the issue and consequence of
looseness and carnal liberty. A child left unto himself, like an Prove. 29.
15. and 12. 6.
untamed Colt, that has gotten the reins on his neck, with much fiercenes
and head strongnesse rusheth into all manner of ungodliness and enormous
exorbitances, and in the end brings himself and his parents to shame:
Therefore a needful thing it is to train up a child in the ways he should
go, for when he is old, he will not depart from it, Prove. 22. 6. 3. That
learning and knowledge might be maintained, it was ordained in King Edward the
sixth his reign, that every beneficed Person who could dispend a hundredth
pounds per annum, should give a competent exhibition to some poor Schooler,
living in one of the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge, or else in some
Grammar Schools of the Realm. Fox Act. and Mon. volum, 2. 656.
The children of poor men are hereby some what civilized, who otherwise for
the most part are too rudely if not brutishly brought up. Fourthly, by this
their education they are disposed and made the more fit for any Trade, Art,
Occupation or honest Profession. Fifthly, they may the sooner and easier be
Catechized and informed in the fundamental points and grounds of Religion:
They are hereby the better enabled to read the Scriptures, and to conceive and
understand what they privately read, or is publicly taught them. Sixthly,
among poor men's children (for nature is as propitious and liberal to them
sometimes, as to the noblest heirs) some may be picked out of excellent good
parts, rare wits, and deep understandings, the which natural faculties, being
well polished by Art and education, may qualify a man for great and necessary
employments, either in Church or Commonweal. Lastly, this bringing up of
Children at School in country Parishes is a great furtherance to the Ministry
of the Word, for hereby they are made the more capable of Divine instruction,
and there is the greater possibility for the Minister to benefit them.
Experience it self teaches how ineffectuall the most powerful Ministry is
upon an ignorant and unlearned congregation. Though the Sun shine bright, yet
it nothing helps the blind man in his way: So though a Minister be never so
laborious and conscionably careful to divulge and scatter abroad the Verbum
Dei est instar Solis omnibus affulgentis, sed nullo cum fructu inter coecos
quibus non sunt oculi ad vid endum Calv. inslit.
beams and light of the Gospel, yet he is like to profit but little those
hearers that are involved in the darkness of ignorance and stark blind in
their understandings. Would to God men of wealth and worldly ability would lay
to heart the miseries of poor infants, who as long as they are brought up in
ignorance, are brought up in sin and so are like to be led away hood-winckt by
the Diveil, into all manner of uncleanness, and sinful abominations. This is
a general neglected duty, seldom practiced, and never almost thought on in
the world. I know in these parts but one only President in this kind, which I
cannot but mention, and that is a Mr. Edward Bisse.
Gentleman in our Parish well disposed this way, who besides a liberal stipend
he contributes toward the plantation of a preaching Minister in an ignorant
Congregation, trains up six poor children at the School, pays for their
teaching, and clothes them once a year, not with ordinary old and abject
induments, but with new, substantial, and very commendable garments. For the
better education and instruction of illiterate and ignorant youth, many in our
latter times have laid out great sums of money toward the erection of free
Schools both in the City and in the Country, and the settling of Lands and a
competent maintenance thereupon: Now these Seminaries of learning are so rare
and thin, that they are not capable Receptacles for all sorts of children
which might repair thither: And besides many men who would willingly have
their sons to be trained up in knowledge, either are so poor, that they
cannot maintain them there, or so remote from thence, that they cannot send
them thither: Therefore it were to be wished that public Schools might be
more frequently erected in every great Country parrish, though no Market
Town, where the inhabitants are of sufficient wealth and ability. This were
indeed a noble work, far more worthy men's cost and expenses, than the
foundation of some kind of Hospitalls and Almes-houses, who are filled too
often with swarms of idle, lazy, unworthy Drones, and perhaps with some
truly poor, aged, impotent Creeples among them, the one whereof might be
better employed, and the other otherwise, as well, if not better relieved. Let
both these (suppose both pious and charitable) works be well weighed in an
equal balance, (laying aside that common and sometimes undeserved glory and
estimation which is attributed unto the one) and you shall find that erection
of Grammar Schools is a work as far transcending and surpassing the
foundation and building of Alms houses, as the Docere simpliciter est melius
quam pascere. Aquin. 2 2ae. que. 32. Art. 3.
instruction of the mind does excel the outward releeving and sustentation of
the body. Revolve Christian Reader, and consider on these things seriously,
and if thou art able to bring such a business Durand. in 4. Sent. 9. 7. etc.
Affirm that Spiritual Almes-giving ( caeteris paribus) are more excellent and
acceptable than corporal. see Mr. Boltons genesis directions, page 258.
to pass, be liberal this way and destinate some portion of thy wealth to so
gracious and glorious a work, make choice of a pious, painful, learned, and
laborious Schoolmasters; allow him a large and liberal stipend for his
encouragement: For it is a thankelesse, tedious, and Herculean labor, which
few either will or can undertake, a calling which is able to tire even a
Tyrannical Perimit savos classis numerosa tyrannos Juvenal. sat. 7. some
understand the place of Dionysius.
Dionysius. He must thou know, feed on deadly crambe, volve and revolve *
Sisyphus his ever backsliding stone, teach and inculcate the same things into
the same brains again and again, Hic labor, hoc opus est, so great and
tedious must his pains be, and his labor reiterated, and therefore requisite
it is, that he should receive a proportionable and correspondent reward. Thus
much concerning (...)
Spiritual Mercy, and works of Piety, tending to the advancement of Learning
and Religion, and safety of souls. Saxum senis perennis Aeolii labor Seneca.
Unto all these give me leave to add one thing more worthy of our present
practice and observation.

For as much as those that are most sick, stand most in need of the
Physician; therefore since prisoners are for the most part a company of poor,
distressed, naked, and most miserable soul's; it greatly concerns us out of
the bowels of our Spiritual mercy, and compassion, to tender unto them a
Spiritual remedy, the Ministry of the Word. The prison it self is a school
of affliction, and affliction by Gods grace may be a good preparative unto
conversion, so that Gods Ordinance may hereby be the more effectual upon
them: and therefore it cannot but be a famous work of Spiritual Charity, to
bring the Light of the Wotd, and blessed means of Salvation unto poor
prisoners who lie under chains, and walk in darkness, and in the shadow of
death. The right honorable and noble Lady, the now Countess of Warwick
Dowager, has showed herself most merciful this way in providing in the
City of Lincoln means for the instruction of poor prisoners in the Castle
there, and has given a yearly and certain stipend for ever to this purpose.
The County of Dorcet likewise has made it self famous and remarkable by the
like rare and almost unparalleld practice, for in their prison there is both a
constant and conscionable dispensation of the Word. These be two notable
presidents and examples, which I could not but nominate partly for others
charitable imitation, and partly for the high commendation and due deserved
praise of the beginners of so Pious a work, worthy of fame, in all those
parts.

CHAP. XIX. Of corporal Charity and works of Mercy which tend to the relief
of the body and outward state.
ALlthough Spiritual Almesdeeds are to be practiced in the first place, and be
in themselves of a more Heavenly, excellent, acceptable, and illustrious
nature, yet the body must be cared for as well as the soul. The poor man's
outward estate and condition must be relieved and supported also, whether he be
in extremity, or only in necessity: There is a Divine Statute to this purpose
in Leviticus 25. 35. If thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with
thee, then shall thou relieve him, yea, though he be a stranger, or a sojourner
that he may live with thee: And Solomon tells us, Pro. 14. 21. 31.
that such a merciful man is a happy man, and he honors his maker that
has mercy on the poor. Our Charity in this kind may be practiced and
expressed many several ways.

1. In free giving: the righteous man is said to scatter, disperse, Pro. 11. 24.
deal, but most frequently Esai. 58. 7.
to give to the poor, unto this Pro. 21. 26.
duty are we earnestly exhorted Psalm. 37. 21.
Psalm. 112. 9.
by our Savior Christ and his Apostles: Now as concerning Luk 11. 41.
the matter of our gifts, we must Romans 12. 13
give of those things which we have in present possession and injoyance,
according as others wants and necessities shall require us, our own hearts
move us, and our temporal state strengthen and enables us.

Some minister food, and deal Prove. 22. 9.
Esai. 58. 7.
their bread to the hungry, a Ezekiel. 18. 7. 16.
work which shall be most certainly rewarded at the day of Mat. 25. 34
Judgment. In this kind was Job very merciful, the Widows Job 31. 17.
and Fatherless did partake of his morsels, he was not wont to eat his bread
alone. Our Savior Christ after this Mat. 15. 32, 33. and 14. 19.
manner refreshed with his miraculous Loaves the hungry multitudes, which did
flock about him. This gracious practice we should not forget at our religious
and solemn Festivals, Neh. 8. 10.
we should then more specially Esai. 58. 7.
remember to send portions Ezekiel. 18. 7.
unto them that want, and for whom nothing is prepared. Some give raiment to
the naked, Job 31. 19, 20.
so did holy Job, the backs of the poor did bless him: so did Act. 9. 36.
Dorcas, she made coats and garments for the poor Widows, and such a holy
and Charitable woman was the Lady Ramsey, and other such gracious Saints of
both sexes, men and women full of mercy and devotion are now surviving. Some
give faggots and fuel to warm the cold, quaking and trembling limbs of the
poor, as did Sr Ambrose Nicholas, Mr John Scott, Mr Rusel, all Londoners, Some
give money, so did our Savior, the compassionate Joh. 13. 29.
Samaritane, the Primitive Luke 10.
Act. 4. 34. 37.
believers and professors of the Gospel at Jerusalem, so did the Corinthians,
and Macedonians, 1 Cor. 16. 2.
2 Cor. 8. and 9.
as their weekly laying aside does sufficiently testify: And there be many
at this day who conform to the same Apostolical precept and Christian
practice dedicating weekly some portion of their substance to good uses, that
so they may be ready to give upon every good and seasonable occasion. Lastly,
some give their Goods, as did Zacheus, and some their Lands, or Luke 19.
the value and prices of them, as did Barnabas and others. Act. 4.


2. In building Hospitals, and erecting Almes-honses, some men have been this
way very bountiful, and almost incredibly liberal as their works and
renowned monuments which they left behind them do infallibly demonstrate. The
most famous Hospitalls in this kingdom are, Christ-church, St Thomas, St
Bartholomewes and Suttons Hospital: private men have been the founders and
Authors of the like but not so great Works, and some of them of the Clergy: Dr
White built one Hospital in Bristoll, Mr Johnson Archdeacon of Licester
erected two, one Mr Latham a private Minister in Northamptonshire built two
more, one for men, and another for women. As concerning Almes-houses they are
many, and very plentiful in most parts of this kingdom, one Mr Winlambe a
Cloth worker built six at Sutten-valens in Kent, Sr Ambrose Nicholas, once
Lord Mayor of London, built twelve near Creeplegate: We have many in our
County lately erected, one at Shepton Mallet, another at Somerton, another at
Brewton, etc.

3. In building Houses of correction for unruly and lawless runnagates, in
raising up workhouses, and a common stock whereby to set the poor on work:
By this means the lazy droanes, and unprofitable members of the republike may
be compelled to do some service unto themselves and others, and preserved
from Idleness, and so from theeverie, and so from the gallows: Of late time
diverse of these houses have been erected in the Country, but the most famous of
all is Bridewell in London.

4. In binding poor men's children apprentices, and training them up in some
honest trades and lawful vocations: hereby the Parents are somewhat eased of
their charge and heavy burden, the children for the present maintained under
their Masters, and enabled for the future to live of themselves, when their
years of service shall be fully expired.

5. In laboring and helping to cure and recover the ficke, weak, impotent,
lame, diseased, wounded, hurt or maimed: Our Savior Christ showed himself
this way very Merciful and compassionate, so did the good Samaritane, and so
must we by our own skill and knowledge (if we have any) or by procuring the
help of others, endeavor to comfort and relieve those that lie groaning under
any grievous corporal misery. In two Hospitals in London much good has been
done in this kind: sometimes with in the space of a year, there have been
cured in St Bartholomewes and St Thomas his Hospital above a thousand five
hundred and sixty defective and impotent persons, besides four hundred which
remained under cute. This certainly must needs be a singular piece of
renowned Mercy and Charity, thus to remoove tormenting pains and aches, to
heal old rotten and putrified sores, to redintegrate languishing and feeble
members, and to restore creeples to health and strength and soundness of body
again, who but now were dying a living lingering death, or living a sorrowful
and dying life.

6. In selling of corn in times of dearth and scarcity not for private
gainesake, but for the public good to lesson and abate the price, when it is
rising, or already risen, that so the poor might have for their money
sufficient to support them, and their families in such days of misery, and
public calamity. A blessing shall be upon his head, that produces and sells
his corn at a low and tolerable rate, but he which with holds it, to
enhaunce and keep up the price thereof, misery and destruction undoubtedly
will be the end of such a cut-throate and Canniball, and this is his allotted
portion in this life, he shall have many Pro. 11. 26.
a curse.

7. In providing Magazins and Storehouses wherein to lay up abundance of grain
in times of plenty for the relief of the poor in the years of dearth and
famine. Joseph was herein Genesis 41. 48 2 Cron. 17. 12. and 32. 28.
very provident, so was Jehosaphat and Hezekiah kings of Judah: If this wise
and laudable course were more observed and practiced in great and populous
commonweals, much mischief and misery might be prevented in time of famine.

8. By being addicted to Hospitality, Hospitalitas est species liberalitatis
qua peregrinos and hospites ac presertim propter verae doctrinae professionem
exulantes, vera benevolentia and aliquibus officiis hospitalitatis prosequimur.
Vrsin. Cat. 704. Tit. 1. 8. Romans 12. 13. 1 Pet. 4. 9. Heb. 13. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 10.
This duty concerns all, both the people and the Ministers of the Gospel,
they ought chiefly to maintain a good example of Piety, Charity, and
Hospitality, that so they might confirm by practice, what in doctrine they
teach, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Now Hospitality consists not in feasting of neighbors,
(as it is commonly and falsely conceived) or in keeping open house for all
goodfellowes, or any drunken and deboist revellers, but in a loving
entertainment of guests, friends, strangers, acquaintance, or any other poor
Saints, which come to our houses, in relieving their wants and communicating to
their necessities. This is that hospitality which is commended and commanded
unto us in the Book of God, and which has been practiced of holy men in
former ages, examples hereof in the Scriptures we have such as these, Abraham
Genes. 18. and 19. Exodus 2. 10.
and Lot entertaining Angels in the shapes of men: Revel inviting and welcoming
destitute and banished Moses: the Old Judge. 19.
man of Gibeah receiving in, and providing for the Levite: Laban Genesis 24.
courteously feasting Abraham's servant: the Widow of 1 King. 17. 10. 15. 2
King. 4. 8. Job 31. 32.
Sarepta, and the Shunamite relieving and refreshing tthe Prophets of God: Job
taking in and lodging strangers, and opening his doors to the Travelers: St
Paul's host, Gajus, and others Romans 16. 23. 3 John 5. 6.
more. This is hospitality indeed to entertain strangers, exiles, needy,
helpelesse Saints: This is one of the good works for which a Widow must be
well reported of, 1 Timothy 5. 10. This we must practice mutually without grudging
and discontentednesse, and for this doubtless we shall be liberally
recompensed at the day of Judgment. As concerning all profuse Christmasse
feasts, where unto all sorts of persons are promiscuously and without
difference invited, if they be civil and moderate, they may be tolerable
enough and procure a little popular applause and reputation to the makers from
men, but if they be not seasoned, nor sauced with Charity, they cannot merit
or obtain any acceptance or reward from God.

9. In lending freely, this is a 1 Pet. 4. 9. Deuteronomy. 15. 8. Mar. 5. 4^. Luke 6.
35. Psalm. 112. 5. and 37. 26.
Work of Mercy, commanded unto us from God in his Law, and charged upon us
also by our Savior Christ in his Gospel. The Prophet David does describe a
good man by this mark and property, after this manner, A good man is
merciful and lends and he who hardens his heart, and shuts his hand
from his poor brother, does sufficiently publish to the world, that he is a
graceless, churlish, and incompassionate man. In Deuteronomy. 15. 18. and verse 7. 9.
10. Exodus 22. 26. 27. Deuteronomy. 24. 6. Job. 22. 7. and 24. 3. 9. Nehem. 5. Deuteronomy.
23. 19. Luke 6. 35.
the performance of this duty, these few conditions are principally
observable: We must lend without grudging, without grief, a hard heart, ill
thought, or evil eye, or a strait and pinching hand, without taking a pawn
or pledge of necessary and present use to the borrower, without Morgage of
Lands, Houses, Vineyards, or taking the present profit thereof, without which
the borrower cannot live, and honestly maintain himself, without Usurie, or
any secret and sinister contracts and agreements. Such kind of lending, I
confess is very rare in these usurious, and cruel times, partly by reason of
the general inundation of that reigning sin of Usury, which has
prepossessed most men's minds, partly by reason of the hardness and flintinesse
of some men's hearts, and partly by reason of the Psalm. 37. 21.
unjust, unhonest, and unequal dealings of some wicked borrowers, who make no
conscience of repayment back again, yet some merciful men there have been
in this kind, who have See Dr. Willet his Catalogue of good works.
lent freely some two hundredth, some six hundredth, some a thousand pounds to
help and further young beginners and practitioners in their honest trades and
professions.

10. In releasing and freely forgiving of debts, in cases of extremity, when
men are accidentally made poor and unable to pay: the Lord to this purpose
made a Law in Israel that creditours should remit unto their debtors all debts
and payments at the end of every seventh year, that merciless and cruel men
might not create beggars in Israel, as they do now too frequently in this
Kingdom and Nation. This release may be twofold, either partial of but some
part or portion only, or total of the whole sum, if the case so requires,
we must lend and look for nothing again Luke 6. 35. require and exact
nothing, but remit and forgive all, or at the least a part, as the converted
usurers did. Neh. 5. 11. This is a great work of mercy and this compassion
should be showen unto poor men, who are willing, but by no means able to pay
their debts, their whole estates being already quite eaten up and devoured by
the unsatiable teeth of Usury. It Is true I confess, the politic law gives
thee leave and power, when a poor man has nothing left, to seize upon his
body, to commit him to safe custody, to lay him up in close prison: but I pray
thee what satisfaction can this make, what profit can thou reap hereby, thou
may not eat his flesh to satisfy thy bloody appetite, thou can not set
him to sale, or sell him for a Bond-slave, thou can not coin him into money,
well may thou keep him under Irons, starve him in Prison, and his Wife and
Children, (if he has any) who were supported with his honest labors: Thou
can never this way be lawfully and honestly recompensed, unless thou
think this Christian satisfaction, to have the life and blood of a man for a
little gilded dirt, filthy dross, and stinking excrements of the earth. Take
heed thou exact not the utmost of thy poor brother, and fellow servant, least
thy Heavenly Master Matthew. 18. 32. 33.
and Creditour exact the utmost of thee, call thee to a reckning for thy
sins, which thou have committed against him, deal as incompassionately and
severely with thee, and deliver thee to the Tormentors till thou have paid the
utmost mite and farthing. Read and peruse the Parable well, and withal
remember the condemnatorie sentence of the Apostle James denounced against all
such as will show no mercy, Jam. 2. 13.

11. In a Relaxation and mitigation of the heaviness of the yoke, burden,
and bands of oppression, under which many lie grieving and groaning. As for
instance, many poor men, disconsolate widows, and fatherless childeren, may
be brought to great misery and extremity, by reason of the intolerablenesse
of Fines, racking of Rents, exactions of Herriots, etc. Now tell me, is it not
a work of great mercy and compassion for rich Landlords to deal favorably
with their poor Tennants in this kind, and to remit and abate some what,
sometimes of their Rents and Fines and Herriots, that so they may be able to
live by them in some commendable fashion, and indifferent state and condition;
yea, it is a point of wisdom and an expression of much Charity and
Fellow-feelingnesse in some cases, not to exact as much as is due, and may be
legally obtained; Nehemiah, did not require Nehem. 5. 18.
the bread of the Governor, because the bondage was heavy upon the people.
Would to God men of eminency, worth, and worldly ability, would imitate the
practice of this merciful man: but there are few such tenderhearted, melting,
compassionate, great ones, in this frozen, cruel, and iron age. Oh that the
complaints of the Prophets were not too true in these our days, That of Esai.
1. 23. of Amos 4. 1. and 3. 10. and 9. 4. and 2. 6. and 5. 11. 12. and of
Micha. 7. 3. and 2. 1. 2. and 3. 3.

12. In reaching forth a helping hand to releeve the oppressed, and the
distressed, which are brought to a miserable and calamitous condition: we are
enjoined and commanded by the Lord, to defend the fatherless, Psalm. 82. 3. 4.
to deliver the poor and outcast, to save them from the teeth and hands of the
ungodly. It is the part of the righteous (says the wise man) to take their
cases and causes into their consideration, and in another place he tells us,
that it is but a vain course to put of, and excuse this duty and office by
pretention of ignorance. Prove. 29. 7.
If thou for bear to deliver them, Prove. 24. 11. 12.
who are drawn to death, and those that are ready to be slain, if thou
say, behold, we knew it not, does not he that pondereth the heart consider
it? and he that keeps thy soul, does not he know it? and shall not he
render to every man according to his works? Now in the discharge of this
needful duty, we must look that all lawful means be only used, and we
must keep our selves every one within the compass and bounds of his calling.
We may contrive and work the deliverance of the oppressed by these lawful
means.

1. By Judging and considering their causes, defending them and their persons,
and rebuking and opposing their enemies, for their sakes: and this is the duty
of those who are called to the Magistracy, and such public Offices in the
Commonweal to be a Refuge and Asylum to Psalm. 82. 3. 4.
the innocent poor, and fatherless, to shelter and protect them against the
storms and tempests of undeserved wrongs, and injuries which are offered them
in the world. Just, Holy, and Upright Job. 29. 12. 17.
Job discharged his Office faithfully in this kind, he delivered the poor
that cried, and the fatherless, and him that has none to help, the cause
which he knew not, he searched out, he brake the jaws of the wicked, and
plucked the spoil out of their teeth, (that is) he delivered the innocent and
harmless from the abusive and corrupt power of biting, snatching, devouring,
injurious and oppressing great ones. So did valiant and courageous Nehemiah,
rebuke the Neh. 5. 7.
Nobles and Rulers (who like heavy Milstones did almost grind the poor to
powder by their usurious and unconscionable dealings) boldly for the peoples
sake: and herein he did but his duty: for Princes, Judges, and Magistrates
(says a Sand. sermon. ad Magist page 138.
reverend Divine) were not ordained altogether, nor yet so much for their own
sakes, that they might Hoc Reges habent magnificum and ingens, etc. prodesse
miscris, supplices fido lare protegere. Sen. m. Medea.
have over whom to rule and domineere at pleasure, as for the peoples sake,
that the people might have to whom to resort, and upon whom to depend for help
and succor and relief in their necessities.

And they ought to remember, that for this end, God has endued them with power
which others want, that they might by their power help them to right, who have
not power to right themselves, etc.

2. In pleading for them: and this is the Lawyers duty, they should open their
mouths, and Prove. 31. 8. 9.
plead the poor man's cause, and theirs who are appointed and destinated to
destruction, and not for lucres sake praevaricate as many do, collude, and
improve their Sophistry, wits, and faculties that way to pervert and deprave,
and undermine their suits and honest causes. Thus we read did that noble
Ahikam, and some of the Princes and Elders for the Prophet Jeremie, when Jer.
26. 17. 24.
he was apprehended, arraigned, and condemned to death, for telling the Truth,
and the Faithful discharge of his Prophetical Office: the verdict was brought
in by the bloody Jurie of Priests, and false Prophets, This man is guilty and
worthy of death: Now this sentence should have been as unlawfully executed,
as it was determined, had not the Princes and Elders stepped in between, and
procured a reprivall for the poor persecuted Prophet.

3. By petitioning for them, as did Queen Ester for Mordecai, Ester. 7. 3.
and the dispersed and distressed Nation of the Jews. So did the Germane
Princes make request unto the King of France for the Anno 1559.
poor persecuted Protestants.

4. By provoking and stirring up others to petition for them, as Mordecai did
Ester, and as Pharaohs Butler should have Ester. 4. 13 1 p.
done for Joseph, Genesis 40. 14. had not he proved a most ungrateful and
forgetful wretch.

5. By making complaint to supreme Authority, against even great ones, though
of an high and an eminent place and station when they offer undeserved wrongs
and injuries unto the servants of the Lord. Herein was Abedmelech the Ethiopian
worthily to be commended for that he interceeded and spoke unto Jer. 38. 7. 9.
King Zedekiah, for the Prophet Jeremiah whereby he helped him out of the
mire, and stinking Dungeon whereinto he was thrown.

6. By writing Apologies for them: as some of the Ancient Fathers did for poor
and helpless Christians, who suffered persecution, under cruel tyrants,
Justin. Martyr Tertullian and others.
and most merciless and blood-thirstie Emperors.

7. By abating and mitigating the Adversaries rage and fury with grave advice,
wise and sober counsel: as did that prudent politic, and truly honorable
Doctor Gamaliell in the behalf Act. 5. 34. 39.
of the Apostles. If men of brains and solid judgments would improve their
best wits and faculties this way to dull the edge, and abate the acrimony of
malice and revenge, when sometimes they may (if they were not too cowardly
afraid to offend greatness) with their loving, exhortary, and persuasive
obsecrations, and entreaties they might do a great deal of good in Church and
Commonweal, pacify, restrain, and for a time disenfierce the enemies and
persecutors of Christ and his members, as the fore mentioned Gamaliel did the
tumultuous, madded, and enraged Jews.

8. By a seasonable discovery of the hellish powderplots, machinations, and
secret mischiefs, which are intended by Satan and his instruments against
Christ's harmless and innocent Lambs. Thus did Paul's sisters son happily
reveal unto him and to the Governor Claudius Lysias the diabolical
conspiracy of those sons of Belial, who had bound Act. 23. 16. 20.
themselves under a curse, that they would neither eat nor drink, till they
had killed the innoxious and guiltless Apostle.

9 By a a secret conveyance of Gods messengers out of the Act. 23. 23. 24. 35.
and 9. 25.
reach of danger, and destruction which ^^ plotted and contrived, by the
treacherous ambushments, and lying await of cruel and deadly enemies. Thus was
the Apostle once secured, and freed by the noble Roman captain, and set at
liberty another time by the Disciples of Damascus, when they did let him down
by the wall in a basket.

10. By ardent prayer and fervent supplication unto God for their deliverance,
when all humane helps fail, and no ordinary lawful means will serve the
turn, Thus did the Church Act. 12. 5.
by their hearty invocation on Psa. 79. 11.
the Lord, free Peter out of prison, and thus did the Prophet David pray for
the prisoners, who were appointed to die, and thus should we with a concurrent
importunity wrestle with our Lord and master by earnest and piercing prayer,
for his distressed, and afflicted people, as some were in this land, in Queen
Mary's days, and as many are now beyond the seas, and against all the
incureable, stubborn, and implacable persecutors and rebels of Christ and his
kingdom wheresoever. The prayers of the Saints, for ought I know, have been
the means to conquer strong cities, and to knock down the enemies of the
Gospel as well as cannons and other warlike engines, they have been the keys
to open the doors to let out his Prisoners, Preces sunt arma Ecclesiae.
and they are the best weapons the Church can use (for they be both defensive
and offensive against either corporal or spiritual, mortal or immortal
enemies.

11. And lastly, by helping them with all our power and strength, as far
forth as we have warrant so to do. Thus Abraham rescued Lot from the heathen
Kings, and of late the most famous incomparable conquering Alexander, the
everlastingly renowned king of Sweden, quickly snatched the German Princes from
the yoke and slavery of their imperious enemies. I could wish my pen were made
of iron, my paper brass, marble, or Diamond, that I might set down in an
everlasting Character, those most memorable, Heroycall, pious, religious,
charitable, renowned actions of this most glorious King, a King, a conqueour in
whose honor and commendation, envy, malice, and malignitie it self cannot but
write a deserved Panegyricke.

13. In a frequent visitation of those that be distressed and helpelesse,
which religion does bind us, and the promised reward at the day of judgment
should move and induce us to do. Now the poor persons, which are principally
visitable are these. First, Such as be sick, a great Emperesse Valentinians
wife was wont to visit hospitalls and to minister with her own hands, to the
peoples infirmities and necessities. Secondly, such as be made poor, and cast
down by the hand of God, by the violence and injustice of injurious and
lawless robbers, or by any other unavoideable and contingent misfortunes. Job
was reduced to such a forlorn state and condition, and in this his misery, as
he had some oversuspitious, censorious, and condemnatory reprovers, to vex
his vexations, augment, and aggravate his sorrows, so he had Job. 2. 11. 12,
13. and 42. 11.
likewise some true-hearted and fellow-feeling friends to visit, comfort and
relieve him, and to condole with him in his grievances and afflictions.
Thirdly, such as be poor and helpelesse neighbors, viz. the fatherless, Jam.
1. 27.
and widows, and such as have a great charge of children, whom they are not
able to maintain, and train up by their own hard labors and endeavors.
Fourthly, such as in other parts, lie in prison for righteousness Heb. 13.
sake: we must remember those which are in bonds, as if we were in trouble and
affliction with them, an excellent example hereof we have in blessed
Onesiphorus for whom in particular the 2 Timothy 1. 16, 17, 18.
Apostle made a most hearty and fervent prayer unto God.

For thus by a conscionable visitation of the distressed, we shall the better
discover the truly poor, who are pinched with extremest penury, from others,
who live in want, but are less miserable: we shall see what pains they take
to live, what burdensome families they have, how their children are brought
up, whether religiously, or no, we shall hereby the better know, how to fit and
proportionate our alms, and charity, whether it be bedding, raiment, food, or
what else, by the due observation of their wants, further you may know that
there is a great deal of attractivenes, sometime in the very visible object to
draw men to pity and compassion: the outward seeing of the eye many times
kindles a secret feeling in the heart. When our Savior Christ saw the
multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them, and induced to feed, to
heal, to teach them: so likewise when the Mat. 9. 36. and 14. 14. and 15. 32.
Luke 10. 33.
Samaritane saw the wounded man, presently he had compassion on him: yea, by
visiting the poor in our own persons, we shall learn (if we have any grace
within us) to be the more thankful to God for those favors and outward
blessings, which he has with a more liberal hand collated on us, then on
others: and we cannot but learn a lesson of temperance, and sobriety, and
resolve for future times to be very moderate and absteyneous in the use of Gods
good creatures, when we so that nature is contented with a little, that poor
people, through Gods providence and blessing, can preserve and sustain
themselves in good health, and strength by bread and water, course fare, mean
clothing, and hard lodging. There be more reasons then these yet to move us to
this duty. In visiting the poor, the widow, and the fatherless, for Christ's
sake, we are said to visit Christ himself: and according to his promise we
Mat. 25. 36.
may expect a reward for our labor, a reward of mercy, not of debt and
obligation: and finally hereby our love unto God is easily demonstrable, for if
we see our brother to need, and then 1 John 3. 17.
shut up our compassions from him, we may infallibly conclude that the love of
God dwells not in us.

14. In redeeming captives, freeing poor prisoners, and delivering the spoiled
out of the Jere. 22. 3. Nehe. 5. 8.
hand of the oppressor, herein was good Nehemiah deeply charitable, he
redeemed his brethren the captivated Jews, according to his ability, cut off
the bondage of the heathen, to 2 Chronicles. 28. 12. 15.
whom they were sold. So likewise were the heads of Ephraim this way very
merciful, in that they, according to the advice and counsel of the Prophet
Obed, freed those that they had in bondage and captivity, clothed the naked,
fed the hungry, and brought home the feeble upon asses unto their own city
Jericho. We may not conceive this to be a needelesse and superfluous practice,
for it is Gods own ordinance, which he established among the people of Israel,
it Levi^t 25. 47. 48. See Doctor Willet on Levit. 25. 47. 48.
has been approved and ratified by the cannons of Counsels, which have been
made to this purpose. Ancient fathers as Lactantius, and Saint Ambrose have
pressed men hereunto, as a high point of liberality. And indeed is there not
great reason, that we should redeem our brethren out of a corporal,
external, temporal slavery, since our blessed Savior so freely redeemed us
out of a spiritual, internal, and (without his mercy) eternal, and
inextricable thraldom and misery? The omission of this duty was the cause of
the ruin and destruction of Mauritius the Emperor, his wife, children and
family, a condign punishment, for so covetous, and merciless a man. The
inhabitants of the Island Majorica, not far from the contine^t of Spain, being
by their situation unavoydably exposed to the injurious outrages and
incursions of Moors and Saracens, are often carried away, as prisoners and
captives by them to be redeemed for money of their friends, for whose ransom,
there are continually on all Sundaies and holy days public collections in
their Churches. Sam. Lukenor. disc. of foreign Cities.
Heathen men have commended this merciful practice, and Seneca says, that it
was wont to be rewarded with some public honors and offices in the Roman
commonweal. And for the fuller clearing of this point, I will relate a notable
example of one Pirrhias a Merchant, who most fortunately, once above the rest,
traversing the seas, redeemed a grave aged, old man from Pirates and some of
his goods, viz. a few barrells of pitch, in which afterward he found great and
much precious treasure: so Most memo rabble likewise is the liberality of
Acacius Bishop of Amida, who when he understood that 7000 soldiers of the King
of Persia were taken captive by the Romans and like to starve for want of
food, laid their calamity to heart, and calling his Clergy together, said thus
unto them, our God has no need either of dishes, or cups, for he neither
eats, nor drinks these be not his necessaries, wherefore since the Church
has many precious jewels both of gold and silver, etc. It is requisite that
the captives should therewith be redeemed and delivered out of prison and
bondage, having thus acquainted the Clergy with this his liberal intention, he
commanded the treasure to be translated into money, and therewith redeemed the
poor Persian heathen captives. This renowned act of bountiful Acacius struck
the King of Persia into admiration, so that he greatly desired the sight of
Acacius. Soc. Scholast. lib 7. hist. Eccles. cap. 21.
strangely did God reward his work of mercy beyond his expectation. Many of
our Christian brethren are too often taken both by sea-pyrates, and land
robbers by Turks abroad, and Dunkerks at home: my meaning is, that many poor
men are often pursued with the malicious cruelties of merciless men, and cast
into prison for improper debts, or for small sums of money perhaps 50, 40,
30, 20, 10. pounds or less, which they owe themselves, and would, but are not
able to discharge, now if these debts be involuntary and unavoydable (as
sometimes they may be) if the poor men have lived honestly by their labors,
and industrious courses, and do promise a reformation of their ways, wherein
they have been defective, and a circumspection and diligence in their calling
for time to come, is it not great pity that these wretched Christians should
lie and starve, and perish in prison? and is it not great charity to pay their
debts, knock off their bolts, and set them at liberty again? Such certainly
as have been liberal this way, in redeeming captives from heathenish bondage
beyond the seas, or in delivering the oppressed from the tyranny and cruelty of
barbarous and Paganish Christians here at home, may worthily be reputed, and
recorded for most charitable persons. Of some such does Doctor Willet make
mention in his Catalogue of good works.

15. In burying decently the dead corpse of our poor deceased friends and
brethren: this is undoubtedly a good and charitable work, for our Savior
Christ commended it in the penitent woman, which anointed him Mat. 26. 10 Mar.
14. 6. Mark. 15. 43. 46.
against his burial. This honor did Joseph of Arimathea perform unto Christ,
and this favor and love did those devout men show unto Saint Stephen that
blessed Proto-martyr, they buried his body, and made great Act. 8. 3
lamentation over it.

Thus we see, wherein we are to exercise our liberality and how many ways we
may express our charity. And for the better relief and sustentation of the
poor, let me prescribe one way more, whereby many men may bemore charitable
then they are, and the needy more frequently comforted and refreshed. To effect
and bring this to pass, all Magistrates, and inferior Officers should (as it
greatly behooves them) with care and conscience put in seasonable execution all
such penal statutes as are established and authorized for the curbing and
restraining of offenders, and also consequently for the relieving of the poor
by the mulets and forfeitures of delinquents Political and wholesome
constitutions there are many in this kind, as for instance for The penalties
and forfeitures are these. 3 s. 4d, a man.
unlawful gaming on the Lords day, 12 d an oath.
for swearing or cursing, 3 s. 4 d.
for tippling and carousing contrary to the statute, 20 s.
for keeping an Alehouse without a license, or for not 20 s.
selling due measure, for being found 5 s.
drunk and swinishly distempered, for 40 s.
Constables or Churchwardens neglect to levy the forfeitures of offenders: now
if Magistrates, and Officers would breath fresh life into these languishing
Laws, by severe execution, and discharge their duties more faithfully, and
conscionably then some of them do, the mouths of blasphemous swearers would be
stopped, disorders and outrages would be prevented, much swinishnesse and beastly
intemperance would be suppressed, the poor would be oftener relieved, the
commonweal would be bettered and rectified, the King would be honored and
obeyed, and God would in all be glorified.

CHAP. XX. To whom mercy is to be showed.
ALbeit from the precedent Chapter it may easily be collected, whom we are to
make choice of, as the objects of our charity, yet to clear all doubts, and to
give full satisfaction to all that desire to be rightly informed in in the
present point, I will more distinctly describe the persons, who are to be
relieved, and what order we ought to observe in the distribution of our Alms,
in these two immediate following Chapters.

The Apostles rule in general is, that we must do good unto all men, but more
especially to them Gal. 6. 10. Mat. 10. 42. Psa. 41. 1. 1 John 3. 17. Deuteronomy. 15.
7. and. 14. 29. and 16. 11. Lev. 19. 10. Jam. 1. 27.
that are of the household of faith, who are called by the holy Ghost little
ones, Disciples, believers, Christians, Saints, fellow citizens, brethren, the
household of God, etc. And the Scriptures do in general commend unto our mercy
the poor and needy, and among these more respectively the stranger, the
widow, the Orphan, and the fatherless. To descend to some particulars, we
ought to be charitable, pittifull-hearted, and liberal handed, viz.

To such as are waxen poor, and fallen into decay, these must be relieved
according to Gods own divine and heavenly statute. Lev. 25. 35. To such as by
accident are unexpectedly overtaken with a sudden faintness, with cold,
hunger, or any other grievance or distress, and cannot 2 Sa^. 17. 28. 26.
have a present supply from themselves, or their friends, though they be
themselves able at other times, to help and relieve others. Therefore Succoth
Judge. 8. 6. 8.
and Penuel did play a very churlish and unmannerly part in denying relief to
Gideon and his army. To such as we know (though poor and miserable) of an
honest life and conversation, and very laborious and industrious in their
callings: thus did Boaz show himself kind and merciful to Ruth and old
Naomi. To such as are plunged Ruth. 2. 8. 14. 15. 16. and 3. 17. Nehe. 5. 2
Kin. 4. 1. 7.
into deep debt by reason of heavy bondage, or the intolerable cruelties of
exacting extortioners, out of which they are never able by their own power and
abilities to redeem themselves. 1 Samuel 30. 11. Luke 10.
To such as are ready to perish in their journeyes, be they aliens, strangers
or heathens: David you know relieved the almost famished Egyptian, and so did 2
Cron. 28. 15.
the Samaritane succor the wounded man. To naked, indigent, feeble and
captivated persons. To such as want provision, daily bread, competent and
necessary food and nutriment, Nehemiah took a special care for Nehe. 8. 10.
such, as appears by his sending of portions unto them. To poor christians
with relation to them as they are christians, thus the Mat. 10 4^. Act. 2 and
4. and 11. 28. 2 Cor. 8. 9.
Primitive Saints comforted and succored one another by their mutual and
reciprocal relief, and assistance, the Antiochians, Macedoniant, and
Corinthians, 1 King. 17. 15. 1 King 18. 13. Mat. 10. 41. Romans 16. 2.
sent relief to the believers in Judea, To the distressed Prophets, and
messengers of the Lord: charitable in this kind was the widow of Sarepta unto
Eliah, and good Obediah, Ahabs steward unto an hundred Prophets of the Lord, so
was Phoebe, Mary, and other good women, so was Onesiphorus, the Vide Dr Willet
Catalogue of good works.
converted Jailer, the Philippians, and others. The large bounty of Mrs Phil.
4. 18. These gave 300 l
Smith, 100 l
Mr Rogers, 400 l
Mr Ridge a Grocer in London, of Mrs 500 l
Venable in this kind is before notified, and never to be forgotten. To poor
prisoners (these though once bad men) may be good objects of our charity. Many
in the city of London have been liberal this way, Sir Wolston Dixie gave
above 60 pounds, Mr Fuller gave Messuages and Tenements to this purpose, Mr
Thomas Fisher 20 pounds to redeem poor men out of prison, who are cast in for
small debts: so did Mr Robert Rogers give 150 pounds to this end, and the Lady
Ramsey 500 pounds. To such as were once men of credit, and great trading, but
now poor and unable to manage their calling and profession of themselves any
longer, Mr Blundell the clothier gave 900 pounds, and Mr Offley 600 pounds, Mr
Heyden 1000 pounds to be lent unto such Tradesmen to uphold and support them.
To young and hopeful beginners in a lawful vocation, one Mr Woodward gave 200
pounds, Mr Offley 600 pounds, Mr Heiden 1000 pounds, Mr Norten the Stationer
1000 pounds to be lent freely unto them. To poor honest and painful maids
marriages, we want not example in this kind neither, Mr Kendricke gave to
some 10 pounds a piece, Sir John Gresham near a hundred, one Mrs Daxie 20
pounds, Mrs Woodward widow gave part of 200 pounds this way, the Lady Ramsey
20 pounds, Mr Blundell for them in Teverton 400 pounds, Sir Thomas Offley 10
pounds, Mrs Jane Baker 100 pounds. To poor householders who have a great
family, and but small means to maintain their heavy and burdensome charge,
the forenamed Sir. Thomas Offley gave ten pounds this way also. Such poor as
these, are sooner to be pitted, and more worthy our alms and liberality, then
many clamorous vagabonds, that beg in the streets. To poor soldiers who
were pressed forth to do their country service in foreign wars and are lawfully
returned home again perhaps maimed, or some other way-needy and distressed, to
such the forementioned Lady Ramsey gave twenty pounds, for they are to be
relieved, pitied, and commiserated.

To any whom we know, or may know to be sick, blind, lame. diseased,
decreped, past labor, any way in want, and not able to help themselves, to
these it behooves us to show pity and compassion. It is an ordinary custom
among the richest and ablest Turks (as the Historian tells me) to send abroad
their servants of purpose, to hearken among their neighbors, which of them
wants victual, money, or apparel, that so they may accordingly supply
their necessities: where is the Christian that does so? It is a shame that we
should come short of a Mohammedan in vertous courses and morrall practices. It Is
true indeed, the uertues of heathens are not entirely good, but mingled with
many vices and imperfections (yet good they are in the matter and substance,
though not in manner and circumstance) and they will serve to shame many of us
Christians, and one day will rise up in condemnation against us.

CHAP. XXI. Of the order to be observed in our Almes-giving.
AS all things must be done seasonbly, for time, so also decently and
commendably for order, this latter circumstance must be observed in our works
of charity as well as the former. Therefore to prevent a (...) a
preposterousnesse, herein, I will prescribe a few general and particular rules
and directions in this case.

The general are these.

1. In the first place, the public state of our country wherein we live, is to
be preferred before all other: a general and Epidemicall disease, which
seizes upon multitudes, and nations, and kingdoms, is more dangerous then a
private and personal infirmity and sickness, and it ought chiefly to be
prevented and remedied, if possibly it can: so the public miseries of a state
and kingdom is more dangerous and ought sooner to be stopped and succored,
then the distress of a private man. Bolton genesis direct. walking with God. page
267.
It is over better that one member should perish then that the whole body
should be consumed. Gracious Nehemiah laid the common calamity chiefly to
heart. Nehe. 1 4. He fasted, mourned, wept, prayed, and improved all his own
power and ability, and used all possible lawful means to remove it, as the
whole book does evidently demonstrate. This is it, for the preventing of which
we are to fight and sacrifice our lives, as David was ready to do. 1. Sam. 17
40. Joab, and his brother. 2. Sam. 10. 12.

The general Calamity of Gods own peculiar people and inheritance, must be
respected and regarded, especially when any great danger is present or
imminent, I must be so affected herewith, that I must not think it too much to
adventure livings, lands, honors, preferments, and life it self, to do them
any service, or to afford them any help or to further their deliverance. Thus
resolute and courageous was Esther for the afflicted Jews. Chap. 4. 16. The
particular rules are these.

1. We must remember that charity (according to the common speech) ought to
begin at home: we must in the first place provide for our own house and
family. Genesis 30. 30. Prove. 31. 15. my meaning is, we should not only lay up
in store, and provide livings, and lands for our children, and care moderately
for future times, but also for the present, allow competent maintenance, and
corporal necessaries unto our servants, by whose labors we are supported and
sustained. A good man, (says Solomon) is merciful to his beast, how much more
merciful do you think should he be to his own household servants, while they
spend their life and strength in his services and employments. God we know,
provided laws for the rewarding and encouraging the labor of bruit beasts.
Deuteronomy. 25. 4. and can we think that he requires no wages, and rewards for his
own Saints and servants. The labourer (whether in spiritual or carnal things
is worthy of his hire, and we shall find that the Lord provided a law to this
purpose. Lev. 15. 12. 13. 14. That Bond men and servants, when they had
finished their years of service, should not go away empty handed, but be
liberally furnished out of the flock, and the floor, and the winepresse, and
such things wherewith God had blessed their Masters: And indeed, nothing can
be more congruous, and reasonable, then that honest poor servants, who have
faithfully served for many years, at the expiration thereof, should be
liberally dealt withal at their departure.

2. In the next place we must One Mr George Gilson a wealthy man is herein
highly to be commended in that be gave in his life time 160 pounds yearly for
a long time to his poor kinsfolk. Vide Dr Willet Catalog.
with a tender and Charitable eye watch over our own natural kindred, sprung
lately from the same progenitors; we must do good unto, and provide carefully
for the poor of our own blood, who depend upon us, of these, is that place in
1 Timothy 5. 8. to be understood, for the word which is rendered ( house) in the
Text, is translated kindred in the Margin; the scope of the Apostle there, is
to free the Church from unnecessary charges and burdens as is apparent verse.
16. and to impose the care of providing for poor kindred upon those of the
same stocks and pedigree, who are able to relieve them, as may be collected out
of the fourth verse of the same Chapter: where they are commanded to show
kindness or piety at home, to their own house and family, and to require
their parents, in affording them nourishment, and sufficient necessaries for
their bodies. This kind of retribution the Greeks very fitly express in a
figurative Ciconiae parents Senio confectos nutrire solent and in volando
fessos ad terga recipere and juvare. Arist. hist. amor. lib. 8. cap. 3. Plin.
lib. 10, cap. 23.
word (...) which signifies to make seasonable requital: the Meataphor is
taken from the Storkes, who, by the very instinct of nature, are taught to be
careful of the Bird of the same nest and feather. It is credibly reported by
good Historians that when the old-ones are grown so feeble and impotent with
age, that they cannot prey and get their food; as they were wont, the
young-ones do feed and nourish them, and when in flying they grow faint and
weary, they support and carry them on their backs: nature it self, hereby
teaching us this lesson, that we ought, if of power and ability, to be very
respective and careful of our parents and kindreds, and to supply their
temporal wants and necessities. We have a wholesome and Charitable Law, which
may very well be called Scap. Grae. lexi. See Dalton cap. 40. fol. 96.
(...), wherein the Father and Grandfather, Mother and Grandmother the Children
and the Grandchildren of every poor impotent person, not able to work, are
commanded to relieve them upon forfeiture of twenty shillings for every Month,
and in case of nonpayment, they are to be committed to prison. Such as fail in
this Charitable duty degenerate into a degree of brutishness beyond the
Storks; for they are not herein deficient; or according to the Apostles
censure, they may be accounted worse, more hard-hearted and uncharitable than
infidels, who as it seems by his speech, would not suffer their near kindred
to live upon public Alms, but such as were of ability among them, would take
special care for their relief and maintenance. This place therefore you see
is notoriously abused, and perverted by too many Covetous, and Carnal
wordlings, who like Spiders suck nothing but poison out of the sweet flowers
that grow in the Paradise of the Scriptures. Ask some Nabal or other (there
be too many of them in the world) why he is not more liberal and Charitable
to his poor, naked, and all-most famished Neighbors? and he will make this
answer, I must do as I may, and as I am commanded by the Word of God, I must
first provide for my self, wife and children, or else I were worse than an
Infidel; this is the excuse, pretense and (in his conceit) invincible argument
whereby he thinks he is able to confute all objections whatsoever, and to
defend himself in his covetous and cruel practices: Thus if Sand. Ser.
flesh and blood be suffered to make the gloss, it is able quickly to corrupt a
right good Text. The Apostle in the forementioned words, means no such thing,
as men would have him. He is so far from giving liberty unto worldlings to
carke and care for posterity immoderately as they do, that he rather perswads
all good Christians in those very words, unto liberality and the duties of
Charity; so then we will retort the Argument, and break the covetous man's
pare with his own weapon, thus, He that will not provide for his own house,
or his kindred is worse than an Infidel: (that is) He that is not Charitable
and liberal unto his Parents, Nephews, and unto his poor distressed and
impotent Kindred though they live not in his house, but are planted abroad from
him, That man may be said to be worse than an Infidel; therefore those
covetous and carnal men that carke and care, only for those that are under
the same roof with them, they are most merciless and uncharitable wretches,
no better, nay worse than Infidels.

3. In a third place we must Prove. 3. 27. 28.
lend a helping hand unto our poor neighbors and common friends and familiar
acquaintance who live in the same parish with us, with whom we have mutual
society, intercourse, and commerce unto whom, as we are near in situation, so
we should be in affection and readiness to help them upon all occasions and
opportunities. Not only Divine, but humane Laws do impose a necessity upon
us to be Charitable to our poor neigbours, both which we must obey for
Conscience sake: And although there be the strong Obligation of a twofold
precept to tie us hereunto, yet our acts of Charity are not the less
commendable, if we give with a Charitable heart, and willing affection.

4. After these we are to exercise Deuteronomy. 15. 7. Levit. 25. 35.
our bounty and liberallity toward our poor Countrymen, who were borne and
bread in the same native air and soil, then to strangers and sojourners, and
then our enemies. For these we are to love and relieve too in their poverty and
extremity. Men's naugty hearts do naturally rise against their enemies, with
much enraged anger, disdain, and contempt and this doctrine may, perhaps,
seem to be a Paradox unto revengefull and vindictive spirits. But read, I
pray, these Scriptures, Luke 6. 35. Romans 12. 20. Prove. 25. 21. and then tell
me, whether this duty does not lie upon thee with a heavy necessity: thou
art commanded to be merciful even as thy heavenly Father is merciful, now he
makes his Sun to Mat. 5. 45, 46. Luke 6. 36.
rise on the evil and on the good, and he causes the Rain to fall on the
just, and on the unjust: He shows abundance of favor unto his enemies, and
the greatest rebels of his Kingdom, and if thou would be holden a Child
of thy Father which is in heaven, thou must do so too, to love those that love
us, to do good unto our friends, who can and will make satisfaction and
requital is no such great matter, Mat. 5. 46, 47. Luke 6. 32, 33.
for the Publicans do even the same, and we can never expect a reward from God
for this carnal love, and these Civil natural, and Moral actions. But to
feed and refresh our very deadly and approved enemies, as Elisha counseled
Jehoram to do, 2 King. 6. 22. is a good Argument of self-denial, of a
gracious heart and humble disposition, and it is a notable work of Mercy,
which shall not be unrewarded at the last day.

Now because in the relieving of the truly poor and needy, there must needs
be a Prioritie, and Posterioritie, observe again that we are to succor.

1. Such as are in extremity and ready to perish, unto these Job had a
principal respect, chapter 29. 13. and the merciful Samaritane, Luke 10. 33.
34.

2. Such as are in necessity, waxed poor, and fallen into decay, (as Job was
by reason of Levit. 25. 30.
fire, injurious outrages of enemies, or by any other unavoydable misfortunes,
whereunto mortality is liable, and obnoxious, unto these must we reach forth
a helping hand, to raise them up again, as Jobs friends did him: chap. 42. 8.
Among these two sorts of poor, whether in extremity or in necessity, special
care is to be had. First, of the Fatherless, the Widow, and the Stranger,
Job. 31. 16. and 29. 12. 13. Deuteronomy. 24. 19. 20. 21. Secondly, of such as are
truly religious, Psalm. 16. 3. Romans 12. 13. It behooves us in my opinion to
respect, love, and relieve sooner a zealous, pious, and gracious Alien or
stranger, than an Atheistical, profane, and irreligious Coozin. Quia sanctior
est copula Bern.
cordium quam corporum, because Spiritual kindred and consanguinitie in Christ
is more excellent, than that which is only corporal and carnal: Upon such as
these did the Prophet David fix his affection, he delighted in no man's
company, but such as did excel in virtue, Psalm. 116.
feared the Lord, and kept his Commandments, Psalm. 119. 63. and the Apostle
enjoynes us to have a special care of the Household of faith, Gal. 6. 10. Now
because among those that are religious some may stand more in need than
others, it concerns us to be very respective unto, and tenderly watchful over
those that are imprisoned, banished, or maliciously persecuted for Christ and
his Gospel sake. It is a transcendent piece of charity to releeve a Jeremie
that is brought to distress and misery, for telling the Truth: for Christ is
relieved in the persons of such, and he will not forget to reward such
merciful men at the day of Judgment, Matthew. 25. 34. etc.

CHAP. XXII. To whom not to give.
I Am very loath to enter into this discourse, fearing least wretched misers and
thurlish Nabals should hence ^ake occasion to harden their already too obdurate
hearts, against all sorts of poor, when they understand that there are some
altogether unworthy of any pity and compassion: My purpose herein is not to
shu^ up any man's hand against the truly poor and needy, but to direct the
merciful man, how he may sometimes spare where he ^ought, that he might the
better give where he should.

1. The blessed Apostle Saint Paul, who himself was very Charitable, and
earnestly in his Epistles exhorted others thereunto, delivered this Cannon,
that 2 These. 3. 6. 10. 14.
such as lived inordinately, and would not work, should not eat, yea, he
charge the Thessalonians to detest and abandon the acquaintance and company
of such disorderly loyterers.

2. We are not to relieve (except in case of extremity, and upon point of
perishing) such as by the Statutes and wholesome Laws of our Land are
stigmatized and branded with the names of rogues, as all runnagates, vagabonds,
and sturdie beggars are, the very ulcers, scab^ and vermin of a Commonweal:
all such wanderers as have neither house or home, an^ make idleness and
begging there trade and occupation, are forbidden to beg, and so are we
forbid to relieve them.

These are not fit objects for our Charity, for to help and maintain such
professed wanderers, who may, and can, and will not work, were to maintain a
school of roguery. Therefore let us shut our eyes, and our ears, and our
hands, and our hearts against them, and take special care that the Law be
executed upon them, and yet we are not uncharitable.

1. Because the Statute laws in this kind are made by the Consultation of the
wisest and choicest men in the kingdom, and by the consent of the people, and
it were a very presumptuous and contumacious thing to disapprove by our
practice what deeper judgments have allowed and established by our own
approbation.

2. All laws authorized and ordained to rule us in good and lawful things,
which are beneficial 2 These. 3. 10. Romans 13. 5.
to the Commonweal, and consonant to the Word of God (as these are) do bind
and tie our Consciences. For 1 Pet. 2. 13. 17. Eccles. 8. 2.
Magistrates (says the Apostle) must be obeyed for Conscience sake: and we are
commanded to fear God, to honor the King, and to keep his lawful Commands.

3. This is the way to suppress such a Lawless generation of lewd vagarants,
and to prevent manifold sins and impieties, which are usually perpetrated
among them, as thefts, adulteries, murders, drunkenness, and other such most
abhorred abominations, not to be tolerated or suffered among the Professors of
the Gospel.

4. They bear the name of Christians, but live under no settled Ministry, in
no horest course and vocation, feeding like Droanes on other men's labors, and
being more like in their lives and conversations to Turks, and Infidels, than
to reformed Christians. Plato allowed not any beggars in his conceited
Commonweal: for, indeed they are in a State, as a Wenne is in the face, a
very great deformity and blemmish, and well ordered Republikes, suffer them as
little as may be.

5. They very much disgrace our Christian religion, and disable our Charity;
for if they be needy and poor indeed, why then do we suffer them, to live
like rogues, to beg from door to door, contrary to Charity and Christian
religion? and if they deserve punishment, rather than mercy, why do we abuse,
and mis-imploy our charity, and not rather seek their reformation by some
legal course, and lawful proceeding?

6. The relieving of such unworthie wretches, is a means to animate and
encourage them in their ungodly conversations and to cause them to continue on
still in their idle, profane, and unsufferable courses, and so we become
guilty by our foolish pity, of their sinful practices.

7. We mis-imploy and mispend our Alms, which might better be reserved for
others, who are more indigent and penurious, and whom we in Chatitie stand
bound to relieve and succor.

8. We can never reap any comfort from this our conceited Charity, and
liberality, because the concomitants, and consequences hereof are apparently
evil, and unlawful: for in relieving vagarant, towns-end beggars, contrary to
the Apostles rule, we disrespect the wisdom of the holy Ghost, also the
wisdom of the King, and State, we disobey and contemn authority, incur
sometimes many penalties, and pecuniarie mulcts, which we are loath to pay; and
harden them in their most cursed and heathnish courses Charity certainly is
not rebellious and opposite to authority, it does not elevate or puff men up,
it does not suffer them to adore their own fancies and conceits, nor to
prefer their own private opinions before the Laws of their Sovereign.
Therefore let no man delude himself, and others too, by this indiscrete
beneficence, and (as I may so speak) uncharitable charity. These Ulcers and
Dron's of the Commonwealth are unworthy of any honest man's Alms, and he that
shows them mercy, does them, and himself, and his Sovereign, and the
Commonwealth, much wrong and injury. I stand to press this Point the more
vehemently, that hereby I might discover the folly, and rectify the erroneous
judgments of many ignorant men, who dare to defend this indiscreet and
unprofitable kind of Almes-giving, and are ever too too slack handed to any
pious and more charitable works. All learned Divines with an unanimous consent
condemn, and censure this sort of beggars, as unworthy objects of a Christians
charity, for they live contrary to Gods Ordinance without a calling, they are
unnecessarie burdens to the Commonweal, they are members of no body, neither
Ecclesiastical, nor political, they do no service either to God or the King,
they live in so base and brutish a course of life, tanquam fruges Hor. 1. Ep. 2
consumere nati, as if they were borne for no other end, but to eat and
drink, to consume and devour Gods good Creatures. A learned and godly Divine
declaimes very sharply against them, and cites the Ancient Z^p. lib. 2. cap.
23. in Pol. Eccl. de validis mendicant.
fathers, the Civil Law, Imperial Constitutions, and other decre's in Germany
against them: Atticus the Bishop of Constantinople sent a great sum Socrates
hist.
of money to the poor of Nice, but with this limitation and restriction, that
it should not be given to such as respected only the belly, and made a trade
of begging, but to such as were truly poor, and ashamed to beg. Give not to
the ungodly, (says the wise man) and help not the sinner, meaning such as
Ecclus. 12, 4. 5. 6.
made a trade of sinning, as these sorts of base, brutish, and heathenish
people do: well said S. Ad. vincent Donat.
Austine to this purpose. It is far better to with hold bread, than by giving
to make the poor rest securely in his unrighteousness. To conclude this
chapter then, idle loyterers, and disorderly vagabonds, where without Country
now swarmeth; are not to be relieved with the fruits of our Alms, except as
before it is excepted, in case of utter extremity. And yet I would have every
one to be good to the poor, the which that we may be, we must understand a
right who are the poor, and what it is to be good to the poor, and for
direction herein, hear what a Mr. Sandersons ser. 1. ad Mag. 142.
learned Divine has written to this purpose: Not he only is good to the
poor, that delivers him that is oppressed: nor is he only good to the
poor, that releeveth him, when he is distressed, but he also is good to the
poor, that punishes him when he is idle: He is good to the poor, that
helps him, when he wants, and he is no less good to the poor, that
whippeth him when he deserves. This is indeed, to be good to the Poor, to
give him that Alms first, which he wants most: If he be hungry it is Alms
to feed him, but if he be idle and untoward; it is Alms to whip him: so
then relieve the poor, but then those that be poor indeed. All that beg
are not poor, all that want are not poor, all that be poor, are not poor
indeed. There is a great deal of difference between the sturdie beggar and
the truly need y Christian: They that are old and impotent, and past work,
they that are sick and lame, and cannot work, they that are willing and able,
but cannot get work, they that have great families, and cannot maintain them
by their work; these be the poor indeed, and unto such as these, be good and
merciful.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the unmercifull who they be, and of the miseries of the
merciless.
AMong all the sons and daughters and sinful offspring of Adam, none lie plunged
in so deplored and lamentable a condition, as pitiless, compassionatelesse,
hardhearted, cruel, and unmercifull men, for they stand registered in Gods
Book among the vessels of wrath, who one day shall be filled full with the
fury and indignation of the Almighty. Matthew. 15. 41.
Cursed they are in their life, cursed at their death, and most cursed shall
they be at the day of Judgment: If you desire to know some of their names,
they are such as these, Extortioners, Usurers, extreme Exactors, Oppressors,
Horders up of Corn in times of scarcity, Enhauncers of the prices of things,
Covetous niggards, Churlish Nabals, cruel Depopulatours, detainers of the
Laborers deserved wages, Bribetakers, Mammonists, Idolizers of dirt and clay,
cunning circumventers, and over-reachers of their brethren: besides these,
there be more of this cursed Catalogue and black Guard, as for instance, Such
as give to the poor, but with a grudging heart, and frowning face: such as
shut their eyes, and their ears, and hands against the helpless members of
Christ, Such as spare more than needs, and spend more than they ought, in
proud Plumes, gay Clothes, Gaming, Gluttony, Drunkenness, and riotous
Revellings, upon Hawks, or Hounds, or Players, and perhaps, sometimes upon
Whores and Harlots, Such as give just nothing at all, or as good as nothing all
their lives long, and at their death, part with some pitiful portion to the
poor, because they can keep it no longer. I cannot give you the entire and
perfect number of all these hard-hearted and merciless men, who will one day
wish that they had never been borne, or (if they must needs have a being and
existence) that they might be Metamorphosed into a brute beast, a stock, or a
stone, or any senseless or inanimate creature, that so they might be the
less capable and sensible of those heavy plagues and punishments, which are
the just deserved stipend and reward of every incompassionate and pitiless
man.

I could wish, that I were endowed with the Art and skill of some cunning
Appelles, that I might delineate and describe this monster of men in his proper
colors, and represent him to your view in all his defects and deformities,
that so you might together with his person, loath and abominate his conditions
and practices: I find in the sacred Scriptures some few marks and properties,
whereby I may thus describe him: He has not 1 John 3. 17.
the least spark of true love either toward God or man, not the smallest
dram of saving Jam. 2.
faith, for though he believes, yet it is but a diabolical assent or
presumptuous Job 6. 14.
confidence: he has no fear of God before his eyes: He can find no
acceptance with God, when he makes his prayers Pro. 21. 13.
unto him, for when he cries he shall not be heard: he is a barren and
fruitless Figtree, which Luke 3. 9.
shall surely be burnt, a most cursed Psalm. 109. 16. with verse. 6, 7, 8. to
verse. 15. Jam. 2.
miscreant, which shall certainly be condemned, a faithless and merciless
steward, which shall be delivered to the tormentors; a notable fool, that
Mat. 18. 34.
to win the world will lose his Luke 12. 20.
own soul: he is a very thief and robber of the poor, nay which is worse,
he is a man of blood, says Ecclesiasticus, a devourer, Eccles. 34. 21.
a murderer of the poor: for, says Saint Ambrose, Si non pavisti, occidisti,
thou have killed thy poor brother, whom thou have not fed. This is to kill,
says the same In Psalm. 118.
Father, to deny the means of the preservation of life: to keep in thy bags
which should relieve the poor, is to bury in the grave, the life of the poor.
And least men should think these words to be but wind or superfluous, and
empty breath, and make light of such paper Gun-shots, as having no strength and
power to pierce through the heart that is harnessed with inhumanitie and
pitilesse cruelty, and congealed unto Adamant, let them ponder a while upon the
parable of the merciless man, Matthew. 18. 30. 34.
who took no pity on his fellow servant, and was therefore rigorously handled
by his own Lord and Master, and cast into Prison there to be tormented
everlastingly for his dogged disposition, and cruel carriage toward his
fellow servants: Or let them take these two principal examples into their
serious consideration: the first is that of unmercifull Dives, who for denying
Luke 16.
Lazarus a little hard lodging, a bed of straw, was tumbled down from his bed
of Down into a bed of flame, for denying him the crumms which fell from his
table, was fed with fire and brimstone in the pit of hell, and for denying him
drink to quench his thirst, was denied himself a drop of water to cool his
tongue, so true is that of Saint James, He shall have Jam. 2. 13.
judgment without mercy: that has showed no mercy. The other example is that
of the Emperor Mauritius, who through covetousness and love of money,
refusing to redeem certain Christian captives, who were destinated by the
Conqueror to the sword and destruction, in case of non-payment, was reduced
into a most lamentable state and condition, to a most merciless and doleful
end. After this cruel and bloody act of his, in not redeeming the captives
(for he had a finger in their slaughter as well as the enemy, because he might
have saved their lives) he never thrived or prospered in any thing he went
about, the Lord gave him over to the horrors of a troubled and wounded spirit,
to be vexed with continual fear of treason, and to be tormented with the
praeapprehension of the torments of hell, but praying against those future
pains and punishments which he feared in another world, and rather choosing to
be afflicted and plagued in this life, in a dream (though they be most
commonly false and Somnia ne cures nam fallunt somnia plures.
deceitful) he learned the decree of God against him, that he should be
dethroned, and delivered up into the hands of bloody Phocas, one of his
Centurions, who should aspire and attain unto the Imperial Crown and
dignity: And even so it came to pass, as he foresaw in his imagination, for
the same Centurion rebelled against him, got the upper hand of him, was
proclaimed Emperor in his stead, and as soon as he was lifted up upon the
wings of ambition, to the highest top of honor, power and Imperial majesty,
he pursued his former lord and master, took him prisoner, first slew his wife
and five children before his face, (he himself all the while crying; justus
es Domine and rectum judicium tuum, Just art thou, oh Lord, and righteous is
thy judgment:) and after he had dispatched them, he murdered most miserably
poor Mauritius himself.

Thus were these two forlorn wretches plagued, the one with temporal, the
other with eternal punishment, not for commission of evil, which they should
not have done, not for cruelty in oppressing the oppressed, or for grinding the
faces of the poor, or for robbing, wronging, or notoriously injurying them:
but for omission of good, which they should have done, for not showing mercy
and compassion when they ought; for this were they hunted, and overtaken with
Gods plagues and punishments, and so shall all the damned at The day of
judgment. This will be one of the most grievovs and unanswerable bills, which
will be cast in against wicked men at the last and great tribunal: Imprimis,
for not feeding Mat. 25. 42, 43, etc.
the hungry: Item, for not giving drink to the thirsty: Item, for not lodging
and entertaining strangers: Item, for not clothing the naked: Item, for not
visiting the sick, etc. As men must then be strictly accountable for all
their thoughts, words, and actions, so more specially for the neglect or
contempt of Charity and the works of mercy: An invincible Armado of former
forgotten sins will then be mustered together, and with all their united
forces fight against, and charge upon poor graceless impenitent sinners: but
sins of malice, sins of uncharitableness they be the Captain sins, who
will march in the forefront of the battle, and being armed with most fiery
Scorpion-stings will vex, and wound, and murder most horribly and be
verlasting scourges and flames unto their consciences

Let unmercifull men consider on these things, and if they desire to escape
those Judgments, which hang over the heads of all merciless men, let them
pray unto God for that unvaluable Jewel, the grace of Charity: Let them put
on bowels of pity and compassion, remoove and prevent all causes and occasions
of unmercifulness and cruelty, which be principally these: Independance upon
God, distrust in his promises made to the merciful. (Let covetous, carnal,
and hard-hearted misers say what they will, they do not believe in God, they
give not credit to his Word) fear of future want and penury, when they have
the Word of Truth to the contrary, wnat of love toward God, and of pity
toward the poor, love of money, and earthly-mindednesse, pride of apparel,
fullness of bread, love of pleasures, and Ezech. 16 49.
pastimes, Self-conceit, and a groundless presumption that they are good
Christians, when they are nothing less, that they are in the right way to
Blessedness, cock sure of Heaven, true worshipers of God, sincere professors
of his Gospel, unquestionable believers, albeit they be not zealous of good
works, nor given to the practices of Charity. These and the like obstacles
and hindrances there are, which stop men from walking the ready way to good
works: They will all appear very clear and evident in the next Chapter of
objections, which worldlings frame upon purpose to shift off the exercise of
Charity, and to spare their purses.

CHAP. XXIV. Of such objections as have been or may be made by merciless and
uncharitable wretches, with their several Answers and Resolutions.
THere was never any Truth so happily innocent, as to maintain it self free
from calumny, obloquie, and opposition, never any duty (though never so
necessary) if unto the performance thereof was required the expense of the
purse, but has been questioned and impugned by Hypocritical and earthen
Christians, who preferring a little piece of filthy clay before Jesus CHRIST
and the Crown of Immortality, labor by fained excuses and pretenses to shift
off these holy duties of Charity from themselves, and are ever more
Non-conformists to those religious and pious practices, which are incompatible
with their worldly profit. Some devise one thing, some another, and not a few
assault this Heavenly and Apostolical Doctrine of laying aside aforehand for
Charitable uses with many arguments, and carnal cavillations, which truth
notwithstanding, can hereby be no more darkened and weakened, then the Sun
with those paper pellets and artificial bubles the little boys shoot and
blow up into the air.

The objections which are or may be made, are sundry and different, some of one
kind, some of another. As waters have a different taste, strength, and
quality, according to the various temper of the veins, the earth, stony
places, and rocks through which they run, and from whence they flow: So an
argument is stronger or weaker, according to the constitution and quality of
the brain, wherein it was hatched, and from whence it does proceed. The
strongest and worst objections (for all are naught, that are made against
Charity) I will first propound, assoile, and clear as briefly as I can; and
although some are so senseless, and foolish that a Recitare were a sufficient
Refutare: yet because every one likes his own things best, and judges of his
own conceits, as the Bear does of her whelps, that they are of all creatures
the fairest, I will mis-pend so much time, as to give satisfaction to every
trivial objection, that so all the mouths of base worldlings might be stopped.

I see no such need, to be this way so disposed?

Our Savior Christ says, the

We have no poor in our Parrish.

1. If this be true (as I can abroad, thus the Law of our land requires thee
to be: Travel abroad with the Samaritane, till thou have found out a wounded
man, a poor neighbor that wants the Oil and Wine of thy mercy and
compassion, to cure and comfort him. Secondly, have thou no poor ruinated
kindred, if not, thou art sprung from a strange and uncoth Stock and
Genealogy: if thou have any, show kindness at home to thy own blood and
kindred, as did the rich man before mentioned Master Jilson who gave a hundred
and sixty pounds yearly to his poor kins-folke, a rare example, and hardly
ever heard of in these hard and pitiless times. Thirdly, its an objection,
which no Parish can truly make, if it consists of many hous-holds: for albeit
there be none poor in extremity, yet there are doubtless some poor families,
who may stand in need of thy aid and liberality, though they come not a
begging to thy door.

I pay my rate to the poor, and to other good uses as much as the Law
requires.

1. It Is the Law then, and

I have as good affection, as the best, and can give when I see cause.

1. Says a Father, Non satis Ambros. lib. 1. offic. ca. 30*
est velle, sed etiam benefacere: Affection is not enough (where there is
ability) without present action and execution. Secondly, the commendation of
thy willingness and afflexibilitie within thee, will prove to be but a
ridiculous ostentation, if thou do not manifest it without thee. Thirdly,
it is not in thee at thy pleasure, to give when, and where there is cause, thou
can do nothing in this case without Gods special Grace, without which thou will easily let slip every good occasion, and wilt not see, where thou should
see, nor do good, when and where God would have thee.

The poor are very unthankefull.

1. All are not so, or if they Act. 9. 33. Luke 6. 35. 36.
deal as mercifully with thy brother. Thirdly, thou art in giving, not to
look unto their thankfulness, but to their misery. Fourthly, their backs
will bless thee, though their tongues return back no thanks. Fifthly, Job.
31. 20.
their ingratitude is their own sin, not thine, it does thee no harm, but
is altogether hurtful to themselves. Sixthly, because they fail in their
duty toward thee, will thou therefore dare to fail in thy duty toward God?
will thou therefore be uncharitable, because they are unthankful? God forbid.
Seaventhly, consider if thou give still, and know that thou shall not
receive any thing back again, no not so much as thanks for thy good deeds,
the more true is thy Charity, and the greater shall thy reward be with God.
For if we seek any recompense with men, we shall surely loose it with God.
Lastly, let us remember, that the Lord (to whom we become creditors, if Matthew.
6.
we give liberally to the poor) undertakes to be our Play Master, we have his
Word, his Bill and Bond for it: and if we expect any thing back again for
our charitable practices and many Prove. 19. 17.
good turns, we must look for it at his hands.

The poor are very lewd, and unworthie relief.

1. All are not so: some poor Matthew. 5. 45.
our Heavenly-Father gives to the good, and to the wicked, and remember, we
must be merciful as he is merciful. Fourthly, we are to know that our own
unworthiness is great before God, yet we beg of him and expect his Alms: are
the poor more unworthie of our Charity, than we are of Gods gracious
liberality? Doubtless not. Fifthly, though they be Dic indignum esse cujus
causa vel minimu^ labores, digna est Imago Dei, qua tibi commendatur, cui te
and omnia tua exhibeas; quod si non modo nihil boni promeritus est, sed injurus
quoque and maleficiis te provocavit, ne haec quidem justa causa est cur illum
and dilectione complecti, and delectionis officio pro sequi desinas: Calv. Inst
lib. 3. c. 7 sect. 6.
unworthie to whom thou do give, yet bethinke-thy self he is not so, for
whose sake thou do give. Sixthly, when thou releevest their necessities,
friendly reprove their ill courses and conditions: Thy Alms and bountifulness
may be a good means to mollify their stubborn natures, and to work them to
amendment. Lastly, it is better to feed ten unworthy and graceless wretches,
than to let Christ go unfed, and unrefreshed, in one poor Lazarus.

When they receive our Charity, they abuse it.

1. The assertion is false, if universal, and do not mispend Gods blessings,
some use them well, give therefore to them. Secondly, do not we abuse Gods
good creatures too much and too often, whereby though we grievously offend his
Sacred Majesty, yet do not we cease to beg, neither does he leave off to
give. Thirdly, the poor in mis-imploying the fruits of our alms, wrong
themselves, not us, they can abuse but a little but we do a great deal, this
then is but a poor pretense to excuse any from works of mercy. Fourthly, If we
know who they are that will waste and consume the money which we give them,
then let us be liberal unto them in other things more needful, let us labor
by frequent admonitions, and friendly objurgations to reform them, far be it
from us ever to harden our hearts, and wholly to withdraw our hands from
succoring them, in their miseries and extreme necessities, but if they persist
in their wicked ways, let us complain of them unto authority, whose Charity
is Misericordia puniens, Merciful castigation and correction for their
amendment.

I am a widow what can be expected from me?

1. If of a mean estate, not Mark. 12. 43.
think quatenus a Widow she may be exempted from showing mercy to the
poor: for the Apostle tells us, that a Widow who is to be honored as a
Widow indeed, must be well reported of for good Works, which if she does
not, she is no Widow indeed. Thirdly, we have heard before how Widows have
been addicted to good Works of Piety and Charity.

I am a Wife, therefore its not for me to give, I cannot, I dare not do any
thing.

If Conscionable subjection

I do give, though more silently and secretly than others, I desire not to be
seen of men, nor to have a Trumpet blown, when I disperse my Alms.

Boast not, I pray thee, of thy thou need not desire the blowing of a
Trumpet, for, if indeed, thou were open-handed, and liberal to the poor, as
they have a hand to receive, so they have also a tongue to blaze abroad thy
Charity and Almesdeeds. Remember also thy lamp of Charity must not burn
under a bushel, thy light must shine before men, that God might be glorified
and malicious mouths stopped by thy many good works. For an Alms may be given
openly, and yet not vainegloriously: It Is true indeed, give we must not to be
seen of men: but its one thing, to give with a sinister and Pharasaicall
intention to be seen, and another thing to give that which may be seen. That
is a strange invisible Alms which none see, and as strangely insensible which
none can feel: Such is the Charity of Selfe-applauding hypocrites, which most
commonly is expressed in nothing, but in words, and vaineglorious speeches.

Alas, may some say, I have but little to give.

Though thou have but a little, Mat. 10. 42
which none are so poor, but they are able to give. God does nothing value or
respect the greatness of the gift, but the readiness and willingness of the
heart: for if there be a willing mind, it is accepted according 2 Cor. 8. 12.
to that a man has, and not according to that a man has not.

There be some more able than my self, rich men, who are good hold-fasts of
that they have, and will do but little.

1. I must let thee know, that Nabal, because other earthwormes starve and
famish the poor? That can never be a good conclusion, which is inferred from
false and erroneous premises: Others richer than thy self give but little,
therefore thou will give just nothing at all: a cursed, devilish and damnable
consequence. Secondly, there be many examples of rich men which do give, and
why do thou (passing over the sound flesh like filthy flies which feed on
corruption) pitch only upon the scabbed and ulcerous parts? There be some
rich and 1 Cor. 1. 26.
wise and learned and noble who are compassionate and merciful to the poor:
take these for thy pattern, and go thou and do likewise. Thirdly, consider,
that giving is compared by the holy Ghost to S^wing, and will thou neglect to
manure, and plow, and sow thy ground, because thy rich neighbor, who either is
a bad husband, or has sufficient old flore, will let his land lie barren and
untilled? And remember what the Apostle faith, 2 Cor. 9. 6.
He that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, but he that sowes not at
all, is sure to reap Prove. 19. 17.
not at all. If thou will lend nothing to Christ's poor members here upon
earth, never look to receive any thing of the Head in the kingdom of heaven.

I have a trade by which I set many Poor on work.

What then will thou give thou do reward them for their pains? thou may
not call that a work of mercy, which is but an act of Justice: for in setting
the poor on work, and paying them for their labors, thou githem but that is
their own, and herein thou aimest chiefly at thy own end, the enriching of
thy self, the preservation of thine own substance, not the sustentation of
the poor. Now this is clean contrary unto (...). Ad se minime respicere liber
alis proprium est. Arist. eth. lib. 4.
liberality and charity, she seeks not her own. 1 Cor. 13. 5. But the good
of others. Thou may do well indeed to mingle and season these actions of
mortaliand uprightness, with works of mercy, to give more to well deserving
servants, then they earne by covenant, to increase their wages, to help them
freely and lovingly in hard times; when difficult businesses, and a tedious
work sticks upon their fingers, and will not reach out to maintain them. This
were true charity, and not merely the setting of poor people on work for thy
own proper gain and lucre.

My wife, may another reply, will not let me give.

1. This may be but a poor Adam did Eve. Secondly, thou art the head, and what
thou have, is at thine own disposing, thou may not en thrall thy self to
thy inferior, nor be ruled and ordered by thy wives rotten and unreasonable
counsels and persuasions. Thirdly, The precepts of God are of more force to
bind thee to the performance of good duties, then thy wives will and entreaties
can be to hinder thee in the exercise of charity. Fourthly, in other things
thou can follow and do thy own will well enough, and why not in this? surely
because Ananias Act. 5. 2.
and Saphira are met together, and are resolved with one heart and hand, to
deteine and keep back part of that price, which should be laid at the
Apostles feet, and given to the poor.

I am my self but poor, and have, but what I get by my handy labors, and the
sweat of my brows.

1. There be some such ingrate Solomon) that makes himself Pro. 13. 7.
poor, and yet has great riches. Secondly, If thou art so poor, as thou
seinest thy self to be, yet first strict precepts binds thee to give. Ephesians. 4.
28. sometimes, and in some cases. Secondly, Thy necessity is not so pinching,
as another extremity, Thirdly, Thou may find in the Scriptures many rich
examples of Joh. 13. 29. 2 Cor. 8. Mar. 12. 44. Luke 21. 1. 3. Mat. 10. 42.
poor almesgivers: as for instance. Christ, who had neither house nor harbor,
the poor widow, poor Macedonians, etc. Fourthly Art thou so poor, that thou
can not give a cup of cold water, for which if heartily given, Christ
promises a reward. Fifthly, Thou can sometimes spend somewhat idly, vainly,
and profanely, and can thou not find in thy heart to lay out as much
charitably upon the poor? 6. Thou can scrape together enough to pay thy
earthly landlord his fines, and rents, which he exacteth, and can thou not
be persuaded to lend to thy heavenly Lord and maker that which he lawfully
requires. Seventhly, consider with thy self, how by thy good example thou
may provoke others unto good works (which is every man's duty. Heb. 10. 24.)
or shame the rich which are slackehanded to the poor. Eighthly, thy pitiful
regard of others miseries, may move others to respect thee, as one fire
kindles another: so the heat of thy brotherly kindness may kindle a
charitable affection in others toward thee. Lastly, thy forwardness to give
in thy poor estate, adds a great deal of luster to thy charity, and makes
thine alms more acceptable unto God, and more commendable and remarkable
among men.

I am in debt.

1. But not by giving to the thy debt unto God: do not think this a just
pretext for the neglect of so important and heavenly a duty. Thirdly, mercy may
be a means by Gods blessing to free thee, and to set thee at liberty again.
4. Consider I pray thee for all thy debt, how thou can provide well enough to
pay the usurer, to buy sometimes gay and costly clothes, and upon light and
idle occasions to spend thy money sinfully and superfluously, and will thou lay
out nothing charitably upon the poor. Fifthly, It may be thou have enough to
pay what thou owe, and somewhat to spare, then restore every man his own and
give of the remainder unto the poor. Sixthly. It is fit inquiry should be made
how thou carnest into debt, perchance thy insatible desue of rising and growing
great in the world, has brought thee to this extremity, and thou have
borrowed of others to buy and purchase more lands and possessions for thy
self; this debt then is volu^tary, for thy gain, and may not be a let unto
charity: or perhaps thy rash and over-hastie entering into bond for other spend
thrifts, or thy own profuseness and prodigality has brought thee into debt,
this debt then remains as a punishment upon thee, and therefore repent for thy
rashness and former lewd courses, and begin betimes before thou art gone to
far, to spare thy purse, (...) He siod. l. 1. (...).
Serain fundo parsimonix, it will be too late to spare when all is spent: employ
thy substance to better uses, lay out where thou may expect a blessing from
God, who borrows of thee, when thou give to the poor.

I have not to give, except I should sell that I have.

1. Let me ask thee, have help thee, but by sale of thy goods and
possessions? If thou have, why then framest thou such a ridiculous pretense:
doubtless thou can provide food and raiment, and other necessaries for thy
self without selling thy estate, of which thou may give if thou will, nay
thou must give or thou art but a miser. Secondly, suppose thou have nothing
(which is but a groundless supposition) remember what our Saviors charge is,
Sell that you have, and give alms, the meaning Luke 12. 33. ver. 22. 29. 30.
whereof is this, as is apparent out of the precedent and subsequent words: do
not tire and weary your spirits, nor wear out Mar. 10. 24 Psa. 62. 10.
your precious time about carnal and worldly things, do not cark and care
immoderately for these earthly and transitory trifles, trust not in your
wealth, glue not your affections to your riches, set not your hearts upon them,
but rather sell that ye have and give alms to the poor and needy, rather lay
up treasures in heaven, then bags in earth, rather grow rich toward God by
relieving the poor, then great and glorious among men by hoarding up store of
wealth in your coffers, the which at the best, in respect of true happiness is
but a base incertaine, inglorious, and beggarly condition. Thirdly, look upon
the examples of the Saints in Jerusalem, how many of them sold all that they
had to relieve the poor brethren, which were under any grievance, pressure, or
distress. They were themselves under persecutions, persued with malicious
enemies, compelled to fly hither and thither, for their own safety and
preservation, yet they stuck close to the promises, they rested on their God,
never making any question what should become of them, when they had given away
all. But here is to be noted, the case must be alike, if we imitate their
practices, for the Apostle in these cases requires an equality, and would not
have some eased and others burdened overmuch. 2. Cor. 8. 13.

I have a wife and children to care for, and I hope I may be exempted.

1. So have most that be married, Job had ten children, yet he was a man
wonderfully, compassionate and bountiful to the poor: a notable example we
have also of one Mrs Owen of Istington who had-two and twenty children,
notwithstanding in her life time she built an Hospital, and gave to it fifty
pounds per annum, a free School, to which she allowed a sufficient stipend,
she gave two hundred pounds to Oxford library, and to many other pious and
charitable works as much as amounted to the sum of 2500. pounds and upwards.
Thirdly, a good wife and children are the gifts and blessings of God, and shall
this his goodness toward thee be a cause of thy ingratitude to him and
uncharitableness to thy neighbor. Fourthly, thy carking, and caring, and
immoderate thoughtfullnesse about the things of the world is to little purpose.
Luke. 12. 25, 26. It can do thee no good, it is Gods blessing that enricheth, as
Solomon Mat. 6. 31. 34. 1 Pet. 5. 7. Jer. 49. 11.
tells us. Fifthly, Christ commands us not to care doubtingly for these
earthly things, and the Apostle would have us to cast all our care upon God,
who cares for us, and promises to provide for wife and children. Sixthly, What
is the aim and end of thy earthlymindednesse, of thy faithless, fruitless,
and immoderate providence and carefullnesse? If it be to greaten thy posterity,
or to leave thy children in a good and blessed state and condition, why then be
merciful to the poor, so shall thy seed be blessed, builders up of the old
wast places, and raisers up for many foundations, for many generations. Esa.
58. Lastly, remember that though thou heapest up riches together, Psalm. 37.
Psalm. 39. 6.
yet thou art utterly ignorant who shall enjoy and gather them. Many men have
provided well in the eyes and judgment of the world, for posterity, scraped
together abundance of wealth very greedily, and kept it as sparingly, and have
not either a prodigal heir wasted all in a moment, or a foolish wife by
marching with an unthriftie second husband, ruined and undon her self, and all
her children: thus God often crosses the plots and intentions of many covetous
and merciless worldlings, who are distrustful of, and independent upon his
providence and promises.

I have had many crosses and losses befallen me, so that my state is much
weakened and diminished.

If such be thy case, then make in thy estate, and Gods secret displeasure to
blow upon thy wealth, to examine well whether thou have not often failed in the
duties of charity: losses and crosses arise not out of the earth, happen not
by chance and fortune as some Idiots conceive, they be either plagues,
punishments, or chastisements for sin, for omission of some good, or commission
of some evil, or else they be trials of our faith, whether we will rely on
God, and his promises, and do what he bids us, or rest upon our own arm of
flesh, our own rotten devices and inventions, as if there were a possibility
to thrive and grow rich in the world without his promise and blessing.
Secondly, thou must know that it is the Lord that gives and the Lord that
takes away. Job. 1. 21. Therefore by these thy * misfortunes (...)
and disasters learn a lesson of patience and obedience, for so thou must or
else thou art not conformable unto thy Savior who though he were a son, yet
learned obedience, by the things which he suffered. Heb. 5. 8. If any way, as
doubtless, many ways thou have disple afed thy Lord and maker, and by thy
ingratitude and uncharitableness, caused him to chastise thee with these
crosses and afflictions, then labor to reconcile unto thee his pleasing
countenance again by new obedience, walking in a new course, and practicing of
new duties, and principally this of charity: there is no better or easier way
to come into his favor again then this, for he will have mercy, and not
sacrifice, and if thou would have God to be merciful unto thee, be thou
first merciful unto others. Thirdly, have thou suffered such a shipwreck in
thy estate, that thou have nothing remaining with unfortunate Job, why then thy
excuse is somewhat tolerable but and if thy case be not so desperate, give then
of that which is left in hope of beter succes, for future time, obey God
herein, still trusting in his mercy, and promise. Heb. 13. 5. 6. for he is all
sufficient, he can, and will supply thy wants and defects. 2 Cor. 9. 8. 4. If
such pretensions of losses and crosses might exempt men from this duty, how
then shall the poor be relieved? for there be very few who have not a share
in those common afflictions whereunto mortality is very liable and obnoxious.
Lastly, consider, that these be signs of Gods favor, and testimonies of his
love, and goodness toward thee, if thou can be instructed thereby: Nay, if
thou art of a Heavenly and Spiritual constitution, and of the number of
Christ's peculiar, beloved elect, and favourite-Nation, thou, wilt like the Be
suck much sweetness: out of thesebitter herbs, and be hereby rather
encouraged and provoked unto good works, than any way dis^^imated by them. The
Macedonians in a great trial of affliction were most abundant in liberality.
2 Cor. 8. Their Charity did not ebb and flow like to the motians and tides of
the Sea, who are then the greatest and rise highest when the Moon is in the
full, but when their affairs suffered an eclipse, and were in the waine and
very much decreasing, even 2 Cor. 8. 3.
then their deep poverty abounded unto the riches of their liberalitis.

3. The Christian Hebrews likewise suffered joyfully the spoiling of their
goods, and even then communicated liberally unto those that were in bonds and
affliction. Heb. 10. 34. And in these our present times, there have been some
who have persevered in this Holy practice both in prosperity, and adversity,
and have testified their richest liberality, in their deepest poverty,
continuing the same hand of bounty to the poor in the midst of their heaviest
losses, which they were wont to reach forth to them all the happy season of
their most gainefull trading and prosperity: but in all this, they were no
loosers, for by Gods great blessing and mercy toward them, they recovered
again their losses by some fortunate commodities which were unexpectedly
thrust upon them. Thus the experience of Gods goodness and providence toward
men, cannot but encourage and move them to trust in the Lord, who never fails
them that rest and depend upon him.

I have no more than is needful for my wife and family, for I spend all, and
make even at the years end.

1. Thus the rich Glutton in Lazarus, and thus in effect rich Nabal replied to
David's servants. Secondly, thou must not measure thy need by thy luxurious,
superfluous, and idle expenses: those things are to be accounted necessaries,
not which men can or do spend, but what they ought to spend in housekeeping.
There is no man of so vast and unlimited an estate but may make riddance of all
before the years end, if he be so prodigally disposed. Although thou have
goodly means, a plentiful inheritance, and immense patrimony left thee, yet
if thou spend, thou carest not what, and know not how, if thou will be an
entertainer of good-fellowes and the like rabble of idle, graceless, and lewd
companions, if thou will suffer thy servants to live as they list, thy children
to run out with the Prodigal in the Gospel, thy means certainly cannot
hold out, thou will scarce have enough for thy wife and family, and so there
will be no portion for the poor, wherefore this is but a poor plea, to object
that thou spendest all, and make even at the years end. Here in thou art the
more culpable in that thou art not only a merciless man, but also a
graceless and careless Prodigal. If thou would play the part of a wise
and righteous man, and order thy affairs with judgment and discretion, Psalm.
112. 5. there would be sufficient for thy own private and needful expenses,
and a supply also for the necessities of the poor. If Dives had abated
somewhat of his too costly raiment, and sumptuous fare, and if Nabal had not
feasted like a king, nor tipled so intemperately, the one might very well have
sustained the life of poor hungry Lazarus, and the other might have releeved
David and his servants without any damage or detriment to themselves at all:
And if the notorious drunkards and joviall revellers of our times were more
abstemious, moderate, and sparing as they ought, they might be far more
liberal than they are to the poor. Thirdly, if thou reply, that thou
spendest all, and neither needlessely, nor riotously, nor superfluously, that
thou art frugall, provident, and circumspect enough, in the managing of thy
affairs, but yet can not thrive, nor make thy means hold out to maintain
thy family, and the poor; then let me advise thee to consider with thy self,
what might be the reason of this thy unfortunate success in thy businesses
and the cause thou art no better blessed: Certainly, it is to be feared, that
thou have been unmercifull, and incompassionate to the poor, and therefore
such a canker and curse does adhere unto thy wealth, that like a man in a
consumption it cannot prosper or thrive, but rather pines and vanishes away by
little and little into nothing. He that withholdeth more than is meet, or
deals with a slack hand shall soon become poor, Prove. 11. 24. and 10. 4.
And if thou desire to thrive and fare well in the world then be merciful to
the poor, for he that has a bountiful eye shall be blessed. Prove. 22. 9.
Perhaps thou will say that thou labourest in things which are good and lawful,
yet in thy labors and endeavors thou have not that true and right aim which
thou should have ( viz.) the releeving of the poor, Ephesians. 4. 28. and
therefore thy labors are also fruitless and unprofitable: for if thou
would be merciful, thou should be blessed upon earth, Deuteronomy. 15. 10.
Psalm. 41. 1. 2. God would bless thee in all thy works, and it is his blessing
that makes rich, Prove. 10. 22. without which all thy labors, pains, and
policies are but vain, fruitless, and unprofitable, Psalm. 127. 1. 2. Deuteronomy. 8.
18. Haggai, 1. 6. 9. and 2. 16. 17. 19. Genes. 26. 12. read these Scriptures.

My place and station requires so great expenses, that I cannot be liberal to
the poor.

We may not maintain the Remember Dives.
dignity of our places with the portions of the poor, and that is no laudable
or honorable condition, whereby men are brought to that strait, that they
cannot be charitable. Job was a Prince of great place and quality, yet very
good and compassionate to the poor. cap. 31. Cornelius was a noble man and of
great eminency in the world, yet he was a large and liberal almes-giver. Act.
10. 2. He that is great should labor to be good too, for greatness without
goodness, nobleness of birth, without the true nobility of the mind,
honorable eminences, and high estimation in the world without holiness and
sanctification, are but miserable privileges, glorious vanities, and
glittering abominations.

I may give so much, as that I may impoverish my estate, and so need my self
before I dye.

1. Most monstrous madness, Pro. 28. 17.
prodigious infidelity, who ever knew a man truly charitable to come to
beggary, or to the misery of a wastfull prodigal? who was ever a looser by
lending to the Lord? There be Esa. 58. 11. Pro. 19. 17. Luke 6. 38. Pro. 11.
24. 2 Cor. 9. 9. 2 Kin. 4. 9.
many promises to the contrary, He that gives to the poor shall not lack, he
shall be like a spring of waters, whose waters fail not, he shall be sure of
repayment, if we give, it shall be given unto us, etc. who can be such an
Atheist, or infidel, as to stagger at these promises. Secondly, this is the
way to increase thy estate, by scattering comes increase, as it falls out by
sowing seed: living wells the more they are drawn, they spring and flow the
more freely, as the widows oil did by pouring out. Thirdly remember how
merciful the Lord has dealt with those that have been merciful: was not the
oil and meal of the widow of Sareptae miraculously preserved for her mercy
to the Prophet? did not the Disciples when they had divided all that they had,
five loaves and a few fishes, receive back again twelve baskets full, when
5000 persons had liberally feasted themselves? So the blessed substance of a
charitable man does sometimes multiply even in the very distribution. Fourthly,
there can be no instance given of any Psa. 37. 25.
truly merciful man, who was ever brought to poverty or extremity by his
almesgiving: I will give credit to the Psalmist in this case, before a thousand
other witnesses, who assures us by his own experience, that he never saw the
righteous (whom he defines to be a merciful man ver. 21.) forsaken, nor his
seed beging their bread. Lastly the ground of this objection, is abhorred
infidelity, and distrust in Gods promises and independance upon his providence.
To help thee therefore out of this gulf of incredulity, and hell of
unbeleefe, consider. First, that thou have not as yet wanted, why will thou
fear future misery, for thy present well-doing? Secondly, Take the
horriblenesse of thy sin into thy serious consideration, for in not believing,
thou, as much as in thee lies, labourest to make God a liar. Thirdly, meditate
on Gods infallible, eternal, and immutable Psa. 34. 12. and 37. 40.
promises. Heb. 13. 5. Psalm. 37. 3, 4. And lastly ponder upon the
faithfulness of the Lord who never failed those that have put their trust in
him.

If I give, its but cast away, and so much lost.

Let it be granted, that they mis-imploied it, yet thou neither do, nor can
loose thereby. First, thou have a strong promise to succor, and bear thee up,
Pro. 19. 17. Luke 12. 33. 1 Timothy 6. 19.
though thy bread be cast upon the waters, yet after many days thou shall
find it again. Eccles. 11. 1, 2. Thou lendest to the Lord, who will
certainly repay thee again. Thirdly; thou providest an everlasting treasure
for thy soul in heaven, and layest up in store a good foundation for time to
come: so as thou can not hereby be any way endammaged. He that gives least,
is the greatest looser, the frankest giver is ever the greatest gainer.

If I once begin to give, more will flock about me.

Whether should the Eagles Job, or Cornelius dwells? Give (says Solomon) a
portion to seven, and also to eight. It is good to be both a cheerful Eccle.
11. 2.
and a liberal giver, and to fill as many empty channells, as possibly thou
can, with the overflowing torrent of thy mercy and compassion, the more thou
feedest, clothest, or relievest the more backs will bless thee, the more
tongues will thank thee, the more mouths will pray for thee. If it will not
stand with thy ability and sufficiency, to give much at once, divide and
portion out that to many which thou intendest to a few, for a little to every
one, is better then something to a few, and nothing to the rest.

The times ensuing may not prove good, and I know not what evil my happen
hereafter, therefore it is best to keep what I have.

1. This is but a groundless dubitation, and carnal reasoning proceeding from
a distrustful heart, and worldly thoughts and Imaginations: shall carnal
(...) Arist. eth. lib. 3. cap. 6.
fear, which is the expectation or opinion of a future evil, hinder thee from
doing a present good? The holy Ghost does teach thee to conclude the clean
contrary: Give a portion to seven and also to eight, for thou know not what
evil shall be upon the earth, Eccles. 12. 2. Charity will be in steed of an
Arc unto thee, when the ocean of Gods plagues and judgments break in upon
the world; be then like a righteous Noah, build this Arc before the flood
come, that thou may not be drowned with the wicked and the merciless.
Secondly, present exercise of mercy is the safest way to prevent future
misery, Dan. 4. 27. and the Apostle tells us, that mercy rejoices or glories
against judgment, Jam. 2. 13. That is, Piscat. in loc.
he that is charitable to his brother, and takes pity on the poor, shall
escape that judgment and condemnation which shall pass upon all merciless
Luke 12. 15. 16. 20. 21.
and cruel men. Thirdly, if adversity should happen, and the things which
thou fear should come to pass, yet God will (as it were) wait upon thee to
succor and deliver thee Psalm. 41. 1. 2. 3. Esai. 58. 11. Fourthly, if thou
hoardest up thy moneys against the time of adversity, as if they were a
Panoply, a competent harness, or like Vulcans armor, an armor of proof
against all thrusts and blows whatsoever; thou art much deceived, for thy
silver and thy gold shall not be able to deliver thee in the day of wrath,
Ezech. 7. 19. Riches profit not in evil times, but righteousness delivers
from death, Prove. 11. 4. Jobes wealth was the falsest friend that he had, it
forsook him, and did him then least service, when he had most need of it, and
in the midst of his affliction this was his greatest comfort and consolation,
not that he had been rich and honorable (for happiness lost, is a woeful
speculation) but that he had been charitable, Job 31. and cap. 29. The perfume
and sweet smell of his good works remained still fresh and fragrant in the
nostrils of his soul, and the very remembrance of them served, as a special
Cordial, to cheer and quicken him in the midst of his heaviest sorrows and
deepest pressures. Such is the nature and property of this heavenly grace, if
it be once firmly radicated in the soul, that it inheres, and abides
unshaken, steadfastly, and eternally. Charity (says the Apostle) never
fails, 1 Cor. 13 8. but whether there be Prophecies they shall fail,
whether there be tongues they shall cease, whether therebee knowledge it shall
vanish away, Charity only is fixed in the soul like the Sun in his orb,
and cannot possibly be plucked thence, but there heats and enlightens, and
comforts, and shines constantly, and everlastingly.

I have a mind to give something to the Church, and poor when I die.

Procrastinated and deferred may part with a portion to the poor, erogate and
distribute much of his wealth to pious and religious uses, but he then makes a
Will against his will, and a division of his substance not unfainedly and
without dissimulation but because death will not suffer him to enjoy it any
longer, could he have carried his bags with him into the grave to bribe the
worms, or into Hell to corrupt the Devils, and pacify his tormentors;
doubtless, he would never have allotted out one mite for Lazarus: Therefore
all such as are of ability, to give while they are alive, but will not till
they be dead, are to know. First, that if all the rich should be so minded,
the Poor might quickly be starved, and that intentionally they are true
murderers of their brethren. Secondly, that they sin in a high degree in
disobeying the Precept of God, who enjoynes them to do good, and to be
merciful, while they have time and opportunity, Gal. 6. 10. Thirdly, that
they are not sure of the continuance of their ability, for there is a world of
ways to make shipwreck of a world of wealth, and who is ignorant, that Eagle
winged riches may fly away from the owners even in a moment? or suppose they
should still remain with them, yet how know they that God will give them grace
to be liberal at their death, who had never the goodness to be charitable in
their life? and how can they be assured, that God will accept of their
Deathbed bounty and Almes-deedes, since at their last dissolution they bestow
that on the poor, which had it been in their power, they would still have
detained, and locked up in their coffers? What Saint Austine spoke of deathbed
repentance is as true of deathbed Charity, Sera raro vera, late liberality
is ralely true and hearty: for all a wicked man's outward actions at such a
time are very obnoxious to a suspicion of Hypocrisy, because for the most part
they be forced, Poenitentia nunqa^ sera si sit seria, sed sera raro vera, etc.
Aug. Hom. 41. ex 50. Amb. exhort. ad ad Poenit. * Actio violenta est duplex,
simpliciter, and absolute violenta, ut deportatio latronis in carcerem, vel
secundum quid, ut projectio mercium in mare ad evitandum naufrogium and vocatur
actio mixta quia partim voluntaria, partim invita Arist. Eth. l. 3. c. 1.
violent, and in a sort involuntary, and proceed from ill grounds, as the fear
of judgment, or conceit of merit, etc. And therefore for a conclusion; Know
all men by these presents, that hypocritical Death-bed-bountie and
vaineglorious funerall-hospitalitie of Usurious, Covetous, Merciless, and
frozen-hearted Nabals, is but a sick, rotten, diseased, and dying liberality.
Let us not dare then to defer our best deeds, till our last, sometimes the
worst, always the weakest hours of life, but rather let us remember to offer
up daily to our Lord and Maker the sacrifice of prayer and supplication, the
Sacrifice of Praise and Thankes-giving, the Sacrifice of Love and Almes-giving,
and the like well-pleasing Evangelicall Oblations, that so we may glorify our
Heavenly Father by our good works, all our life long, and prepare them also
against our death, as so many precious ointments, odours and Revel. 14. 13.
perfumes, to embalme our souls unto Immortality: for blessed are they that
thus die in the Lord, they rest from their labors, and their good works do
follow them, even so,

Amen.
FINIS.
Recensui librum hunc, cui titulus est [The ready way to good works, or a
Treatise of Charity, etc.] in quo nihil reperio quo minus cum utilitate
publica imprimatur; modo intra quatuor menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur.

Ex aedibus Fulh. Aug. 2. 1634. Sa. Baker R. P. D. Episcopo Londinensi cap.
domest.


