A LAMENTABLE DISCOVRSE, UPON The paricide and bloody assasination: committed
on the Person of HENRY the fourth (of famous memory) King of FRANCE and
NAVARRE.

Translated out of the French Copy, Printed at Rouen by Peter Courant, and the
Copy of Paris, Printed by FRANCIS HVBY, with permission.

PRO LEGE* REGE, ET GREGE LOVE KEPYTH THE LAW, OBEYS THE KING AND IS GOOD
TO THE COMMUN WELTHE ^^

LONDON Printed for Edward Blunt and William Barr^^ 16^^.

A LAMENTABLE DISCOVRSE UPON THE PARRICIDE AND BLOVDIE assasination committed
on the person of H^^^^ the fourth of famous memory, King of France and of
Navarre.
IT is not the property of greatest sorrows, to speak much, for tears and
heartbreaking sighs are fittest demonstrations to declare the greatest
passions; which makes me express in few Words, the great grief, and
public sorrow France at this time suffers: now then, and (...) posserity
ever lament, that last Friday, the foureteenth day of May: the next day after
the ^^c^ing, and coronation of the Queen out great Henry (or most famous
memory) King of France and Navarre, being at Paris about three of the clock
in the afternoon, intended to go to his Arcenall: took his Caroch, and as a
Prince which lived without fear or suspicion of his people, passed through the
City, accompanied with few of his Nobility; without taking for his better
assurance, either Archers, or any of his usual Guard.

But mischief, or rather our sins procured, that an accursed and execrable
assasigne named Francis Rauaill^rt, borne in Angoulesme, approached his person,
not far from S. Innocents; where seeing his Majesty's Caroche stayed by a
Cart, which met and stopped their passage; taking opportunity, assaulted with
most hellish fury this good King, with a long knife, made of purpose; with
which he gave him two wounds in the left side: the first was given nigh the
shoulder, which entered not far; but only rased the skin: the second was
mortal, the blow entering betwixt the fifth and sixth rib, cut asunder the
vein leading to the heart; and the wound was so deep, that it reached into
the Caua Vena, which was pierced with the point of the knife. The Prince
finding himself wounded to death, lost upon the instant his speech, by reason
of the abundance of blood, which issued outo his mouth, therefore they turned
the caroch to the Louu're, where he was no sooner arrived, but he rendered his
soul into the hands of Almighty God; testifying with his eyes and hands lifted
up to heaven, that he died a true Christian and good Catholic: My Lord the
Archbishop of Ambrun, doing the last service of a Churchman, exhorted him in
this last action.

Is it not now a wonder to the Christian world, to see France a second Affrike,
breeding such detestable mo^sters? What shame does this age breed to that of
our forefathers? What disastre that a king of France should not escape the rage
and fury of a cutthroat villain his own subject? Wicked villain, thou have
bereaved us of this great Prince, who^ we lament with tears, and whose loss
we shall ever feel. Thou thoughtest in thy damnable dessigne to swallow us up
in a gulf of misery and desolation. but God in his goodness has relieved us,
and otherwise disposed the hearts and affections of the French, then thou in
thy frenzy did imagine, or the hellish counsel of Satan suggest. The
dark prison wherein thou art justly enclosed, where new torments are invented
and prepared to chastise thy offense, will not let thee see, how that for all
thy wicked act, all things remain constant in the same tranquillity they were
before. It is to Gods grace alone we owe the thanks, yet deny not due praise
to those instruments he has vouchsafed to use: for the Lords Officers of the
Crown, this famous Court of Parliament, the Magistrates of Paris, have al with
one heart and common consent, succored and assured the estate; so that there is
not any show of commotion or sedition amongst this great people: Resolution and
modesty, which makes the Parisians much to be commended, and serves as an
example to all the other Provinces of the Realm.

Thou (I say) can not see how in the same hour of thy horrible attempt, all
the Nobility ran to the Louu're offering, and protesting their fidelity; thou
see not though the father be taken away, the son is left us, to succeed in
government, young though he be, yet shall he be strengthened with the sage
advise of great Princes, and the Queen his mother, who a midst her great
griefs will remember the common good; and has vouchsafed for our comfort to
accept the Regencie, and government of the kingdom. In the presence of the
Princes Peers, the Constable, the Chancelour, the Cardinals, the Marshals of
France, and other the great officers of the State, all assembled in the great
Chamber of the Palace, with authority of the Court of Parliament, his lawful
successor sitting in his throne, was solemnly acknowledged, and proclaimed
king of France the fifteenth of May.

In sum, this young Prince is so worthily brought up, in the love, and fear
of God with all other virtues; which serve to the ornament of a great king,
that treading in the footesteps of the late king his father he will cherish
Religion, love Justice, be generous, meek, affable, gracious, and shine in a
full luster as a fair sun over all France. All things shall flourish under
his reign, his people shall bless him, etc with fixed eyes to heaven, shall
pray God for his happy preservation.

Thus now we see, this Prince happily established, so well maintained, with
force of arms, advise of Council, and love of his subjects: that it shall be
in vain, for any to dare to stir without receiving condign chastiseme^t:
since then the entry to his kingdom is so blessed, and seconded with the
favors of heaven, let us not provoke the anger of God, by out evil demeanors;
let us so behave our selves, that amongst all the French, only this assasine
be detested, and held in abomination amongst strangers, let us remenber that
as there is nothing that raises tempests at Sea, but contrary winds, so
nothing that troubles a state but disunion if our own judgment and capacity
cannot instruct us, yet let the school of reason reach us, let us consider that
in a humane body, there is an head, and under that head many noble parts, that
the member that is destined to one service, dares not exercise another office,
the legs will not be the arms nor the lunges the heart; likewise in a well
ordered estate, one is acknowledged for head, and gi gives life to all the
other members, which work nor move but under his authority, so that every one
acquitting himself of his duty. by a good union and correspondence, kingdoms
are conserved and of small ones become great: whereas contrariwise by disunion
and ^ars, great ones have been ruinated, and come to nothing.

Remember you French men: that it is above 1200. years, since ^he kingdom of
France, has bin ^euerenced for one of the greatest Monarchies in the world,
tak heed that posterity do not reproach us, that the mine of it happened in our
age* And that by our rage we have demolished, that which our ancestors have
raised by their wisdoms and valors: and if the public interest money on
not let every one at least be (...) hi^ of his ow^^ particular we are all
e^barked in one vessel, if it perish, it will be ^^^g^ (...)ell if any of us
escape: we are all in one (...), if that fall weshall al be overwhelmed in the
^^^^er Let us not forget, that we are yet wet with our last ship wrack, that
it is not many years, since we we^e freed from civil wars* the desolation
whereof never comes alone, but is always attended with plague, famine, and all
oath sort of calamity, as the loss of our goods, and estates, the
imprisonment and ransoming of our bodies, the sack and spoil of our Cities,
the rauishing of our wives and daughters, and the bloody death of our children*
Let us know that experience is the mistress of fools, let us not wait to
repent of the mischief, after we have felt the smart by our folly: We are now
in peace, let us continue preserved, and seek to maintain it by the help of
God. Let us not be like sorcerers, and Magitians, which cause rain, and
thunder by their charms, contrary to the course of Nature mischiefs, and
m^series come but too soon, let us not provoke them, or go to meet them.

You great ones which have the charge and government of the kingdom, in the
name of God, have no other object before your eyes, but the good and service of
your King, above all fly disunion, which like a wicked Counsailour seeking to
ruin others, overthrows it self, assure your selves, the greatness of the
estate, is the greatness of your own, her tranquillity and establishement, is
the base and foundation of your own families. Study not who shall overthrow
his companion, but who shall best and most faithful serve his Country; it is
only the property of weak and shallow men, to flesh themselves with envy,
rancour, and dissimulation; carry you all your hearts in your faces. love one
an^^her that you may the better serve one Master* It shall be your prosperity,
and doubt not but that in a state there are more good the^ wicked, and that
there was never any mutinous or factious, but in the end was curbed by the
authority of his Sovereign.

You have at this day a king redoubtable, over whose person the eye of the
divine providence does so wateh, that though he be yet young, he shall not be
the less obeyed or feared throughout all his kingdom: the Edicts of the late
king his father, shall be observed as his own: you shall have him a common
father over his people.

It is said that Alexander, made no distinction betwixt Greek and Barbarian,
but only by their v^rtues, not resting upon the difference of their habit. So
our king shall judge who are good and bad French men, only by the mark of
their obdience, and fidelity: every one shall have part of his grace and
favor, as he shall make himself worthy by his service.

In such sort, that all things being so firmly established within the
Realm, we shall not have cause to fear any danger from without the king is in
peace with his neighbors, and we assure our selves there is none of them, but
is so good and generous, that he does deplore this sinister accident, happened
to the late king, and though he had, before the death of this Prince, dessignes
and means to endammage France, he does now turn his hate into love, moved
only by commiseration of this disaster: And if we may now hope for this
tenderness of heart from Princes, which be strangers, what ought we to expect
from those who are naturally borne French? God for his mercy inspire France
with so much of his grace, that not wanting counsel, true and lawful
command, we may render that obedience and submission, which good and loyal
subjects, owe unto their Sovereign. Pelletier.

FINIS.

