To the most Honorable Assembly of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the
House of Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Adventurers in the Ship called the Pearl.
HVmbly showing: That She departed out of the Port of London in November 1611.
and returned two years after laden with goods, to the value of 20000.li. Upon
the 26. of November 1613. before the goods came to London, Morris, one of the
Adventurers, was sent for before diverse of the Lords of his Majesty's Council,
Who delivered that the Spanish Ambassador had made a great Complaint to his
Majesty, that the Pearl had been in the East Indies, and robbed the King of
Spaines Subjects, desiring therefore that the goods might be sequestered into
his Majesty's Custody (as indifferent between the Ambassador, and the
Adventurers, until the point of Piracie was tried.

Morris answered he never was Pirate, Herein the Petitioner was debarred of
the benefit of the Law, as he conceiues.
but a Merchant, and had paid the King many Thousands for Custom and Impost;
and yet if he were, the Law of England was, that giving security, he was to
possess the goods until the Law had tried the Title; but this would not be
granted. But their Lordships ordered that the goods should be put into
Warehouses (the weights and contents first taken by Morris) under three locks,
whereof his Majesty had one key committed to Sir Lionel Cranfield and Sir
Arthur Ingram; the Ambassador another key; The key of the Warehouse Morris
had, yet the locks were broken open, the goods carried away, and sold without
his priuitie.
and Morris a third key: and if by Law they appertained to him, God forbid
(said the Earl of Northampton) but they should have them.

Afterward the cause was brought into the Admiral Court, and in April 1614.
after several days of hearing of the same, before Sir Daniel Donn, knight;
and Doctor Treuor doctors of the Laws, chief Judges of the said Court (in the
presence of Master Manning Proctor for the Ambassador, and Francis Fowler
Solicitor for his Lordship, and of James Ireland Proctor for Morris) It was
upon the 21. of the said Month of April ordered, that the goods so sequestered,
should be prized, and sold by the public Officers of his Majesty's Exchequer,
or by any other that were able at the full value with all Celeritie that might
be, and the moneis arising thereof to be sequestered, and safe kept in the hands
of Sir Lionel Cranfield, and Sir Arthur Ingram Knights, they giving fit caution
to pay the moneis to the true proprietors.

But upon the 23. of the said Month of April 1614. Sir Arthur Ingram came
before the said Judges, Of these goods, to the value of 2600. li. were
delivered to the Spanish Ambassador, who was to give security to pay them to
the Proprietors, if the suggestion of the Piracie made by his Lordship was
acquitted, but yet they neither have the money, nor the security.
and altogether refused, both for himself, and Sir Lionel Cranfield, to give
any caution for the said moneis, as they had ordered them to do: Whereupon the
Judges the same day ordered, that the said goods should be by Sir Lionel
Cranfield and Sir Arthur Ingram, prized, and sold to such as would give most
for the same; And that the moneis thereof accruing, should be deposited in safe
keeping in his Majesty's Receipt at Westminster, for whom right had.

That in April 1615. the said cause received final hearing before the Right
Honorable Sir Julius Casar, Knight; Sir Daniel Donn, Knight, chief Judge of
the Admiral Court; Sir John Crook, Knight; and diverse others his Majesty's
Judges of the Admiraltie of England: where the point of Piracie was legally
acquitted, and discharged by Proclamation.

Since which, they have often attended the Lord Ambassador of Spain, that as he
was the Author of this their misfortune, so he would be pleased to get them
restitutio^ of their said goods, or the moneis they were sold for, with such
damages as they have sustained for want thereof: That after the Piracy
acquitted, so much of the goods as came to 2800. li. or thereabouts, were sold,
and the moneis disposed of without their consents.
from whom, they have received many fair and hopeful answers, and in truth
never went from his Lordship unsatisfied with strong assurance to effect their
request within some short time after: And in these hopes they have spent many
Months, but yet no relief thereby, but they, their Wives and Children still
suffered to languish in great misery; besides diverse others to whom they are
indebted, are also like to be undone, for that the Petitioners are not able to
give them satisfaction, by reason their goods are kept from them as aforesaid.

That they have likewise diverse other ways endeavored to have restitution of
their goods, or the true value thereof, but never could obtain the same, nor
certainly understand how they have been disposed.

THerefore the humble Suite of the Complainants is, That this Honorable House
will be pleased to take into their considerations these Points following, as
well for the relief of the Complainants, in restitution of their goods, or the
true value, with such further damages, as they have sustained for want thereof,
as for the general good of the People.

Whether the goods were sold to the full value, and according to the true
intent of the Order in the Admiral Court.

Whether the moneis they were sold for, were deposited in his Majesty's Receipt
at Westminster, or what is became of them.

And whether it be not a just grieuance to the Commonwealth, That upon
complaint, and suggestion of Piracie by any Foreign Princes Minister, the
Subjects, by strong hand, and powerful proceedings, should be kept from their
goods, and the moneis they were sold for, after the Point of Piracie legally
cleared, and acquitted by Proclamation, as the Complainants have been ever
since April 1615.

And if these, or any of them shall in the high Wisdom of this Honorable
Court be found to be grieuances*

Then, the Complainants humbly pray, that they may be relieved therein, as the
Justice of their cause shall require.


