A TRVE REPORT, Of the late discoueries, and possession, taken in the right of
the Crown of England, of the Newfound Lands: By that valiant and worthy
Gentleman, Sir Humfrey Gilbert Knight. Wherein is also breefely set down,
her highness lawful Title thereunto, and the great and manifold Commodities,
that is likely to grow thereby, to the whole Realm in general, and to the
Adventurers in particular. Together with the easines and shortness of the Voyage.

Seen and allowed.

At London, Printed by I. C. for John Hind, dwelling in Paul's Church-yarde,
at the sign of the golden Hind. Anno. 1583.

To the Right Honorable Sir Fraunces Walsingham Knight, principal Secretary
to the Queen, her most excellent Majesty.
HOW much more happy might I account my self, (right honorable Sir) if I had
so well applied my time in this University, as through my more dilligent
study, I were able to handle the matter, (which I have in this Treatise taken
upon me) as the worthynes thereof does merit.

Truly Sir I was for a time, drawn into a doubtful ballaunce, whether I
should proceed therein, as my affection intised me, or leave it off, as good
discretion advised me. Eftsoons have I right heartily wished that some of
those ripe, and perfect wits, adorned with like judgment, (wherewith God has
plentifully blessed this our age) would have employed their pens, learnedly
to have set forth this cause: But seeing that in wishing, I do find
nothing, but to wish, and that the case so stands, as either the thing, right
woorthye both knowledge, and practice, shall still lie in a slumber, or rather
rest buried in the grave of oblivion, unless I do make public my weakness
and insufficiencye, and thereby subject my self to the diuersitye of men's
judgments, I have made choice, rather to endure the disgrace of the one, then
that my Country should sustain the inconvenience of the other, trusting that
your honor (who has hitherto been a principal Patron of this Action) will
upon my humble suit vouchsafe your favorable protection hereof. For we do
read (right honorable) that Archimedes in respect of his gravity and
wisdom) held that reputation amongst the Syracusans, that whatsoever he
allowed, was accounted for good: which historye, if I should apply unto your
honor perticularlie, as both aptly and truly I could, I might (in the
opinion of some men) incur the suspicion of flattery, and receive from your
Honor but the like answer, which King Theseus made unto blind Oedipus.

I do not (quoth he) O Oedipus, honor my self with other men's words, but
with mine own works. In silence therefore will I pass your ready and virtuous
disposition, both honorably to favor, and favorably to further all such
attemptes as seem pleasing to GOD and profitable to your Country, both which
(by the testimony of good writers, the opininion of wise men, and experience of
great trauailors, these Western Discoueries do certainly promise. In regard
whereof, I do the rather presume to prefer this Pampflet to be Patronized
by so worthy a person, whereby my escapes may be the more easilye excused,
my willing pains the better accepted, and the voyage more effectually supplied.

Thus being loathe any longer to detayne your honor from your weightye
affairs, I humblye take leave, beseeching GOD many years to lengthen your
life, with much increase of honor. From my lodging in Oxforde, the tweluth of
November.

Your Honors poor Scholar, in all service to use. G. P.

The Table of the Chapters, containing the principal matters in this Book.
1 The first Chapter, wherein the Argument of the Book is contained. 2 The
second Chapter, shows that it is lawful and necessary, to trade and
traficke with the Savages. And to plant in their Countries. And deuideth
planting into two sorts. 3 The third Chapter, does show the lawful Title,
which the Queens most excellent Majesty has unto those Countries, which
through the aid of almighty GOD are to be inhabited. 4 The fourth Chapter
shows, how that the trade, traficke and planting in those Countries, is
likely to prove very profitable to the whole Realm in general. 5 The fifth
Chapter, shows that the trading and planting in those Countries, is likely
to prove to the particular profit of all the Adventurers. 6 The sixth Chapter,
shows that the traficke and planting in those Countries, shall be unto the
Savages themselves very beneficial and gainful. 7 The seventh Chapter,
shows that the planting there is not a matter of such charge or diffyculty,
as many would make it seem to be. 8 The Contents of Articles of Assurance,
between the Principal assigns of Sir Humfrey Gilbert Knight, and the four
sorts of Adventurers, with them in the voyage for the Western Discoueries.
The end of the Table.
Sir William Pelham Knight, in commendation of the discourse following.
LIke as the Fishes, breeding in the deep,
Through all the Ocean are allowed to raung:
Nor forced in any certain bounds to keep,
But as their motions carry them to chaung.
To men like liberty, does reason give:
In choice of soil, through all the world to live.
To valiant minds each land is a native soil,
and virtue finds no dwelling place amiss.
Regard of honor measures not the toil,
To seek a seat wherein contentment is.
That seat, that soil, that dwelling place of rest:
In this discourse, most lively is expressed.
Our foreign neighbors bordring hard at hand,
Have found it true, to many a thousands gain:
And are inritcht by this abounding land,
While pent at home, like sluggard^s we remain.
But though they have, to satisfy their will:
Enough is left, our cofers yet to fill.
Then England thrust among them for a share,
Since title just, and right is wholly thine:
And as I trust the sequel shall declare,
Our luck no worse, then theirs before has been.
For where the attempt, on virtue does depend:
No doubt but God, will bless it in the end.
William Pelham.

Sir Fraunces Drake Knight in commendation of this Treatise.
WHho seeks, by worthy deeds, to gain renown for hire:
Whose heart, whose hand, whose purse is pressed: to purchase his desire
If any such there be, that thristeth after Fame:
Lo, here a mean, to win himself an everlasting name.
Who seeks, by gain and wealth, to advance his house and blood:
Whose care is great, whose toil no less, whose hope, is all for good
If any one there be, that couettes such a trade:
Lo, here the plot for common weath, and private gain is made.
He, that for virtues sake, will venture far and near:
Whose zeal is strong, whose practice truth, whose faith is void of feere*
If any such there be, inflamed with holy care.
Here may he find, a ready mean, his purpose to declare.
So that, for each degree this Treatise does unfold:
The path to Fame, the proof of zeal, and way to purchase gold,
Fraunces Drake.

M. John Hawkins, his opinion of this intended Voyage.
IF zeal to God, or countries care, with private gains access,
Might serve for spurs unto the attempt this pamflet does express.
One coast, one course, one toil might serve, at full to make declard
A zeal to God, with countries good, and private gains regard.
And for the first this enterprise the name of God shall found,
Among a nation in whose ears the same did never sound.
Next as an endless runuing stream, her Channels does discharge:
That swell above their bounds, into an Occean wide and large.
So England that is pestered now, and choakt through want of ground
Shall find a soil where room enough, and perfect does abound.
The Romans when the number of their people grew so great,
As neither wars could waste, nor Rome suffice them for a seat.
They led the^ forth by swarming troops, to foreign lands amain
And founded diverse* Colonies, unto the Roman reign.
Th'athenians vs'de the like devise, the Argiues thus have done,
And fierce A chilles Myrmidons when Troy was over run.
But Rome nor Athens nor the rest, were never pestered so,
As England where no room remains, her dwellers to bestow,
But shuffled in such pinching bonds, that very breath does lack:
And for the want of place they craule one ore another back.
How nobly then shall they provide that for redress herein,
With ready hand and open purse this action does begin.
Whence glory to the name of God, and countries good shall spring,
And unto all that further it, a private gain shall bring.
Then noble youths courageously this enterprise discharge,
And age that cannot manage Arms, let them support the charge.
The issue of your good intent, undoubted will appear,
Both gracious in the sight of God, and full of honor here.
John Hawkins.

Master Captain Bingham, his commendation upon this Treatise.
IF honor and reward, may move the mind,
By noble actions, highly to aspire:
The forward man in this discourse shall find,
Reward and honor, proposed for hire.
Which meede, no right renowned heart mislikes:
Though gaind by passing, through ten thousand pikes
The white whereat we level, well is known,
The plot and place, with finger poynted out:
The name thereof through all the world is blone,
To put the hard believers out of doubt.
Our foreign neighbors, like it to their gain:
And suck the sweet, while sleeping we remain.
The journey is but easy to be gonne,
The frozen Pole disioyned far does lie:
We shape our course, far from the burning Zonne,
The soil is subject to a milder sky.
And by proof, of many records tried:
The Paradise, of all the world beside:
Then launch ye noble youths into the maine,
No lurking perrils lie amidde the way:
Your travel shall return you treble gain,
and make your names renoumed another day.
For valiant minds, through twenty Seas will room:
And fish for luck, while sluggardes lie at home.
Richard Bingham.

Master Captain Frobisher, in commendation of the voyage.
A Pleasant air, a sweet and firtell soil,
A certain gain, a never dying praise:
An easy passage, void of loathsome toil,
Found out by some, and known to me the ways.
All this is there then who will refrain to try:
That loves to live abroad, or dreades to die.
Martin Frobisher.

Master Captain Chester, his commendation of this Treatise.
Mark well this book when you to read begin,
And find you shall great secrets hid therein.
For with your selves you may imagine thus,
That God has left this honor unto us.
The journey known, the passage quickly run,
The land full rich, the people easily wunne.
Whose gains shall be the knowledge of our faith,
And ours such riches as the country has.
Pinche not for pence to set this action out,
Pounds will return, thereof be not in doubt.
Your country shall be bound due thanks to give,
For that the poor hereby you may relieve.
Unto your Prince good service you shall do,
And unto God, a work right grateful to.
John Chester.

Matthew Roydon master of Art to his fellow Student.
TO praise thy book because I am thy freende,
Though it be common and thy due indeed:
Perhaps it may some dainty ear offend,
Reproof repines that virtue has her meede.
Yet neuerthlesse how ever things succeed,
Since to no other end thy book was made:
All that I wish, is that thou may persuade.
Matthew Roydon.

Master Anthony Parkhurst in commendation of this Treatise.
Behold a work that does reveal,
The ready way to wealth and fame.
Commodious to the common weal.
And just without impeache of blame.
Which followed as the course does lie,
May make all England thrive thereby.
It is not fond surmisde report,
Nor fantasy vain heads to feed:
The mention of the truth, coms short,
And lesser then the thing indeed.
Of record many thousands are,
That can all this and more declare.
How happy were our England then,
(Since neither men nor shipping want)
Some good and well disposed men,
An other England there would plant?
And so employ a number there,
Whose persons may be spared here
Th'atempt could never fail his fame,
Nor proof return without effect:
For commonly all actions frame,
Where Christian cause has chief respect.
And he that in the heavens above does reign,
(No doubt) will bless the sequel of their pain.
Anthony Parkhurst.

Arthur Hawkins in commendation of this Treatise.
MY friends, if at Th'exchaunge a man should go and tell,
that such, and such commodities he had to sell.
Whereof we stood in need and scarcely to be found,
Whereby a quick return with profit would redounde.
I doubt not ere I past, but you would crave the sight,
Of these commended wares, and buy them if you might.
You Are proferd at this time, fair Grapes to make your wine,
The pleasant fruits of Spain, the Figs and Orange fine.
The speckled Russian Furs, that Esterlings us sendes,
The Rosen, Pitch, and Deals that Dansk and Denmark lendes.
The Metal here is shown that with a quenchles fire,
Inflames our thirsting hearts vnstaunched in desire.
A bargain may you have, it is put into your hands, Of all commodities you
have from other lands.
And at so easy price you can not choose but gain:
A trifle is the most, together with your pain,
But what is that some says? our Englishmen gives ear,
Only to gain, God shield it should be true I hear.
If we religious be, lets rigge our ships with speed,
And carry Christ to these poor souls, that stand in need,
Why pause ye thereupon? the freight will quite the charge,
For what is done for God, does find reward full large.
A. H.

John Achelley Cyttyzen and Marchantailour of London, for conclusion.
IF truth and praise have power, to make this matter gracious:
What need we then extol the thing, has been commended thus.
And by the better sort that wright, of truth and knowledge so:
As nothing of this work, they promised further then they know.
Believe them for they be our friends, and with our Counties weal:
Let us imbrase that God and truth, so loouinglie reveal.
Whereof the merit is no less, then is the bruted Fame:
Ask strangers and that noble mind, that did attempt the same:
To whom we owe the titles, that to Virtues Nimpes are due:
So good a Knight whom English men, in virtue should pursue.
No doubt but God will bless th'atempt, succeed him roundly then:
And in this Voyage follow fast, you that be English men.
With such supply from time to time, as what is well begone:
Be not for want of men and aid, through slackfulnes undone.
So shall you harbor in your hearts, the seeds of magnanimity:
A virtue where with all, the Romans did enlarge their Empery.
Be you prepared for every foe, and be courageous then:
For that you slip through negligence, will fall to other men.
Envy has eyes to see afar, your new attempt will whet:
A number more to seek therefore, if you your selves forget.
Send forth with speed, get footing there and make provision:
It Is ill for us to linger thus, and talk thereof so long.
John Achelley.

The first Chapter, wherein the Argument of the `Booke is Contained.
IT was my fortune (good Reader) not many days past, to meet with a right
honest and discrete Gentleman, who accompanied that valiant and worthy Knight
Sir Humfry Gilbert, Master Edward Hay
in this last journey for the Western discoueries. And is owner and Captain
of the only Vessel which is as yet returned from thence:

By him I did understand, that Sir Humfrey departed the coaste of England the
eleventh of June last past, with five sail of Ships from Caushenbay near
Plimmouth, whereof one of the best forfooke his company, the thirtenth day of
the same month, and returned into England.

The other four (through the assistaunce of almightye GOD) did arrive at Saint
John's Haven, Sir Humfrey Gilbert did arrive at S. John^ haven in Newfounde
Land, the 3. of August. Anno. Do. 1583.
in Newfounde Land, the third of August last. Upon whose arrival all the
Masters and chief Mariners of the English Flete, which were in the said Haven
before, endeavoring to fraughte themselves with Fysh, repaired unto Sir
Humfrey, whom he made acquainted with the effect of his commission: which being
done, he promised to entreat them and their goods well and honorably as did
become her majesty's Lieftennaunt. They did all welcome him in the best sort
that they could, and showed him and his, all such courtesies as that place
could affoorde or yield.

Then he went to view the Country, being well accompanied with most of his
Captains and Soldiers. They found the same very temperate, Among these there
was found the tract of a beast of ^. inches and a half over
but somewhat warmer then England at that season of the year, replenished
with Beasts and great store of Foul of diverse kinds: And Fish of sundry
so^tes, both in the salt water and in the fresh, in so great plenty as might
suffice to victual an Army, and they are very easily taken. What sundry
other commodities for this Realm, right necessary the same does yield, you
shall understand in this treatise hereafter, in place more convenient.

On monday being the fifth of August, the General caused his Tent to be set
upon the side of an hill, in the view of all the Flete of Englishmen and
Strangers, which were in number between thirty and forty sail, then being
accompanied with all his Captains, Masters, Gentlemen and other Soldiers, he
caused all the Masters, and principal Officers of the Ships, as well
Englishmen as Spaniardes, Portingals, and of other nations to repair unto his
Tent: And then and there, in the presence of them all, he did cause his
commission, under the great seal of England to be openly and solemnly
read unto them, whereby were granted unto him his heirs, and assigns, by
the Queens most excellent Majesty, many great and large royalties,
liberties, and privileges. Sir Humfrey took possession of the N^w found l^^de
in the right of the crown of England.
The effect whereof being signified unto the Strangers by an Interpretor, he
took possession of the said land in the right of the Crown of England by
digging of a Turfe and receiving the same with an Hasell wande, delivered unto
him, after the manner of the law and custom of England.

Then he signified unto the company both strangers and others that from thence
forth, they were to live in that Land, as the Territories appertayning to the
Crown of England, Three laws established there by Sir Humfrey.
and to be governed by such Laws as by good advise should be set down,
which in all points (so near as might be) should be agreeable to the Laws of
England: And for to put the same in execution, presently he ordained and
established three Laws.

First, that Religion publicly exercised, should be such and none, other then
is used in the Church of England.

The second, that if any person should be lawfully convicted of any practice
against her Majesty* her crown and dignity, to be adjudged as traitors
according to the Laws of England.

The third, if any should speak dishonourably of her Majesty, the party so
offending, to loose his ears, his Ship and goods, to be confiscate to the
use of the General.

All men did very willingly submit themselves to these Laws. Sundry persons,
be came Tennants to Sir Humfrey, and do maintain possession for him in diver^
places there.
Then he caused the Queens majesty's Arms, to be engraued, set up, and
erected, with great solempnity. After this, diverse English men, made suit unto
Sir Humfrey to have of him by inheritance, they accustomed Stages, standinges
and drying places, in sundry parts of that Land for their Fish as a thing that
they do make great acco^pte off, which he granted unto them, in fee farm.
And by this means, he has possession mayntained for him, in many parts of
that Country. To be brief, he did let, set, give and dispose of many
things, as absolute governor there, by virtue of her majesty's letters
pattents.

And after their Ships were repaired, whereof one, he was driven to leave
behind, both for want of men sufficient to furnish her, as also to carry
home such sick persons as were not able to proceed any further: He departed
from thence the 20 of August, with the other three, namely, the Delight,
wherein was appointed Captain in Master William VVinters place, (that thence
returned immediately for England) Master Morries Brown: the Golden Hynde, in
which was Captain and owner, Master Edward Hay: and the little Frigate where
the General himself did go, seeming to him most fit to discover and
approach the Shore.

The 21. day they came to Cape Raze, toward the South parts whereof, lying a
while becalmed, they took Codd in largenes and quantity, exceeding the other
parts of Newfound Land, where any of them had been. And from thence, trending
the Coast West, toward the Bay of Placencia. The General sent certain men a
Shore, to view the country, which to them as they sailed along, seemed
pleasant. Whereof his men at their return gave great commendation, likeing
so well of the place, as they would willingly have stayed and wintred there.
But having the wind fair and good, they proceeded on their course toward the
fyrme of Ameryca, which by reason of continual Fogges, at that time of the
year especially: they could never see, till Cox Master of the Golden Hind
did discern Land, and presently lost sight thereof again, at what time they
were all upon a breach in a great and outrageous storm, having under 3.
fadome water. But God delivered the Frigate and the Golden Hind, from this
great danger. And the Delight in the presence of them all was lost, to their
unspeakable grief, with all their chief victual, munition, and other
necessary provisions, and other things of value not fit here to be named.
Whereupon, by reason also that VVinter was come upon them, and foul wether
increased with Fogges and Mysts that so covered the Land, as without danger of
perishing they could not approach it: Sir Humfrey Gilbert and Master Hays,
were compelled much against their wills to retire homewardes. And being 300.
Leagues on their way, were afterward by tempestious weather, separated the one
from the other, the 9. of September last, since which time, Master Hay with
his Bark, is safely arrived, but of Sir Humfrey as yet, we hear no certain
news.

Upon this report (together with my former intent, to write some brief
discourse in the commendation of this so noble and worthy an enterprise) I did
call to my remembrance, Plutnrch.
the History of Themystocles the Grecian, (who being a right noble and
valiant Captain) signified unto his Countrymen, the citizens of Athens, that
he had invented a devise for their common wealth very profitable, but it was
of such importance and secrecy, that it ought not to be revealed, before
private conference had with some particular prudent person of their choice.

The Athenians knowing Aristides the Philosopher, to be a man endued with
singular wisdom and virtue, made choice of him to have conference with
Themystocles, and therevppon to yield his opinion to the Citizens concerning
the said device: which was, that they might set on fire the Navy of their
enemies, with great facility as he had laid the plotte: Aristides made
relation to the Citizens, that the stratageme (devised by Themystocles) was a
profitable practice for the common wealth but it was dishonest. The Athenians
(without further demand what the same was) did by common consent reiecte and
condemn it, preferring honest and upright dealing before profit.

By occasion of this history, I drew my self into a more deeper
consideration, of this late undertaken voyage, whether it were as well pleasing
to almighty God, as profitable to men? as lawful as it seemed honorable. As
well grateful to the Savages, as gainful to the Christians. And upon mature
deliberation, I found the action to be honest and profitable, and therefore
allowable by the opinion of Aristides if he were now alive, which being by me
herein sufficiently proved, (as by Gods grace I purpose to do) I doubt not
but that all good minds, will endeavor themselves to be assistauntes to this
so commendable an enterprise, by the valiant and worthy Gentlemen our
Countrymen already attempted and undertaken.

Now whereas I do understand that Sir Humfrey Gilbert, Apparation in hand
for a new supply.
his adherents, associates, and friends do mean with a convenient supply
(with as much speed as may be) to maintain, pursue and follow, this
intended voyage already in part performed, and (by the assistaunce of almighty
God) to plant themselves and their people in the continent of the hither part
of America, between the degrees of 30. and 60. of septentrionall latitude.
(Within which degrees by computation Astronomicall and Cosmographicall are
doubtless to be found, Englismen
Ma. John Hawkins Sir Fraunces Drake Ma. William Winter. Ma John Chester. Ma.
Martin Furbisher. Anthony Parkchurst. William Batts. John Lowell David Ingram.
Strangers French.
Sir John Ribaulte. Jacques Cartier. Andrew Theuet. Mounser Gou^den. Mounser
Popellynere John Verasanus.
Italian.
Christopher Columnus

all things that be necessary profitable, or delectable for man's life. The
climate mylde and temperate, neither too hot not too cold, so that under the
cope of heaven there is not any where to be found a more convenient place to
plant and inhabit in: which many notable Gentlemen, both of our own nation
and strangers (who have been traueilers) can testify: and that those
Countries are at this day inhabited with Savages who have no knowledge of God*
Is it not therefore (I say) to be lamented, that these poor Pagans, so long
living in ignorance and Idolatry, and in sort, thirsting after christianity,
(as may appear by the relation of such as have travailed in those parts,)
that our hearts are so hardened, that few or none can be found which will put
to their helping hands, and apply themselves to the relieuing of the miserable
and wretched estate of these silly souls?

Whose Country does (as it were with arm advanced) above the climats both
of Spain and France, stretche out it self toward England only. In manner
praying our aid and help, as it is not only set forth in Mercators
general Map, but it is also found to be true by the discovery of our
nation, and other strangers, who have often times travailed upon the same
Coasts.

Christopher Columnus of famous memory the first instrument to manifest the
great glory and mercy of almighty God in planting the Christian Faith, in
those so long unknown regions, God does not always begin his greatest works
by the greatest persons
having in purpose to acquaint (as he did) that renowned Prince, the Queens
Majesty's Grandfather, King Henry the seventh, with his intended voyage for the
Western Discoueries, was not only derided and mocked generally even here in
England, but afterward became a laughing stock to the Spaniardes themselves,
who at this day (of all other people) are most bounden to laud and praise
God, who first sturred up the man to that enterprise.

And while he was attending there to acquaint the King of Castile (that then
was) with his intended purpose, by how many ways and means was he derided?
His custo^e was to bow himself very low in making of courtesy.
Some scorned the pildnes of his garments, some took occasion to jest at his
simple and silly looks, others asked if this were he, that lowts so low,
which did take upon him to bring men into a Country that abounds with Gold,
Pearl, and Precious stones? If he were any such man (said they) he would
carry another manner of countenance with him, and look somewhat loftier.
Thus some judged him by his garments and others by his look and countenance,
but none entered into the consideration of the inward man.

In the end, what success his voyage had, who list to read the Decades. The
History of the West Indies, the conquest of Hernando Cortese about Mexico,
Hernando Cortese.
and those of Francisco Pizare in Peru about Casamalcha and Cusco, may know
more perticulerly. Francisco. Pyzare
All which their discoueries traueils, and conquests, are extant to be had in
the English tongne. This device was then accounted a fantastical imagination,
and a drowsy dream.

But the sequel thereof, has since awaked out of dreams thousands of souls
to know their Creator, being thereof before that time altogether ignorant.
And has since made sufficient proof, neither to be fantastic, nor vainly
imagined.

VVithall, how mightily has it enlarged the dominions of the Crown of Spain,
and greatly enritching the subjects of the same, let all men consider.
Besides, it is well known, that sithence the time of Columnus his first
discovery, through their planting, possessing, and inhabiting those parts,
there has been transported and brought home into Europe, greater store of
Gold, Silver, Pearl, and Precious stones, then heretofore has been in all
ages, since the creation of the world.

I do therefore hartelie wish, that seeing it has pleased almighty God, of
his infinite mercy at the length, to awake some of our worthy Country men,
out of that drowsy dream, wherein we all have so long slumbered.

That we may now not suffer it to quail for want of maintenance, that by
these valiant Gentlemen our Countrymen is so nobly begun and enterprised. For
which purpose, I have taken upon me to write this simple short treatise,
hoping that it shall be able to persuade such as have been, and yet do
continue detractors and hinderers of this journey, (by reason perhaps that
they have not deliberately and advisedly entered into the judgment of the
matter) that yet now upon better consideration they will become favorable
furtherers of the same. And that such as are already well affected there unto,
will continue their good dispositions. And with all, I most humbly pray all
such as are no Nyggardes of their purses, in buying of costly and rich
apparel, and liberal Contributors, in setting forth of games, A reasonable
request.
pastimes, feastings and banquettes, (whereof the charge being past, there is
no hope of public profit or private commodity) that henceforth they will
bestow and employe their liberality (heretofore that way expended) to the
furtherance of these so commendable purposed proceedings.

And to this end have I taken pen in hand, as in conscience thereunto
moved, desiring much rather, that of the great multitude, which this Realm
does nourish, far better able to handle this matter then I my self am, it
would have pleased some one of them to have undertaken the same. But seeing
they are silent, and that it falls to my lot to put pen to the paper, I
will endeavor my self, and do stand in good hope (though my skill and
knowledge be simple, yet through the assistaunce of almighty GOD) to prove
that this voyage, late enterprised, for trade, traficke, and planting, in
America, is an action tending to the lawful enlargement of her Majesty's
dominions, The argument of the Book.
commodious to the whole Realm in general. Profitable to the adventurers in
particular, beneficial to the Savages, and a matter to be attained without any
great danger or difficulty.

And lastly (which most of all is) A thing likewise tending to the honor and
glory of almighty God: And for that the lawfulnes to plant in those Countries,
in some men's judgments, seems very doubtful, I will begin with the proof
of the lawfulness of trade, traficke, and planting.

The second Chapter, shows that it is lawful and necessary to trade and
traficke with the Savages. And to plant in their Countries. And deuideth
planting into two sorts.
ANd first for traficke, I say that the Christians may lawfully travail into
those Countries and abide there, whom the Savages may not justly impugn and
forbid, in respect of the mutual society and fellowship between man and man
prescribed by the Law of Nations.

For from the first beginning of the creation of the world and from the renewing
of the same after Noes floode, all men have agreed, that no violence should be
offered to Ambassadors. That the Sea with his Havens should be ^^^mon. That
such as should fortune to be taken in war, ^^^ld be servants or slaves. And
that Strangers should (...) be driven away from the place or Country where.
(...) they do come.

If it were so then, I demand in what age, and by what Law is the same
forbidden or denied since? For who doubts but that it is lawful for
Christians to use trade and traficke with Infidels or Savages, carrying thither
such commodities as they want, and bringing from thence some part of their
plenty.

A thing so commonly and generally practiced, both in these our days, and in
times past* beyond the memory of man, both by Christians and Infidels, that it
needs no further proof.

And for as much as the use of trade and traficke, (be it never so profitable)
ought not to be preferred before the planting of Christian faith. I will
therefore somewhat entreat of planting (without which, Christian Rellgion can
take no root, be the Preachers never so careful and diligent) which I mean
to divide in two sorts. The principal causes why this viage is undertaken.


The first, when Christians by the good likeing and willing assent of the
Savages, are admitted by them to quiet possession.

The second, when Christians being unjustly repulsed, do seek to attain
and maintain the right for which they do come.

And though in regard of the establishment of Christian Religion, The first
kind of Planting.
either of both may be lawfullye and iustlye exercised. Whereof many
examples may be found, as well in the time of Moises and Joshua, and other
Rulers before the byr^^ ^f Christ. As of many virtuous Emperors and King (...)
thence his incarnation: yet do I wish, that before the ^^^cond be put in
practice, a proof may be made of the fir^^, saving that for their safety as
well against the Savages, as all other sorraine enemies, they should first well
and strong lie fortefie themselves, which being done, then by all fair
speeches, and every other good means of persuasion to seek to take away all
occasions of offense.

As letting them to understand, how they came not to their hurt, but for their
good, and to no other end, but to dwell peaceably amongst them, and to trade
and traficke with them for their own commodity, without molesting or greeuing
them any way, which must not be done by words only but also by deeds.

For albeit, to maintainer right and repel injury, be a just cause of war,
yet must there hereof be heedefull care had, that whereas the Savages be
fearful by nature, and fond otherwise, the Christians should do their best
endeavor to take away such fear as may grow unto them by reason of their
strange apparel, Armor, and weapon, or such like, by quiet and peaceable
conversation, and letting the^ live in security and keeping a measure of
blameles defence^, with as little discommoditie to the Savages as may be, for
this kind of war would be only defensive and not offensive.

And questionles there is great hope and likely hoode that by this kind of
means, we should bring to pass all effects to our desired purposes:
Considering that all creatures, by constitution of nature, are rendered more
tractable and easier w^nne for all assayes, by cour^esie and myldnes, then by
cruelty or roughnes: and therefore being a principle taught us by natural
reason, it is first to be put in ure.

For albeit as yet the Christians are not so throughlye furnished with the
perfectnes of their language, either to express their minds to them, or
again to conceive the Savages intent. Yet for the present opportunity, such
policy may be used by freendly signs, and courteous tokens toward them, as
the Savages may easily perceive, (were their senses never so gross) an assured
freendshippe to be offered them, and that they are encountered with such a
nation, as bringes the^ benefit, commodity, peace, tranquillity and safety.
To further this, and to accomplish it in deeds, there must be presented unto
them gratis, some kinds of our peittie marchaundizes and trifles: As looking
Glasses, Bells, Beads, Braceletts, Chains, or Collers of Bewgle, Crystal,
Amber, Iett, or Glass etc. For such be the things, though to us of small
value, yet accounted by them of high price and estimation: and soonest will
induce their Barbarous natures to a likeing and a mutual society with us.

Moreover, it shall be requisite, either by speech, if it be possible, either
by some other certain means, to signify unto them. That once league of
freendshippe, with all loving conversation, being admitted between the
Christians and them* that then the Christians from thence forth will always
be ready with force of Arms to assiste and defend them in their just
quarrelles, from all invasions, spoils and oppressions, offered or to be
offered them by any Tyraunts, Adversaries, or their next borderers: and a
benefit is so much the more to be esteemed, by how much the person upon whom
it is bestowed stands in need thereof.

For it appears by the relation of a countreyman of ours, This David Ingram
was in this last journey with Sir Humfrey and is very desirous to be employed
^^ether again.
namely David Ingram, (who traveled in those countries xj. months and more)
That the Savages generally for the most part, are at continual wars with
their next adjoining neighbors, and especially the Canniballs, being a cruel
kind of people, whose food is man's flesh, and have teeth like dogs, and do
pursue them with ravenous minds to eat their flesh, and devour them.

And it is not to be doubted, but that the Christians may in this case justly
and lawfully aid the Savages against the Canniballs, So that it is very
likely, that by this means we shall not only mightily stir and unflame
their rude minds gladly to embrace the loving company of the Christians,
proffering unto them both commodities succor, and kindness, But also by their
francke consents, shall easily enjoy such competent quantity of Land, as every
way shall be corespondent to the Christians expectation, and contentation,
considering the great abou^dance that they have of Land, and how small
account they make thereof. Taking no other fruits thereby then such as the
ground of it self does naturally yield. And thus much concerning the first
sort of planting, which as I assuredly hope, so I most hartelie pray may take
effect and place.

But if after these good and fair means used, the Savages nevertheless will
not be heerewithall satisfied, The second kind of Planting.
but barbarously will go about to practice violence either in repelling the
Christians from their Ports and safe Landinges or in withstanding them
afterward to enjoy the rights for which both painfully and lawfully they
have adventured themselves thither.

Then in such a case I hold it no breach of equitye for the Christians to
defend themselves, to pursue revenge with force, and to do whatsoever is
necessary for the attayning of their safety: For it is allowable by all Laws
in such distreses, to resist violence with violence. And for their more
security to increase their strength by building of fortes, for avoiding the
extremities of injurious dealing.

Wherein if also they shall not be suffered in reasonable quietness to continue,
there is no bar (as I judge but that in stout assemblies, the Christians may
issue out, and by strong hand pursue their enemies, subdue them, take
posession of their Towns, Cities, or Villages, (and in avoiding murtherous
tyranny) to use the Law of Arms, as in like case among all nations at this
day is used: and most especially to the end they may with securitye hold
their lawful possession, least happily after the departure of the Christians,
such Savages as have been converted, should afterward through compulsion
and enforcme^nt of their wicked Rulers, return to their horrible Idolatry (as
did the children of Israel, Judges. 6.
after the decease of Joshua) and continue their wicked custom of most
unnatural sacrificing of human creatures.

And in so doing, doubtless the Christians shall no whitt at all transgress
the bonds of equity or ciuility, for as much as in former ages, (yea before
the incarnation of Christ) the like has been done by sundry Kings and
Princes, Gouerners of the children of Israel: cheefely in respect to begin
their Planting, for the establishment of Gods word: as also since the nativity
of Christ, mighty and pussaunt Emperors and Kings have performed the like, I
say to plant, possess, and subdue. For proof whereof, I will allege you
examples of both times.

We read in the old testament, how that after Noes fludde was ceased,
restoration of mankind began only of those few of Noes children and family
as were by God pre elected to be saved in the Arc with him, whose seed in
process of time, was multiplied to infinite numbers of nations, which in
diverse sorts divided themselves to sundry quarters of the earth. And forasmuch
as all their posterity being mightily increased followed not the perfect life
of Noe their predecessor, God chose out of the multitude, a peculiar people to
himself, to whom afterward being under the government of Moises in Mount
Synay, he made a grant to inherit the Land of Canaan, called the Land of
Promise, with all the other rich and fertile Countries next adjoining thereunto.
Nevertheless, before they came to possession thereof, having been afflicted
with many grievous punishments and plagues for their sins, they fell in
despair to enjoy the same.

But being encouraged and comforted by their Rulers, (men of God) they
proceeded, arming themselves with all patience, to suffer what soever it
should please God to send: and at last attaining to the Land, they were
encou^tered with great numbers of strong people and mighty Kings.

Notwithstanding, Joshua. 4.
Joshua their leader, replenished with the spirit of God, being assured of the
iustnes of his quarrel, gathered the chief strength of the children of
Israel together, to the number of 40000. with whom he safely passed the huge
River Iourden, and having before sent privy spies for the discovery of the
famous City Ierico, to understand the certainty of the Citizens estate,
Joshua. 6.
he forth with came thither, and environed it round about, with his whole
power the space of seven days.

In which respite, perceiving none of the Gentiles disposed to yield or call
for mercy, he then commanded (as God before had appointed) that both the
City Jericho should be burned, yea, and all the inhabitaunts, as well old as
young, with all their cattle, should be destroyed, only excepted Rahab, her
kindred and Family, because she before had hid secretly the messengers of
Joshua, that were sent thither as spies. As for all their gold, silver,
precious stones, or vessels of brass, they were reserved and consecrated to
the Lords treasury.

In like manner he burned the city Hay, Joshua. 8.
slew the inhabitants thereof, and hanged up their King. But for so much as the
Gebionites (fearing the like event) sent Ambassadors unto Joshua, to entreat
for grace, favor, and peace: he commanded that all their lives should be
saved, and that they should be admitted to the company of the children of
Israel. Joshua. 9.
Yet understanding afterward they wrought this by a policy, he used them as
drudges to hew wood and to carry water, and other necessaries for his people.
Thus began this valiant Captain his conquest, which he pursued and never
left till he had subdued all the Hethites, Amorites, Cananites, Pheresites,
Heuites, and Iebusites, with all their Princes and Kings, Judge. 11. 13
being thirty and one in number, and diverse other strange Nations besides,
whose lands and dominions, he wholly divided among Gods people.

After that Joshua was deceased, Judah was constituted Lord over the Army, who
receiving like charge from God pursued the proceedings of the holy Captain
Joshua, and utterly vanquished many Gentiles, Idolaters, and adversaries to the
children of Israel, Judge. 1.
with all such Rulers or Kings, as withstoode him, and namely, Adonibezek, the
most cruel tyrant: whose thombes and great toes he caused to be cut off, A
good not for all Conquerers to be merciful.
for so much as he had done the like before unto seue^ty Kings, whom being his
prisoners, he forced to gather up their victualles underneath his Table. In
this God showed his justice to revenge tyranny. We read likewise, that Gedeo^
a most puissant and noble warrior, so behaved himself in following the worthy
acts of Joshua and Judah, Judge. 6. 7.
That in short time he not only delivered the children of Israel from the
hands of the multitude of the fierce Madianites, but also subdued them and
their Tyrants, whose lands he caused Gods people to possess and inherit.

I could recite diverse other places out of the Scripture, which aptly may be
applied hereunto were it not I do endeavor my self by all means to be brief.
Now in like manner will I allege some few of Inductions out of the autenticall
writings of the Ecclesiastical Historiographers, all tending to the like
argument. And first to begin with all, we do read. That after our savior
Jesus Christ had suffered his passion. The apostles being inspired with the
holy Ghost, India the great, was not preached unto by the Apostles. Metrodorus
the Philosopher, the first discouerer of India the great.
and the knowledge of all strange languages, did immediately dispearse
themselves to sundry parts of the world, to the preaching of the Gospel. Yet
not in so general a manner, but that there remained some far remote
Countries unvisited by them, among the which it is reported that India the
great, called the uttermost India, as yet had received no light of the word.
But it came to pass, that one Metrodorus, a very learned and wise Philosopher
in that age, being desirous to search out unknown lands, did first discover
the same, finding it wonderful populous and rich, which upon his return being
published, and for certain understood, there was another grave Philosopher of
Tyrus called Meropius, Meropius.
being a christian, who did resolve himself (following the example of
Metrodorus) to travail thither, and in a short time assisted but with a few,
in a small Vessel arrived there, having in his company two young youths,
Edesius and Frume^tius.
Edesius, and Frumentius, whom (being his scholars) he had thoroughly
instructed, both in lyberall Sciences and christian Religion. Now after that
Meropius somewhile staying there, had (as he thought) sufficient understanding
of the Indians whole estate. He determined to depart, and to bring notice
thereof unto the Emperor, whom he meant to exhort to the conquest of the same.
But by misfortune he was prevented, for being in the midst of his course on
the Sea homeward, a sore tempest arose, and perforce drove him back again, to
an unknown Port of the said land: where he by the most cruel barbarous
Indians on the sudden was slain with all his company, Meropius slain.
except the two young scholars aforesaid, whom the barbarous Indians, by
reason they were of comely stature and beautiful personages, took, and forth
with presented them to their King and Queen: Edisius and Frumentius preserved
by the Indians.
which both being very well lyked of, the King courteously entreated, and
ordained Edesius to be his Butler, and Frumentius his Secretary, and in few
years by reason of their learning and civil government, they were had in
great favor, honor, and estimation with the Princes. But the King departing
this life, left the Queen his wife with her young son to govern, and gave
free scope and liberty to the two christians, at their best pleasure to pass
to their native soyles, allowing them all necessaries for the same. Yet the
Queen who highly favored them, was very sorrowful they should depart, and
therefore most earnestly entreated them to tarry and assist her in the
government of her people, till such time as her young Soon grew to type
years, which request they fulfilled,

And Frumentius excelling Edesius far in all wisdom, Frumentius in great
favor with the Queen of the Indians.
ruled both the Queen and her subjects at his discretion, whereby he took
occasion to put in practice privily, that the foundation of christian religion
might be planted in the hearts of such as with whom he thought his persuasion
might best prevail, and that soonest would give ear unto him, which being
brought to pass accordingly, he then with his fellow Edesius, An other great
work of God begun by a man of mean birth.
took leave of the Queen to return to his native country. And so soon as
he was arrived there, he revealed to the Emperor Constantine, the effect of all
those events: who both commending his deeds and wholly allowing thereof, by the advice and good liking of Athanasius then Bishop of Alexandria, did arm and
set forth a convenient power for the aid of Frumentius, in this his so godly
a purpose. Ruffinus, the Author of this storye.
And by this means came the Emperor afterward by fair promises, and by
force of Arms together, unto the possession of all the Indians country. The
author of this story Ruffinus received the truth hereof, Euse. in his
ecclesiastical history testifies how that Constantine the great, did enlarge
his dominions by subduing of Infidels and Idolatrous nations. Eusebius lib 1.
de vita Constant. Cap. 4. et Cap. 9.
from the very mouth of Edesius companion to Frumentius.

Moreover, Eusebius in his History Ecclesiastical in precise terms, and in
diverse places makes mention how Constantine the great, not only enlarged his
Empire by the subduing of his next neighbors, but also endeavored by all
means, to subject all such remote Barbarous and Heathen nations, as then
inhabited the four quarters of the world. For (as it is written) the Emperor
thoroughly aided with a puissaunt army of valiant soldiers whom he had
before persuaded to christian religion, in proper person himself, came even
unto this our native Country of England, then called the Island of Britains,
bending from him full west, which he wholly conquered, made tributarie, and
settled therein christian faith, and left behind him such Rulars thereof, as to
his wisdom seemed best. From thence he turned his force toward the North
coast of the world, and there utterly subdued the rude and cruel Nation of
the Scithians, whereof part by freendly persuasions, part by maine strength, he
reduced the whole to christian Faith. Afterward he determined with himself
to search out what strange people inhabited in the uttermost parts of the
South. Eu. eod lib. Cap. 39.
And with great hazard and labor, making his journey thither, at last became
victor over them all, even to the country of the Blemmyans, and the remote
Etheopians, that now are the people of Presbiter John, who yet till this day,
continue and bear the name of christians.

In the East likewise, what Nation soever at that time he could have notice
off, he easily wunne and brought in subjection to the Empire. So that to
conclude, there was no region in any part of the world, the inhabitaunts whereof
being Gentiles, though unknown unto him. But in time he overcame and
vanquished.

This worthy beginning of Constantine, Theodorit in Ecclesiast. Hist. lib, 5,
Cap. 20.
both his sons succeeding his room, and also diverse other Emperors afterward
to their uttermost endeavor followed and continued, which all the Books of
Eusebius more at large sets forth. Theodoritus likewise in his
Ecclesiastical history makes mention how Theodosius the virtuous Emperor,
employed earnestly all his time, as well in conquering the Gentiles to the
knowledge of the holy Gospel, utterly subuerting the profane Temples and
abominable Idolatry. As also in extinguishing of such usurping tiraunts,
Theodoritus cap. 26 eod. libro.
as with Paganism withstoode the planting of christian religion. After whose
decease his sons, Honorius, and Arcadius, were created Emperors, the one of
the East, the other of the West, who with all stoutly godliness, most carefully
imitated the foresteps of their father, either in enlarging their territories,
or increasing the christian flock.

Moreover, it is reported by the said aucthor, that The odotius Junior the
Emperor, no whit inferior in virtuous life to any of the above named Princes,
Eod. lib. 20. chap. 36.
with great study and zeal pursued, and prosecuted the Gentiles, subdued their
Tyraunts and Countries, and utterly destroyed all their Idolatry, converting
their souls to acknowledge their only Messiah and Creator, and their
countries to the enlargement of the Empire. To be brief, who so lists to
read Eusebius, Pamphilus, Socrates Scolasticus, Theodoritus, Hermia, Sozomen,
and Euagrius Scolasticus, which all were most sage Ecclesiastical writers,
shall find great store of examples of the worthy lives of sundry Emperors,
tending all to the confirmation of my former speeches.

And for like examples of latter time (yea, even in the memory of man) I shall
not need to recite any other then the conquest made of the West and East
Indies, by the Kings of Spain and Portugal, whereof there is particular
mention made in the last chapter of this Book. Herein have I used more copy
of examples, then otherwise I would have done, saving that I have been in
place where this manner of planting the christian. Fath, has been thought of
some to be scarce lawful, yea, such as do take upon them to be more then
meanly learned. To these examples could I join many more but whosoever is not
satisfied with these few, may satisfy himself in reading at large the
aucthors last above recited Thus have I (as I trust) proved that we may justly
trade and traffic with the Savages, and lawfully plant and inhabit their
Countries.

The third Chapter does show the lawful title, which the Queens most
excellent Majesty has unto those Countries, which through the aid of
almighty God are mente to be inhabited.
AND it is very evident that the planting there shall in time right amply
enlarge her Majesty's Territories and Dominions (or I might rather say) restore
her to her Highness ancient right and interest in those Countries, 1170. Owen
Gwyneth, was then Prince of North Wales.
into the which a noble and worthy personage, lyneally descended from the
blood royal, borne in Wales, named Madocke ap Owen Gwyneth departing from the
coast of England, about the year of our Lord God. 1170. arrived and there
planted himself, Nullu^ tem pus occurrit Regi.
and his Colonies, This Island was discovered by Sir Humfrey and his company, in
this his last journey.
and afterward returned himself into England, leaving certain of his people
there, as appears in an ancient Welsh Chronicle, where he then gave to
certain Islands, Beasts, and Fowls, sundry Welsh names, as the Island of
Pengwyn, which yet to this day bears the same.

There is likewise a Foul in the said Countries, called by the same name at
this day, and is as much to say in English, as VVhiteheadde, and in truth,
the said Fowls have white heads.

There is also in those Countries a fruit called Gaynethes which is likewise a
welsh word. Moreover, there are diverse other welsh words at this day in use,
Who has also seen berded men there, which can not be natural cu^trimen, for
that the Americans are void of beardes.
as David Ingram aforesaid reports in his relations. All which most strongly
argues, the said Prince with his people to have inhabited there. And the same
in effect is confirmed by Mutuzuma that mighty Emperor of Mexico, who in an
Oration unto his subjects, for the better pacifying of them, made in the
presence of Hernando Curtese, used these speeches following.

My kinsemen, friends, and sernaunts, you do well know that eigteene years I
have been your King, Mutuzuma his Oration to his subjects in presence of
Hernando Curtese.
as my Fathers and Grandfathers were, and always I have been unto you a
loving Prince, and you unto me good and obedient subjects, and so I hope you
will remain unto me all the days of my life. You ought to have in
remembrance, that either you have heard of your Fathers, or else our divines
have instructed you that we are not naturally of this Country, which Oration
was made about the year 1520.
nor yet our Kingdom is durable, because our Forefathers came from a far
country, and their King and Captain who brought them hither, returned again
to his natural country, saying, that he would send such as should rule and
govern us, if by chance he himself returned not, etc.

These be the very words of Mutuzuma, set down in the S^anish Chronicles,
Look the conquest of West Indi^s ^ol. 2 31.
the which being thoroughly considered, because they have relation to some
strange noble person, who long before had possessed those Countries, do all
sufficiently argue, the undoubted title of her Majesty: For as much as no
other Nation can truly by any Chronicles they can find, make prescription of
time for themselves, before the time of this Prince Madocke. Besides all this,
for further proof of her highness title sithence the arrival of this noble
Britton into those parts (that is to say) in the time of the Queens Majesty's
Grandfather, of worthy memory, King Henry the seventh, Letters pattents were
by his Majesty granted to John Gabota an Italian, to Jews, Sebastian, and
Sansius, his three sons, to discover remoate, Barbarous and Heathen
Countries, which discovery, was afterward executed to the use of the crown of
England, in the said Kings time, by Sebastian and Sansius his sons, Ma.
Oliue^ Dalbony. Ma. Edward. Reow. Ma. R. H. Ma. I. A.
who were borne here in England: In true testimony whereof, there is a fair
Haven in Newfounde Land, known and called until this day, by the name of
Sansius Haven, which proves that they first discovered upon that Coast, from
the heyght of 63. unto the Cape of Florida, as appears in the Decades.

And this may stand for another title to her Majesty, but any of the
foresaid titles is as much, or more then any other Christian Prince can
pretend to the Indies before such time as they had actual possession
thereof, obtained by the discovery of Christopher Columnus, and the conquest of
Vasques Numes de Balboa, Hernando Cortese, Francisco Pysare, and others. And
therefore I think it needeles to write any more touching the lawfulnes of her
Majesty's title.

The fourth Chapter shows, how that the trade traficke and planting in
those Countries, is likely to prove very profitable to the whole Realm in
general.
NOW to show how the same is most likely to prove very profitable and
beneficial generally to the whole Realm. It is very certain, that the
greatest Jewel of this Realm, and the cheifest strength and force of the
same, for defense or offense, in martial matter and manner is the multitude of
Ships, Masters and Mariners, ready to assist the most stately and royal
Navy of her Majesty, which by reason of this voyage shall have, both increase
and maintenance: And it is well known, that in sundry places of this Realm,
Ships have been built and set forth of late days for the trade of
fishing only: Cox the M^ster.
Yet not withstanding the fish which is taken and brought into England by the
English Navy of Fishermen, will not suffice for the expense of this realm
four months, if there were none else brought of strangers. And the cheifest
cause why our Englismen do not go so far westerly, as the especial
fishing places do lie, both for plenty and greatness of fish, is for that they
have no succor and known safe harbor in those parts. But if our nation were
once planted there, or near thereaboutes: whereas they now fish but for two
months in the year, they might the^ fish so long as pleased themselves or
rather at their coming find such plenty of Fish ready taken, salted and
dried, as might be sufficient to fraught them home without long delay, (God
granting that salt may be found there) whereof David Ingram (who traveled in
those Countries as aforesaid) says that there is great plenty: and withal
the Climate does give great hope, that though there were none naturallye
growing, yet it might as well be made there by art, as it is both in Rochell
and Bayon, or else where. Which being brought to pass, shall increase the
number of our ships and Mariners, were it but in respect of fishing only:
but much more in regard of the sundry Marchaundises and commodities which are
there found and had in great abundance.

Moreover, it is well known that all Savages, as well those that dwell in the
South, as those that dwell in the North, so soon as they shall begin but a
little to taste of ciuillitie, will take marvelous delight in any garment be
it never so simple: As a shirt, a blewe, yellow, read, or green Cotton
cassocke, a Cappe or such like, and will take incredible pains for such a
trifle.

For I my self have heard this report made sundry times, by diverse of our
Countrymen, who have dwelt in the sotherly parts, of the West Indies, some
12. years together, and some of less time: That the people in those parts,
Clothiers. Wolmen. Carders. Spinners. Weauers. Fullers, Sheremen* Diers.
are easily reduced to civility both in manners and garments. Which being
so, what vente for our English clothes will thereby ensue, and how great
benefit to all such persons and Artificers whose names are coated in the
margent, I do leave to the judgment of such as are discrete.

And questionles hereby it will also come to pass, Drapers. Clothiers.
Cappers Hatters. etc. And many decayed towns repaired.
that all such Towns and Villages, as both have been and now are utterly
decayed and ruinated (the poor people thereof being not set a work by
reason of the transportation of raw Wool of late days, more excessiuely
then in times past) shall by this means be restored to their pristinate wealth
and estate, all which do likewise tend to the enlargement of our Navy and
mayntenaunce of our navigations.

To what end need I endeavor my self by arguments to prove, that by this
voyage, our navy and navigations shall be enlarged, when as there needs none
other reason then the manifest and late example of the near Neighbors to this
Realm, the Kings of Spain, and Portingall who since the first discovery of
the Indias, have not only mightily enlarged their dominions, greatly
enritched themselves and their subjects: but have also by just account
trebbled the number of their Ships, Masters and Mariners, a matter of no
small moment and importance.

Besides this, The idle persons of this Realm shall by occasion of this journey
be well employed and set on work.
it will prove a general benefit unto our Country, that through this
occasion, not only a great number of men which do now live ydlely at home,
and are burdenous, chargeable, and unprofitable to this Realm, shall hereby
be set on work, but also children of 12. or 14. years of age or under, may
be kept from ydlenes, in making of a thousand kinds of trifeling things,
which will be good Merchandise for that Country. And moreover, our idle women,
(which the Realm may well spare) shall also be employed on plucking, drying,
and sorting of Feathers, in pulling, beating, and working of Hemp, and in
gathering of Cotton, and diverse things right necessary for dying. All which
things are to be found in those Countries most plentifully. Hemp does grow
near Saint Lawrence River naturally.
And the men may employ themselves in draging for Pearl, working for Mines,
and in matters of husbandry, and likewise in hunting the VVhale for train, and
making Caskes to put the same in: besides, in fishing for Codde, Salmon and
Herring, drying, salting* and barrelling the same, and felling of Trees, hewing
and sawing of them, and such like work, meet for those persons as are no men
of art or science.

Many other things may be found to the great relief and good emploiemnts of
no small number, of the natural subjects of this Realm, which do now live
here ydlelie to the common annoy of the whole state. Read the beginning of
the book entitled, diverse voyages touching the discovery of America.
Neither may I here omit the great hope and likely hoode of a passage by the
Graunde bay, into the South Seas, confirmed by sundry Aucthors to be found
leading to Cataia, the Moluccos and Spiceries, whereby may ensue as general a
benefit to the Realm or greater, then yet has been spoken off, without
either such charges, or other inconveniences, as by the redious tract of time
and perrill, which the ordinary passage to those parts at this day does
minister. And to conclude this argument withal, it is well known to all men
of sound judgment, that this voyage is of greater importance, and will be
found more beneficial to our Country, then all other voyages at this day in
use and trade amongst us.

The fifth Chapter shows, that the trading and planting in those Countries is
likely to prove, to the particular profit of all the Adventurers.
I Must now according to my promise show forth some probable reasons, that the
adventurers in this journey, are to take particular profit by the same. It is
therefore convenient that I do divide the Adventurers into two sorts: The
Noble men men and Gentlemen by themselves, and the Marchaunts by themselves.
For as I do hear, it is meant that there shall be one society of the Noble men
and Gentlemen, and another society of the Merchants. And yet not so divided,
but that each society may freely and franckly trade and traficke one with the
other.

And first to bend my speech to the Noblemen and Gentlemen, who do cheefely
seek a temperate climate, wholesome air, fertile soil, and a strong place by
nature, whereupon they may fortefie, and there either plant themselves, or such
other persons as they shall think good to send to be Lords of that place and
Country: To them I say that all these things are very easy to be found with
in the degrees of 30. and 60. aforesaid, either by Southe or North, both in
the Continent, and in Islands thereunto adjoining at their choice: But the
degree certain of the cleuation of the Pole and the very Climate where these
places of force and fertility are to be found, I omit to make public, for
such regard as the wiser sort can easily conjecture: the rather because I do
certainly understand, that some of those which have the managing of this
matter, know it as well or better then I my self, and do mean to reveal
the same when cause shall require, to such persons whom it shall concern and
to no other: So that they may seat and settle themselves in such Climate as
shall best agree with their own nature, disposition, and good likeing: and in
the whole tract of that land, by the description of as many as have been
there, great plenty of mineral matter of all sorts, and in very many places
both stones of price, Pearl, and Crystal, and great store of Beasts,
Birds, and Fowls both for pleasure and necessary use of man is to be found.

And for such as take delight in hunting, Beasts for pleasure
there are Stagges, VVild Bores, Foxes, Hares, Conneys, Badgers, Otters, and
diverse other such like for pleasure. Also or such as have delight in Hawking,
there are Hawks of sundry kinds, and great store of game, both for Land and
River, as Feazaunts, Partridges, Cranes, Heronshawes, Duckes Mallardes, and
such like. There is also a kind of Beast, much bigger then an Ox, whose hyde
is more then 18. foot long, of which sort a Countriman of ours, one Walker a
Sea man, who was upon that Coast, did for a truth report, in the presence of
diverse honorable and worshipful persons, that he and his company did find in
one Cottage above 240. Hides. which they brought away and sold in France for
xl. shillinges and hyde, Hides sold for xl. shillings apece.
and with this agrees David Ingram, and discribeth that beast at large,
supposing it to be a certain kind of Buffe: there are likewise beasts and
fowls of diverse kinds, which I omit for breuities sake, great store of fish
both in the salt water and in the fresh, Great Grapes. Wine of the Palmtree.
plenty of Grapes as big as a man's thombe, and the most delicate Wine of
the Palmetree, of which wine there be diverse of good credit in this realm have
tasted: and there is also a kind of grain called Maize, Potato roots, and
sundry other fruits natural growing there: so that after such time as they
are once settled, they shall need to take no great care for victual.

And now for the better contentation and satisfaction of such worshipful,
honest minded, and well disposed Marcha^ts, as have a desire to the furtherance
of every good and commendable action, I will first say unto the^, as I have done
before to the Noble men and Gentlemen, that within the degrees above said, is
doubtless to be found, the most holesom and best te^pature of air,
fertillitie of soil, and every other commodity or marchaundize, for the
which, with no small perril we do trauaill into Barbery, Spain, Portingall,
France, Italy, Muscouie and Dansike. All which may be either presently had,
or at the least wise in very short time, procured from thence with less
danger the^ now we have them. And yet to the end my argument shall not
altogether stand upon likelihoodes and presumptions, I say that such persons
as have discovered and travailed those parts do testify, that they have
found in those Countries, all these things following, namely.

Of Beasts for furs.
Martens. Beauers. Foxes black and white. Leoperdes.
Of Worms.
Silk worms great and large
Of Birds.
Hawks. Bitters. Curlewes. Herons. Partridges. Cranes. Mallards. VVildgeese.
Stockdoues. Margaus. Blackbirds. Parrotts. Pengwyns.
Of Fishes.
Codd. Salmon. Seals. Herrings.
Of Trees.
Palmetrees yielding sweet wines. Cedars. Fyrres. Sasafras. Oak. Elm.
Popler.
And sundry other strange Trees, to us unknown.

Of Fruits.
Grapes, very large. Muskemello^s. Limons. Dates great. Orrenges. Figs.
Proynes. Reisons, great and small. Pepper. Almonds. Citrons.
Of Mettalles.
Gold. Silver. Copper. Lead. Tin.
Of Stones.
Turkeis. Rubies. Pearls, great and fair. Marble, of diverse kinds. Jasper.
Crystal.
Sundry other commodities of all sorts.
Ro^en. Pitch. Tar. Turpentine. Frankensence Honny. Wax. Rubarbe. Oil
Oliffe. Train Oil. Musk codde. Salt. Tallowe. Hydes. Hemp: Flax.
Chuchenell^ and Dies of diverse sorts. Feathers of sundry sorts, as for
pleasure and filling of Featherbeddes.
And seeing that for small costs, the truth of these things may be
understood (whereof this intended supply will give us more certain assurance)
I do find no cause to the contrary, but that all well minded persons should be
willing to adventure some convenient portion, for the furtheraunce of so good
an enterprise.

Now for the trial hereof, considering that in the Articles of the Society
of the adventurers in this voyage, there is provision made, that no aduenturer
shall be bound to any further charge then his first adventure: and yet
notwithstanding keep still to himself, his children, his apprentises and
servants, his and their freedom for trade and traficke which is a privilege
that Adventurers in other voiages have not: and in the said articles it is
likewise provided, that none other then such as have adventured in the first
voyage, or shall become adventurers in this supply, at any time hereafter are
to be admitted in the said society, but as Rede^ptionaries, which will be very
chargeable: Therefore generally I say unto all such according to the old
Proverb, Nothing venture, Nothing have. For if it do so fall out, according to
the great hope and expectation had (as by Gods grace it will) the gain which
now they reap by traffic into other far Countries, shall by this trade
return with less charge, greater gain, and more safety: Less charge I say,
by reason of the ample and large deep Rivers at the very bank, whereof there
is many, whereby both easily and quietly they may transport from the innermost
parts of the maine land, all kind of merchandise, yea, in Vessels of great
burden, and that three times, or twice in the year at the least. But let us
omit all presumptions how vehement soever, and dwell upon the certainty of such
commodities as were discovered and found by Sir Humfrey Gilbert, Commo^^ties
found in August last.
and his assistants in Newfound land, in August last. For there may be very
easily made, Pitch, Tar, Rosen, So^e ashes, in great plenty, yea, as it is
thought enough to serve the whole Realm of every of these kinds. And of
Train Oil such quantity, as if I should set down the value that they do
esteem it at, which have been there, it would seem incredible.

It is heerby intended, that these commodities in this aboundaunt manner, are
not to be gathered from thence, without Planting and settling there. And as for
other things of more value, and that of more sorts and kinds then one or two,
(which were likewise discovered there) I do hold it for some respects, more
meet for a time to be concealed and uttered.

Of the Fishing I do speak nothing, because it is generally known: And it is
not to be forgotten, what very trifles they be that the Savages do require in
exchange of these commodities: yea for Pearl, Gold, Silver, and precious
stones. All which are matters in trade and trasfique of great moment. But admit
that it should so fall out, that the above specified commodities, shall not
happily be found out within this first year. Yet it is very clear that such
and so many may be found out as shall minister just occasion to think al cost
and labor well bestowed. For it is very certain, that there is one seat fit
for fortificatio^, of great safety, wherein these commodities following,
especially are to be had, that is to say, Grapes for wine, Whales for oil,
He^pe for cordage and other necessary things, and Fish of far greater sise
and plenty, then that of Newfound land, and of all these so great store as may
suffice to serve our whole Realm.

Besides all this if credit, may be given to the Inhabitaunts of the same
Soil, a certain River does thereunto adioyne, which leads to a place
abounding with rich substance: I do not hereby mean the passadge to the
M^luch^s, whereof before I made mention.

And it is not to be omitted, how that about two years past, certain
Marchaunts of S. Mallows in France, did hire a Ship out of the Island of
Iersey, to the end that they would keep that trade secret from their
Countreimen, and they would admit no Mariner other then the Ship boy belonging
to the said Ship to go with them* which Ship was about 70. Tun. I do
know the Ship and the boy very well, and am familiarly acquainted with the
Owner, which voyage proved very beneficial.

To conclude, this which is already said, may suffice any man of reasonable
disposition to serve for a taste, until such time as it shall please almighty
God through our own industry, to send us better tidings. In the mean season,
if any man well affected to this journey, shall stand in doubt of any matter of
importance touching the same, he may satisfy himself with the judgment and
lyking of those of good calling and credit, as are principal dealers herein.
For it is not necessary in this treatise, publicly to set forth the whole
secrets of the voyage.

The sixth Chapter, shows that the Traffic and Planting in those Countries,
shall be unto the Savages themselves very beneficial and gainefull.
NOw to the end it may appear, that this voyage is not undertaken altogether
for the peculiar commodity of our selves, and our Country, (as generally
other trades and iourneies be) it shall fall out in proof, that the Savages
shall heerby have just cause to bless the hour, when this enterprise was
undertaken.

First and chiefly, in respect of the most happy and gladsome tidings of the
most glorious Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ, whereby they may be brought
from falsehood to truth, from darkness to light, from the hieway of death, to
the path of life, from superstitious idolatry, to sincere christianity, from
the devil to Christ, from hell to Heaven. And if in respect of all the
commodities they can yield us (were they many more) that they should but receive
this only benefit of christianity, they were more then fully recompensed.

But hereunto it may be objected, that the Gospel must be freely preached, for
such was the example of the Apostles, unto whom although the aucthorities and
examples before alleged, of Emperors, Kings, and Princes, as well before
Christ's time as since, might sufficiently satisfy: Yet for further answer,
we may say with Saint Paul. If we we have sown unto you heavenly things, 2.
Cor. 9.
do you think it much that we should reap your carnal things? And withal,
The workman is worthy of his hier. These heavenly tidings which those laborers
our country men (as messengers of Gods great goodness and mercy) will
voluntarily present unto them, does far exceed their earthly riches.
Moreover, if the other inferior worldly, and temporal things, which they
shall receive from us, be waied in equal balance, I assure my self, that by
equal judgment of any indifferent person, the benefits which they then
receive, shall far surmount those which they shall depart withal unto us. And
admit that they had (as they have not) the knowledge to put their land to
some use: Yet being brought from brutish ignorance, to ciuility and knowledge,
and made them to understand how the tenth part of their land may be so manured
and employed, as it may yield more commodities to the necessary use of man's
life, then the whole now does: What just cause of complaint may they have? And
in my private opinion, I do verily think that God did create land, to the end
that it should by Culture and husbandry, yield things necessary for man's life.

But this is not all the benefit which they shall receive by the christians,
for, over and beside the knowledge how to till and dress their grounds, they
shall be reduced from unseemly customs, to honest manners, from disordred riotous
rowtes and companies, to a well governed common wealth and with all shall be
taught mecanicall occupations, arts, and lyberal Sciences: and which stands
them most upon, they shall be defended from the cruelty of their tyrannical and
blood sucking neighbors, The bargain can not be unjust, where both parties are
gainers.
the Canniballes, whereby infinite number of their lives shall be preserved. And
lastly; by this means many of their poor innocent children shall be preserved
from the bloody knife of the sacrificer, a most horrible and detestable custom
in the sight of God and man, now and ever heertofore used amongst them. Many
other things could I here allege to this purpose, were it not that I do
fear least I have already more then half tired the Reader.

The seventh Chapter shows that the Planting there, is not a matter of such
charge or diffycultie, as many would make it seem to be.
NOw therefore for proof, that the Planting in these parts is a thing that may
be done without the aid of the Princes power and purse, contrary to the
allegation of many malicious persons, who will neither be actors in any good
action themselves, nor so much as afoord a good word to the setting forward
thereof: and that wurse, is they will take upon them to make Molehylles seem
Mountains, and flies Elephants, to the end they may discourage others, that be
very well or indifferently affected to the matter, being like unto Esoppes
Dog which neither would eat haie himself, nor suffer the poor hungry ass
to feed thereon.

I say and affirm that God has provided such means for the furtheraunce of
this enterprise, as does stand us in steed of great treasure: for first by
reason that it has pleased God of his great goodness, of long time to hold
his merciful hand over this Realm, in preserving the people of the same, both
from flaughter by the sword, and great deathby plague, pestilence, or
otherwise, there is at this day great numbers (God he knows) which live in
such penury and want, as they could be contented to hazard their lives, and
to serve one year for meat, drink, and apparel, only without wages, in hope
thereby to amend their estates: which is a matter in such like iourneis, of no
small charge to the Prince. Moreover, things in the like iourneis of greatest
price and cost, as victual (whereof there is great plenty to be had in that
country without money) and powder, great artillery, or Corselets, are not
needful, in so plentiful and chargeable manner, as the show of such a journey,
may present, for a small quantity of all these to furnish the Forte only will
suffice, until such time as diverse commodities may be found out in those parts,
which may be thought well worthy a greater charge. Also the peculiar benefit
of Archers which God has blessed this land withal, before al other nations,
will stand us in great stead amongst those naked people.

Another help we have also, which in such like cases is a matter of marvelous
cost, and will be in this journey procured very easily (that is to say) To
transport yearly as well our people, as al other necessaries, needful for the^
into those parts by the Fleet of Merchaunts, that yearly venture for Fish in
Newfound Land, being not far distaunt from the country, meant to be
inhabited, who commonly go with empty Vessels in effect, saving some little
fraught with Salt. And thus it appears that the Soldiers wages, and the
transportation may be defrayed for far less sums of money, then the
detractors of this enterprise have given out. Again, this intended voyage for
conquest, has in like manner many other singular privileges, wherewith God
has as it were, with his holy hand blessed the same before all others. For
after once we are departed the coast of England, we may pass straight way
thither, without danger of being driven into any the countries of our enemies,
or doubtful friends, for commonly one wind serves to bring us thither, which
sildome fails from the middle of January, to the middle of May, a benefit
which the Mariners make great account off, for it is a pleasure that they have
in few or none of the other iournies. Also, the passadge is short, for we may
go thither in thirty or forty days at the most, having but an indifferent
wind, and return continually in sixteen or twenty days at the most. And in
the same our journey, by reason it is in the Occean, and quite out of the way
from the intercourse of other countries: we may safely trade and traffic,
without peril of pyracie, neither shall our Ships, people, or goods, there be
subject to the arrest or molestation of any Pagan Potentate, Turkishe Tyrant,
yea, or christian Prince, which heertofore, sometimes upon slender occasion in
other parts, have stayed our Ships and marchaundizes, whereby great numbers
of our Countrymen have been utterly undone, diverse put to ransom, yea and
some lost their lives: a thing so fresh in memory as it needs no proof, and
well worthy of consideration.

Besides, in this voyage, we do not cross the burnt line, whereby commonly
both beuerage and victual are corrupted, and men's health very much impaired,
neither do we pass the frozen Seas, which yield sundry extreme dangers:
but have a temperate Climate at all times of the year, to serve our turns.
And lastly, there need no delays by the way, for taking in of freshwater and
Fuel, (a thing usually done in long iourneys) because as I said above, the
voyage is not long, and the fresh waters taken in there, our men here in
England, at their return home, have found so wholesome and sweet, that they
have made choice to drink it before our* Beer or Ale.

Behold here good Countreimen, the manifold benefits, commodities and
pleasures heretofore unknown, by Gods especial blessing not only revealed
unto us, but also as it were infused into our bosoms, who though hitherto like
Dormise have slumbered in ignorance thereof, being like the Cattes that are
loathe for their pray to wette their feet, yet if now therefore, at the last
we would awake, and with willing minds (setting frivolous imaginations aside)
become industrious instruments to our selves, Questionles we should not only
hereby setfoorth the glory of our heavenly Father, but also easily attain
to the end of all good purposes, that may be wished or desired.

And may it not much encourage us to hope for good success in the country of
these Savages, being a naked kind of people, void of the knowledge of the
discipline of war, seeing that a Noble man, being but a subject in this
Realm, (in the time of our King Henry the second) by name Strangbowe, the^
Earl of Chepstowe in South Wales, by himself and his Alleis and assistaunts,
at their own proper charges, passed over into Ireland, and there made conquest
of the now Country, and then kingdom of Ly^^ster, at which time it was very
populous and strong; which history, our own Chronicles do witness. And why
should we be dismaide, more then were the Spaniardes, who have been able
within these few years, to conquer, possess and enjoy; so large a tracte at
the earth, in the west- Indies, as is between the two Tropicks of Ca^cer and
Capricorn, not only in the maine firm land of America* which is 47. degrees
in latitude from South to North, and does co^tain 2820. English miles at the
least, that the King of Spain has there, in actual possession besides many
goodly and rich Islands, as Hispaniola, now called Sa* Domingo, Cuba, Iamica,
and diverse other, which are both beautiful and full of treasure, not speaking
any whitt at all, how large the said Land is from East to West, which in
some places is accounted to be 1500. English miles at the least, from East to
West, between the one Sea and the other.

Or why should our Noble nation be dismaide, more then was Vasques Numes de
Balboa, 2. D^cad. lib. 5. fo. 77. of the West Indes, in English Canons is a
kind of boat. 3. Decad. lib. 1. fol. ^7*
a private Gentleman of Spain, who with the number of 70. Spaniardes at
Tich^ri, gave an overthrow unto that mighty King Chemacchus, having an Army
of an hundred Canoas and 5000. men, and the say de Vasques Numes not long
after, with his small number, did put to flight King Chiapes his whole Army.

Likewise Hernando Cortese, being also but a private Gentleman of Spain,
About the year of our Lord 1511.
after his departure from the Islands of Cuba and Acusamill, and entering into
the firm of America, had many most victorious and triumphant conquests, as
that at Cyntla, where being accompanied with less the^ 500. Spanish footmen,
Conquest of the West Indes fol. 43 and 45. in English.
thirteen Horsemen, and six pieces of Ordenaunce only he ouerthrewe 40000
Indians The same Cortese with his said number of Spaniardes, took prisoner
that mighty Emperor Meter^ma in his most chief and famous City of Mexico,
which at that instant had in it above the number of 500000* Indians at the
least, and in short time after, obtained not only the quiet possession of the
said City, But also of his whole Empire.

And in like manner in the Country of Peru, which the King of Spain has now
in actual possession, Francisco Pysare, with the only aid of Diego de
Almagro, and Hernando Luche, being all three but private Gentlemen was the
principal person that first attempted the discovery and conquest of the large
and rich Country of Peru, which through the aid of the almighty, he brought
to pass and atchiued, in the Tambo of Cassiamalcha, (which is a large place of
ground, enclosed with walls) in which place he took the great and mighty
Prince Attabalipa prisoner, A marvelous victory.
amidest the number of 60000 Indians his subjects, which were ever before that
day accounted to be a warlike kind of people, which his great victory it
pleased God to grant unto him in the year of our Lord 1533. he not having in
his company above the number of 210. Spaniardes, whereof there was not past 60,
horsemen in all: After the taking of which Prince, Attabalipa, he offered unto
Pyzare for his ransom, to fill a great large Hall full of Gold and Silver,
and such Gold and Silver vessels as they then used, even as hie as a man might
reach with his arm. And the said Prince caused the same Hall to be marked
round about at the said height, which ransom Pyzara granted to accept. And
after when as this mighty Prince had sent to his vassals and subjects to bring
in Gold and Silver for the filling of the Hal, as aforesaid, as namely to the
Cities or Towns of Quito, Pacyacama and Cusco, as also to the Caloa of Lyma,
in which Town, as their own writers do affirm, they found a large and
fair house, all s^ated and covered with ^olde: and when as the said Hal was
not yet a quarter full, a mutenye arose amongst the Spaniardes, in which it was
commonly given out, that the said Prince had politiquely offered this great
ransom under pretense to raise a much more mighty power, whereby the
Spaniardes should be taken slain, and overthrown: whereupon they grew to
this resolution, to put the said Prince to death, and to make particion of the
gold and silver already brought in, which they presently put in execution. And
coming to make perfect Inuentory of the same, as well for the Emperor then
King of Spain, his fifth part as otherwise there was found to be already
brought in into the said Hall, the number of 132425. pound weight of silver,
and in gold the number of 1828125. pezos, A pezo is worth vii. s. vi. d.
English.
which was a riches never before that nor since seen of any man together, of
which there did appertain to the Emperor for his fyft part of Gold 365625.
pezos, and for his fifth part of silver 26485. pound weight, and to every
Horseman 8000. pezos of gold, and 67, pound weight of silver. Every Soldier
had 4550. pezos of gold, and 280. pound weight of silver. Enety Captain had,
some 30000. some, 20000. pezos of gold and of silver, propottionally
aunswerable to their degrees and calling, according to the rate agreed upon
amongst them. Se the History of the West Indies in French; the xiii. book.
fol. 138. some part whereof is translated into English.
Fraunces Pizare as their General, according to his degree and calling
proportionally, had more then any of the rest, over and besides the Massy
table of gold, which Attahalipa had in his Lyttier, which wayed, 25000. pezos
of Gold: never was there before that day, Soldiers so rich in so small a
time, and with so little danger. And in this journey for want of Iron, they did
shoe their Horses some with Gold, and some with silver. This is to be seen in
the general. Historye of the west Indies, whereas the doings of Pizare, and
the conquest of the Peru is more at large set forth.

To this may I add the great discoueries and conquestes, which the Princes of
Portingall have made round about the West, the South, and the East parts of
Africa, and also at Calicute and in the East Indies, and in America, at
Brasilia and elsewhere, in sundry Islandes in fortefying, peopling, and planting
all along the said Coasts, and Islandes, ever as they discovered, which being
rightly wayed and considered, does minister just cause of encouragement to our
country men, not to account it so hard and difficult athing for the subjects
of this noble Realm of England, to discover people plant and possess the
like goodly lands and rich Countries not far from us, but near adjoining and
offering it self unto us (as is aforesaid) which have never yet heretofore,
been in the actual possession of any other Christian Prince, then the Princes
of this realm All which, (as I think) should not a little animate and
encourage us, to look out and to adventure abroad, understanding what large
Countries and Islandes the Portingals with their small number have within these
few years discovered, peopled, and planted, some part whereof I have thought
it not amiss, breefely in particular to name, both the Towns, Countries, and
Islandes, so near as I could upon the sudden call them to remembrance,
for the rest I do refer this Reader to the Histories, where more at large
the same is to be seen. First they did win and conquer from the Princes of
Barbary the Island of Geysera and town of Arzilla, not past 140 mile distaunt
from their Metrapolitane and chief City of Fesse: and after that they wunne
also from the said Princes the Towns of Tangier, Seuta, Mazigam Azamore and
Azaffie, all along the Sea Coasts. And in the year of our Lord 1455.
Alouis de Cademost^ a gentleman Venetian, was he that first discovered for
their use Cape Verd, with the Islandes adjoining, of which he then peopled and
planted those of Bonanista and Santiago discovering also the River Senega,
otherwise called Niger and Cape Rouge and Sere Leone, and in a few years
after they did discover the Coast of Ginea, and there peopled and built the
Castle of Mine: then discovered they further, to the countries of Melegettes,
Benyn, and Manicongo, with the Islandes of Principe, Anobon, Saint Matthew, and
S. Thomas, under the Equynoctial line, which they peopled and built in the said
Island of S. Thomas, the Haven Town or Port of Pauosan. After that, about the
year of our Lord 1494. one Bartholomew Dias was sent forth, who was the
first man that discovered and dobled that great and large Cape called Bon,
Esperance, and passing the Curraunts that run upon the said coast, on the
Southest part of Africa, between the said maine Land and the Island of S.
Lawrence, otherwise called of the ancients, Madagascar, he discovered to the
harbor named the River of Infants. After that since the year of our Lord God
1497. and before the full accomplishment of the year of Christ 1510 through
the trauails and discoueries of Vasques de Game, Peeter Aluares, Thomas Lopes,
Andrew Corsale, John de Empolie, Peeter Sinter, Sancho Detoar, Ceffala is
accounted to be the place where the Noble and wise King Solomon did fetch his
gold.
and that noble and worthy Gentleman Alonso de Alburqueque, they did discover
people, and plant at Ceffala, being upon the East side of Africa, in 20.
degrees of latitude of the South pole, and direct West from the Islande of S.
Lawrence, (at which Port of Ceffala, diverse do afirme that King Solomon did
fetch his gold) As also upon the said East side of Africa, they did
afterward discover people, and plant at M^nzanbique, Quil^^ Monbaz^ and
Melinde 2. degrees of sotherly latitude, and so up to the straight of Bubell,
Mandell at the entering of the Red sea, all upon the East coast, of Africa,
from whence they put off at the Cape of Garda Funi, and past the great gulf of
Arabia, or Indian Sea East to Sinus Persicus, and the Island of Ormus, and so
passing the large and great Riuet Indus, where he has his fall into the main
Occean, in 23. degrees and di. under the tropic of Cancer, of Septentrionall
latitude, they made their course again directly toward the South, and began
to discover people and plant upon the west side of the hither India at Goa,
Mangallor, Canan^r, Calecute, and Chochyn, and the Island of Zeylam.

And here I think good to remember to you, that after their planting upon
this coaste, their forces grew so great, that they were able to compel all
the Mores, the subjects of the mighty Emperor of the Turks to pay tribute unto
them, ever as they passed the Gulf of Arabia, from the port of Mecca in
Arabia filice, where Mahomet lies buried, or any of the other ports of the
said Land, ever as they passed to and from the Havens of Cochyn, Calecute, and
Cananor, and by their martial manner of discipline, practiced in those parts,
the great and mighty Prince the Sophie Emperor of the Persians, and professed
enemy to the Turck, came to the knowledge and use of the Caliuer shot, and
to enterlace and join footmen with his Horsemen, sithence which time the
Persians, have grown to that strength and force, that they have given many
mighty and great overthrows to the Turk, to the great quiet of all
Christendom.

And from the Island of Zeylam aforesaid, they also discovered more East, in
passing the Gulf of Bengala, and so passed the notable and famous River of
Ganges, where he has his fall into the maine Occean, under the tropicke of
Cancer, and to the Cape of Malaca, and unto the great and large Islands of
Sumatro, These are the furthest parts of the world from England. At these
Islands has Sir Fraunces Drake been, where the fame of the Qu. most excellent
Majesty was renowned.
Iaua mayor, Iaua minor, Mindano, Palobane, Celebes, Gilolo, Tydore, Mathin,
Borneio, Machian, Terranette, and all other the Islandes of Molucques and
Spiceries, and so East, along the coasts of Cataia, to the Ports of China,
Zayton, and Quinsay, and to the Islandes of Zipango, and Iapan, situate in the
East, in 37. degrees of septentrionall latitude and in 195. of longitude. Their
noble and worthy discoueries here also is not to be forgotten, that in the
year of our Lord 1501. that famous and worthy gentleman Americus Vespusue,
did discover people and plant to their use the Holds and fortes which they
have in Brasillia* of whom (he being but a private Gentleman, the whole
Country or firm Land of the West Indies, is commonly called and known by the
name of America.

I do greatly doubt least I seem ouertedious in the recital of the
particular discoueries and conquestes of the East and west Indies, wherein I
was the more bold to urge the patience of the Reader, to the end it might
most manifestly and at large appear, to all such as are not acquainted with
the Histories, how the King of Portingall, whose Country for popularity and
number of people, is scarce comparable to some three shires of England. And
the King of Spain likewise, whose natural Country does not greatly abound
with people Both which Princes by means of their discoueries, within less
then 90. years past, have as it appears, both mightily and meruailouslie
enlarged their territories and dominions through their own industry, by the
assistance of the omnipote^t, whose aid we shall not need to doubt, seeing
the cause and quarrel which we take in hand tends to his honor and glory,
by the enlargement of the Christian faith.

To conclude, since by christian duty we stand bound cheefely to further all
such acts as do tend to the increasing the true flock of Christ, by reducing
into the right way those lost sheep which are yet astray. And that we shall
therein follow the example of our right virtuous predicessors of renowned
memory, and leave unto our posterity, a device memorial of so godly an
enterprise. Let us I say for the considerations alleged, enter into judgment
with our selves, whether this action may belong to us or no. The rather for
that this voyage through the mighty assistaunce of the omnipotent God, shall
take our desired effect (whereof there is no just cause of doubt) Then shall
her Majesty's dominions be enlarged, her highness ancient titles justly
confyrmed, all odious ydlenes from this our Realm utterly banished. Diverse
decayed Towns repay red, and many poor and needy persons relieved, and
estates of such as now live in want shall be embettered. The ignorant and
barbarous Idolaters taught to know Christ. The innocent defended from their
bloody tyrannical neighbors. The diabolical custom of sacrifycing human
Creatures abolished.

All which (no man doubts) are things grateful in the sight of our Savior,
and tending to the honor and glory of the Trinity: Be of good cheer
therefore, for he that can not err has said: That before the end of the
world, his word shall be preached to all nations. Which good work, I trust is
reserved for our Nation to accomplish in these parts: Wherefore my dear
Countrymen, be not dismayed, for the power of God is nothing diminished, nor
the love that he has to the preaching and planting of the Gospel any whirt
abated. Shall we then doubt he will be less ready, most mightily and
miraculously to assist our Nation in this quarrel, which is cheefely and
principally undertaken for the enlargement of the christian faith abroad, and
the banishment of ydlenes at home, then he was to Columnus, Vasques Numes,
Hernand^ Cortese, and Fraunces Pyzare in the west: and Vasques de Game, Peter
Aluares, and Alonso de Alburqueque in the East.

Let us therefore with cheerful minds and courageous hearts, give the
attempt, and leave the sequel to almightye God, for if he be on our part, what
forces it who be against us. Thus leaving the correction and reformation unto
the gentle Reader, whatsoever is in this Treatise too much or too little, or
otherwise imperfect, I take leave and so end.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Articles of Assurance, between the Principal assigns
of Sir Humfrey Gilbert Knight, and the four sorts of adventurers, with them
in the veyage for the Western Discoueries.
Assocyates. which be such as adventure. C. l. Assystants. which be such as
adventure. L. l. Adventurers in the first degree. which be such as adventure.
XX. v. l. Adventurers in the second degree. which be such as adventure. Xii. l.
x. s.
EVery person which has adventured in money or commodities with Sir Humfrey
Gilbert Knight, The ratification of former Adventurers.
or with any principal assign from him, shall have and enjoy all such Lands,
Liberties, Freedoms, Priueleges and commodities as to any of them has been
granted or couenaunted by the said Sir Humfrey, or by any principal assign,
in writing to be showed under his or their hands and seals. So as he has or
shall deliver in all his adventure before the last day of December next.

And every person which has adventured himself in the last voyage, Rewards to
such as have adventured in person in the last voyage Associates*
and continued in the same, until such time as the admiral of the said voyage
was lost, and will adventure himself in this next voyage, shall in recompense
have his rate doubled.

portion according to the quantity of his adventure, of al commodities gotten
and returned into England, by any the Vessels which shall be set forth by the
said principal assign, before the twenteth of March next, in Anno 1583.

England.



Humfrey Gylbert and his heirs, and to the principal assign the like fifth
part. and also one fifth part of Crystal to the said principal assign to be
found and clearly gotten upon the same sixteen thousand acres.

and releeuing of maimed persons etc. to be bestowed and employed at the
discretion of the principal* Assign and his heirs, the Lieftenaunt and
Associate, there for the time being.

Assistants
shall bear the name of an Assistant, he, and his heirs males, and three of
his servant, serving him seven years to have free liberty to trade, as in
the first Article of Associates.







Adventurers in the first degree.
the some of xxv. pound shall be an aduenturer of the first degree he, and his
heirs males, and two of his servants serving him seven years, to be free of
trade, etc. as in the first Article of the Associates.







Adventurers in the second degree.
shall be an aduenturer of the second degree, he and his heirs males and one of
his servants seruinge him seven years, to be free of trade, etc. as in the
first article of the associates.







The general and admiral in this voyage, General.
shall have in all things as an associate, with double quantity of Land, the
Leiftenaunt and Viceadmirall in quantity of Land as an associate, and in
privileges as an assistant.

Every Captain, Captains and Masters.
and Master of a ship in the said voyage, shall have as an assistant.

EVery Ma. his mate, Ma. Carpenter and Ma. Gunner, and quarter Ma shall have in
Land as an assistant, and in privileges as an aduenturer of the first degree.

EVery skillful man in trying of mineral matters, and every apoticarie
sk^lfull in choice of drugges, shall have in Land as an assistant, and in
privileges as an aduenturer of the first degree.

EVery Gunners and Carpenters mates, Steward, Surgion, Boteswane, Purser,
Trumpeter and other Officer and necessary artificer, having their necessary
instumentes and tools, shall have according to the rate of Lands as an
aduenturer of the first degree, and in preuiledges as an aduenturer of the the
second dgree.

Every Soldiour and Mariner shall have in all things as an aduenturer of the
second degree. Soldiers


EVery Person that shall winter and remain in those Countries, one whole year
shall have double the quantity of Land, as by this rate he ought to have, if
he did not stay one year as aforesaid.

These rewards to be extended to those persons only, which shall travel in
the said voyage for, their thirds or shares upon their own adventures without
wages and not to any others.

EVery person, who shall be willing to adventure in commodites, as aforesaid
under the some of xii. pound x. shillinges shall have freedom of trad, land
and liberties rated, according to the proporcion of his adventure

FVery person which has, or shall adventure in this voyage in money or
commodities as aforesaid, and will also adventure his person in this next
voyage shall have in respect of his person according to the ra^ aforesaid, over
and above his adventure.


