THE PERIOD OF THE PERSIAN Monarchy.

Wherein sundry places of Ezra, Nehemiah and Daniel are cleared:

Extracted, contracted, and englished, much of it out of Doctor Raynolds, by
the late learned and godly Man WILLIAM PEMBLE, of Magdalen Hall in Oxford.

Published and enlarged since his death by his friend, RICHARD CAPEL.

Postquam gens Iudaea coepit non habere prophetas, proculduhio deterior facta
est; eo scilicet tempore quo sciperabat instaurato templo post captivitatem,
quae fuit in Babylonia, futuram esse meliorem.

Aug de Ciu. Dei l. 18. c. 45. LONDON Printed by R. T. for John Bartlet at the
sign of the guilt Cup in Cheape-side in the Goldsmiths Row. 1631.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, The thing I must desire of thee, is, that as thou go
along, thou would first read the Texts of Scripture, and the heads which
are in the margin, else many things will be but cloudy and dark; the rather,
because in some places the sentences are not so fitly distinguished as it were
to be wished; as (for instance) may appear in page 56. the 5. chap. ver. 19.
and chap. 13. ^er. 15. Wherefore I entreat the Reader still to have his eye on
the margin, and view first the contexts there, and then the explication will
come to his hand with more clearenesse and perspicuity.

Also I am to beg of the Reader, that he will with his pen (ere he read this
Tract) mend the faults here noted, many whereof maimne the sense and lose the
meaning, (occasioned by the Transcribers mistaking in the copying of it out)
smaller matters, as mispointing and the like, I forbear to trouble you with,
as coming of themselves to every man's observation.

RICH. CAPEL.

In the Margin.
Page 26 line 1. read, vid. 23. quaest. p. 32. l. 17 r. abstenti. l. 21. r.
appartati dal sacerdotio. ibid. l. ult. r.. 1. p. 34. l. ult. r. Dtus. in ^.
Pet. p. 35. l. 26. add in marg. Ier. 3.16. p 36 l 5. r. quarto. p. 40. l. 13.
r. lun. in 1. King. ibid. l. 18.19. r. facelle ammarstrar. ibid. l. 26. r.
haure^be. l. 27. r. benche. l. 28. r. pure. p. 41. l. 2. add in marg. Piscat.
in 1. Reg 3.1. p. 44. l. 16. r. predecessori. l. 18. r. habbiaro, put in, i. e.
the iniquities of our predecessors which we have imitated. p. 50. l. 16. r. but
new, respectu actus revelandi. p. 57. l. 7. r. cap. 12. p. 62. ac. l. 17. add
in marg. Perk. Cas. Consc. l. 1. c. 12.. 2. q. 3. Deodat. Ital. annot. on Dan.
4.25. p. 63. at l. 12. add in marg. Act. 12.22.23. Joseph. Antiq. l. 19. c. 7.
Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 10. p. 67. at l. 30. add in marg. Walae de 4. praecepto.
p. 130. p. 78. l 1. r. the marginall note thus: The very word (...), in diverse
ancient writers is taken metaphorically applied to the mind, and not only for
civil freedom: in the compound ever (...): in the abstract (...), Meannesse,
Base, Baseness: See plenty of instances in Scapula and Stephanus. p. 88. l.
26. r. (...).

In the Book.
Page 5. l. 2. a fine, for the Magus, read this Magus. p. 13. l: ult. blot out
the in both places. p. 17. l. 4. after (that) put in times. p. 21. l. 27. a
fine after the word Wall, add (But before the building of the Street and Wall)
above, etc. p. 33. l. 33. r. the old Testament was almost complete. p. 35. l.
9. blot out the. p. 37. l. 7. for that, r. their. p. 41. l. 6. r. Deuteronomy. 7. 4.
p. 43. l. 3. for be, r. do. p. 47. l. 4. r. have bin used. p. 54. l. 21. r.
that that which David. p. 56. l. 28. begin a new Section with the words, The
last, etc. p. 56. l. 26. r. their fal^e, or foolish. p. 64. l. 28. r. in their
office. p. 69 l. 2. r. it is because. p. 69. l. 18. r. as from this. p. 73. l.
16. r. (...). p. 75. l. 2. r. (...). l. 11. r. (...). p. 77. l 9. r. The
freemen, except such and such freemen. p. 78. l. 23. r. (...) p. 79. l. 30. for
others, r. other. p. 8^. l. 33. r. (...) p. 8^. l. 2. 31. for wherefore r.
where, for our Hebrew word (...) which we translate, [the Nobles of Judah.] p.
83. l. 28. for does, r. did. p. 83. l. 33. r. Freemen, long before when it
first, etc.

A CHRONOLOGY OF THE PERSIAN MONARCHY.
CHAP. I.
CYRUS took Babylon about the 20th year of his reign, ^un^cius in Chronol.
comm. lib. 2.
and was after Emperor of that Monarchy Years. 9 Months. 2 Cambyses his
son, called, Dan. 10.13. Prince of the Kingdom of Persia, because he did
rule at home, as Prorex, during his fathers warlike expeditions abroad. Whiles
his father lived, he hindered the work of the Temple. But that he reigned with
his father 2 years at least, and that those two years should bepart of those
seven which Herodotus gives him, cannot be proved. They may rather be part of
those nine years, that Sulpicius Severus, or of those more that Ctefias and
Alexandrinus ascribe unto him. He slew his Brother, and not long after dyed of
a wound he gave himself by chance, having reigned after the death of his
Father Years. 7 Months. 5 3 Darius Hystaspis ( Cambyses dying without issue)
was chosen Emperor by the 7 Princes of Persia. He reigned over the Monarchy
36 4 Xerxes the son of Darius by Atossa the daughter of Cyrus, succeeded his
Father in the Empire. He had an elder Brother Artobarzanes, or Artemenes, who
gave way to Xerxes his younger brother. This X^rxes was Assuerus the mighty
Emperor, who married Ester the Jew. He reigned after the decease of his
Father, and two years together with his Father, after the manner of the
Persians, as Viceroy 20 and above somewhat. 5 Artaxerxes Longimanus, Nehemiah
his Lord and Master, the son of Xerxes by Queen Ester,being much what about
14 years of age, Ezra. 6.11.14. Nehem. 2.4.
succeeded his Father ( Artabazanus, who affected the Crown, and held up some
7 months being slain) and reigned. They that give him but 40, do disjoine
those odd months, that Xerxes and Zogdianus reigned. Ptolemy and Clemens
Alexandrinus join them with Artaxerxes years, and so give him [41.] 41 6
Darius Nothus, so called, because he was Artaxerxes his Bastard, succeeded his
Father. Artaxerxes had a young son called Xerxes, who, some fortnight after
his Fathers death was slain, and deprived of his life and right by Zogdianus,
or Secundanus his bastard Brother, who took the Crown, but held it not above
7 Months. For being slain also, this Darius called before Ochus, a bastard
also, took the Empire, and was called Darius, and held it (some give
Artaxerxes his Father 41 years, some 46 years: but the most and best agree
upon 40 years.) This Darius Nothus his bastard son had the honor to have
the holy City builded and finished in his days. He reigned in all Years. 19
Months. 6 7 Artaxerxes Mnemon. In his days flourished the Prophet Malachie.
Cyrus his brother, called Cyrus the younger, took arms against him with the
loss of his own life. Whose expedition is described by that famous Xenophon.
This Artaxerxes reigned 43 8 Ochus, called Darius Artaxerxes Ochus. He reigned
23 9 Arses the son of Ochus was slain by Bagoas an Eunuch, Diodor. Sicu^.
lib. 17.
who killed first Ochus his Father. Arses reigned 3 Broughton leaves out the 20
years of Ochus, and makes Ochus and Arses to be but one man: and thrusting out
Arses, gives unto Ochus his three years and no more. He was deceived by the
Florentine Printer of Clemens Alexandrinus, printing for [(...) (or (...) for
20, (...).
put by the Library) (...)] for (...). Years. Months. 10 Darius Codomannes
his son succeeded him: and in the 6 year of his reign he was beaten by
Alexander Magnus, and slain by Bessus Governor of Bactrya, one of Alexanders
Princes and Captains, and so an end of the Persian Monarchy. He reigned 6 The
whole time of the Persian Monarchy was a matter of 228 years. Cyrus began to
reign in Persia the 55 Olympiad. Darius the last was subdued by Alexander the
112 Olympiad. So betwixt Cyrus and Darius there fell in 57 Olympiads, and each
Olympiad had the term of 4 years: so we find 228 complete years, only
adding the imperfect years of the 112 Olympiad: in which Olympiad Darius was
slain. Some petty differences there are about small matters in judicious
chiefly about some pieces of years.
Chronologers, (chiefly about Cyrus his time, after he was Emperor: for some
give him but 3 or 4 years at the most.) But in the sum of the matter, the
chiefest agree upon this reckoning, and give to the Persian Monarchy about 228
years.

CHAP. II. An Explanation of the former Kings of the Persian Monarchy out of
Daniel.
Dan. 11.2. There shall stand up yet 3. Kings in P^rsia: and the 4. shall be
far^e richer than they all. And by ^is strength through ^is rubes, he shall
stir up all against the Realm of G^aecia. Since the former voice shows this
was in the f^rst year of Darius the Mede: and therefore, whereas it is said,
There shall stand up [yet] three Kings: the sense is, That from, or after
Darius the Mede there shall be three Kings in Per^ia. viz. Cyrus, Cambyses,
Darius Hystaspis; and then the fourth is plainly Xerxes, as appears by that of
his great riches, and his huge and mighty preparations made to invade Greece.
Now since it is as clear as day, that the fourth was Xerxes, the other 3 can be
no other than Cyrus, Cambyses and Darius Hystaspis.

The only Objection that can be made, is of a Magus, named Smerdis, who took
upon him to be the son of Cyrus, and usurped the Throne after Cambyses,
Herod^t. in Thalia.
against whom he conspired. But the answer is, that the Holy Ghost does not
hold him worth the naming, and he bears no place in the holy writ amongst the
Kings of Persia: whether it be for that his time was short; for e^e he saw 7
moneth^, the Nobles conspired against him, and suppressed him: or whether he
being a conspirator is rather to be called a Tyrant than a King. it is out of
question the Holy Ghost does pass the Magus or Sm^rdis over. Some do take the
odd months, that this Smerdis usurped, and add them to the time of Cambyses;
and so give him somewhat a longer time of reign than I have done: but so small
a difference is not worth the speaking of.

2. Chron. 36. a 20 And they were servants to him and to his b sons. (a
Nebuchadnezzar.

b His son Euilmerodach: 2. Reg. 25.27.

His nephew Belshazzar. Dan. 5.1.) And all nations shall fear him, and his
son, and his sons son, until the time of his Lord come, when many nations
and great Kings shall serve themselves of him.

2. Chron. 36.21. To fulfill the Word of the Lord spoken by c Jeremiah, until
the land had her fill of Sabbaths: for all the days that she lay desolate she
kept Sabbath d 70 years. c Ier. 25.11. And this whole land shall be desolate,
and an astonishment, and these Nations shall serve the King of Babell. 70.
years. and Ier. 19.10. d beginning when Iehoiaki^ or Ieconiah was carried away
captive, ending at the first year of Cyrus and Darius the Mede Kings of
Persia. That they began at Ieconiahs captivity, is proved by Ezekiel. 40.1. In the
five and twentieth year of our being in captivity, in the beginning of the
year, in the 10th day of the month, in the 14th year after the City was
smitten. etc. Now Ezekiel, for the most part, reckons the year from the first
of Ieconiahs captivity. As Ezech. 1.2. And more plainly out of Jeremiah, cap.
29.2.10. where writing to those that were carried away with Ieconiah, he tells
them, that they shall be 70 years in captivity from the time of their carrying
away; as may appear, if the Chapter be rightly considered of.

2. Chron. 36.22.23. But in the first year of c Cyrus King of Persia, etc.
Thus says Cyrus King of Persia. c Together with Darius the Mede, whom Cyrus
had of his own accord admitted into the government of the Empire with
himself, as Dan. 5.31. Darius of the Medes took the Kingdom being 62. years
old. and, Daniel 9.1. In the first year of Darius the son of Ahash^erosh of
the seed of the Medes, which was made King of the realm of the Chaldeans* For
Cyrus, led with ambition, went about wars in other Countries: and therefore
Darius had the title of the King* though Cyrus were King in ^ffect.

Ezra. 1.1. Now in the first f year of f Cyrus King of Persia, that the Word
of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the Lord stirred up
the spirit of Cyrus K. of Persia, and he made a proclamation throughout all his
Kingdom, etc. f When he first reigned over Babylon: for otherwise he reigned
30. years in Persia, and in the 28th. of his reign of Persia was this
captivity of the Jews ended.

Ezra. 2.2. Which came with g Zerubbabel, to wit, Ieshua, Nehemiah, etc. g
Zerubbabel was chief Captain. Ieshua or Iehoshua son of Iehozadak high
Priest, Hag. 1.1. But Nehemiah a man of great authority went not now, but came
64. or 54. years after.

Ezra. 3.1. And when the 7. month was come, and the children of Israel were in
their Cities, the people assembled themselves as one man unto Jerusalem. From
the first day of the 7. month they offered burnt offerings. h And Cambyses his
son. synecdochice.

Ezra. 3.8. In the second year of their coming unto the house of God in
Jerusalem, etc. they began to set forward the work of the house of God: and v.
9. they laid the foundation. Ezra. 4.5. And they hired counselors against them
to hinder their device all the days of l Cyrus K. of Persia, even inclusive
accipiendum more Heb.
until the reign of Darius K. of Persia. l The son of Hystaspes, the third
King from Cyrus, who either for to curry favor with the people, or for the
love of Atossa, Cyrus his daughter (whom after he had gotten the Kingdom he
married) did carefully ratify every thing that Cyrus had done, that hereby he
might establish himself; and therefore in his time also those crafty
underminers of the Jews prosperity did prevail.

6 And in the days o^ k Ahash^erosh (in the beginning of his reign) wrote
they an accusation against the Inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem. k That is of
Xerxes called Ahashuerosh or Assuerus, (q. d.) an hereditary Prince, both
because he was borne after that Darius was King, as also because he first was
borne of A^ossa Cyrus his daughter, and so seemed by subrogation and
representation to succeed his vid. Herod. principium polym^iae.
grandfather Cyrus.

7 And in the days of l A^tash ashte (Mithridate Tabeel, and the rest of the
companions, etc.) wrote unto the King, for the staying of the building of the
Temple. l Or Artaxerxes, he namely that was called (...) or Longimanus, the
son of Xerxes by Amestris the daughter of Otan, (as Herod. Polym^.) whom
Ctesias calls Amistris, or Amystres, the daughter of Onopha; That is to say,
by Ester the daughter of Abi^hail, Ester 2.15.

Ezra. 5.24. Then m ceased the work of the house of God, which was at
Jerusalem, and did stay unto the second year of n Darius King of Persia. m
About 41. years, for Artaxerxes Longimanus reigned 40. whereunto must be added
the first year of Darius.

n Namely, Darius Nothus (for a bastard was he) who before he was King was
called Ochus.

Ezra. 5.1. Then Haggai, a Prophet, and Zechariah the son of Iddo prophesied
unto the Jews, that were in Judah and Jerusalem. Haggai. 1.1. ^n the 2. year
of King Darius, in the 6. month, in the 1. day of the month, came the Word of
the Lord by the ministry of Haggai the Prophet, unto Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel, a Prince of Judah, and to Iehoshua, the son of Iehozadach, the
high Priest. chap. 2. In the 7. month, and 21. day of the month, came the
Word. v. 4. Who is left a^ong you, that saw this house in her first glory? how
do you see it now? Is it not in your eyes in comparison of that, Zech. 4.9.
as nothing? The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house,
Zech. 1.1.
and his hands shall also fi^ish it, etc. In the 8. month of the second year
of Darius, came the Word of the Lord unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah,
the ^onne of Iddo, the Prophet. And v. 7. In the eleventh month, etc. Zechar.
7.1. And in the 4. year of King Darius, the Word of the Lord came unto
Zechariah. o This and the verses following are spoken by way of prevention, to
comfort the Jews, dismayed at the consideration of the meannesse and simplenes
of this house, in comparison of that which Solomon built; purposedly done by
the Prophet, because about 106. years before this time, the very like grief
possessed the hearts of good men. Ezr. 3.12. Not that any of them that saw the
first Temple were now alive, but by an usual Hebrew manner of speaking; Quasi
dicas, Say that any of them were now alive, how would they weep? Yet for all
that, says the Lord, Go ye on: For the glory of the second house shall exceed
that of the first. For those in Ezr. 3.12. were then said to be old.

Ezra. 6.10. That they may offer sweet odo^^s unto the God of heaven, and pray
for q the Kings life, and for his r sons. p (viz.) Darius Nothus which made
this decree.

r Namely Arsaca, afterward called Artaxerxes, Cyrus Artossa and Oxendrae
perhaps, if he were borne at that time. Now this the King did more earnestly
require, because some other of his children had soon dyed. Ctesias.

Ezra. 6.14. So the Elders of the Jews builded, and they prospered by the
prophesying of Naggai the Prophet, and Zechariah the son of Iddo, and they
builded and finished it by the appointment of the God of heaven, and by the
commandment of s Cyrus, and t Darius, and u Artashashte Kings of Persia. v.
15. And this house was finished in the 3. day of the month Adar, which was the
6. year of the reign of K. Darius, and the 42. after their return. s (viz.)
Cyrus the great, who first gave commandment for the return.

t (viz.) Darius Nothus,

v Or Artaxerxes, namely Artaxerxes Mnemon, who reigned together with his
father Darius Nothus. And therefore it is, that Plutarch gives him 62. years
reign. because from the beginning he was made Co-Emperour with his father, by
reason of the wars against Secundianus and other chief men of the Kingdom.

Ezra. 6.23. And they kept the feast of unleavened bread 7. days with joy for
the Lord had made them glad, and turned the heart of the K. of x Ashur unto
them, to encourage them in the work of the house of God, even the God of
Israel. x Darius Nothus, who dividing his Kingdom with his son Arsaca or
Artaxerxes, committed to his sons charge the more Southern parts of the
Kingdom, and reserved to himself such Countries as lay more Northerly, as
more befitting his age and experience in those quarters. For whilst his father
Artaxerxes Longimanus lived, he was made Governor of Hyrcania, where also he
married Parysatis. Now the Countries subject unto the Persian King, are bounded
within the two Seas Hyrcanum and Persicum. Plin. lib 6. cap 13.
All that tract bounding Northward on the Caspian or Hyrcanian Sea is called
Assyria. The other lying Southward toward Mare Rubrum and Sinus Persicus is
called Herodot. in Melpo^ene.
Persia. But special mention is made here of the King of Ashur, because that
these Jews, which went with Ezra in the second return from captivity, did
come out of those high and Northern Countries; the former that returned under
Zerubbabel, out of the Southern Countries. That this is so, appears in the 8.
Chapt.

Ezra. 7.1. Now after these things, in the y reign of Arthashash^^ K. of
Persia, was Ezra, the son of Seraj^h, etc. And ^e came to Jerusalem (with
other of the Jews) in the 5. month: which was the 7 z year of the K. ver. 9.
For upon the first day of the first month, he began to go up from Babel: and
on the first day of the fifth month, came ^e to Jerusalem, according to the
good hand of his God, that was upon him. Nehemiah. 1.1. The words of Nehemiah,
the son of Hacha^iah, in the month b Chisten, etc. in the 20. year, etc. v.
2. came Hanani, one of my Brethren, etc. v. 3. And they said to me, The
residue, etc. y (i. e.) Of Artaxerxes Muemon, when after his fathers decease,
he alone ruled the Empire.

z After he began to reign alone.

a Artaxerxes Muemon, Darius, says the Geneva.

b The third month of the year, according to the Chaldean calculation, which
Nehemiah follows.

Nehem. 2.1. Now in the month c Nisa^, in the 20. year of K. d Artashashte,
the wine ^tood before him, and I took up the cup, and gave it to the King. c
The 7. month by the Chaldean account.

d Artaxerxes Muemon. Darius Hystaspis, says the Geneva.

Nehem 5.14. And from the time, that the K. gave me charge to be Governor in
the land of Judah: from the 20. year, even to the 32. year, that is, 12
years, I and my Brethren have not eaten the bread of the Governor.
Notwithstanding the Wall was finished on the 25. day of Elul, in e 52. days.

When the Wall was builded, 7.1.
etc.

e That is, the Locks, Gates and Bars were set up fifty two days, after the
stone wall was built. verse. 1.

Now the City was large and great: 4.
but the people were few therein: and the houses were not builded. And f Ieshua
begat Ioiakim, Ioiakim also begat Eliashib, Nehem. 12.10.
and Eliashib begat Ioiada, and Io^ada begat Jonathan, and Jonathan begat
Iaddua. In the days of Eliashib, Ioiada, and Iohanan, and Iaddua, 22.
were the chief Fathers of the Levites, written in the reign of Dar^us the
Persian. f The succession of the hie Priests from the captivity to the
translation of the Persian Monarchy to Alexander the Great, whom as Joseph.
Antiq. Iud. lib. 11. cap. 7. and 8. reports Iaddua did meet as he came toward
Jerusalem. Now none ought to wonder, that Nehemiah should record this; for from
the beginning of Artaxerxes Muemon, whom Nehemiah attended, until Alexander
Magnus, are not threescore years.

g The last King of Persia, called also Codomannus, Him Alexander overthrew.
Nehemiah lived till the time of Darius the Persian. Nehem. 12.22. Nehem. 6.15.
Therefore the Altar erected by the Israelites, Ezr. 33. not long after their
return, even while Cyrus yet reigned, could not be built by Nehemiah, unless
we say that Nehemiah lived above 200. years; which is not credible: For so
many years at least were between Cyrus and Darius the last, whom Alexander
overcame.

CHAP. III. Doubts removed, which seemed to prove the Persian Monarchy much
shorter than the former account.
Answer 1.
ARGUMENT. I. From the story of Mordecay, who, they say, was carried captive
with Ieconiah from Jerusalem.
THat Mordecay was not carried captive from Jerusalem with Ieconiah: That place,
Ester 2.5. [ Who was carried away] is necessarily to be referred to Kish,
Mordecay's great grandfather.

1 The accent Tipcha proves nothing.

2 Nor the Conjunction Copulative [ and] And be nourished Hadassa.

3 No more does the history or narration of Kish, put between, in verse. 6.

4 If Mordecay, named, Ester 2.2 were the same that is mentioned in Ester; yet
it follows not, that he was carried captive with I^coniah from Jerusalem: For
Zerubbabel himself, with whom he is mentioned, was not carried captive with
I^coniah, but was begotten in the captivity by Pedajah, the son of Salathiel;
Mat. 1.12.
^onne by law though not by nature of Iaconiah. Again Mordecay mentioned in
Ezra 2. returned into Iudaea, as is manifested by Nehem. 7.7. but Mordecay in
Ester went not into Iudaea at all.

Arguments to prove it, are,

1 The Pronoune relative must be referred to the next going before it, and not
to that which is further off, as 1. Chron. 2.7.

2 To what other end should mention be made of Kish, unless to show by his
carrying away captive, how Mordecay a Jew, borne of him, became citizen of
Susa? Certainly he is not named to distinguish him from the other Mordecay,
which is one rule why men's fathers and grandfathers are named in Scripture.

3 This confirms the truth of Gods promise, which he made to those that were
carried away captive with Ieconiah, Ier. 24.6. That they should return, be
built up, planted, and not rooted out, etc. And therefore were commanded to
marry and beget children. Ier. 29.6. Whereby it appears that the promise was
made unto their posterity also. The performance whereof by this story of Ester
is excellently declared.

4. From the time. For if Mordecay were carried away captive with Ieconiah,
then was he above a hundred years old in the 12th. of Assuer^s, according to
Broughton. For by 2 Kings, 24.16. we may judge him to be at the least 20^
years old, when he was carried Captive. From the 8th. of Nebuchadnezzar, in
which Ieconiah was captived, to the first of Cyrus are 63. years. From the
first of Cyrus, to the 12. of Assuerus, are 20. years. All make 103. at least
100. At which age Mordecay was altogether unfit to perform offices and
services in Court, As Barzillay at a less age. 2. Sam. 19.36.
But reckon we the times of Cyrus and Cambyses aright; and make (as the truth
is,) Assuerus to be Xerxes: and there are betwixt Cyrus the first, and Xerxes
the twelfth 60. years. So Mordecay shall have lived about 140. years in the
twelfth of Xerxes, being then too, of strong and able body, and likely to live
longer. As may appear, Ester 10.2, 3. (...).

Answer 2.
ARGUM. 2. Nehemiah is named among those that returned in the first year of
Cyrus from Babylon. Ezra. 2.^.

And this Nehemiah lived till the end of the Persian Monarchy. Nehem. 12.
therefore (says Mr Broughton) the Persian Monarchy cannot be held to stand
200 years.


There be two Nehemiahs. One mentioned, Ezra 2.

Another who returned in the 20. year of Artaxerxes Mnemon: and lived till the
reign of Darius the Persian.

Answer 3.
ARGUM. 3. Ezra is called son of Serajah. Ezra. 7.1. Now Serajah was slain
before the destruction of Jerusalem, 2. King. 25.21. Therefore Ezra must needs
be borne at that time: who also lived until the later times of the Persian
Monarchy: therefore either the Persian Monarchy must endure but 130 years: or
else Ezra must live above 200, which is not likely.
There is Ambiguity in the word Son, which M. Broughton takes properly; as if
Ezra had been immediately the son of Serajah: whereas indeed he was so
Serajahs son, as the Jews used to call their posterity, even to the fifth
descent, Sons. And Zerubbabel is usually called the son of Shealti^l, whereas
he was but his nephew.

Answer. 4.
ARGUM. 4. Is from the 70 weeks of Daniel, which they say do begin at the 1.
year of Cyrus, and end with Christ, and are precisely 490 years: and
therefore the Persian Monarchy, cannot be, no not 200 years. For then from the
first of King Cyrus will arise more then 490. years to the death of Christ.
When Daniels 70. weeks begin, is uncertain. Some will have them begin in the
first year of Cyrus: some in the second of Darius* Nothus: others in the
twentieth of Artaxerxes Mnemon. A man may follow his judgment: for neither the
one nor the other is defined in the Text, Dan. 9.25. but is absolutely put [
from the outgoing of the Word] which we know went forth in three Kings reigns.

But for the end and period of them, it must necessarily be at the death of
Christ: and not as some will have it, at the destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans. Its plain, Dan. 9.24. But to grant this Proposition true, though
uncertain, that Daniels seventie Weeks begin at the first year of Cyrus, yet
does not this follow thereupon, That from the first year of Cyrus are
precisely 490. years: for Numbers are either taken,

Properly, when they note that which naturally they signify:

Improperly or figuratively, when they signify either more or less, in regard
of the circumstance of the matter, and the speakers intention. So is Two and
Three taken properly, Matthew. 16.21. and 27.23. and 20.19. Improperly, Hos. 6.2.
Seven properly, 1. King. 18. Figuratively, Luc. 17.4. Matthew. 18.22. Ten
properly, Exodus 34.28. figuratively, Numb. 14.22. Twelve properly, Mat. 10.2.
figuratively, Apoc. 7. Thousands, figuratively, Dan. 7.10. So that often in
Scriptures Numbers finite are put for infinite, certain for uncertain,
perfect for imperfect, round and gross for corrupt.

2. Chr. 26.21. For the land rested (or kept Sabbath) all the days of her
desolation, to fulfill 70 years.
These 70. years begin at the time of the first Captivity, in the reign of
Ioakim. Now from this time till the eleventh year of Zedekiah, when he was
captived and the Temple and City burnt, the Land cannot be said to keep
Sabbaths, because the Inhabitants were not yet carried away: and therefore it
was but a part of these 70. years that she rested.

Not precisely. Judge. 11.26. Israel dwelt in Heshbon, Aroer, and Arnon, 300.
years.
For reckon from their first inhabiting of those Cities, and we find it but
260. years, or thereabouts: unless we add the 40 years from coming up out
of Egypt. But it ought to be understood synecdochice and figurate. Apoc.
11.12.13. Three years and a half, etc.


Often mention is made of three years and a half, of 42 months, (which make
so many years) of 1260. days, which also make so many years: In all which we
must needs understand a certain number to be put for an uncertain, that is,
for the whole time that runs on from the passion of Christ till the end of
the World.

Let us consider the drift and scope of the Angels speech. Daniel he
understands by books, that the 70. years of Captivity were now even at an
end: Hereupon he prays that God would be merciful to the people and holy
City. An Angel is sent to him, and talks unto him, not of the 70. years of
Captivity to be ended under Cyrus, but of seventy times seven years, of most
glorious deliverance from the slavery of Hell and the Devil, to be purchased
by Christ. As if the Angel had thus said: Thou Daniel think of 70. years,
at the end whereof thy people is to have a deliverance from carnal servitude
under Babylon, and a restoration of an earthly Jerusalem: but I give thee to
understand of a far more glorious liberty and freedom from Satan's slaverie,
to be purchased by Christ for thy people after 70. times 7. years. Do not
thou think of 70. years, which are now even gone and past, but of 70 times 7
years, which when they are come to end, thy people and city for whom thou
prayest, shall obtain this great blessing.

Wherefore this is spoken in allusion to the 70 years of Captivity, to show
that Gods mercy should exceed his judgments seventie times, which from that
should endure seventy times seven year, till the coming of Christ, and
afterward for ever. It is therefore a prophetical prediction, and not an
hystoricall relation: and the circumscription of time is used only for memory
sake; that after these many years, they should be sure to obtain such a
deliverance, as, than which, they could desire nothing more.

Not precisely. Genesis 15.13.

Know for a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not
theirs 400. years, and they shall serve them.


For from the time that God spoke unto Abraham (whence the years must
necessarily begin) unto the coming of the children of Israel out of Egypt,
are 430. years, as Moses witnesses, Exo. 12. If we say that they begin at the
fifth year of Isaac; yet from the time that God spoke, unto that, are about
twenty years. From that to the departure of the Israelites, Matthew. 1.17. From
Abraham to David, are 14. Generations: from David to the captivity of Babylon,
14. Generations: from the Capt. of Babylon unto Christ, 14. Generations.
whole 400. Wherefore, from the time that God spoke this, till the departure
from Egypt, are four hundred synecdochice; above four hundred precisely.

What! precisely fourteen in all? No. From David to the Captivity of Babylon,
were twenty seven, as Mr Broughton confesses. In the other two were indeed
fourteen.

Full and whole? By no means. Mat. 12.14.

So shall the Son of Man be three days, and 3. nights in the heart of the
earth.


For Christ was buried on the Evening of the sixth day, the same day he dyed.
The seventh day he rested in the grave, upon the eight day early he rose
again. So that he was but two whole days in the grave, and scarce that
neither. Now the Day and the Night make one Day, Genesis 1. And therefore because
Christ rested in the Sepulcher part of three days, he is said by a synecdoche
to be three days and three nights in the heart of the Earth.

If the Angel had said, The seventy years of your Captivity in Babylon: But
after 80. times seventy years, Christ shall be slain, and so you shall obtain
a more glorious freedom; Then had the Angel spoken precisely: for, from that
time to the death of Christ, was precisely five hundred sixty years. But so
the force and efficacy of the Type had bin obscured. To which the Angel would
allude by the name of seventy times seven years.

Antiochus his persecution continued three years and a half precisely, Dan.
7. Now Antiochus was a Type of Satan. And therefore the Time, times, and half
a Time, forty two months, 1260. days, all making up the same number of
years, are uttered by S. John, Apoc. 11.12, 13. in allusion to Antiochus
persecution. For by this he comfort the Woman, that is, the Church,
persecuted by the Dragon Satan; That this persecution should last but a little
while, even as that of Antiochus; not properly, but figuratively: for Satan
persecuteth the Church unto the end of the world.

That the seventy weeks are not to be understood precisely, but by a
synecdoche, is thus proved. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy People,
says Gabriel, Dan. 9. ver. 24. That these are whole and full so many, is
proved by their partition. For there are seven weeks from the going forth of
the Commandment, ver. 25. and sixty three weeks when the street and wall
shall be builded; and again, after threescore and two weeks, Christ shall be
slain. But not presently after those sixty nine weeks; but in the middle of
the last week. ver. 27. Where it is said, And he shall confirm the Covenant
with money for one week: and in the Middle of the week he shall cause the
sacrifice and oblation to cease. Then thus the Reason stands:

If Christ dyed in the midst of the last week; then from the first year of
Cyrus to the death of Christ, are not precisely 490. yeare^, but 486. and a
half. The reason of the consequence is plain: For if Christ dyed in the
midst of the last week, i.e. the seventieth week, then to the death of
Christ from Cyrus the first, are but sixty nine weeks and a half. Now sixty
nine weeks cum dimidio, make but four hundred eighty six years cum dimidio;
whereas seventy whole weeks make four hundred ninety years.

But Christ dyed in the midst of the last week. This is manifest: For Christ
then dyed, when sacrifice and oblation ceased. This is proved by the ninth and
tenth to the Hebrews. But sacrifice and oblation ceased in the midst of the
last week. This Daniel expressly says, Cap. 9. ver. 27.

Therefore from the first year of Cyrus to the death of Christ, are not four
hundred ninety years precisely: And by consequent, the seventy weeks are to
be understood figurate and synecdochice: not praecise and troprie.

Christ was baptized about three years and a half before he dyed, and then
(says Funccius) was sacrifice and oblation abolished out of the place. Mat. 3.
ult. This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. And therefore God was
pleased afterward with no other sacrifice, but the immaculate Lamb Christ. But
for answer: So God was only pleased with the sacrifice of Christ before his
Baptism. For he was a perpetual sacrifice from the beginning: and the other
sacrifices pleased him only as Types and shadows of Christ's sacrifice of
himself. Secondly, Moses sacrifices and such Types of Christ were acceptable
unto God after his Baptism: which is plain, Matthew. 8.3. where Christ after
his Baptism bids the Leper offer the gift, that Moses commanded. Which was,
Levit. 14.10. two Lambs and an Ewe Lamb, for a trespass offering and a burnt
offering.

Answer
Object.

The word (...) must be translated Dimidio, not Medio. So that Christ shall be
said to abolish sacrifice and offering, not in the middle of the Week, but in
half of the Week: and this half must be the last half, and not the first.


Though the word signify both ways, Exodus 12. Medio noctis Exodus 24.16. dimidium
sangui^is.
yet here it must be translated middle, not half:

1. By the consent of the Learned:

2. By this reason out of the Text. Christ is here said, to Cause to cease, or
to abolish sacrifice and oblations in the midst of the 70th. week. Now this
Action is not actio maneus, and continuata, but cito transiens. For it is meant
of the death of Christ. Unless therefore we will make Christ's death to be a
continued action, and say, that Christ dyed in the half of the Seventy Seven;
i.e. his crucifying and death continued for the space of 3. years and a half
(than which, what more absurd?) we must needs grant, that he dyed in the
middle. Had it been said, that Christ should preach the Gospel in half the
last 7. it had been truly; because it was a continued action.

Not only in this last week, but in some of the former is this Synecdoch^ to
be understood. For the 70. weeks are divided into 3. parts: ver. 25. Kno^
therefore, and understand, that from the going forth of the commandment to
bring again the people, and to build Jerusalem shall be seven Weeks (there is
the first part) and threescore and two Weeks, (there is the second) and the
Wall, and the Street shall be built again, in a troublous time. After
threescore and two weeks Christ shall be slain. v. 27. And he shall confirm
the Cov^nant for many one Week (there is the third part:) and in the midst
of the Week, he shall abolish sacrifice and oblation.

The Reason is this then:

Seven Weeks are said to pass before the building of the street and wall;
above 49. were past. And therefore by these 7. Weeks more years are meant*
than are precisely set down.

The Minor is proved by the story of Scripture. For ( Ezr. 4) the building
both of the Temple and City, as appears by the Letter of S^imshag, was
hindered all the days of Cyrus, till the second year of Darius. And from the
2. year of Darius, along unto the 20. of Artaxerxes, who succeeded him, was it
still hindered, as appears, Nehem. 1.1. The Wall was built afterward, Cap. 4.6.
The Street, Cap. 7. Whereby it is manifest, if we reckon the years from Cyrus
the first, to Artaxerxes the 20. that the Wall and Street could not be builded
in the first 7. Weeks. Therefore those words [ In the other] are falsely
shuffled into the Text.

Eusebius, Iunius, and Tremellius say, That the Temple was built in the first
7. Weeks.

CHAP. IV. Observations and explanations on some places of Ezra, and Nehemiah.
THe resolution is; That we must read on: Some do question, whether it be
their part to read on in the Book of Ezra, in their private going over the
Scripture: since many places are nothing but names, and as they conceive, of no
great use to us.
for that nothing In sacris Libris nihil contemnatur, aut obiter praetereatur:
etiamsi nomina recenseantur. Chrysostom. hom. 21. and 24. super Genesis Et in Romans
16. Ser. 31.
is to be contemned in these holy writings; no nor to be skipped over. Say it
be but the repeating, and cataloguing only of names. There is no Book, no
Chapter, no line in the Word of God, but is profitable, given by inspiration of
God, and written for our learning. And if we understand it not in some places;
yet those places have in them an immanent power to edify: though as yet it be
not transient, conveighing the profit of it to us, till in some measure we do
understand it.

2. The way to come to the understanding of them, is, not to pass those places
over; but to read them. And when we are busy in reading places which we
conceive not, Chrysostom. Sermon. 3. de Lazaro.
God opens the heart, and sends us in, the interpretation, as he did Philip to
the Eunuch, Act. 8.

3. There is much to be had out of the Genealogies, to a wise, and diligent
Reader. We learn the increase, or decrease of the Church, the strange holding
out of some Families, as the Servants of Solomon, and the Gibeonites, called in
these Books, the Nethinims: They were made drawers of water to the Temple, as
a kind of punishment. God made this cross, a mercy. Their employment so near
the house of God, gave them fit occasion to be partakers of the things of God.
And the Lord, we see, did wonderfully honor them. The nearer they were to the
Church, the nearer to God. In a word, he sees little, that sees not many
things of excellent use, to be gathered out of Chapters full of names.

4. Say, that as yet we can pick nothing out of some such Chapters; yet must we
not step over them in our course of reading them: but we are in any hand to
take them along in our reading, if it be but to show our obedience to God in
reading over all his sacred word.

Object. But does not Paul, Tim. 1.4. warn Timothy, that he should not give
heed to fables, and endless genealogies, which minister questions, rather then
ediying?
Resp. He does. But he means Genealogies that were fabulous, not such as do
edify: Now all the Scripture tends to edifying. Cajetan notes, that he means
by endless Genealogies, such as are not in the word, which gender questions,
that the Scripture does not end and determine. August. contra Adversarios
Le^gis and Prophet. lib. 2. cap. 1. tom. 6.
No question, the Apostle finds fault with such fabulous genealogies, as in
those days were too common among the Jews, and after were written in the
Books of Talmud. S. Paul Aquinas in 1. Tim. 1.4.
1. Tim. 4.7. calls them old wives tales. And when men begin to be giddy, and to
be sick of foolish pride, they study much in doting pedegrees. Paul to Timothy
and Titus both, means such genealogies as do move and not end questions. Which
minister questions (says Paul to Timothy) not which end questions. What
questions? Tit. 3.9.
foolish questions. And for those genealogies which had any pith in them, they
became also uncertain and endless, when Herod had burnt up the Records, as
Josephus notes. Now Chrysostom. Hom. 23. in Act. Questionum nullus finis.
of such questions there is no end: And we may all observe, that to be full of
impertinent questions, comes from a weak understanding: as we see in children,
who will even tire one with babbling questions. So the Apostles in their ruder
time, before the passion of Christ, and after too, before the coming down of
the holy Ghost, were asking questions sometime not so profitable, as, When the
day of Judgment should be? But when they were filled with the gifts of the
holy Ghost, Acts 2. we hear no more of such questions. No, no: They then found
fault with such curiosity. The same holy Father does observe, that Thomas,
Judas, and Peter were full of questions. But John, whom Christ loved, and who
might have been most bold with him, was very sparing that way. In a word, the
Genealogies of the word are of great use, and do satisfy the doubts of men,
and not move questions that can have no end.

This was not in his first year of his Kingdom of Persia, Cap. 1. v. 1. Now in
the first year of Cyrus King of Persia, that the Word of the Lord by the mouth
of Jeremiah might be fulfilled: the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus King of
Persia, that he made proclamation throughout all his kingdom.
but of his Monarchy, when he had conquered Babylon. Now how long he reigned
after his Conquest, precisely we cannot say. Dan. 10.1. we read of The third
year of Cyrus, and some Chronologers think he lived not much above five or six
years longer.

It Is said, The Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus. There be that say, that,
Cyrus was converted, because he is called The Lords anointed, and his Servant.

But Saul was the anointed of the Lord: yet none of the best men, or of the
best Kings: He that does look over the stories of Cyrus; shall find that he
lived and dyed a mere Heathen. And the Prophet Isay, cap. 45.4. says in the
name of God, That Cyrus had not known him. And therefore, it was in respect of
his office, and the work the Lord did design him to; though he never were
really anointed with oil, as Saul and David were. I say, in regard of his
place, and this great work of the Lord in his hand, he was called, The
anointed of the Lord. Out of which we may see, that the Lord does many times
do great and famous matters for his Church, by the hands of wicked men. And
their divinity is not sound, who hold the contrary Tenet. It was the mighty
work of God to bring this wise and great Prince in the very first entrance
into his Monarchy, before things were fully settled, to dismiss so great and so
In respect of their custom and Religion.
united a people, as the Jews were, into their own Country with such a fair
and ample patent as he did; they being held among the Barbarians, a People
given much to insurrection: But God must and will have his ways take place.
There is no resisting of his will by any: The will of men must go after his
decree. Which decrees of God, manifested no less than 170. years before, did
not leave this fact of Cyrus contingent, but made it necessary.

They write, that he was made to see the Prophecy of Isaiah, where he finding
his very name, so long before he was borne, was thereby moved to this great
work. That might be a persuasion: but the cause, we see, was; because the
Lord by a potent work of his spirit stirred up the heart of Cyrus to send
forth so gracious an Edict. And yet we must not think, that this his being
made acquainted with the will of Gods decrees, gave to this his Act the Nature
of Obedience; Obedience being properly an act of ours, when we do obey the
will of Gods command; he by it imposing on us and requiring of us, the work as
a duty. In the first of Kings 11. Jeroboam had it cleared to him, that Gods
will was, he should be King over the ten Tribes: yet because it was a will
of Gods decree, not of his command, as of a duty to be done by him, he goes
among Divines for an intruder, and an usurper, in and for that fact of his.
Vid. 23.9.5. cap. 45. in annot.
It Is Obedience, when we obey a divine precept: but not ever when we follow a
divine instinct. Davenant. in Col. 1. v. 2. p. 15.16.
It Is a work belonging immediately and only to God to work effectually on
the Will, and thus to stir up the heart of a man. Kings hearts are in Gods
hands.

This shows us, Ver. 7. Also Cyrus the King brought forth the Vessels of the
house of the Lord: which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of Jerusalem, and
had put them in the house of his God.
that nothing that is once appointed by God in his worship, say it be after
used in Idolatrous worship, as these vessels were, can be defiled. but it may
and must return to 'ts ancient use: and be had in the worship of God again.
Whereas we read, 2. Kings, 24.13. that Nebuchadnezzar did cut in pieces all
the Vessels of gold, which Solomon K. of Israel had made, in the Temple of the
Lord: The meaning is, That he did Heb. (...) truncavit.
curtaile, as it were, the Temple. Ver. 8. Even those did Cyrus King of Persia
bring forth by the hand of Mithridath the Treasurer: and numbered them unto
Shazbazzar the Prince of Judah.
For it is plain, he did reserve those Vessels whole. For Belshazzar did after
drink in them, Dan. 5.2. And here we find, that they were restored, and
brought back to the house of God again. This Shazbazzar, the Prince of Judah
was Zerubbabel, called so in Chaldaea* Iunius denies it: but our English
Annotations, and that of Deodat's, in the Italian, do with more likelihood
affirm it. He was by the King ordained head and Conductor of those of his
Nation, who would be willing to return. Thus God kept the seignorie, and the
chief staff of Authority in the line of Judah. No length nor change of time
can eat out, and break off the decrees of God.

CHAP. V. This Chapter contains a list of such as returned to Jerusalem, Ezra
2.
at the first going up; and chiefly, of those, who offered presents for the
reedifying of the Temple of the Lord.
IN the numbers you may find some differences from that Catalogue we have,
Neh. 7. As for example: Here, v. 5. the Sons of Arah are said to be 775. There,
v. 10.652. Reconcile the places thus: 775. gave their names in Babylon, that
they would return: only 652. mentioned in Nehemiah, came up into Iuda^a; the
rest changing their minds, or dying by the way. And where Nehemiah has more,
it might be by joining with them in the way.

Question is made, whether only they of Judah and Benjamin returned?
The Sanctius in Zachar. 8. and 13.. 32.
Answer that is made, I think, is sound: That since in Ezr. 2. the sum of
the Principals of the whole Body, that returned, besides their followers, were
42360. But now reckon we the numbers of Judah and Benjamin by the pole, which
are punctually set down, Ezr. 2. and they come short of the total sum, a
matter of 12000. Now these 12000. are those of other 10. Tribes, besides Judah,
and Benjamin. We read, that so many went over of other Tribes to Rehoboam,
that, (as it is said) His Crown was strengthened by them. and many of Israel
came over to Asa: and in Hezekiah's days, sundry of Ashur, Zabulon, and
Manasse joined themselves with Judah. And who can doubt, but that in Captivity,
being Contrymen in foreign parts, much of the 10. Tribes incorporated
themselves into the two Tribes? And no other but this is the meaning of that
fifth ver. of the first chap. of Ez. Then rose up the chief of the Fathers of
Judah and Benjamin, with all them whose spirit God had raised to go up: That
is (says Deodate) all those of other Tribes; according as we read, 1. Chron.
9.3. In Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Judah, and of the children of
Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim, and Manasse, who, no question, in the
Captivity for very conscience and Religion, joined themselves to Judah.

By Province, Ver. 1. Now these are the children of the Province, that went up
out of the Captivity.
our English Annotations means Iudaea: but Iunius, and Deodate do seem to
me with more reason, to understand by Province, Babylonia, that is, says
Iunius, those who enrolled their names in Babylonia; called here a Province,
says the Italian, because the other Israelites were dispersed in sundry other
provinces.

Zerubbabel was son of Mat. 1.12.
Salathiel, Ver. 2. Which came up with Zerubbabel, Iesuah, and Nehemiah,
Serviah, Reelajob, Mordecay, Bilsha^. etc. Of Zerubbbael.
borne in Babylon, and accordingly he had a Babylonian Chrysostom. Hom. 7. in
Mat. 2.
name. He was a Chief in the first year of Cyrus: and we find in sacred
Story, that he lived to see the building of the Temple, about the 6. year of
Scaliger de emendat. temporum, lib. 6.
Darius Nothus. Now say he was but 14. Great men under some tutors are put in
places of employment young. Asclepiades held, men began about that age to be
wise, And the Civil law says, that men at 14. are fit for action, Vid. Tertul.
de anima, cap. 38. Zach. 4.9.
years of age, the first of Cyrus, yet to Darius Nothus is a matter of 100.
years, as appears by the Chronology. Hence we see, that the Lord gave him a
life much longer than ordinary. We read nothing when he dyed after the
edifying of the Temple. This cleares that in Zachary 4.9. The hands of
Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house; his hands also shall finish
it. The very phrase does tell us, that the Lord did draw out his life of
purpose, that he might live to make up that goodly work. Like as Moses, Deuteronomy.
ult. had a longer life than usual given him, that he might bring the People of
God out of Egypt. In that place of Zechary the Lord does promise Zerubbabel
some singular matter, in that the Prophet affirms, that the hands of
Zerubbabel that laid the foundation, the same hand shall finish it; meaning, an
exceeding long life. Thus we see how God does cause some to live to be wondrous
old, above others, because he has something to be done by them. Then age is
a crown indeed, when it is thus found in the ways of Righteousness. Neither
has it a good savor, for men to say of an old Zerubbabel when he is going
hence, What matter is it to hear of such an aged man dying, or dead? What?
does not the Lord threaten it as a curse, that he will take away? whom? the
youth? No, the prudent and the ancient, Isa. 3.2.

This Nehemiah was not Nehemiah the famous, Verse. 2. Of Nehemiah.
but another of the same name; as there were sundry of the same name: One, Ezr.
3. Another, Ezr. 8.10. For this Nehemiah came up with Zerubbabel in the first
of Cyrus: and Nehemiah the great lived till the time of Darius the last, beaten
by Alexander; which is two hundred years and upwards. Now that in those days
Nehemiah should live above 200. years, sounds not likely. Nehemiah was the
penner of the book called Nehemiah, and in the book mention is made of Iaddua
the Priest; of whom we read in Josephus, that he did meet Alexander the great
in his Formalities, and stayed him from doing hurt to the City, and the Temple.
Again we read, that Nehemiah was cup bearer to Scal. de emend. lib. 6. Wolph.
in ^it. lib. Nehem. c. 12. Dion. Carthus. in Ezr. 2.
Artaxerxes, and the Persians used to have young men for their Gentlemen about
them. But this Nehemiah, coming up the first year of King Cyrus, must needs
be stricken in years, in Artaxerxes time.

He was not Mordecay, Verse. 2. Of Mordecay.
Esters Uncle: but another of the same name. For this Mordecay came up with
Zerubbabel. Now if Esters Mordecay had returned with Zerubbabel, he would not
have dwelt at Susis, and trained up Ester among the Heathen, but rather in the
holy Land, among the people of God. And it is plain, that this Mordecay did
return into Iudaea, Neh. 7.7. But that ever Esters Uncle came into Iudaea, is
unlikely. We must know, that it was a common thing among the Jews, to have
more names than one, or two. Which we must consider, lest it breed mistakes in
reading the Scriptures.

Verse. 61. And the children of the Priests, the children of Habaja^, the
children of Roz, the children of Barzillai, which took a wife of the daughters
of Barzillai, the Gileadite, and was called after their name.
In the Captivity, the Priests being in a strange Land, were not to offer any
other sacrifices, except it were spiritual sacrifices of praise: Whereupon
there being not that commodity made of it, as was used to arise out of their
slain sacrifices; some Priests, who had married themselves into the Noble
Family of Barzillai, (...)
Verse. 62.

i. e. genealogizatorum.
These sought their Register amongst those that were reckoned by Genealogy:
but they were not found, therefore they were, as polluted, i.e. kept from the
Priesthood. Heb. (...) and elongati sunt: so Steph. Polluti a sacerdotio. i.e.
ut polluti abstrusi sunt a Sacerdotio. Iunius. Apportati del Sacerdotio co^^e
person non consecrate, Deodat. Genesis 11.4.
put from the Priesthood.


took scorn to be in the Register of the Priests in the time of the Captivity
of Babylon, and took the name of Barzillai after the Family of their wives.
Now after the return from the Captivity, the Priesthood growing into fame,
gain, and request again, and there being holy things to eat of, these
degenerate Priests would feign have taken place among the Priests of the Lord;
but the Magistrate would not suffer them: because, when time was, they did
scorn the Priesthood, the Priesthood should now scorn them. A just reward of
God and man for such proud and insolent kind of people. It Is common when men by
their wit go about to get a Name, that they lose their Name. After the flood
they would needs build a tower to get a Name to themselves, and not to God: and
it is their reproach to this day. And this was all the use that those Creatures
made of the late deluge, the greatest judgment of God that ever was.

Verse. 63.

And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy
things, till there stood up a Priest with Vrim What Vrim and Thummim was, Vid.
Phag. in Exodus 18. and Delr. disquisit. Magicas. l. 4. q. 2.. 4.
and Thummim.


[ The Tirshatha] It is a name of office, viz. The Governor or Deputy of the
King: We see he was a man of power that could keep those great men from the
Priesthood, and forbid them to eat of the most holy things. By Tirshatha I
conceive the same; who, cap. 1.8. was called Shazbazzar: as Daniel was called
Balshazzar: An use among the Chaldees to change the name of the Jews. Now
Shazbazzar was Z^robbabel, as we have showed before.

[Till there arose up a Priest with Vrim and Thummim] viz. to ask the Lords
advice and counsel. By Priest, is meant the high Priest, for he had the Vrim
and Thummim, and none but he. So when Saul murdered the Priests of the Lord,
Abtathar fled to 1. Sam. 23 6.
David with the Ephod (says the text) that is, with the Ephod of the high
Priest; and presently David began to enquire by the Ephod of the Lord. A great
providence of God for the comfort of his poor servant David! And hence it is
that we read, that the Lord answered not Saul by 1. Sam. 28.6.
Vrim and Thummim: for it was now with David; not with Saul.

This Vrim and Thummim was either lost or burned together with many other
things, when that the Chaldees took the City of Jerusalem, and was never found
again. How then does he here say, Until there stand up a Priest with Vrim and
Thummim?

1 It may be that Zerubbabel did not know but that Vrim and Thummim might by
the providence of God be had again.

2 Until. that is, Never. An usual Phrase in Scripture, ( q. d.) You shall
never come to the Priesthood again, except God shall reveal his mind to be
otherwise by Vrim and Thummim which will never be. [ Vntill] is thus taken in
the word in many places.

1 No. Was it not a great decay to Religion, that Vrim and Thummim were lost?
Did not the Church now want a rule of certainty?
For the word of God was ever the lively Oracle, the Rule of Rules, that was
the sacred Canon, now the Scripture. For the old Testament was complete, and
when there was so much of the word written, there was the less use of Vrim and
Thummim. And therefore after the loss of Vrim and Thummim, the Church was to
keep the closer to the Law of Moses: as Malachy, who lived after the loss of
Vrim, and wrote last of all the Prophets, Mal. 4.4.
did command. Mal. 4.4. Remember the Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded
unto him in H^reb, for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments.

2 For ought I see, the Vrim and Thummim was not to decide matters of doctrine,
but events and facts and successes in war and peace, as we see in David
often. vid. Numb. 27.18. 1. Sam. 23.5.9. and 30.7.8.
And this was in Joseph. Antiq. lib. 3. cap. 9.
extraordinary cases: In things ordinary, the Prince was to have the Law before
hisface, Deuteronomy. 17. Ios. 1. but in extraordinary Accidents, he was to seek
answer from God by the Vrim and the Thu^mim of the Priest.

3 The Church was in as good case for certainty in things of salvation, under
the second Temple, when the Vrim and Thummim was not, as under the first Temple
when it was. That of Rabbi Talmud in Ion. cap. 1. fol. 21. that not only Vrim
and Thummim, Henry Ainsworth in Exodus 28.30. seems to like too well this
Rabbinicall Blasphemy, as he does in his annot, dote on the Rabbis too often.
but the holy Ghost was wanting in the second Temple, is blasphemous. For had
not Christ and his Apostles the holy Ghost? and did not they live under the
second Temple? Nay: Is not more, and more full revelation promised in the
second Temple, than in the first? Hag. 1.8. and Cap. 2.4.10.

4 Besides, after Vrim and Thummim was gone they had some Prophets; as Haggai,
Zechariah, and Malachy. I confess that Prophets by office and commission ended
in Malachy, Yet Drus. 2. Pet. 1.21.
there be that hold, that after him there were now and then some Prophets only
by the Spirit. I know there was a great silence of Prophets after Malachy, to
prepare the people for to expect the coming of that great Prophet. For though
it were vox populi, and a tradition among the Priests John. 1.20.21. and
7.40.41.
and Levites, that the great Prophet was one distinct from the Christ the
Messiah: yet I doubt not, but the Church did understand Moses the great Prophet
prophesied of, to be no other than the expected Messiah: And therefore the
dampe that was of Prophets after Malachy, turned to the good of the godly. It
taught them, that Christ Jesus was now at hand. And upon his coming, we find
that the Lord stirred up two Prophets in a line, Maldonat. in Ioh. 1.21.
Zachary the father, and John the Baptist his son, to point out him;
Prophets by grace, rather than by office. And so I may say, that the want of
Vrim and Thummim did teach the Church, that they were shortly now to expect the
true Vrim and Thummim, Christ Jesus, the high Priest of their profession. And
besides, it should have taught them to cleave the more to the written Oracles
of God.

This, Jeremy seems to me to show in the loss of the Arc: viz. That that
loss should be no loss. The people of God should not care to look after the
Arc any more: but set their hearts on the true Arc Christ Jesus, the Arc of
Arkes. This then the Church got by it: That by the want of Vrim they learned,
that the Ceremonies were in going, and the Messiah in coming; that salvation
was not to be placed in the ordinances of Moses, since Vrim and Thummim it
self was utterly gone.

Lastly, we see that the Church did stand and was the pillar of truth without
Vrim and Thummim. The Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 4. quarta probatur.
Argument is loose, that is made to prove the infallibility of the great Bishop
of Rome from the Vrim and Thummim of the high Priest: For beside that the
Argument may follow from the Heb. 4.14. and 8.1.
Leviticall high Priest to Christ our high Priest, of whom that high Priest was
a Type, and not of the Pope; yet we see that the Church stood to the word, when
there was no Vrim and Thummim, from the taking of Jerusalem to the coming of
Christ Jesus; for in that interim the high Priest had no Vrim and Thummim. And
for that slender voice called Bath-col, mentioned by Tremelius in Act. 12.22.
which Henry on Exodus 28.30.
Ainsworth would have to make some supply for the defect of Vrim; it has no
ground: and is to be turned back to the foolish Rabbis from whom it came. And
therefore the Law and the Prophets was the standard, and not the Vrim and
Thummim. I doubt not but the people had by some means perfect notice of the
Revelation made to the Priest, and they were absolutely to stand to the Oracles
given by Vrim and Thummim from the mouth of God: Yet me thinks, it is hard to
prove that the Priest did use it for matters of Religion and doctrine, and not
only for matters of fact and event: Next, that the Priest had answer when he
would, though he himself were never so wicked: or lastly, That the sins of
the people did not hinder the giving of the Oracle sometime. It Is enough that
for some 550. years the high Priest was destitute of Vrim and Thummim; and yet
I hope the Lord did not leave his people without a sure and certain rule of
faith and direction of life, which is the holy Word of God. And Malachy does
tell us, that though the Priests lips by that place and office should have
preserved knowledge; yet often they did not: And though, while Vrim lasted, it
never gave any false or fallacious answers; yet many times, what for the sins
of the Priest, and what for the sins of the people, the Lord refused to give
any answer at all; and the answers that were given, were rather in matters of
Numb. 17.21. 1. Sam. 23.11, 12. and 30.7, 8.
fact than of doctrine and of faith.

The argument is too weak, that the Cardinal does draw from the Jewish
Church, to prove that the Pope has the deciding Spirit and Voice in matters of
Faith; since from the destruction of Jerusalem to Messiah the Prince (a space of
some 550. years) there was no Oracle by Vrim and Thummim, no Psalm. 74.9. We
see not our signs: there is no more any Prophet.
succession of Prophets, nor but a few Prophets at all from Malachy till
Zachary the father and John Baptist the son: No miracles, except the Poole of
Bethesda, granted to the Jews to strengthen them in the true worship of God
under the persecution of Antiochus, till the days of Zachary and John Baptist
and the Lord Jesus. And yet the providence of God did not leave the Church for
all that time without sufficient and ample means of their salvation. In a
word, the loss of Vrim and Thummim, the Arc, and other Ceremonials, taught
them to look off from the shadows, and to look for the Truth, the Lord Jesus.

CHAP. VI.
Chap. 4. v. 5.

They hired counselors against them, to frustrate their purpose all the days
of Cyrus K. of Persia, even until the reign of Darius K. of Persia. Question
is made who this Darius King of Persia was, which of the Darij.


CYrus after the Edict made in behalf of the Jews, was called abroad to the
wars. He left his son Cambyses the power of a King at home; and Cambyses
hindered the execution of his fathers Proclamation.

1 Not Darius Medus, as Ben-Gorion says; for he was predecessor to Cyrus. Now
it is plain by this Text, that our Darius succeeded Cyrus; And by the tenor of
this fourth Chapter we find that the building was let the days of Cyrus,
Assuerus, Artaxerxes, even until the second year of this Darius: therefore
our Darius was not only after Cyrus, but after Assuerus and Artaxerxes also.

2 Not Darius Hystaspis, as Joseph. antiq. lib. 11. cap. 3.
Josephus thought: For, Ezr. 4.6, 7. there is mention of Assuerus and
Artaxerxes, who went betwixt Cyrus and our Darius. But Darius Hystaspis was the
immediate successor of Cambyses, and Cambyses succeeded Cyrus his father:
therefore our Darius cannot be Darius Hystaspis. For betwixt Cyrus and our
Darius, Ezra mentions two: but betwixt Cyrus and Darius Hystaspis there was but
only Cambyses. As for the Magus, he is not in account among the Kings of
Persia; either for that he was a tyrant, or else for that he stood but seven
months.

3 Therefore this our Darius was Darius Notbus, the son of Axtaxerxes
Longimanus, named Ezra 4.7. the father of Artaxerxes Mnemon.

CHAP. VII.
HEre are six generations left out betwixt Merajoth and that Azariah, Chap. 7.
v. 3.

The son of Amaziah, the son of Azariah, the son of Merajoth.


who was the Priest, as it is 1. Chron. 6. viz. Amariah, Ahitub, Zadok,
Ahimaaz, Azariah, Iothanan. These were omitted here for brevitie sake, because
have is made, to show only, that Ezra came from Aaron, to honor Ezra, and to
give him the more authority. And likely it is, that those are passed over who
were borne in the time of the Babylonian Captivity: and those set upon record
here, as though they had been the very next, whose memory was fresh and most
famous, as being Priests about the time the Temple was ruinated. We may say,
That he does set down by name the Catalogue of those his Ancestors only, who
flourished during the standing of the Temple. And it is a truth, that Ezra was
not the immediate, but the mediate son of Serajah: and so Ezra uses the word
Son in a many of places.

CHAP. VIII.
Cap. 10.11.

Now therefore make confession unto the Lord God of your Fathers, and do his
pleasure, and separate your selves from the people of the land, and from the
strange wives.


THe question is, Whether in case a man marry an Amorite, now an infidel; he be
to put her away by virtue of this Law?

No, by no means: He must keep her, if she will stay with him: as Paul
shows, 1. Cor. 7.12. And Peter inferres 1. Pet. 3.1. Where he shows, that
Christian wives must by their conversation labor to win their husbands, that
obey not the Word, (that is) that are Heathens. Therefore they are not bound to
part a believing man from an unbeleeving wife, Cap. 9.1.

Now when these things were done, the Princes came unto me, saying; The people
of Israel, and the Priests, and the Levites have not separated themselves from
the people of the land, doing according to the abominations even of the
Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Iebusites, the Ammonites, the
Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites, ver. 2. For they have taken of their
daughters for themselves, and for their sons so that the holy seed have
mingled themselves with the people of those lands; yea the hand of the Princes
and Rulers has been chief in this trespass. Cap. 10.44. All these had taken
strange wives, and some of them had wives, by whom they had children.


a believing wife from an unbeleeving and infidel husband. We must say then,
that this Law in Chytraeus in Levit. 18.28. qu. ^. c. etiam citantur.
Ezra was a part of Moses policy, which did bind them then, but not us now.

Next I say, It did not bind them simply neither: but in case such wives were
not Proselytes; but did remain in their superstition. For Salmon did marry
Rahab a convert Canaanite, and did well in it: But these in Ezra did persist in
their infidelity and superstition. And if Pharaohs daughter were a Proselyte,
Solomon did not sin against Piscator 1. King. 3.1. Solomon's first wife was an
Egyptian; but a proselyte. 1. King. 3.1, 2, 3. e verisimile che prima la
faccile an marsirat ne^la vera rel^gione e ren unciare all sue Idololatrie: i.
e. It Is like he caused her to be instructed in the true religion, and to
renounce her Idolatry. Deodat. Italian. Altra mente haualbe peccato contra alla
Leg. Deuteronomy. 7.3.4. i. e. Else he had sinned against the Law. Ibid. La quale
benchi reguardi principalmente a popoli Cananei male detti, ha puri una ragione
generale del periculo de esser indotro ad Idololatria. i. e. Though the place
in Deuteronomy. 7.6. be chiefly meant of the Canaanites; yet it has a general
reason from the danger of being drawn to Idolatry: Deodat. ibid.
that Law of Moses then: much less was he bound to put her away. He is
deceived, The Question is, whether in case a man marry an Amorite, now an
Infidel, he be to put her away by virtue of this Law?
who writes that Solomon did not ill in it, not on this ground, because she was
a Proselyte; but because she was none of those seven cursed Nations, named,
Deuteronomy. 4.7. This evasion is not current: For though those seven be only named,
yet other the like are meant; And Ezra 9.1. the Egyptians are set down by name
and the Moabite: Yet Boaz did his duty in marrying of Ruth the Moabitesse, she
being now in faith and religion united to the people of God. The sum is: that
it was a Law of Moses binding during the time of his policy; That if an
Israelite should marry an Infidel, remaining an Infidel, she was to be put
away, and it seems her children too: which Law is not in force now: Christians
are not bound to it; but do sin if they divorce such wives (very Infidels)
that are willing to live with their Christian husbands.

CHAP. IX.
THis shows that Nehemiah was the penner of this Book. Nehem. 1. v. 1. The
words of Nehemiah, the son of Hacheliah, etc.
And therefore it is a mistake in Genebrard. lib. 2. The Engl. Argument on the
Book of Nehemiah.
those, who make Ezra to be the writer of this Book of Nehemiah. And this
appears further, in that he speaks often of himself in the first person (I
Nehemiah) and not in the third person. For though some, that are makers of a
Book do sometimes speak of themselves in the third person (as Matthew and
John do in their Gospels, and Moses in his history) [ Matthew said, John said,
Moses spake] yet he that is not the author of a Book never speaks of himself
in that Book, in the first person; as in this Book often Nehemiah does.
Neither is it any argument that Ezra wrote it, because in the Hebrew editions,
it is called Ezra; since the Ebrewes did this to tell up the just number of
twenty four Books of the old Testament. Both the Books of Samuel stand
under his name; yet Samuel was not the writer of all, but part was written by
Sixtus Senensis Bibl. lib. 1.
Samuel, some by Nathan, and some by Gad.

Verse. 6.

Both I and my Fathers have sinned.


The conclusion is clear, That we ought to confess the sins of our fathers:
but first, Vid. Fewerbornij disputat. An Deus posteros puniat ob Majorum suorum
flagiti^?
not to have a pardon for them, when they are dead and gone.

2 Nor that God pardons us their sins, The Ezekiel. 18.
soul only that sins, that shall dye. No guilt necessarily passes from
the father to the son; but that of Adam, together with the sin. There is
but one only Original sin.

The son is not guilty of the fathers sin, any further than he does make it
his own sin also, by some consent; either affirmative, by doing or liking
what his father has done in point of sin; being glad of the broth wherein
the abominable thing was sodden, and so subscribes to it, by a tacit and
interpretative consent: Or

2 Negative, when we do not dissent. A child is bound to humble himself for
his fathers sins upward, as far as ordinarily he may come to the certain
knowledge of them; which sometimes is, to the third and fourth generation. Now
if he be not humble and take them to heart, there is a secret consent; because
he does not by this act of humbling show his dissent: And had such a child the
occasions and tentations his forefathers had; he would do as they did. And
thus he sets his fathers sins on his score; and makes them his own. According
to that of Daniel to Belshazzar, cap. 5. ver. 22. And thou his son, O
Belshazzar, have not humbled thine heart, though thou knew all this. viz.
Nebuchadnezzars sin and punishment. In the Legal Covenant of works, the
guilt, together with the fault and corruption, did convey it self to the
Posterity. Original sin descends by force of that Covenant: And that
Commination to visit the sins of the Fathers, has an eye to the Covenant of
the Law. But now in the Evangelicall Covenant of grace, the sin, and the
wrath of God, goes no further than the very persons offending: Only God does
sometimes make the fathers sins an occasion, never a cause of punishing the
child with some greater measure of punishment* should personal sins in the
guilt, descend from fathers to the children: we should have more Original
sins than one.

When then in the Word they Levit. 26.40.
were commanded to confess, together with their own sins, the sins of
their forefathers: it was not that their forefathers sins, that went no further
any way than their forefathers persons, should be remitted to their forefathers
being dead, or to them being alive, but that such sins, which they themselves
had also in their own proper persons by occasion of the example of their
forefathers committed by act or some consent, might be forgiven unto them. So
Psalm. 79.8. [ Remember not,] against whom? Our forefathers? No: But, Remember
not [ against us former (...)

Iniquitates praecedentium. Rainold. ( which we and our Fathers have committed)
genev. ^ote. [Le. iniquita depassati Ital.] i. e. de nostri maggiori, e
predecessoni, le quali no^ halliamo, seguitate. Deodat.


iniquities; that is, such sins as we have committed through the example of
our forefathers, at least have one way or another made our own. The
Translation reads it [ former Iniquities.] Word for word it is in the
original, [ The Iniquities of those that were before us:] i. e. of our
Ancestors.

CHAP. X.
Cap. 2. v. 8.

And a letter unto Asaph the keeper of the Kings 1. King. 5.6.
^orest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the gates of the Palace,
which appertains to the House, and for the Wall of the City, and for the
house that


THat is; I shall ^^ter into.
For the house that he himself was to have, being made governor by the King.

It appears by Ezr. 6.15. and Nohem. 2.1. that the Temple was built before the
walls of the City. The walls of the City were first broken down, and last
built up; and that 14. years after the Temple. And one reason hereof is given:
for that before in all the former edicts made in behalf of the Jews by Cyrus
or any other, there was no word as touching the reedifying of the City, but
only to build again the Temple. Paraeus rather is in the truth, who holds,
that Cyrus did by edict give leave to build the City: Orat. de 70. hebdom.
Dan. but by reason of so great resistance, they could do little or nothing to
the City. And therefore Nehemiah gets Letters Patents to build the City, and
the walls of the City. And the truth is; That the Jews after their return,
grew secure and careless, fell to Vid. Calvin. in Zach. cap. 1. v. 3.
marrying strange wives, and other disorders, till the Lord stirred up the
spirit and zeal of our Nehemiah, and he never gave over till he had finished
the work. So much good may one man of place, power, and zeal, and courage do
for the Church. Neither was the Lord wanting to him in his blessed enterprise;
But he sent in Haggai and Zachariah, a pair of noble Prophets to encourage
the people in the work of the Lord: Neither will the Lord be wanting to any of
us in things that are good, if we be not wanting to him and our selves.

As if he should say; Verse. 11.

Should such a man as I fly? and who is there that being as I am, would go
into the Temple to save his life? I will not go^ in.


It is not for me that have a calling from God to do what I do, which
calling is a sufficient testimony of his assistance and protection, for fear
to leave the work begun, and so to discover disobedience and diffidence toward
God. Iunius is of opinion, that he being a stranger, ( i. e.) not a Priest,
was not by law to go into the Temple: As it is Numb. 3.38. But I rather follow
Deodate, who seems to like better to say, That he would not flee to the
Temple, because it was for malefactors, who used to take sanctuary there to
shift for their lives. Exodus 21.14. 1. King. 1.51. and 2.28. S^majah, who
persuaded him to run to the Temple, was a Priest, and he did put a color of
retired Religion on it too. So that even Priests were found ready to hinder the
building of the Walls. But Nehemiah did look to God and not to Man, and
therefore in the next verse he says: He perceived that God had not sent him,
for that he went about to draw him from his vocation, which had a sure
foundation. We must not suffer, no not Divines themselves, to turn us out of
our callings, places, and duties.

CHAP. XI.
Chap. 8.1.

And all the people gathered themselves together as one man into the street
that was before the watergate: and they spoke unto Ezra the Scribe, to bring
the Book of the Law of Moses, which the Lord had commanded to Israel.


HEre we see how forward the people were: they called upon Ezra; and Ezra
thought it not much to be stirred up by the people to do his duty. The wind
of Gods spirit blows where it lifts, and sometimes begins with the
common people. The duty that they pressed Ezra unto, was a plain Text, Deuteronomy.
33.10, 11. where God commanded in the feast of Tabernacles, that the Law should
be read unto the people. Where the people have Scripture for it, they must say
to Archippus, Do thy duty.

Ver. 8.

So they read in the Book in the Law of God distinctly, and gat^ the sense,
(...) caused them to understand the reading.


The people were too many to be taught by one: and therefore they made sundry
companies and congregations, and had many Doctors of the Law to teach them.
Therefore it is said: [ They read] in the Book. And having read, they gave the
sense, and made the people to understand thereading. The meaning is, That by
Nehem. 8.8.
comparing places of the word of God, they did clearly expound to them the
meaning. (...) i. e. ^a^ant intelligenciam per ipsam Scripturam, They g^ve, the
sense by the Scripture it self.

(...) (...) testimoniis, by co^fe^ring of places. Aug. lib. q. 83. quaest. 69.
tom. 4. Bretewood in his Enquiries, Chap. 9.


Reading and expounding, or preaching, have used of old to go together. So in
the case of Philip and the Eunuch. And Act. 13.15. After the lecture of the Law
and Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them, saying: Men and
brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on. We see
more Scriptures were read than were presently expounded: yet when reading of
the word was, there used to be expounding of some portion. It Is a poor conceit
to say, That before the Captivity there was nothing but bare reading; but
after, when the people had lost much of their Language and did hardly
understand the Tongue, that then literal expounding came in by learned men
that had the skill of the Tongue: As Schoolemasters do, when they construe
lessons to their boys in Grammar Schools.
As though [ giving of the sense] had bin nothing but a grammatical
interpretation of the word. Preaching is ancienter than so. Noah was a Preacher
of righteousness: And Acts 15.21. Moses of old time has in every City them
that preach him; seeing he is read in the Synagogue every Sabbath day. Moses of
old, (i. e.) from the first time, Vid. Syrum Paraphrastem.
from the very beginning (...). ab aetatibus antiquis. A phrase never used of
the Ages, only since the Captivity. And that it is said, Moses, and not Moses
and the Prophets, as Acts 13.15. it seems to me to note the times of Moses Law
before the Prophets were.

The word translated Reading, is Vid. Pagnin. Ion. 3.4.
(...) which does properly signify an Assembly, or Convocation: and here the
Scripture is named by that name, to show us, That the holy Scripture ought to
be read in the Congregation and Assembly. 2. Chron. 17.9.

Iehosaphat sent Levites and Priests, who taught in Judah, and had the Book of
the Law of the Lord with them, and went about throughout all the Cities of
Judah, and taught the people. This teaching was our preaching, not only
construing the words to the people; for in those days the common people had
not lost any of the languag^, but understood the Hebrew perfectly.


Take it then for a truth, That before and after the Captivity, the Church of
the Jews had their Teachers who did expound and preach unto them the meaning
of the Scriptures: And Ezra with the rest here are said to interpret, not the
words, but the meaning. They gave the sense, that is, not the literal sense of
the Hebrew words, which the Jews understood full well, but the spiritual
sense. I cannot believe that the Jews in Captivity lost the use of their
native Tongue; and I think it not credible, that the Jews in the space of
seventy years should so forget their native Tongue, they being a people so
scrupulous as they were, to have no more commerce with strangers than needs
must. And lastly Haggai, Zachary and Malachy, who lived and wrote after the
Captivity, did speak and write to the people in the pure Hebrew Language:
Which they would not have done, but that the people understood the Language.
The Hebrews were in Egypt 220. in Chaldea but 70. In Egypt they were held to
greater bondage Daniel styles the Chaldaean Monarchy Golden, by reason of the
kind and free usage the people of God found in their captivity there.
than in Babylon; yet they brought with them the purity of the Language out of
Egypt. What? kept it 220. years in Egypt and not 70. years in Babel? Daniel
indeed has a tincture of Chaldee writing in the Captivity, and he being in
Chaldaea.


CHAP. XII.
That is, Cap. 9.8.

And foundest his heart, (i. e. Abraham's) faithful before thee, and made a
Covenant with him.


he gave him a faithful heart first, and then finds his heart faithful, not
by nature, but by grace; and makes a Covenant with him: So Epist. 107.
Augustine* Pravenit hominis voluntatem, nec eam cujusquam invenit in cord,
sed facit. God does at first, not find, but make our wills and hearts good. So
Aquinas, Aquin. 1.2. q. 114. art. 5. ad. 2. Non ^^men ita quod prius dig^i
fuerint, sed quia ipse per great iam eos facit dignos: qui stolus pote facere
mundum de immundo conceptum semine.
God is said to give grace to the worthy: not that they are worthy before he
gives them grace; but because he by grace makes them worthy: who only can
cleanse that which is unclean.

He then does abuse plain places of Scripture, Verse. 20.

Thou gave also thy good spirit to instruct them.


who does hold, that the spirit teaches not, but stirs up motions to learn.
It does both. It follows not to infer: that if we say, the Spirit teaches,
we must grant Anabaptisticall Revelations. Did we say, that the Spirit did
teach by rote, without the book, that were to join with the Anabaptists: but
to hold that the Spirit teaches by the word, is to speak with the Scripture,
Ephesians. 1.17. The Spirit is called the Spirit of Revelation in the knowledge of
him. 1. Cor. 2.13. Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's
wisdom teaches; but which the holy Ghost teaches. That men pretend the
Spirit, is no Argument against the teaching of the Spirit: for men do as much
pretend the Church, and do father their fancies on the Church. As for inward
teaching without the word we leave that to the Anabaptists, and to the Papist,
who does affixe and appropriate an infallible teaching to the private spirit of
the Pope* Which spirit, the Papist in the Pope, and the Anabaptist in his
Enthusiast, make the Standard of all truth, and superior to the word. But to
say that the Spirit teaches in and by the word, by vid. Doughty, of Divine
mysteries: p. 24. Inspirations (says he) examined by the touch of sacred
writ, may be a rule: but I mean not new revelations, respectu doctrinae
revelatae, but new, enlightening both the Organ, and Object.
enlightening us, and casting a clearing light on the word also, is that which
here we read in Nehemiah, and has gone for good and sound doctrine, till of
late it has been otherwise taught without ground.

CHAP. XIII.
Cap. 8 v. 9.

Then Nehemiah, which is Tirshasha, and Ezra the Priest and Scribe.


TIrshasha is a Persian word, and signifies a man in high Office about the
Prince; and such an one was Nehemiah. Other there were that did bear the like
office: as Nehem. 7.70. it is said; The Tirshasha gave to the Treasure a
thousand drams of gold. But this Tirshasha is some other officer, and not our
Nehemiah. We see the great goodness of God, who did prefer to great place
and favor some of his servants, about Heathen Princes: And it is a comfort,
that if God send us or ours into the Countries or Courts of Pagans, yet he can
prefer us then, and preserve us there. Nehemiah is very great, and holds his
goodness. And Daniel with the rest were in as high place of dignity and
command as ever they could have been, had the Court and Commonwealth of
Israel stood. Doubt nothing: as long as we follow God: God can keep us to our
consciences, and our consciences to him in Babylon it self. Let us teach our
posterity to pray and believe: and though they have not one penny in their
purses, yet faith and prayer will carry them all the world over. And if God in
his providence make them great in a land of Persians, in the houses or Courts
of Pagans; faith will keep them good.

This Feast of Boothes, Verse. 17.

And all the Congregation of them that were come again out of the Captivity
made Boothes, and sat under the Boothes. For since the time of Ioshuah the
son of Nun unto this day, had not the children of Isra^el done so: and there
was very great joy.


was a Feast of 7. days: and it had these uses.

1 That all Generations might by it understand, that when Israel came out of
Egypt, the Lord made them to dwell in Booths. 2 To remember their misery past.
3 To look for redemption by the death of Christ. And therefore Zachary makes
the signification of this holy feast to be to show us, That the memory of
Christ redeeming us by his death, Zach. 14.16, 17, 28, 19.
is to be kept with all manner of spiritual joy. 4 Of thankfulness for their
fruits; it being kept at this time. Verse. 18.

And he read in the Book of the Law of God every day, from the first day unto
the last: and they kept the feast 7. days: and on the 8. day a solemn
Assembly according to the manner.



But was this Feast disused since Iosua's time? What? for a matter of 1000.
years; such a Feast as this, so expressly commanded by God, so utterly
omitted in the times of so many godly Princes and Priests? I think not; rather
that it had not been kept with such devotion and celebration from Iosuah till
now: (which I think is the reason why mention is here made of the Feast of
Booths.) For here we find, v. 18. That all the 7. days, day after day, the
Book of the Law of God was read, and they had Congregations to that purpose
each day, and then they had a solemn Assembly on the 8. day according to the
manner. By which word we see, that the manner had been to have a solemn
assembly on the 8. day. But it seems, the manner had not been to have
Assemblies and reading from the first day to the last day; no not from Iosua's
time, as it was now: So that in Iosuah's time, they did use to read the Law in
such order and manner, as they did now. In Levit. 23.35.36. there is required a
holy Convocation, only the first day and the last 8. day. Did they more now in
this Feast, than the very Law it self required? If they did, they must have
warrant from the Spirit of God by some revelation made to Nehemiah, Ezra, or
some other for it; which appears not: or else, who required this at their
hands, to do more than God commanded? And therefore I leave I^nius and Deodate
in this, and do rather think, that in the Feast of Booths, by the very Law,
reading of the Word was Deuteronomy. 31.11.
required all the days, though that the first and last were days of
restraint, more solemn Convocations and great holy days, in which they might
do no work, as they might in the interim days. And so John 3.7. the last is
called the great day of the Feast.

I think there had been an omission of (such) reading of the Law, viz. day
after day, which was required by the institution in the Law, and had been in
use till Iosuah's time, but was discontinued from his time till now; and now
was brought into use again. The manner had been continued to read on the 8.
day, the solemn day: but now it was done every day of the Feast of
Tabernacles. And therefore mention is made of the solemnizing of this Feast of
Boothes in this place; to show that there was a great reformation of a disuse,
which crept in anon upon Iosuah's days, and had continued in the Church in
very godly times now 1000. years. We see that a neglect in Divine worship may
continue long in the Church, in the times of the best men.

2 Though it have lasted ever so long, yet it is our duty to do what we can
to set it right again at the last.

This Feast was celebrated in Boothes made of the boughs of green trees, in
remembrance of Gods favors to them in the wilderness; at which time they had
their dwelling in Boothes. The chief sort of Trees are named: and for Palms,
it is observed that they carried them in their hands; It being an old wont, that
branches of Palms were carried as signs of Pausanias in Areadicis.

Plutarch. (...). l. 4. c. 5.


victory and great joy. Hereby, says Henry A^sworth on Levit. 23.40. we may
see the reason, why at Christ's coming to Ierusal^m (though at another time of
the year) the people and children strawed the way with branches of trees, and
took branches of Palme-trees, and went forth to meet him, and cried Hosanna:
Mat. 21.8.9. Io^. 12.13. For all the Legal Feasts (says he) had their
accomplishment in him, and to him the honor and solemnity of every Feast did
by right appertain. So he. But what if these did it only to testify their
joy and exultation? it being a custom in all nations to show their joy with
boughs: And they being to entertain Christ, a King, did it with garments and
boughs; such things as came next to hand. Besides, the boughs in the Feast of
the Jews, were more for their remembrance of dwelling in Boothes in the
wilderness, than for joy. Again, this was not at the Feast of Tabernacles and
Boothes, that Christ came to Jerusalem; and were it not better to say, That
these Jews old and young did what they did by some instinct from heaven, than
only to imitate a custom of a Feast performed at another time of the year,
that all might understand that which David had prophesied of the Messiah to
come, was now fulfilled in Christ? For certain, neither humane counsel, nor
imitation of a custom, but only a divine inspirement could make infants to
do as here in Matthew we read that they did. Matthew. 21.15, 16.


CHAP. XIIII.
Cap. 11.
COmpare the eleventh Chapter with 1. Chron. 9.2. and you shall find that the
number is greater in the Chronicles, than here. The answer is; that here only
those are reckoned who inhabited Jerusalem by lot: But in the Chronicles we
have those also recorded, who went willingly and of their own accord, and
therefore the sum is greater.

CHAP. XV.
BY son is here meant the Nephew of Iojada, Cap. 13.28.

And one of the sons of Iehojada, the son of Eliash^b the high Priest, was
the son in law of Sanballat the Horonite: but I chased him from me.


the brother of Iaddua the high Priest: his name was Manasses an Apostata: he
did marry the daughter of Sanballat the Horonite, i. e. a Moabite Esai. 15.5.
Ier. 48.3.
of Horonajim: And because he could not continue in the Priesthood by reason he
had a strange wife; he was minded to turn away his wife, that he might not be
turned out of his Office. Now to keep him to his wife, Sanballat undertook to
build a Temple, every way as stately and as goodly as that at Jerusalem: and,
that it might have the more honor, on Mount Judge. 9.7. Joseph. lib. 11. cap.
ult. Antiq.
Gerazim, hard by the City Sichem, and that Manasses should be chief Priest of
the Temple. Which Sanballat, having first got leave of Alexander, did perform;
and from this beginning came that famous schism as touching the place where
sacrifices were to be offered, betwixt the Samaritanes and the Jews. Ioh. 4.20.
Before God had pointed out a place, they did worship on high places where they
pleased: but, when once the Lord had chosen Mount Moriah, and set his Name
there, it was unlawful to sacrifice any where but there. And though before,
Abraham and Jacob and others did please God with the high places; yet
afterward, the Kings of Israel are shent for that they did not demolish the
high places. Yet still for other kinds of Worship which were not tied to one
place, as sacrifices were, the Jews and Luc. 6.12. Rainold. praelect. 186.
Christ himself (the policy of the Jews being not buried) did use many times
to go up to a mountain, an high place to pray. But sacrifices, they were only
at Jerusalem; and whereas the Samaritanes did pretend the Fathers, meaning by
[Fathers] Jacob, and perhaps Abraham too; yet it was but a pretense; For they
came not of Jacob but of the 2. King. 17.
race of the Assyrians: neither was the Temple on Mount Gerazim ancienterthan
the time of this Manasses. And this Manasses marrying the daughter of Sanballat
the Moabite, a great man in place and power, bred this schism. Jacob did set
up an Altar near Sichem; Genesis 33.18.20.
but it was before God had confined his worship and sacrifices to one place. As
for a Temple, there was none besides that at Jerusalem, till Sanballat on this
occasion did build one: which Temple remains in the East unto this day. A me
and a vobis recedant, qui dicunt, Nolumus esse meliores quam Paties nostri.
Bern. ep. 93. Chrysostom. 1. Cor. 2. Hom. 8. in Morali.
They use to brag most of antiquity that have least cause, and have no better
arguments for themselves than to follow their false and foolish Ancestors. The
last cleeres all the rest: Remember me, O my God, for good.

Cap. 5.19. Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have done
for this people.

Cap. 13.15. Remember me O my God concerning this, and wipe not out my good
deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and for the officers thereof.


He produces his good deeds as testimonies of his sincerity, and of that
willing mind that was in him to do God service: which will of his
notwithstanding came from God, not from himself. He prays the Lord not to
charge his sin upon him committed in other matters: and in the good he did,
he begs of God that he would regard only his sincerity, and think upon him
in mercy. He brags not, but prays; Verse. 22.

Remember me, O my God, concerning this also; and spare me according to the
greatness of thy mercy.


produces the good which through the grace of God he had done, yet claims
nothing as due in justice, but sues to God to remember him in mercy and
goodness. No thought of merit, where the suite is, to be spared according to
the greatness of Gods mercy.

CHAP. XVI. An Appendix.
SAint De Civit. Dei: lib. 18. cap. 48. Cyril. lib. 5. in Genesin. Ambros. l.
3. cap. 10.
Augustine by the later house understands the Church of the Christians, Haggai.
2.9. The glory of the later house shall be greater than the former, says the
Lord of Hosts: and in this place I will give peace, says the Lord of Hosts.
whereof the later house was a Type: but this needs not; since it holds true in
the history and the letter. For the later Temple built by Zerubbabel did come
to greater glory, than ever that had which was built by Solomon. As for the
opinion of Lib. 15. cap. 14.
Josephus, that Herod did demolish Zerubbabels, and build another in the place
of it; it is exploded: And the truth is; That Sanct. in Hag. c. 2.10.
Herod did not build a new, but beautify the old.

In outward glory the former Temple did excel the last beyond comparison.
Besides the excessive deal of gold that was in the former, 1. King. 6.
there were five things in the Temple of Solomon, which were not in that of
Zerubbabel.

1 The Cloud, an Emblem of Gods presence.

2 Fire, which consumed the sacrifice.

3 Vrim and Thummim. Though Antiq. lib. 3. cap. 9.
Josephus say it lasted till 200. years before his time: but he is out in this.

4 The Arc.

5 The succession of Prophets, which went on under the former house without any
great interruption. Some little pause there was sometimes: but God used to stir
up Prophet upon Prophet. In the Captivity, Ezekiel prophesied till about the
14. year of that Captivity when the City was smitten: Ezekiel. 40.1.
After we read not of any till toward the return. Then stood forth These
were but few: and they were rather writing than preaching Prophets.
Daniel, Haggai, Zachary, who were whiles the Temple was in building;
Malachie, when it was new built: As we see by his reproving of that sin in
corrupting the holy seed, by marrying stranger^. ( Bibl. sanct. 1.1.
Sixt^s Sene^^is cannot prove his opinion, who places him as low as about 500.
years before Christ,) and therefore Malachy does close up all* by referring the
Church to the written Law. Signs and miracles did wear out, and prophecies
were no more. Now this great eclypse was to tell the Church, that the great
Prophet was to be expected, John 3.
in whom all prophecies, signs, miracles were to meet.

Besides those that were burnt, many of the things of the Temple were carried
away in the first deportation under Io^akim; many in the second under Ieconiah,
and the clean riddance was made in the third under Zedekiah. 2. Chron. 3.18.
2. King. 24.13. Ier. 25.19. and 27.19, 21.
The Scripture names those of Brass and the lesser, much more than those of
Gold and the greater. For it appears by Ezekiel 9.3. That the Arc was not
carried away with Ieconiah, but under Zedekiah. For in that place we find,
that the Prophet had revealed unto him, that the time was now at hand, when the
Arc and the Cherubius should be destroyed, and the whole City made a prey.
Now Ezekiel wrote in the 5. year of Iehoiakim, and lived until the twenty
fifth. And we find, that shortly after in the days of Zedekiah all was lost
and gone. 2. King. 24.15.
The Tabernacle and Altar of incense were carried away before. For among the
Treasures of the Lord house there spoken of, were the Tabernacle and the
golden Altar. Now in that there were so many ornaments of note and use in the
former Temple, that were not in the later; we conclude, That Solomon's Temple
did far surpass Zerubbabels in outward glory. And therefore, whereas the
Prophet does preach here; That the second house shall put down the first house
in glory, and they by experience should find no such matter in regard of
outward pomp: (whether they respected frame and building, or furniture) they
were then to look to the person of the Messiah, who should and did honor the
second house with his bodily presence: which made it glorious spiritually; and
shed his blood to reconcile all to himself, during the state of the later
Temple. And therefore it is in our Text; And I will give peace, meaning inward
spiritual peace; Peace in heaven, Luc. 19.38. Luc. 2.14. Ephesians. 2.14.
peace on earth: Christ Jesus being our peace. Though this second Temple was
built by Zerubbabel; yet it was called commonly Solomon's Temple. I am sure that
a Porch was usually called Solomon's Porch: Ioh. 10.23. Acts. 3.11. and 5.12.
whether because Solomon built this Porch long after the finishing of the
Temple; and others doing the like, this was for distinction called Solomon's
Porch: or rather (since question may be made of the truth of that story in
Josephus) because it was by Zerubbabel built in the very same place, De bell.
Iudaic. c. 6. l. 6.
and right after the same form that Solomon's was; Deodat. annot. on Ital.
Transl.
that therefore it kept the old name. The gate of this Porch was called
Beautiful: and the Prince did only enter in thereat, and not the people;
Ezekiel. 44.3.
for the people entered in at the North gate, Ezekiel. 46.9.
and at the South.

CHAP. XVII.
Dan. c. 1.8.
WHy defile himself?

Dan. cap. 1. v. 8. But Daniel had determined in his heart, that he would not
defile himself with the Kings meat: nor with the wine which he drank.
Because, Deuteronomy. 14.3. Dan. 5.4.
1. It was often such as was against the Law of God.

Romans 14.21.
2 Used so, as would defile them, being against the word of God.

1. Cor. 10.20. Dan. 1.7, 8.
3. Daniel saw, that the Kings love and provisions were not single and ^incere;
but that he meant his own profit: which his fellows also Ananias, Mishael and
Azari^s saw.

Dan. 1.12.
The Kings drift in training them up, that they might stand before him, was,
that they should attend him as Courtiers in his Palace: And (they being of the
blood royal, and seed of the Nobility) that he might thereby better assure
the Land of Judah. Verse. 4.19. Verse. 3.


But did not Daniel afterward eat?

He did, when he was in his greatness, and could command what sort of diet he
himself pleased; such as neither in nature nor use was against the Leviticall
Law of God. The Jews were not bound to the Judicial Law indeed; but only
within the Kingdoms of Israel: For Daniel and Mordecay were great Officers and
Magistrates in foreign parts; and no question, they did minister justice
according to the national laws and customs of those Countries, and not
according to the Leviticall and Judicial Laws of Moses: But yet the Jews
were most strictly tied all the world over to an exact observation of the
Ceremonial and Leviticall Laws of God: and therefore Daniel, though out of
his Country, durst not eat, lest he should defile himself by transgressing
the Ceremonial Law.

Cap. 2.46, 47. Then the King Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and bowed
himself unto Daniel, and commanded that they should offer meat offerings and
sweet ^dours unto him. Also the King answered Daniel, and said; Of a truth it
is, that your God is a God of Gods and a Lord of Kings, and a revealer of
secrets, seeing thou could reveal^ this secret.
Nebuchadnezzar being amazed with the work of Daniel, went about, in his
person and by his command to make a god of him. Had he only bowed to him in
reverence, in that affection which may well be toward a Prophet of the Lord,
(as Alexander did to the high Joseph. antiq. l. 11. cap. 8. Genesis 13.29.41. 2.
Sam. 10.
Priest, and is indeed lawful to be done,) Daniel might have accepted it: But
the King went too too far; and that act of his to command meat offerings and
sweet odours to be offered to him, was flagrant Idolatry: and therefore it
could not stand with the piety of Daniel, who would not so much as eat of the
Kings meat, to give the least entertainment to any such Idolatry. And though it
be not expressed in so many words, yet it is plain enough; that Daniel did
reprove this fact of the King, and thereupon was nothing done. And the words
themselves in Nebuchadnezzars reply give us this meaning. The King answered
unto Daniel (says the text): therefore Daniel had spoken his Lyran. Peter.
Sanctius ad locum Tremel. Deodat. e ^ostris. Gal. 4.14. Acts. 10.25. and 14.13.
and 28.6.
mind to the King, though the words be left out (Of a truth it is, that your
God is a God of Gods) This shows, that Daniel had informed, that there was but
One only God, and that Divine worship was due to that One God only. We may
receive Prophets and Preachers as Angels: but we must not receive them as Gods.

Dan. 4.53.

The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchad^ezzar: and he was driven
from men, and did eat grass as Oxen: and his body was wet with the dew of
heaven, till his hairs were grown like feathers, and his ^ailes like birds
claws.


Some have said that Nebuchadnezzar was metamorphosed into a very beast: but it
is the truer opinion to say, that his malady was in mind not in body. God
stroke him with a kind of melancholy madness: Insomuch that he lost all
judgment, sense, and use of reason; living and doing like a beast of the
field. His life was a wild kind of life, out of the communion of men. And they
may as well say, he was turned into an Eagle, because it is said, that his
hairs were grown like Eagles, as to affirm that he was changed into an Ox,
because he is said to eat grass like Oxen. The conclusion would as well be,
that he was converted into Oxen; because as our Translation reads it according
to the original, it is not said [as an oxe] but [ as the oxen] in the plural
number. Pride has been punished with the heaviest hand of God: The Angels
through Pride lost their habitation, and are now in Hell. It was Pride that
made of an Angel a Devil, turned them out of Heaven into Hell. Adam through
Pride lost himself, and all his posterity, as far as lay in him, was cast
out and kept out of Paradise; and was the cause of all the sins and sorrows,
that have been, are, or shall be in the world. Nebuchadnezzar a mighty
Monarch, for his Pride made for seven years a wild man, lost the use of
reason and lived like a beast: and it is worse to be like a beast than to be a
beast (says the Philosopher.) And Herod another King, as proud as he, for his
very pride in admitting only of the Acclamation (It is the voice of God, and
not of man) he did not procure it: behold he is, for suffering divine honor to
be given to him, and affecting to be a lowzie God, eaten up of worms. The God
of glory has ever resisted the proud afar off: whatever he gives to any,
he will not give his glory to another. When Satan came once to look after
divine honor, Mat. 4.
Christ puts him off with a short answer; Avoid Satan.

CHAP. XVIII.
A chief sin, Nehem. 13.17. Then I contended with the Nobles of Judah, and
said unto them. What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath?
for which the children of Judah were carried into Captivity, was, as ye see,
because their fathers had profaned the Sabbath; Gods judgments ever following
this sin, as the shadow does the body. And see! the hand of God was scarce
off them; but this people are mad after their profits, and do abuse the
Sabbath as bad, if not worse than ever. So, almost impossible it is for a man
to cast out of his heart and life, sins that bring in profit* which, Verse. 18.

Did not your Fathers th^e? and did not our God bring all this evil upon us
and upon this City? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel, by profaning the
Sabbath.


Nehemiah coming with authority from the great King, as a Lord Deputy, makes
use of his Commission to redress. This was so grand an affront to the
Ordinances of God; suffer this, and suffer all: and therefore we find him here
round with them. And he works upon them first with words, and if that would
not do, then he threatens blows; and found success.

Here we see, that as Nehemiah a Civil Magistrate; Verse. 19.

And it came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark
before the Sabba^h, I commanded, that the gates should be shut, and charged,
that they should not be opened till after the Sabbath. And some of my servants
set I at the gates, that there should no burden be brought in on the Sabbath
day.


so Civil Magistrates now may and must take strict courses for the settling and
keeping in order of the Service of God. They do them the greatest wrong, who
would turn them over to the second Table. The Kings of Israel were most
curious of all in matters of Gods worship: and can we find, that ever they went
or sent to Jerusalem to know the pleasure of the high Priest? And in their
steps did the Kings of Christendom tread for many Ages: Begin with Constantine
and down to Charles the Great, and some years after. The Emperors have ever
took it, and used it, as the chiefest flower in their Crown, and the
principal Verb in the Office; to carry the sway in disposing of the things
belonging to the managing of the worship of God; Verse. 20.

So the Merchants and sellers of all kind of ware lodged without Jerusalem once
or twice. Verse. 21. Then I testified against them, and said unto them: Why
lodge ye about the Wall? If ye do so again, I will lay hands on you. From
that time forth came they no more on the Sabbath.


And that without once looking after any power in or from the Bishop of Rome.

The matter we look after is, That by this of Nehemiah we see, that it was
not held by him a lawful thing for them then to work; or for him to suffer
them to work on the Sabbath in times of harvest. Their treading of
wine-presses does evince, that the time was harvest time; in that the work was
an harvest work. A custom they had got to keep a shambles, a fair on that
day, and to labor at their harvest. Nehemiah saw that Religion would soon
die, if thus they might go on. And therefore he gave not over, till he had
made them give over. Authority in the hands of a resolute man is of great force
and use.

As touching harvest-worke, in my mind, the question were at an end, if we did
but distinguish betwixt ordinary and usual Cases; (and then, as we have most
reason to serve God in harvest, and most need of rest, we and our people, when
we use to labor most; common understanding will grant, that then there lies a
probition against labor.)

And extraordinary and unusual occasions. And so who doubts, but it is lawful
then to labor? Indeed when the case stands in aequilibrio; and one is as like
as the other; and no man can say, but the precious fruits of the earth are as
like to be saved as spoiled: here my opinion is, That we are to put the matter
into the hands of God. But when the case stands so, that either we must work,
or there is a moral certainty, that the fruits of the harvest will receive a
sensible hurt, to the prejudice of our life or livelihood; here I conceive it
to be a duty to work: Here, I say, we break the Sabbath, except we break
it. Christ says, That the Priests laboring in the Temple, Matthew. 12.5.
did profane the Sabbath: Marc. 2.27 Vid. Maldonat.
and yet were guiltless. How so? profane and yet guiltless? Because those
their Temple-workes (had it not been on such occasions) would have been a
profanation of the Sabbath. The sense of a Law, is the Law: and in the sense of
the Law, the labor of the Priests was an hallowing of the Sabbath: But in the
mere Letter; (which the Pharisees, with whom Christ did dispute, did follow)
it was, to see to, a profanation of the Sabbath: but in the true meaning they
did sanctify, and not profane it. Right so: In case of necessity, we profane
the Sabbath, except we profane it: we perish, except we perish. For
necessity herein has no law: and it does add a new relation to the work we
do; no new Ens, but a Modus Entis. And there is not the greatest toil in the
world; but in this sense, it is a keeping of the Vid. Bound. lib. 1. page 217.
Walae. de 4. praecept. p. 129.
Sabbath holy. For the Sabbath was made for man ( i. e.) not only for the very
being of Man; but for his wel-being. And therefore whatsoever by necessity,
without fraud or covin, is to be done on that day for the comfort of man, that
now is turned into a very Sabbath-worke. I bind not man in a Mathematical
manner to points of Physical necessity. And therefore, if it stand for the
conveniencie of Man, and there were nothing to the When thou can not do it
before, nor well defer it after the Sabbath. So Zauch. in 4. praec.
contrary ( a part ante, nor a part post,) I mean, that it might not have
been done as well before, or deferred till after the Sabbath: so I call it a
necessary Work. Christ cured some upon the Matthew. 12.1. It appears by Luc.
6.1. that it was the 7. day of unleavened bread: which was a Ceremonial
Sabbath: But yet by Christ's justifying of them from the Priests profaning the
weekly Sabbath guiltlessely, it is plain, that the reason of both sorts of
Sabbaths in this was alike. Luke 13.15.
Sabbath day, whose life lay not upon it, but that they might have stayed till
the morrow: And the Disciples in that of plucking the Ears of Corn (wherein
they are justified by Christ) were not in that extremity, but they might have
put it off, till they came to Town: and therefore they were to do many
corporal works on the Sabbath, and were yet guiltless; nay guilty even of
breaking the Sabbath, except they did do them.

And as the Sabbath was made for man; so for the creature too, for the Ox, the
Ass, etc. And therefore when the creature, that is, a necessary creature, is
in danger of receiving any notorious damage, that may make it unserviceable
for man, did they break the Sabbath if they did work to save it? No, The
Sabbath was broken, except they did work: Neither is it any thing to say, we
must rather let our hay and corn fall into, and lie in the suddes, and accept
therein the chastisement of our sins. What? and perhaps famish? And must we
suffer our Ox to stick in the mire, as a rod from God? What? not lift the
poor Ox out? And yet a man that is rich feels no loss in an Ass or a
sheep: Luke 14.5. Matthew. 12.11.
In mercy then to the poor creature we must let all lie and see it done. It
is a conclusion held on all hands, That an house on fire is warrant enough for
a whole Parish to lay about them on the Sabbath day, to quench it. And is not
water as unmercifull an element as fire? Yea to preserve life, man did Josh.
6.4. 1. King. 20.29. Zanch. in 4. praec.

Danae. eth. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 10.

Walae. in 4. praecept. p. 115.


fight and 2. King 19.1. Thom. ^^. 2 ae. q. 122. art. 4.
flee on the Sabbath day; and did well. Then we conclude, That in mercy to the
creature, (to preserve it) in mercy to our selves, (to preserve that which does
preserve us in good liking) and in both (to show our obedience to God) work at
any bodily work we must on the Sabbath; and are free. Nehemiahs case lay not
in such exigents: and therefore Nehemiah did like himself, in reproving and
reforming. Nothing is to be concluded against what I have said, out of that in
Exodus, That in harvest, they were to cease on the seventh day. I have read an
answer, That this was a privilege of that Nation, that they had a Wri^ of
protection against all Inundations: As God undertook for them during their
Journey up to the anniversary Feasts, to keep all well and safe at home the
while; So the promise of the former and latter rain in season, was a peculiar
to the Israelites. But what needs this, since a reconciliation is at hand; that
this prohibition is to be construed with the exception still of necessity?
Tremel. in Mark. 2.1.
Tremellius, a Jew by nature, is of the mind, that by very Talmud, dangers of
life, though not evident, were cause enough for a Jew to work upon the Sabbath
day. And Lyra in Exodus 20.
Lyra another Christian of the same Nation, writing on the very words of the
Law, is plain, that for all the words of the Law, it was lawful to do those
works which could not well be deferred to the next day, nor done the day
before. He says not, which could not simply be deferred; but, which could not
well be deferred: His meaning is in In Casualibus.
casualties, as he himself calls them.

A maine observation out of the words of Nehemiah is, touching the persons with
whom Nehemiah is said here to contest. Our last and best Translation reads it,
Nobles: I have read, that it were fitter to translate it, Freemen. And this is,
to bear out an Opinion, that even among the Jews a servant did not sin in
working on the Sabbath day, in case his Master command him: As though Nehemiah
had contested with all and with only Freemen: and that therefore the servants
were in no blame. Manual. cap. 13. n. 7.
Navarrus to help this his Opinion, puts in two Clauses of exception: One is,
That the servant is to hear one Mass: the other; that the Master do not
enjoyne him work on the holy day in contempt: If he do, then the servant is
rather to dye the death, than to work at his Masters command.

CHAP. XIX.
A word of the Argument, and then more at large of the proof of the Argument.
Say, the word did signify Masters (which it does not;) yet I deny the
Argument: He contested with the Masters; therefore the Masters only were in
fault. And the reason why I deny it; because I find it granted, that the
servants would have rested with thanks, if they had not been constrained to
work. What needs then to urge the servants to do that, which of themselves
they would feign do? The Masters were chief in fault: therefore he contests
with them. The Masters had in their power to reform all: therefore Nehemiah,
like a wise and just Prince deals with them. He was a Magistrate, and his
business being not for correction of what was done, but for reformation, that
they might do so no more; whom in reason should he speak unto, but the
Superiors? mend them, mend all. The servants would come in of themselves: if
they would not, the Masters had power to force them to it whether they would or
not. Me thinks then, it is an argument to be pitied, to fall from the pen
of any learned man, and from this to conclude, That the Servants did not sin,
because in that sabbaticall reformation Nehemiah did contest with the Masters,
and not with them by name. But what if we prove out of this very Chapter, That
Nehemiah did contest with all, Servants and all? Look but into the 15. verse,
and there we read, that Nehemiah saw some treading wine-presses on the
Sabbath day (and these are confessed to be Servants) and bringing in sheaves,
and lading Asses, as also wine, grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens
which they brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day. All these, or the most of
these, I am sure, were Servants: For who used to bear burdens, but the
Servants? And were not these in fault? Else, why did Nehemiah contest with
them? He was to deal wisely and justly. The Text says, That he testified
against them: and therefore not only the work was done by them; but a There
was not only Voluntas facti, sed peccati.
sin was committed by them. As good an Argument as the former might have
arose to infer, That only Servants were in the sin, because he testified
againsts the Servants, and not the Masters by name. But the thing we look is
not to be denied: and that is, Because here, ver. 15. Nehemiah testified
against the Servants that did bear burdens, that therefore They did sin. For
we have it confessed, that they would not have trodden the wine-presses, nor
carried the burdens, except their Masters had commanded them. And therefore,
albeit their Masters did charge them to do it: just and wise Nehemiah did
testify against those Servants, for those works on the Sabbath day; which
works they did in obedience to their Masters. And out of this, he that has
half an eye may see, that the Servants did sin. He did look besides the
Book then, who did and durst write, That Nehemiah did not reprove the
Servants, by whose employment and labor these things were done: For, the Text
is express, That Nehemiah did testify first against them; The Servants that
did tread the Presses, and bear the Burdens, ver. 15. and then the Nobles,
ver. 17.

Once more from the very Text in hand, I prove That Servants, as servants, were
in the same sin with their Masters; though not in the same point and degree
of sinning. I say in the sin as sin, to shut out all cavil. For it is a
very riddle to me in a matter so express and evident, a servant should
concur to the fact, and not to the fault. I mean so far as to make them
guilty as well as the master, though not so much as the Master. Thus I argue.

Those, whom Nehemiah did contest against, ver. 21. were in a sin (else he
dealt, nor justly, nor wisely to contend with them.)

But besides the Merchants, those were sellers of all kinds of ware: I think,
the most of them, I am sure many, were servants. For who be they that in all
trades, places, markets, faires, sell? What? Not the servants as well as the
Master? Therefore they did sin.

Again, Those whom Nehemiah threatened to lay hands on, were in a sin in
Nehemiah's opinion; else neither his wisdom, nor justice would, that he
should lay them up. But he said, he would lay hands on the sellers of all
kinds of ware, who lodged about the Walls of Jerusalem. And amongst these
sellers, there must needs be many servants. Neither does Nehemiah threaten
some, but all (indefinitely) the Sellers: for sellers of all kinds of ware, is
all one with all sellers of wares. The terms are aequipollent: And therefore
servants were in fault.

Now how poor and weak this kind of disputing is, we will show out of
Nehemiah 5. v. 7. There Nehemiah is said to rebuke the (...)
Nobles and (...)
Rulers, for that they did exact usury of their Brethren. The word englished
Nobles is by the Septuagint (who being Jews, are said to know best the sense
of their own Language) I say, the word is by them translated (...) [ men of
renowne] and it must mean such, because in order they are before Magistrates.
Well then; Can any man once imagine, that men of fame and renown only did put
their money to hire? And yet we see Nehemiah then and there is said to contest
with the Nobles and Rulers only by name. Is it not now a simple piece of
Logic, thus to argue? Nehemiah contested with the Nobles and Rulers only for
Usury: therefore Usury was a finne only in Nobles and Rulers; or that none
were Usurers then but the Nobles and Rulers.

Do but read Nehemiah 13.10. and there we find the portions of the Levites had
not been given them. By whom? By the Vatablus in locum.
Israelites: They, to save their purses brought in nothing. Whom does Nehemiah
reprove? The words be verse. 11. that he contended with the i. e (...) Rulers.
The proper sense of the word, is a Ruler in Heb. and in the Chaldee also. as
(...) Dan. 2.48. and (...) Dan. 3.2. A Governor, and nothing but a Governor
(...) Princep^ Magnus: A Great Prince. Pag^ine.
Rulers. Did none refuse to pay their portions but the Rulers? Yes, the whole
body of the people: The corruption was general. The Levites and the Singers
were made to fight so low, that they were fled: the exigent was such, that they
must fly or famish. Which could not have been, if none had been delinquents
but the Rulers. He that runs may read this to be so, verse. 12. Then brought
all Judah ( viz. after Nehemiah had made the reformation) mark, [All Iudah]
then brought the tith of the corn: And therefore all Judah sinned in not
bringing the Portions of the Levites and Singers. [All Judah.] Out of the text
it self I prove, that such a conclusion as this holds not. Nehemiah reproved
the Rulers only; therefore the Rulers only were in transgression: For the
words, as they lie, show us that all Judah offended: And yet Nehemiah calls
only the Magistrates to coram: And why? they had power in their hands to
reform this in all. So here he contended with the Nobles. I say then, as the
truth is, that Nehemiah dealt only with the great Ones, because they were
chief in the sin to suffer it; and it was in their power and place to
reform it: That so he and they joining together to bring about the full
reformation, the Lord might have his Sabbaths again. Having cleared, as I take
it, the weakness of the Argument, we are now to show, that the proof is of
no force.

CHAP. XX.
IT is laid in the sense of the word (...), which our Translation Englisheth
Nobles, and that rightly. The Word naturally does signify a Grandee, a Chief
as head over the rest in Power, or Authority, or both. One that with his
Countenance is able to do much upon the rest, whether they be servants or not.
No man has reason to say the contrary, since it does radically signify some
great Men, whether Magistrate or Magistrates fellow. The Hebrew word which
indeed does signify, and is commonly used to signify a Freeman, is (...).
Which is up and down translated a Freeman, in all versions that I know. But
our word (...) comes from a root, which signifies Schindl. Penteglot. c* ad
(...) quod aulici Proceres olim candidis vestirentur: quod de Iosepho legimus.
Genesis 41.42. and de Mordochaeo. Est. 8.15.
White. Because States used to be clad in White in those times and places. But
the Septuagint, who were natural Jews render it (...), which is properly
Freemen. The thing I am to prove then, is. That the S^ptuagint understood by
(...), Men of Quaelity, Neh. 4. v. 14, 19. The words be [ I said to the Nobles
and Rulers and to the rest of the People.] The word translated Nobles is (...):
and so rendered it must be.

For read it Freemen, and what a poor sense do we put upon the holy Text. I
said to the Freemen, and Rulers, and to the rest of the People. What, Freemen
put before Rulers. Again, Freemen opposed to the rest of the People. Were not
the Commons many of them Freemen now? Nay. The word People is so far from
being restrained to Mean, only Servants; that Servants are rather excluded
than otherwise: not meant at all, rather than only meant. Nehemiah had neither
need, nor cause to speak to the Servants, whose Masters had power over them,
to bring them in to his Will. How then does the Text oppose them to Freemen,
and make them as two several distinct Branches? But what say the 70 here?
(...), i. e. Honorable Men. And therefore the 70 themselves took Nobles,
Honorable, to be the meaning of (...). The like we have, Neh. 5.7. Where
Nehemiah dealt in the matter of Not that Nobles were all Usurers: but because
it was their sin to see it and suffer, and in their power to redress it.
Neither can it be thought that all the Freemen were Usurers: and therefore to
render it Freemen cannot hold*
Usury. What be the words. I rebuked, says he, (...). The Nobles and Rulers,
says our Engglish. Me thinks it makes the holy Ghost to speak backward to
English it thus. I rebuked the Freemen and Rulers. And here we have the 70 for
us. Again, they translate it (...), honorable. A third place we find, Neh.
6.17. The Nobles of Judah sent many letters to Tobija. It makes a kind of
Nonsense of it to read it. The Freemen of Judah sent many letters. The word
is, (...). And must we make them a Popular State, and turn their Commonwealth
into a Democracy, that Letters must be written in the name of every Freeman.
And here, as before the Septuagint have it (...). No no, They were the Nobles
that wrote, whose Letters were like to carry some stroke with Tobijah. And can
it sink into any Man's head, that all or most of the Freemen must meet many
times, to write many letters to Tobijah. Thus we see, how often in this very
book of Nehemiah, which best of all opens it self, the word (...) is used,
where it can possibly (both by the Scripture and by the Translation of the 70.)
signify nothing but Nobles. And were not the Septuagint Jews? Did not they
best know how to give the right meaning of their own Language? Now, what say
we to other places of Scripture! We read Esaias. 34.12. They shall call the
Nobles to the Kingdom. The word is (...). Read the word Freemen: it is
ridiculous. They shall call the Freemen to the Kingdom. And here, once more,
the Septuagint are for us. The Greek is (...). i. e. Princes, great officers,
men of place, power: and the like we find, Ier. 27.20. The words be.
Nebuchadnezzar carried away with King Ieconiah all the Nobles. The original
is, [(...)] What? did he carry away all the Freemen? No such matter. He left
all the Freemen, or all almost behind him. They were not carried away in the
deportation of Ieconiah. But the Nobles he did all, or as good as all. But we
must consult with the Septuagint. There it is, (...), Potentates. And one place
more, if you will in Ier. 39.6. Where we read, That after Nebuchadnezzar, had
slain the sons of King Zedekiah: the Text says, That the King of Babel slew
all the Nobles of Judah. The Original has [(...)]. Translate it Freemen, and
there is as little truth, as good sense in it. For he did not then kill all the
Freemen of Judah. So to English it, is to father untruth's upon the book of
God. We must not leave out the Septuagint. They must be heard by all means.
And how do they Greek it here? Why [(...)] Princes again. By all these
places we see how little truth there is in such bold assertions as these, that
(...) does properly signify Freemen. That the Septuagint, who were Jews by
Nature, and could best say what is the signification of the words in their own
Language, do so understand it. Which we see, is neither so, nor so. But if a
1000 Septuagints had said that Freemen is the proper and natural signification
of the word (since we see the contrary in almost all the places of the Bible
where the Word is used:) we must crave pardon, if we be hard of belief in the
point. But do not the 70 here, in the very place, Nehemiah 13.17. translate
the word (...)? They do. Does not (...), naturally and Grammatically signify
Freemen? It does. And did not the 70 know what (...) meant? They did. What will
you do now? No hurt done. I mean not: nor need to disable the Version of the
70 (as a great Hie^onym. in Isay. 10. and passim.*
Hebrician and Divine both does. Nor am I about to say, That the Edition that
we now have, is so vitiate, that one would think it were not the same, but
some impostor rather.) Yet De Verbo De^ lib. 2. c. 6.
Bellarmine is so bold with the 70. It Is enough to carry it on our side, that in
so many places (as above) the 70 themselves construe the word (...) by such
Greek words as never can signify a Freeman, as such: but ever A man of
Eminency and Port. And now, whereas in our place, the Septuagint do translate
(...), The meaning is, not to note out free Men simply: but such Freemen as
were also Men of Note and Quality above the rest. And let the reason of this
Metaphorical use of the word be. Because such Men should be of a free and
generous spirit. Or else. Because Rulers were taken and chosen (when chosen)
never out of Servants: but of such, whose houses were free in Israel. We will
not look after other Authors: but (to leave this place till anon) prove out of
some other places of Scripture, That the 70 cannot still mean Freemen, when
they do translate [(...)] (...). Which they do, but rare and seldom. To
begin with 1 Kings 21.8. Where we find, That Iezabel wrote Letters in Ahabs
name to the Elders, and to the Nobles that were in his City, The Hebrew word
translated by our English Nobles, is our word (...) where it is by the 70 done
into Greek (...). Now by the very Text it appears, that (...) cannot be
translated a Freeman. For it is not to be imagined that Iezabell did write and
direct her Letters to the Elders and Freemen of that City. What had the Freemen
to do with her practice? She had a bloody secret in hand, which she neither
would, nor need to impart to every Freeman. But the Rulers and Nobles, they
were the men, that were only fit to be entrusted with her feat, and able to
satisfy her wicked turn. Her drift was to put off the matter with a fair
color, and to cover it from the eyes of the Commons. Which she could not do
nor meant to do, if so be she had written to the Freemen in the Kings Name.
Except such and such Freemen that were fit for her design, were not to be made
acquainted with that horrid plot? What? writes that to the Freemen, which by
all means her desire was to secret from the Freemen. And she might well
think, That all the Freemen would not have come in to her mind to massacre a
man and his family, for nothing but his conscience. And therefore I take it a
clear case. That by (...) here are meant Nobles and not Freemen. And yet the
70. have it in the Greek (...). Therefore in this place they do not think
that (...) signifies Freemen. Nor do they by their (...) intend to express
Freemen (qua tales) but great men.

And the same is also proved by Eccles. Eccl. 10.17. Vulgar, Nobiles. Vat ab.
Filius Nobilium. So Paguine, Tremel. Clarissimi. Piscator. Cuius Rex natus est
viris illustribus His Scholion. Heb. Cuius Rex filius Candidorum est. Hebraei
(...) candidos seu albos intelligunt viros principes, claros, and illusties:
vel quod gererent candidas vest^s, vel quod nomine ^apientiae, and virtutis
illustres and clari essent.
10.17. Blessed (says the holy Ghost there) art thou Land, when thy King is
the son of Nobles.] The Hebrew is our word in question (...). In the
Septuagint it (...). What English is this? Blessed is the Land when the King is
the son of Freemen. A wise blessedness. And translations agree in the best
Linguists, to give the word (...), such words in Latin, as can bear no good
English except by such a word as Nobles, Illustrious, Renowned. And in these
places, it is not to be denied, That when the 70. translate (...): though (...)
do in the Grammatical signification of it properly signify any Freemen as
Freemen: yet) the 70. do by it understand a Potent, a Man of place, and
account. As it is plain and proved to be plain by the places before cited,
which are all the places I know, (except this in Nehemiah now in question)
where in the 70. (...) is done into the Greek (...). And the reason was, The
very word (...) in diverse ancient Writers is taken metaphorically, applied to
the mind, and not only for civil freedom in the compound, (...): in the
abstract (...), mean, base baseness. See plenty of instances, out of Greek
Authors, in Scapula, and Stephanus.
as I said, because such should be of a free and noble mind. And does not this
make it plain. That whenever the 70. are to translate (...) which is radically
and properly a Freeman as a Freeman simply, as opposite to a Bondsman, there
they ever use to translate it by the word (...): but when they are to translate
(...) usually they do give it a word in Greek which signifies a Gentleman, or
rather one a size above a Gentleman. And in these few places where they put it
into the word (...) (as in those places I have set down and in this of
Nehemiah) the scope of the places do show, that they mean to note thereby
nothing less than nakedly a Freeman. And if challenging were so fit among
Scholars, me thinks I might put any man to prove, That in any place where (...)
is used in the Original, or where (...) is made by the 70. the translation of
(...): that then and there in any one place it must yea, or may be rendered a
Freeman, Quatenus a Freeman contradistinct to a servant. The brief of all is
in two words. In other places where (...) is made by the 70. the translation of
(...) it cannot signify Freemen: and therefore it does not follow that it must
here, in our place of Nehemiah.

And now at last to come to the very place, I say that here it does not
signify a Freeman, and therefore the 70. who being Jews borne knew best to
translate their own Language, do not here (translating (...)) mean thereby a
Freeman: but a man of Note and Name. It Is a poor piece of Learning then to say,
that it does properly signify, a Freeman, when there is no one place in all
the Bible, where it must, say I? nay) where it may handsomely be translated
Freeman. And for this place I dare appeal to all Interpreters, where ever any
did translate it by a word that is ever used in any Tongue to signify a
Freeman. Only excepted this questioned translation of the 70. now in hand.
When I say all: I mean all Hieron. Optimates.

Vulg. Optimates.

Beda. Optimates.

Pagn. Optimates.

Pagn. in Thesauro, Magnate^.

S. hindl. Primates.

Buxd. Clarissimi.

Tremel. Clarissimi.

Interlin Heroes. French. les gouverneurs.

Spanish, a los sennores English translat. Geneva. Rulers. last, Noble^. Ital
gli huomini, Notabili*


I have seen, and by them I judge the same of all the rest, I have not seen.
Diverse words they have: but all the wit in the world cannot express what they
all mean in a more full formal, and significant term than Noble, which is
our last English. To say all in a word, the 70. translate commonly (...) by
(...) and (...), which of force signify Nobles: and in two or three places
(where they render it (...), they must and did mean Nobles. And so do the
circumstances of this very place ( Nehe. 13.17.) evince it to be understood
here. Consider but that the same form and manner of chiding and reproving
which he follows here, he used before, Verse. 11. Where he says, he contended
with the Rulers about the abuse of the Levits portion. But there the men
reproved were great men. For the word is (...) which is there in the 70. Vid
Arist. polit. l. ^. cap. ult. who having occasion to treat of some Magistates
says, (...).
(...) and that is nor can be nothing but Rule^s. In regard of their place of
office, he calls them there Rulers. In regard of their Birth or others Titles
and dignities he calls them here ( Verse. 17.) Nobles: in both, the same rank
of men. But because the Septuagints translation of the word in this place (...)
is by some made such a matter: We will therefore show, it is not for nothing,
that we af^firmed the 70. to mean by (...), A man of a free and noble spirit.
Consider we then that [(...)] properly and originally does signify Ingenuous
men. Now an ingenuous man is defined in Institut. Iuris. lib. 1. tit* 4.
Law to be borne not made a Freeman. Yet a common use of (...) in Scriptures
is to signify Princes, Potentates, Rulers, Nobles. The 70. who being ^ewes
best knew the use of their own mother Tongue, do Pro. 19.6. (...). King. Psalm.
118.9. and 47.10.83.12.113.7. (...). Princes. 1. Sam. 2.8 (...). Powers. Prove.
8.16. (...). Tyrants or Kings. The word tyrant was anciently of a good meaning.
Scapula.
often translate it by words, which do and in very grammatical etymology must
signify Rulers. And the Beza in Luc. 22.25. Iansen. concordant. cap. 133.
learned are in the right, when they teach us, That Luke (22.25) by (...)
Benefactours bountiful does express the Hebrew [(...)] and that S. Luke does
import men of authority and place. Two of the Ptolomej Kings of Egypt, took to
them this Title to be called Ptolomeus Euergetes. And why? But because Princes
and Grandies should be men of a bountiful mind, and of a free and most
ingenuous spirit. And (...). Arist. pol. l. 3. cap. 11.

Qui magistratum ambieb^^t Boni dicebantur, quia munus non ni^i a Bonis
administrari vel ambiri fas erat Seneca. lib. 1. ep. 3. Sic. qui publica
curabant Optimates, quia non nisi Optimis committi debebant publica negotia.


Aristotle says, That Kings were created from their Beneficence. And gives
this reason. For that good men are highly esteemed for their virtue. As then
the Hebrew and Greek words, which signify properly ingenuous, free,
munificent, are used for Princes as common as may be, because such men should
have such conditions; and he wrongs the Text, that shall translate (...)
Ingenuous: may I not in like manner say. That the 70. in our place uses the
word (...), which thematically and properly signifies Freeman for a Nobleman,
because me^, of quality such, should be endued with such qualities. The very
same we see in the word 1 King. 21.8. (...). i. e. To the Elders, meaning the
chief Magistrates and Masters of the City, and passim.
(...), whose immediate and literal signification is an elderly man, a Senior.
Yet how often in the old Testament is it used to signify a Ruler in the State?
And all over the new Testament for a Ruler and Rector in the Church. And why?
Because men are not usually so fit to be put in place in either, till they come
to some years. The reason we have in the (...) Eth. lib. 1. c. 3. (...).
Polit. lib. 7. cap. 9* (...). Ibid.
Philosopher. Because a man is not fit for a Counselor in the state, till he
be of some good experience, which a Junior cannot have: Nor in the Church, till
he be of composed manners, which is not found every day among the younger sort.
Old in time and old in manners usually go together. To come to the point then.
Since most an end the 70. do translate (...) by words expressing Nobles; And
since in those few places, where the 70. do make use of the word (...), the
Circumstances of the place do carry it, That simply Freemen as Freemen cannot
be meant; but Noblemen, because they should be men of free minds (as the words
(...)* are translated in like sort from the literal sense to signify men of
place and quality;) And since all translations I think, I am sure all that I
have seen, do in the National and learned versions and translations turn it
by words expressing Nobles, Lords, Worthies, Heroical persons, Potentates,
Illustrious and the like; Since I say all these proofs meet, as most pregnant
to evince the true and full signification of the word (...) to be Nobles; the
conclusion is ours: That Nehemiah did contest not with all the Freemen; but
with the Nobles, as men that were in place and power to redress the
Profanation of the Sabbath day.

CHAP. XXI.
THe Argument to prove the word (...) to signify Freemen, from the use of the
Chaldee word (...) was not worth the printing. What? does not that Chaldee come
by etymology from the Hebrew word, and does the Chaldee usually signify
Freemen? and yet do you say, the Argument thence is of no force? No. Of none
at all. For to pass it over, that the Chaldee edition is but a Paraphrase, no
punctual Translation; neither is it, as it is, so exact; (so says De Verb.
Dei li. 2. cap. 3.
Bellarmine) neither is it Aquila is thought to fl^rish under Adrian the
Emperor after Christ.
Onkelos, but forty years before the birth of Christ.
ancient enough to carry a conclusion for the use of a word (for in so many
hundred of years as the Chaldee is later then Nehemiah, it is usual for
significations of words to change; It Is Use rather then Grammar that brings in
significations of words. ( Horat in art poetica.
Use is Norma Loquendi.) To pass over all this, what if the Chaldee (...) be
used to signify Nobles, as well as the Hebrew (...)? Where is all this
boasting then? Look but in Dan^el 7.9. (and Daniel lived about the days of
Nehemiah) and there only, that I know, we have the Chaldee wo^d. It is (...) it
signifies and is translated White, just as the Hebrew word. And Nobles using to
apparel themselves in white, thence they were both in the Chaldee and Hebrw
words called (...) and (...). Neither do we speak at random. For in radice
(...)
Schindler, (as great a Linguist as Christendom has known, dispraise to
none) does assure us, That the Chaldee (...) does signify men of place; and he
does express the meaning of the Chaldee by three Latin words, Principes,
Magnates, Primates, all which signify great men. And if the Chaldee Paraphrase
may be heard for good; then look Ier. 27.20. wherefore our Hebrew word (...)
(which we translate Nobles of Judah,) The Chaldee has (...), that is, The
Princes. Both come to one.

Therefore the Chaldee himself being Judge, the Hebrew (...) is not Freemen;
but Princes. But does not (...) in Chaldee properly signify a Freeman? It
does. Is it not derived by Etymology from the Hebrew (...)? I think so; I
grant it: and yet all this comes not home to the point. For words have the
signification from the common use, and the Chaldee coming in long after, had
some a^teration from the grammatical signification. And that I do not only
say, but prove. For because the Chaldee does not use to express the Hebrew
(...) by the Chaldee (...) (though (...) be derived from (...),) but to show a
difference, the Chaldee paraphrase is constant in using to render the Hebrew
word (...), which is indeed precisely a Freeman, by the Chaldee word (...),
which was in the Language when the paraphrase wrote Freemen. As Ez. 21.2. (...)
in Hebrew; in the Chaldee (...), i. e. the son of the Freeman. Since then the
Chaldee does not express (...) by (...), ^ut by some other word s^gnifying
Nobles Chaldaeus passim pro (...) habet (...) ^ilius liberorum. So Pagni^. in
These. in radice (...)
, but (...) he does ever use to translate by (...); therefore I conclude, that
in the Judgment of the Chaldee paraphrast himself, our word (...) does
signify Nobles, and not Freemen.

To argue from the signification, of a word, that it now has to prove the
signification it had 400, or 500 years ago, is of no force; since the use of
words do come and go, almost as fast as the fashion of Clothes. As it follows
not that because (...) does signify a Tyrant now, that therefore it does never
signify a King. Times do change, and words do alter with Time, both in
pronunciation and signification. And so I think that the Chaldee, which in the
Paraphrast his days did signif^e Freemen long before, when it came first out
of the Hebrew word (...), did signify Nobles. Howsoever men please to think
of that Conjecture, I have my desire in that the Chaldee himself does not
translate (...) by (...), signifying Freemen; though radically (...) does
derive it self from (...). But (...) they do construe by words signifying
Nobles.

Say then that Nehemiah had not testified against the Servants, which the Text
flatly says he did, and say that (...) did signify Masters, which we have
proved to be very false: yet thus to dispute; He contested with the Masters,
Ergo, the Masters were only in the sin: And, The Servants did not sin,
because not contested with: This I say is such an Enthymeme, that a Freshman
newly come from turning over Brierwoods Notes, can tell how at the first sight
with reason to deny the Consequence. For Nehemiah did reprove the Nobles,
because they were in greatest fault to suffer it. And in their hands it lay
much to reform it. And Nehemiah would not be said in it, but threatens them
all, rich and poor, mighty and mean, bond and free, Master and Man, one with
another. And he had his Will. God gave him good success. For the Text says,
That they went away, and from that time forth, they came no more on the Sabbath
day. And what a mercy were it, if the Lord would be pleased so to order the
hearts, pens, and tongues of the Learned, that from henceforth, they would
give over and speak, and write no more against the Sabbath Day.

FINIS.

