A TREATISE CONTAINING THE AEQVITY OF AN HVMBLE SVPPLICATION WHICH IS TO BE
EXHIBITED UNTO HER GRACIOUS MAJESTY AND this high Court of Parliament in the
behalf of the Country of Wales, that some order may be taken for the
preaching of the Gospel among those people.

Wherein also is set down as much of the estate of our people as without
offense could be made known, to the end that our case (if it please God) may be
pitied by them who are not of this assembly, and so they also may be driven to
labor on our behalf.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOSEPH BARNES, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Tigers head. 1587.

TO ALL THAT MOVRN IN SION UNTIL THEY SEE Jerusalem in perfect beuty, and namely
to my Fathers and Brethren of the Church of England, grace, mercy and love in
the Lord Jesus be multiplied.
IT has been the just complaint (beloved in the Lord) of the godly in all
ages, that Gods eternal and blessed verity, unto whom the very Heavens
themselves should stoop and give obesiance, has bin of that small reckoning
and account in the eyes of the most part of great men, as they valued it to be
but a mere loss of time to yield any attendaunce thereupon. Hence it comes
to pass that the truth being at any time to be countenanced, none very often
are found in the train thereof, but the most contemptible and refuse of men.
And because these also being guilty unto themselves of great infirmities (and
foul sins many times) and not ignorant that affliction is the sequel of
earnest and sincere profession do pull their necks from the yoke, and their
shoulders from the burden: the Lord is constrained very severely to deal
with them before they can be gotten to go on his message. Whereupon also
follows their endeavors in Gods own cause not to have the events which they
expect. Example hereof Jonas may be one for all. And which is far more
lamentable, in as much as the drousie and careless security, the cold and
frossen affections of the godly themselves in most weighty affairs is never
wanting, their careful diligence, and earnest zeal joined with hearty, and
vehement prayers always desired, the Lord suffers his own cause, to
contract some spot from their sinful hands. These considerations beloved, but
specially the later, kept me back a great while from this action, which I have
now by the goodness of God brought to this pass you see. It would be a grievous
wound unto me all my life long if the dignity of a cause worthy to have the
shoulders of all the princes under the coape of heaven for it footstool should
be any whit diminished by my foul hands, which notwithstanding I protest to
have been washed as fair as their stains would permit. But I am not a little
comforted, two manner of ways. First that the Lord knows he thrust me almost
against my will hereunto. And for as much as I see the honor of Jesus Christ (in
whose countenance God the father has lovingly wincked at my sins, and whose
is all that I have) stands upon the progress of the word preached among us,
my silence, though to the danger of my life, shall not be tray his honor. Is
not he a God? Will he not be religiously worshipped? Will he not have this
religion framed according unto his own mind? Has he not regard whether his
true service be yielded him or no? if he have, woe be unto that conscience that
knows this and keeps it secret, or is slack in the promoting hereof. Seeing
it pleased him, who also separated me from my mothers womb to stur me up
hereunto, I doubt not but he will give that success of my labors, that may be
most to his glory. Surely by his assistaunce I neither can nor will be slack.
The dignity of the cause (I hope) will be regarded: if not, importance must take
no denial in the matter of our God. My second comfort is, that what effect
soever shall ensue my pains, I seek not my own but theirs whom it concerns,
namely my parents and brethren according to the flesh. Whose state is so
miserable at this day, that I think it were very great vndiscreetnes for me
to spare any speech that were likely to prevail. Naie I would to God my life
could win them the preaching of the Gospel. Our sickness is at the heart, it
must not be dallied with, either present remedy or undoubted perdition. And so
will they judge, who view our estate offered unto her Majesty and the
Parliament. Which was not published only least posterities should know such
dishonor of God either at al to have been, or in 28. years not redressed
under Queen Elizabeth our souerain. As for the adversaries who understand our
estate too well and rejoice at our silence, I regard them not at al, for what
have we amiss at this day, which flowed not out of the midst of their
inheritance, cursed Rome, that bottomless pit and furnace of idolatry? I have
only therein touched our calamity, and not touched a great part thereof. To
come unto you beloved of the church of england, I know our cause shall come
through many of your hands, I do with tears beseech that it may have all the
lawful favor you find of your hearts to affourd unto Christ in his poor members.
It may stand in some one to dash the whole. Therefore in the name of God I
require al of you, that you hinder not his honor, the salvation of perishing
souls, and the good to the common wealth hereby intended. If you do otherwise,
I pray God, so many souls, as perish in miserable Wales for want of preaching,
be not required at your hands in the day of judgment. But beloved I promise
al good things on your parts, and crave not only prayers, unto the Lord for the
speedy erecting of our Jerusalem; but all other helps of speech and
countenance, of motioning the matter unto her Majesty and the Parliament;
showing the danger, of denying the great profit, and necessity of granting our
petition. It is your duty which cannot be shaken off, as it appears by the
example of Ebed-melech, Ierem. 38.9.
Jeremy 38.9. The like act done by the Princes and Elders of the Land,
Jeremy. 26.16, 17. When the Princes hard Baruch read in their ears, the
words of the book containing all the curses Jehovah had determined to bring
upon Israel and Judah etc. it is recorded by the holy Ghost, that they were
afraid both one and other, and said unto Baruch, we will certify the king of
these words, and did so. Wherein they performed nothing but that which every
one of you before the Lord is bound to do. Gods people requires this at your
hands. The state of the common wealth and her Majesty's (whom the Lord in
mercy deliver from all foreign and domestical treasons) cry unto every one
of you that can give any counsel, Iliad. 3. A counselor must not sleep all
night.
(...). You must not sleep al night, in this case, but entreat the Lord, her
majesty, and this honorable court, to raise the ministry of his word in
Wales. This matter concerns al very nearlie. The way to procure to your
selves favor with the Lord, and credit with her Majesty, is to solicit our
cause, and so you shall find it. The more earnest you be herein, the more honor
shall be unto the Lord, and her Majesty will be the more beholding unto you.
Nebuchad-nezzer an idolater blessed the Lord, because Shadrak Meshak and
Abednago the servants of the living God, Dan. 3.9.
changing the kings decree, did yield their bodies, rather than they would
worship any other God. If they had been as backewarde as were other Jews in
this case, how had that notable decree to the honor of God been promulgated?
ver. 29. Where had been their commendation? No other way conueyeth the true
favor of any prince unto the subject. Prou. 10.22.
Gods blessing which makes rich and honorable is joined hereunto. Though it
were otherwise, yet this thing is laid upon you, be not disobedient. And likely
it is to be otherwise. For (I am afraid) behold that which the Lord has
built, he will destroy, that which he has planted he will root up. Ierem.
45.45
And do you seek for great things unto your selves? Seek them not. If in the
day of trouble you will be hidden, you must be Ieremies, you must be
Hebedmeleches, you must be Barucks. In these three men the Lord showed, that
even in this life, he makes great difference between the zealous and
lukewarm professors. Jeremy for his roundnes in his office was beaten and put
in the stocks, Ier. 35.15.16 Ier. 29.26.27.
Iere. 35.15.16. judged worthy to die, Ier. 29.26.27. accounted a rauer and one
that made himself a prophet, Ier. 29.26.27, a man that sought not the wealth
of his people but the hurt, Iere. 38.4. Hebedmelech was a noble man, but some
thing over zealous, and one that would not stick to tell the king himself that
he had yielded unto his noble men in a thing that was evil in all that they
had done to Jeremy the Prophet, Ier. 38.5.9. Baruch was out of favor both
with prince and priest, Ier. 36.19.26. because he favored Jeremy. But when
the land was made desolate, and the words of poor Jeremy became true, who
then went unto the wall? Verily the king and his nobles, priests, and prophets.
And Jeremy the true servant of the Lord, must have a whole senate of noble men
sent to take him out of prison and to know his will, Nebuzaradan, Nebushasban,
Raebsaris, Neregal, Ier. 39.4.13.
etc. the king of Babeles princes. Hebedmelech should not be given into the
hands of the men whom he feared, but be surely delivered because he put his
trust in Jehovah. Ierem. 45.45.
Baruch should have his life given him for a pray. Howesoeuer it goes
therefore, your service in our cause shall be recompensed. They that know what
it is to have their iniquities forgiven, and their sins covered by the
sufferings and passions of Jesus Christ will be wounded, to see others under
the curse. The Churches of God round about us go to wrack in France, Belgia
and a great part of high Duch, I would Scotland had continued in her first
love, and that the hands of the builders were strengthened among you. Come what
will come, stand you manfully in the faith, my fathers and brethren, and
according to the counsel of Jude (...)
renew the battle again with your spiritual enemy, Iud. 3.
and contend with earnestnes. It may please God though the lively branches be
cut off, to quicken us dead boughs, by the virtue of our head Jesus Christ. I
doubt not by the Lords goodness, if the truth be established among us through
continual preaching, but that al which profess Godliness in Europe, shall
heartily thank the Lord for our zeal and courage therein. Our nation are full of
dross I grant, as all the sons of Adam are by nature, and very stony
hearted. But the word of God is a fire for the dross and an hamber for the
stone Ier. 23.29. And the weapons whereby the man of God warreth, are not
carnal, but mighty through God to cast down houldes, and to bring under
every imagination that is against the knowledge of God. 2 Cor. 10.5. when al
things shall be measured unto us by the measure of the sanctuary (as all must
be or else the building prove ruinous) our God will be for a diadem of beutie
unto us, and for a spirit of judgment, he will give us his spirit to please
him. I thought it needless to put her Majesty and the Parliament in mind that
every thing amongst us must be ordered according to the word it self. For
otherwise both the word and the Minister shall want a great deal of the
dignity due unto both. Suffer the scepter of the word to rule, and this will
not be derogatorious unto man, much less unto the word. It will be hard to find
a yoke fellow for that, which can neither abide superior nor brook an equal.
My brethren for the most part know not what preaching means, much less think
the same necessary to salvation. Though they grant it needeful, they think it
sufficient to hear one sermon once perhaps in all their life. Therefore was is
needful for me to set down the necessity of preaching, and of continual
preaching, that if they labor not for the same, their blood may be upon
their own heads. For they cannot deny themselves to be put in mind hereof. If
there be any other point of doctrine touched it tends also to this end. The
diligence beloved which I hope your learned Bishops, Doctors and other great
Divines men of famous report have taken in England, cannot suffer you to be
ignorant in these points. Therefore take the^ not as written unto you. For the
case it self you know what it is, even that which the Lord of host will have
most seriously thought upon, and granted without al naie. In respect whereof
it comes with Gods own letters patents, wherewith all estates in the world,
naie all the Angels in heaven cannot dispense. Concerning the ha^dling of it by
me a wretch, I protest my self to have labored according to the example of the
Apostle, to speak as I have been allowed of my God, seeking to win the favor
of none, much less the disliking of any, least man's unequal displeasure
would be contented with no less satisfaction than the blood of many a
thousand souls. God forbid man's infirmities in me should bring this effect.
Naie it must not. For be I the son of Adam ten thousand times, compassed with
never so many infirmities, never so base, vile, polluted, and defiled, yet the
preaching of the word in Walls is Gods glory, and therefore must stand. And yet
it may be the Lord by this supplication does but try the good wills of those
small or great through whose hands it shall come, and never means to have any
such thing performed: as being out of hand to make an end of al, and to come
himself to sit in judgment, where his word shall be surely countenanced. The
consideration whereof should make men enter deeply into their dealings herein.
O why should the curse of any damned soul among us pursue the withstander of
our salvation? To make an end, pray for us breethren and now pray, and pray
again that our God would incline mercy unto us in the sight of the Queen her
Counsel and all the Queens mighty princes, and that builders may be raised
among us. So let it be our God, Amen.

THE NECESSITY laid upon man to 2. These. 1.8. Isai. 53.11.
know aright, the eternal, his creator, and redeemer, and to seiue him
according unto that knowledge; which is done of that people alone, Ephesians.
2.12. 2. Tim. 19.10. 1. Cor. 1.22.
amongst whom, the light of the Gospel does shine, as is not obscurely
showed, by the Lords severe punishment, upon them that are either (...). Iud.
4. and 15.
irreligious, or negligently regard, and desperately contemn the truth, being
offered unto them: so does it most lively appear, by the Lords free and
undeserved Ezekiel. 36.32 1. Cor. 4.7. Romans 4.2. Iam. 1.17.
(yet rewarding blessings) upon all such, as in an holy obedience conform
themselves according to his will. What flames of unquenchable vengeance,
careless negligence of Gods service, and the wilful rejecting thereof, has
stirred in former times amongst nations; and will, as long as the just God
justly requiteth the contempt of his word, kindle for ever amongst posterities,
I wish all men duly to consider. The Lords anger, for the sins of his own
people, the children of Israel, was executed upon them to the full: even
because, they hardened Ierem. 19.
their necks, and would not hear his word. The Iere. 22.5.7.
Lord swear by himself, that the Temple should be laid wast, that he would
prepare destroiers against it: Ierem. 21.5.
he himself with a stretched-out hand, and with a mighty arm, would fight
against them, even in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation. And
because Ierem. 26.2.
they would not hear him their City should be a curse unto all the nations of
the earth. The whole Ierem. 24.9.
people should be given for a terrible plague to all kingdoms, for a reproach,
for a proverb, for a common talk, and for a curse unto all places whither he
should cast them. Coniah Ierem. 22.24
the King himself should not escape, no though he were the signet of the
Lords own right hand, yet should he be plucked thence. These plagues with many
others most heavy and wo^full, did the Lord denounce against them by the hands
of his Prophets, and performed by the hand of Nebucadnezzar king of Babell:
Because Ierem. 40.3.
they sinned against the Lord and obeyed not his voice, therefore these things
came upon them as it is manifest Jeremy 40.3. Which are not so lightly to be
set by of any, as though they belonged properly unto that time, and people,
especially seeing the Lord judges 1. Pet. 1.17
without respect of persons; and seeing that nation, kingdom and people that
sins against the Lord; shall be destroyed, as it appears by the tenor of his
judgment executed upon Tyrus, Nineveh, Babel, and other Monarchies of the
world. There is no exception of the Deuteronomy. 7.26. and 30.15.19.
blessing and curse; life and death; but the blessing and the life shall be to
him that obeys, the curse and death shall be upon the disobedient soul.
Neither was the gross Idolatry of this people the only cause of their ruin;
but the Lord would have them acknowledge Ierem. 2.19.
that it was an evil, yea a bitter evil that his fear was not in them. This
also did the Leuits Nehem. 3.9.
after their return, confess to have been the cause of their banishment,
even that their King, Princes, and Priests did not diligently attend,
diligently attend I say upon the commandments of Iehoua. And in that great
day, all wicked men shall know, that the Lord will surely render confusion in
flaming fire, not only unto wicked doers, but also unto them 2. These. 1.8.
that know not God. Nothing therefore but shame, indignation, and wrath, Romans
2.8.9.
tribulation, and anguish of soul in this life, can be expected for of those
people, whose tongues and works are against Iehoua, to provoke the eyes of his
glory, Isai. 3, 8.
and after this life, a tormenting portion in that lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, which is the second death. Of which sort al they must needs be,
which never heard of that, which is the Romans 1, 15. 1. Co. 1.21.
power of God to salvation to as many as believe. On the contrary side the
prosperous estate of that nation, language, and people, whose God is the Lord
Iehoua, what heart will not rejoice to see? If you will know therefore the
root of the flourishing estate of any kingdom, David Psalm. 44.15.
tells you that it is, in having Iehoua to be your God. The children of
Israel upon this foundation were thought to be such a gorgious Deuteronomy. 4.6.
building, that all other nations seemed to be but cottages, and wormes-houses
in respect of them. For in that they Deuteronomy. 26.16.17, 18, 19.34.26.
had set up Iehoua to be their God, and to walk in his ways; to keep his
ordinances, laws, and statutes, and to harken unto his voice, the Lord also
had set them up that day to be a precious people unto himself; and to make
them high above all nations in praise, in name and in glory. A large
declaration of the privilege of such a people is recorded Psalm. 33. Behold
the eyes of Jehovah do look upon them that fear him, and wait for his
kindness, that he may deliver them from death, and keep them alive in the
time of famine. And in the life to come John says of them in the Revelation,
Reave. 7.16.17
that they shall not hunger any more, neither shall the sun light on them nor
any heat, for the lamb that is in the midst of the throne shall govern them,
and lead them to the lively fountains of water, and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes. Oh then what Christian, yea ingenious, humane, natural
heart will not be grieved to see any people in such a forlorn case, as not
only to be bereaved of those unspeakable blessings of the Lord, whereof al they
shall be partakers that fear him, but also laid open unto the weapons of his
revenging and consuming anger in this world, and in that to come, to his
eternal and never ending wrath? And who would not strain himself to the
utmost of his ability, and beyond all his might, to make known the case of
such a people, unto those who both can, and also would find a remedy thereunto?
For mine own part, because I see the spiritual misery wherein we now live
in the Country of WALES, for want of the preaching of the Gospel and the great
plagues that are like undoubtedly to fall upon us for the same; I cannot but be
so asfected toward these our calamities, as in respect of the Lords honor, the
desire of the salvation of my breethren, my loyal obedience unto her Majesty,
and the discharge of my own conscience, I do always from the bottom of mine
heart wish and pray for the redress hereof, and now by writing with all
humility and submission in the fear of God, lay open our estate, first unto
the consideration of your excellent Majesty my dread sovereign Queen
Elizabeth, unto whom only of all the potentates of the earth, I owe all
obedience and service in the Lord Jesus, and next unto the view of your high
court of Parliament, desiring you upon my knees in the name of the great God
the creator and preserver of heaven and earth; whose honor is now in hand, that
our petition may be so thoroughly waied, as our necessity requires. The sum
whereof is; that it would please your Majesty, and this honorable assembly, in
a zealous and a godly compassion, to regard the lamentable and woeful estate of
us your poor subjects, and breethren, which live at this day altogether
without the knowledge of Isai. 43.11.^
a saving God, because we have not 2. Chro. 15.2
teaching Ministers among us, and that some order may be taken by your Majesty
and the estate, whereby we may be freed from that destroieng gross
darckenesse of ignorance, wherein we now are bewrapped to the woe of our
souls for ever: And so by our true conversion unto the Lord, we may avoid
everlasting death, and prevent the fierceness of the wrath and indignation,
which we see justly to hang over us in this life. The remedy of this our
grievous case, is only had (and no other way) by speedy Luke 10.2. Matthew 9.8.
providing unto us such pastors, as may feed us with the food of life, the
pure word of God, and bring us home unto the only 1. Pet. 5.4. Heb. 13.20.
Luke 22.25. Mark. 10.
Lord of pastors, and sheepeheards, the Lord Jesus. This is the sum of al (my
dread sovereign) that I your base vassal have emboldened my self to offer
unto you, and this your high court of Parliament; wherein I protest that in
respect of my weakness al manner of ways; the baseness of my condition, I
entreated the Lord to send unto you by the hand of him whom Exodus 4.13.
he should send, that is by one endued with such gifts, and authority also,
as whereby the suite might have purchased some countenance, and so be found
more available, and plausible. But considering that this mine endeavor might be
a means to stir up some such, and that the Lord, is the Lord of countenance,
credit, and favor, and therefore can add unto his own cause; the good liking
of men either more, or less, as seems best unto him, which only guides the
hearts of the children of men. And that he is then fully seen for his own
glories Romans 4.2. Ezekiel. 36.32.
sake to bring the work to pass that tends to the salvation of any, when
he uses most abject, and unfit tools, I do not doubt if it be his good
pleasure, but that this supplication, though put up by a sinful weak hand,
shall have all the intertainment that the message of the living God desires to
have. And although our estate being duly waied, does with most patheticall,
and pierceing cries, (that may move again the very flinty rocks) make
entreaty for it self, and declare the unanswerable necessity either of having
our petitions granted, or of the torments of our souls in hell fire for ever,
and our fatal ruin in this life: yet I thought it most needful in this
brief treatise to set down some of the reasons whereupon our petition is
grounded, that by the view of them, it may appear how dangerous a thing it is
in the sight of God and man to deny our suite. And here verily the cause may
be seen at the first sight to be environed with a two-fould wall (as it were)
of most just, and apparent equity. First in respect of the honor of God,
whereat especially it aims. Secondly in regard of man, whom it does not a
little concern. Whether therefore you do consider the Lord himself whom we
disdain, and contemn (for want of better instruction out of his word) by our
ungodly lives, or her gracious Majesty and this honorable assembly, who are
bound before the Lord with an vncancelable band to see the eternal verity of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ taught unto, and obeyed of all the inhabitants
within the precincts of her Majesty's dominions; or my dear brethren and
countri-men, whose ioiful and happy felicity is this way sought for, you shall
find the supplication to be full of dutiful endeavors toward the maintenance
of Gods glory, the safe estate of this kingdom, and our soueraign, (whom the
Lord long preserve over us) and hurting none, full of equity on all parts. We
desire to have the knowledge of our God, and the Laws of his kingdom (whose
subjects in name we profess our selves, and in deed ought to be) made
known and taught unto us. We desire that the tyranny of Satan, who 2 Cor.
4.4. Ephesians. 6.2. and 2.23.
exercises a regencie in the hearts of all them (amongst whom Gods truth has
not been taught) may be ouerthrown Romans 1.16. Heb. 4.12. Ier. 23.29.
by the powerful arm of God the word preached, Iam. 1.21.
who can save our souls. Now therefore to you right honorable, worshipful, and
reverend of this Parliament (with all humility be it spoker) in the audience of
our God, in the presence of Jesus Christ, and in the witness of every child of
God, who shall read this little treatise, we most earnestly and vehemently as in
the cause of Jesus Christ, and in the cause of our souls, entreat and beseech
you, cry and call upon you to do your endeavors, that Satan may no longer keep
us in bondage, which ought to be employed in the service of our God, and that
the Lord Jesus his throne may be established in our hearts, 1. Cor. 6.19. and
3.16.
as it ought to be in those which are his members. What interest has satan in
us, that we should be permitted to be at his beck, and leave undone the duty
we owe unto our most beneficial and loving God, even by the law of creation?
Why should he prevail more with you which continually seeks your destruction
and ours, than Jesus Christ, whose love toward us was sealed with the loss
of his life, even then, when we were his enemies? Will you reward his
inconceivable kindness in such sort: as to suffer any that you can hinder, to
be sworn servants of his professed enemies? Sworn servants I say, for
whosoever serves not the Lord Christ in Romans 6.16. and 7.5. 2. Pet. 2.20.
newness of life, and holiness of conversation, has taken the oath of a
soldier to serve sin under Satan's banner. Why should the son of God be
bereaved of the title that he has in his people, and conueiance thereof made
unto a damnable crature? Consider I pray you the weight of the cause in this
one point: it is concerning no less matter tha^ a kingodme, yea the kingdom
of the God of al kings, Jesus Christ: the contention is between the most
glorious in heaven and earth, and his own slave, where the indignity of the
usurper ought to move you. We are weary of the heavy bonuie bondage of the
one, and desire the easy yoke of the other. In the absence as it were of our
Lord and king, we have none to run unto for help, but you, whom he has
placed above us. Pity our condition, naie rather let it be seen that you
rejoice to have such opportunity to enlarge, and make conspicuous the glory of
your redeemer, that it may be a witness unto your souls whenever you
depart this life, that indeed you have quited your selves like men in the
places whereunto he has enioined you, by defacing the kingdom of Satan. You
are now to declare unto which of the two you would have us subjects, who shall
be king, Satan or the Lord Christ: and therefore whether of the two can
prevail more with you Not that the devil is able, or dares withstand his
maker, or that the Lord needs the help of man, to overthrow his forces, as
not being of power to rule, unless man set the crown upon his head: but
because he has taken this course in the government of his Church here upon
earth, that unless the Magistrate do uphold his honor against Satan, it
will fall to the ground for ought men can see, and he having commanded men of
authority to be zealous in his cause, will reward them according unto their love
toward him in this point. For hereby he does try their good wills, in that
he declares his honor to be usually measured in the heart of the people,
according unto the proportion of the magistrates love toward him: reserving
always unto him nevertheless the power to beget his love in the subjects,
whose prince may be an Idolater: and to bridle the fury of his enemies when
he will, without the assistance of man; and to reedifie his Church, though all the kings under heaven gainesaie the same. But this not proceeding from them
will be to their greater condemnation, because they chose rather to have their
people in the slavery of Satan, than in the liberty of Christ. For one of them
will, yea must needs bear rule in the hearts of all men; either the Lord by
his spirit conveyed unto them through the ministry of his word: or the old
serpent, by his devilish illusions. That both cannot rule together, Mat.
12.25.29.
it is apparent, because they are so contrary the one to the other: the
subjects of both kingdoms disagree, the laws be diverse. If you choose the
son of God, and place him in his throne among us, by the preaching of his
Gospel (for otherwise you cannot be said to make choice of him) then assure
your selves that the Lord will 1. Sam. 2.30
honor you, because you honor him, and not forget the upholding of his
kingdom by you, especially in such an age: as wherein most of the estates in
the earth have bereaved him of his right, and given their crowns unto the
beast. Then happy be your names and memories, and the memories of your
posterities for ever. And happy be the days that ever we were borne to be
governed by such a godly Prince, and godly counselors. But if you make worse
than Claucus his change, and as much as in you lies rob Christ Jesus of his
kingly dignity, what are you to look for at his hands, but the cruel
destruction that is prepared for those, who will not suffer the son of God to
rule over them, or theirs? Consider, and consider again, that they deny Jesus
Christ a kingdom over theirs, and consequently prefer Satan before him; which
deny the ministry of the Gospel unto the people, under their government. The
reason of which assertion appears not only by some places of Scripture
before quoted: but also in that the word preached, is called the Matt 13.19.
Luke 8.11.
word of the kingdom by our Savior himself: and the glad tidings of the
Gospel called the Luke 8.4. Matthew. 3.1.
kingdom of heaven. By the parable of the vineyard which is said to be the
inheritance of the son of God Matthew. 21.38. and whereof he accounts
himself robbed when he has not fruit yielded unto him; Matt. 21.38.
which only is done where the Gospel florisheth. In that the Gospel is
called the Gospel of the Mat. 24 14.
kingdom. Wherein politik Gamaliel also Act. 5.39.
gessed aright that the Highpriests and Sadduces should be found to do nothing
less than (...), that is, fight against God, if they withstoode the course of
the Gospel. To be short verse 31.
Peter in the very same chapter a little before makes it a part of Christ's
prerogative roial, to work repentance in the heart of man, and assurance of
remission of sins, which no Christian will say to be otherwise effected, than
by preaching. In so much as they must needs be convinced to eneruate, and
weaken the same soueraignety of the Lord of life, who any way refuse to have
them for whose wealth they are to provide good laws, instructed by the Gospel.
If this conclusion be true (as in very deed it is most true) oh how ought you
of this honorable assembly to labor, for the erecting of the ministry of
the word in Wales, seeing they that will be slack in the same detract from the
honor they owe unto Jesus Christ, and plainly show how little they care
whether his kingdom sincketh or swimmeth. As for these that withstand this, I
dare boldly affirm them to conspire with Satan about the inuading of Christ's
kingdom, and most contumeliously to tread his crown under foot. Where by the
way they are entreated with all reverence to look better unto their dealinges,
who under the name of conformity, and obedience, stay the course of the
ministry in any place, and desired to acknowledge this unity to be nothing
else but a consent with Satan to wrest the scepter out of Christ his hand, and
undermine his chair of estate; if they have done heretofore foolishly, let
them now, (following the counsel of the wiseman) lay their hands on their
mouths, and take heed least by defending former practices, they ad
drunckennes unto thirst. It may be if men knew the sin of resisting the
Gospel to be so heinous, they would perhaps further our suite; or at least
not hinder it. But because the preaching of the word is thought no better
than folly of worldly wisemen, it comes often to pass that the rejecting of
a suite tending thereunto, is made a thing of small moment. And although in very
deed this sin be high treason against the Lord, yet the offenders herein will
avouch themselves to seek the honor of God, no less than the earnest
furtherers of the word preached, yea though they throw al their blockish, and
wilful reasons in the way, to stop the passage of it. And least men should
term them by their rightname, they think the excuse will stand in good
steed, to say, they cannot see how the hindering of the Gospel should be so
odious in the sight of God, and therefore no reason why they should be thought
kickers against the heaven, seeing they in every point favor the proceedings
of their Prince. But how vain and ridiculous is their excuse? For shall a
traitor be therefore acquitted, because he offending against the Laws of God,
and his sovereign (as in transferring the praerogatiue due unto his Prince
unto a foreign Idolatrous shaven priest) protests that he neither
acknowledges not sees his actions therein to be traitorous? Or shall
Pellagians, Papists, Arians, etc. avoid the names and punishments of
heretics, because they affirm nothing but that whereof, by the strong
delusion of Satan they are persuaded? I trow not. No more can he be said to
do any thing less than to iustle against the heaven, and him that dwells
therein, which puts his shoulder against the progress of his word, though
his own corruption will not suffer him to perceive this his rauing madness.
As therefore you of this honorable assembly would not be taken defacers of
Gods glory: so in most humble wise I admonish you not to oppose your selves in
any sort against this our petition: and as you would find favor at the hands
of the judge of all the woorld in the day of judgment, and be acquitted before
Jesus Christ, and by him, further his honor to the uttermost of your power.
Regard whose cause it is; what account he makes of it: how derogatorious it
is unto his glory, for you to deny us the Gospel. I know it will be answered
here, that her Majesty and the Parliament deny the true service of God unto
none, and have taken order that no false religion should be used of any
subject in this land. Which thing also I do affirm from my heart, and thank
God for, and the Lord will not forget Queen Elizabeth's kindness in this thing
toward his house. I add moreover, that if any the people of this Realm want
the same in particular, which he has granted all in general, it is her will
they should acquaint the Parliament with their cause, where they ought to be
heard Hitherto therefore tends my speech. If we th. people of Wales making
our estate known, shall not have it redressed by this assembly, that then the
overthrow and weakening of Christ's kingdom is intended thorough this means
(by them that shall binder preaching to be granted unto us) our calling adding
great strength thereunto. Let all know therefore how greatly it tends to the
honor of the most high God, (which he will maintain as the apple of his eye
against all the evil willers thereof, unto their utter ruin and shameful
confusion both of body and soul) that the lamp of the Gospel should be set
on fire amongst us, and that a repulse should be given to Jesus Christ by
repelling this our cause. Good my Lords, whose honor in the fear of God I
desire, think with your selves that the Lord of heaven, being now rejected of
most nations of the earth is thrust into this poor Island of England, as into
the furthest western parts (sauadge America, and that continent excepted) but
surely his entertainment here, if one handmaid had not better cherished him,
had been very cold. He has often threatened us to depart, by taking her with
him from such ungrateful subjects as we are. Particular men he has by his
several blessing, and the sound of his word, from the highest to the lowest
solicited unto his service. Alser the most part refused. This one time he will
try whether the whole estate of the land will allow him any larger demaines,
than hitherto he enioied. And therefore he now knocks by this our suite, at
the door of the Parliament, to know whether we the people of Wales shall be
granted him, as his heritage. If it be denied, he protests that he will
stay no longer. He expects an answer: Have a regard what ye do. A greater
matter cannot be consulted upon. What a shameful thing were it for man to deny
his God, that which most concerns his glory? Alas the day what hinderance will
it be unto any of you to have us poor Welshmen celebraters of the honor of
our God? And what pleasure will it be unto you to have him departed from this
kingdom in a rage, because he is not heard in that thing, wherein he most
delights? And believe me, I am highly afraid he will take your denial so
unkindly, that England shall feel, by the taking away of his Gospel, what a
gest it ungratefully lost. Therefore, as I said before, so I say again, that
our suit is not slightly to be looked unto, much less denied: because upon
the granting of it, not only the salvation of many thousand souls; but also
the glory of the most mighty God relieth. It were extreme madness for us to be
cold in that suite, wherein we would have others whom it concerns not so
much, to be vehement and earnest. And we might justly both before God, and men,
fry again in our condemnation, if we were not most earnest in a matter of such
weight. Salvation is not bestowed upon them that care not whether they have it
or no: Nay our Savior sets down, that seeking for it will not serve, but
there must be great striving used; and that with agony, and contention. (...).
Strive says he Luke 13.24
to enter in at the strait gate; for many I tell you will (...).
seek to enter, and shall not be able. Marvel not therefore if we leave no
stone unturned to come by that which is so precious, and so hardly found. But
the objection ministers greater strength to our argument. For either the
Parliament must deal most injuriously with her Majesty, and say it is not
her will to have Christ Jesus reign over us, (which far be it from entering
into any man's heart) or that they will in a cause so directly tending unto
Gods glory, and the good of the weal public, resist that, which she most of
al would have decreed. This later has not been found, and I hope never will
be in the Parliament of England, as long as Queen Elizabeth has the scepter
in her hand. And can any man admire that we have all this while of her Majesty's
ragine been by the just judgment of God, without the word preached, and also
read, as shall be showed, whereas we never as yet opened our mouths for it? I
am so far then, from conceiving any undutiful thought of my sovereign, and
this high Court, as transferring the cause of our ignorance upon them, that I
protest in justly rests on our selves. For when did that day shine this
twenty eight years, and above, that any among us, (whom the Lord had endued
either with authority or gifts of learning) have moved this cause effectually
unto her Majesty, or the Court of Parliament? Though I would wish we had found
the favor in their sight, (howbeit unworthy of our selves) to be driven unto
the mariadge of Jesus Christ, against our wills, that some more might solemnise
the same, than do at this day, to his honor and their own eternal felicity.
If any man will here demand, whether the Lord requires any more at the
hands of this high Court in the cause of religion, than is already performed,
seeing there is not only permission granted, for all that will to profess the
truth; but also a commandment, that none adventure the contrary, I answer he
exacteth a great deal more. As to see that every inferior person, have done
his duty in the performance of that, enioined unto him, for the planting of
religion. To see, whether such Laws, as have been already provided, in that
cause, have been put in practice, if not to consider where the fault was, and
see it amended. To consult whether a better order may be taken for the
progress of true religion, than hitherto has been, and being found to put the
same in execution. Again, for as much, as the work is the ruling of Gods
people, especially to provide, that the government may be according to the
Lords own Laws. Briefly where the word is not preached, there to establish
the same with speed. Our whole country of Wales, as yet, being altogether in
ignorance, to endeavor themselves in deed, to see the same called. In a word to
order every thing in every particular parcel of this Island and the other
according unto the Law, and testimony (for the declining therefrom argues
great ouer-sight and folly, as it is set down Isai. 8.20. Otherwise the Lord
should enioine, more unto a father, or master in the government of his family,
than unto a magistrate in the common wealth. For a father and so a master, is
not only bound to see, that his son be no Idolatour, or swearer (which would
to God all fathers performed) but also to bring them up, in Ephesians. 6.2.
instruction and information of the Lord. Did Abraham no more, think you, than
command his servants, that they should take heed, they served not the gods
beyond the rivers, and will them in some general sort, to serve Jehovah? You
shall find it otherwise recorded of him, Genesis 17.19. Good Iehoshuah
protested that he, and his house, that is, all those that were under his
government would serve Jehovah. In whose example the doubt will not be worth
the answer, Iehosh. 24.14
that Iehoshuah does content himself in this place, only to have barelie
offered the truth unto his people, and given them the choice whether they
would profess it or no, whereas his protestation imports, that as many as
would be governed by him, should serve Jehovah. If they did otherwise, such
rebels against God, were not fit to be his people. To omit, that the case is
far unlike, in the people of Wales, and the Israelites at this time, I would,
that all, which be are the chief sovereignty of any commonwealth christian
(whether monarchy, Aristocracie etc.) would plainly declare, that they should
not be their subjects, who would not be obedient unto the Lord, as did
Iehoshuah in this place. David took a band of himself, Psalm. 101.7.
to keep no such in his house. Wherein it appears, that he did both deny
the same, to be a cage for Idolatours, and in like manner would have al things
there according unto the will of God. His care was no less in the common
wealth, as may appear by his great solicitude, in bringing home the 1 Chro.
13.5 1. Chro. 15.13
Ark, confessing and amending his careless oversight herein before committed,
by his earnest desire to add as much dignity as he could unto the service of
God, in offering to build him an house.

Lastly the exhortation he made at his deathbed, to the rulers, and his son
Solomon proclaims openly, what a care he had to see the Lord honored of
every man in his kingdom. I thought good in this place to set down David's
words. 1. Chro 28.8.
Now therefore (says he) in the sight of al Israel, the congregation of
Iehoua, and in the ears of our God, keep and make diligent enquiry, for all
the commandments of Jehovah, your God, that you may possess this land, and
leave it for an inheritance unto your children after you, for ever. And thou
Solomon my son, know thou the God thy fathers, and worship him with an
upright heart, and with a careful soul, for Jehovah searches the hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of the thoughts, if thou search for him, he
will be found of the; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. I
see to whom I speak, and therefore application needs not. Only you are to
marcke, that no service by picce-meale, but according unto all the
commandementes is allowable, and that the Magistrate must practice all that God
requires of him. The will of God in any particular point of religion being
unknown unto him, he must make diligent search and inquiry for it himself
(keep and seek all the commandments says he.) In which words the holy
ghost notes, that a good magistrate may be ignorant of his duty, but giving
this caveat withal, that as soon as he is put in mind thereof, We must seek
until we find, and having sound, keep the commandments.
though by an inferior person, he must not be borne in hand by any other that
all is well (for how can that be well and in good case, which is not according
to the Lords will?) but see reformation out of hand. The necessity of obaieng,
is set down, in that the Lord would not spare Salomo^ if he did the contrary,
no, though he had made a promise of favor unto him. Further concerning the
magistrates duty in this particular care, that God be honored through his
charge, we shall find in the example of good Iehosaphat, who, having in the
third year of his reign, most 2. Chro. 17.9 2. Chro. 19.5.
notably established religion. (sending Leuits about throughout all the Cities
of Judah to teach ithe people) notwithstanding, in the 18. or 17 year confer 2.
Chr. 16.5. 1. Kings 22.41. with the 1. Kin. 16.29. went through the people from
Bersheba to mount Ephraim, and brought them again unto Jehovah the God of
their fathers, so little a thing was it in his eyes, to have once very notably
reformed his people, unless he did the same, as often as need required.
Religious Ioshia, 2. Chro. 33.29.
carried the like heart with him. The good king rent his clothes, his heart
melted within him with weeping, and wringing of hands, he humbled himself
before his God, and immediately set upon the reformation of every thing amiss,
as soon as he perceived the Lord to be dishonored by neglecting the
performance of his will, in any point. But what needed he to have taken all
these pains? He had a promise, all should go well in his days, and after him,
his people were sure, to smart for their former sins. He had done well for
his part, fals-religion was expelled in the 1. year of his reign (this being
the 18.) Judah and Jerusalem were purged from their high places, time would not
serve to establish every thing, according unto the law of Moses, the people
were simple, not capeable of the government, required by the word of God, his
nobility, by reason of their long continuance in Idolatry, not so well
persuaded of the true religion, he sought to establish. It was very new unto
them, their weakness were to be born-withal: Yea they must have the liberty of
their consciences. Perhaps they who should have been most forward, as the high
priest, and others, were found very great enemies, unto all good proceedings.
It may be they looked, that all should be committed unto their hands, as the
pope has done in times past. For what had a civil magistrate to do with
setting in order things belonging unto religion? These and many other
hindrances, he had I grant. 2. Chro. 34.3.
But look when the zeal of the Lords house has eaten up any, how easily they
swallow all occasions, that might hinder the true worship of God, in any that
belongs unto them. And therefore, that very year, even then, when he was
farther instructed, by examining the book of the Law of Moses, concerning his
duty, he gathered the people from the greatest, verse. 30, 31, 32
to the smallest, priest and Leuite, read the word, of the covenant in their
ears, and made a covenant before Jehovah to keep his commandments, his
statutes, and his testimonies, with all his heart, and with all his soul. He
cause al, that were found in Jerusalem, and Benjamin, to stand unto it. So
far was he from bearing with any in their Idolatrous persuasions, that could
not (for consciences sake forsooth) but turn back from Jehovah the God of
their fathers, that as it is recorded of him he verse 33.
compelled all that were found in Israel, to agree unto the covenant, and to
serve Jehovah their God which they did al his life. In which actio^ (religion
being now received by public consent) he did not only according to the
commandment Deuteronomy. 13.69.
and the example of his pre decessors the Ius. 22.21.19
whole congregation in the book of Joshua and godly king Asah Chro. 15.13
(who de creed that whosouer would not serve Jehovah, should be stoned, whether
he were small or great) but also, that which the wonderful, and great works
of God, wrested from Dan. 3.29.
Neubuchadnezzer, and almost nature it self showed unto king Artashash. Ezra.
7. a6.
Gods honorbeing precious in the eyes of this assembly, as I hope it is, will
drive them to follow these godly examples, and to look with the eyes of an
Egle, into the estate of our Church in Wales, yea compel us, by authority
rather than fail to honor and sanctify the Lord, by the knowledge of our
salvation. For then, he is said to gain a name, and majesty to himself, when
he is seen, to forgive sins, not for man's desert, but for his own Isai.
4.8.9.12
glory sake: and he is then known to be the Lord, when he is Ezekiel. 76.23
sanctified in his people. For indeed none is able, either to forgive sins
or to sanctify the profane heart of man, but the Lord himself. Therefore the
prerogative above all others given to out savior christ in the revelation, is,
that when there was none found in heaven or earth, or under the earth, worthy
to look upon the book sealed with seven seals, muchlesse able to open it, he
the lion of the tribe of Judah performed both.

But who knows this save they, Ephesians. 2.13
that are redeemed by his blood? And his blood cle^seth none, but thesei which
heard the word of truth, even the gospel of salvation preached unto them. The
way then to procure, that the people of Wales may cry with a loud voice,
Worthy is the lamb, to take the book, and open the seals thereof, Revel.
5.12
because he was killed, and has redeemed us to God out of every kindred, and
tongues, people, and nation, is to bestow the word preached upon them. And
how greatly the calling of men unto salvation augmenteth both the might, and
the exceeding riches of Gods strength, shall be easily gathered, if you do but
consider that the treasury, the jewel house, and wardrobe (as I may say) of
Gods glorious in heritance, in the Saints, and the exceeding greatness of his
power toward them, that believe, is no other way discerned, but by the
spirit of revelation, through the knowledge of god; as the express words of
the Apostle do enforce, Ephesians. 1.18.19. All which proceed from hearing the
word of truth, verse. 13
as he set down before. The words which the Apostle uses to express the
meaning of the holy ghost does most evidently convince that they who felt not
this power in themselves, count the Lord to be but a weakeling. For although
the contemplation of nature, (...)etc.
the moving of the heavens, and the creatures therein contained, may afforde
some glimse of the might that is in the creator; yet this is not indeed so
much as a shadow of the other, wherein the Lord is said to exercise the power
of his own right hand. As first in giving the Lord Jesus a conquest over all the
Coloss. 15
principalities, and powers of his enemies, making him to triumph over them,
and that Heb. 2.10 18.4, 5. and 5.7
by weakness, sufferings, crosses, calamities, temptations, yea and death it
self: then in raising him from death, to give him a name, above all names, and
to make him the head of al. Secondly in us, his poor members saving our
helpless, and damned souls, woorking mightily in our sinful and stony hearts,
by the conversion of us unto him* giving us poor flesh and blood, a conquest
also over our own flesh, and the rebellious motions thereof: and which is
more, over the prince of the world himself. Assuring our unbelieving hearts,
of his love toward us, showing how mighty his spirit was in the Lord
Jesus; who had it powered upon him, without measure, seeing we that have but a
dram thereof, and that in a body of sin, are not without some reioicing
effects by the power of Gods mighty spirit. Herein and in such actions the
power of God, to a believing heart, shows it self, to be ten thousand times
greater, than in creating a thousand worlds. Can the Parliament of England be
desirous to glorify their God, and not decree, that this power of his be
manifested unto us, by delivering every of us out of the tyranny of that mighty
potentate, who is even the God of this world? Our savior Christ, even in
respect of his manhood is so glorified of his father; that man cannot augment
the same, yet the Apostle is plain, that his honor consists in no other
point, than that every tongue should confess Phil. 2.11.
him to be the Lord, to the glory of God the father, And least carnal men
should think, the Lord smally to esteem the glory he gains, by these, that
are called unto the knowledge of his truth, the regard he has hereunto, is
two manner of ways showed. First, in that he, which was the substance, and
essence of the Lords own glorious Majesty Phil. 2.6.
equal with God, Ier. 2.3. I say 44.26 1 John 1. Rom, 9.5.
God himself, made himself of no reputation, taking upon him the form of a
servant, became vile, and bale, as we read, Esai the 52 14.15.3. Phil. 2.7.8.
only to the end he might reserve from hell, some of the lost sons of Adam,
by whose salvation he should be glorified. Secondly for as much, as the chief
end of his coming to judgment, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. in that great and glorious day,
wherein the secrets of all hearts shall appear, is to be made glorious in his
Saints, and marvelous in them that believe. It is out of controversy, that
on this day the Lord will make the majesty of his son Christ, so glorious,
and of such rare excellency, as the very Angels themselves shall wonder and
be astonished thereat: and yet there be none others set down, in whom he shall be
glorified. but only those that believe. Shall we say then, the training up of
such is of small acceptaunce in his sight? God forbid. Shall we think, that
their estate will be any thing tolerable, who in this life, though they do not
further the Gospel, yet will not hinder the same? No truly. For here be only
two estates of men spoken of, either those, in whom Christ Jesus shall be
glorified (in every of whose hearts, the Lord has so wrought, by his spirit,
that they desire nothing more, than that he may rule the souls of men by his
word) or the other whose portion shall be woe of soul. And who are they?
only turks, infidels, papists, traitors, adulterers, thieves, murderers, and
such like workers of iniquity? These I grant indeed, but not these alone. For
the Apostle gives no such mark unto al, but he comprehends both the one, and
the other, in this, that they obey not the Gospel. Be a man therefore
accounted never so ciuilly honest, talk he never so well of the Church, and the
dignity of the Gospel, be he in show never so good a subject unto his prince
(for the devil is not so unwise, as he will have al his limbs, manifest
breakers of the commandments, but he will use some visured oppugners of Gods
glory) yet if in any sort, you can perceive, that he uses any other behavior
toward Gods truth, than he ought to show there, whereunto greatest
obedience, and duty is to be yielded, take him by and by for one, whom Paul
means. Because he obeieth not, but undutifully handles the gospel. Slips I
grant the children of God may have, and that very foul ones: but few of them so
fall, as they must needs have that to accompany them whereunto the honor of God
is tied. We may see then what reckoning our savior Christ makes of the fruit
he reapeth by the ministers labor. And he will maintain his honor in this
point, by the utter ruin of all the clippers thereof, and be smally beholding
(as we hear) in heaven, unto them that negligently labor for the same in
earth. Here mark I beseech you, that for as much as Satan is permitted among
us, not only to lift up his heel against his Lord, but even to outface him in
his own inheritance, the Lord threatened very lately and does every day to
measure our punishment, by the same line. How likely was it, had not he in
mercy choked with their own raiging spirits, these insatiable blood-suckers,
Babington, and his adherentes, that we should have had in this kingdom the
hand of the vile, against the honorable, the base against the noble, Isaie 3.4.
the indigne against the woorthiest of the land? Yea and the Lords anointed,
the very Lamen. 4, 20
breath of our nostrils, she under whose shadow we have been thus long
preserved from heathen popish tortors, was like to fall into their hands. The
Lord grant you of this honorable assembly wise hearts before it be to late, to
examine aright the cause of these ungodly attempts, and to prevent the issues
of them. Which shall never be done as long as the Parliament will permit
Non-residences, impropriate liuinges, swarms of ungodly ministers, the
insolent, and tyrannical proceedinges of some, joined with pomp too too
unreasonable, to keep out a learned and godly ministry, by whose means the
Lord Jesus would recover his own again. Persuade your selves, that the Lord
may justly give our possessions to strangers, because an enemy is tolerated
in this land, quietly to enioie the right of Jesus Christ, and by suffering
such ungodly practices countenanced in the action. If the Spaniard, French, or
any the forces of Rhomish Caine have their desire upon us (as I hope in God
they never shall) how shall pluralities of impropriations, and other
Church-liuings etc. defend us and ours from their fury? To shut up this point,
all the former things confidered, is not our petition most reasonable in
regard of Gods honor? Well in respect of her Majesty, it has many reasons
whereupon it may be grounded. Can we ever hope to have the tidings of
salvation proclaimed in Wales, unless this be performed in her days? And
have we a lease of her life? Would it pleased God we had. Rather the door of
our hope is every day threatened to be shut. Now therefore the Lord warns us,
to take the opportunity while it is offered. Now he takes heaven and earth to
witness that at this instant, at this Parliament, at this time of her Majesty's
prosperous reign, he lays before us life and death good and evil, salvation
and damnation, and that for ever. We shall never have the time to choose again
for any thing we know. And how effectual for the preservation of her
highness think you would be the prayers of so many thousand of her people, even
of the whole welsh nation? Which she now wants in as much as they know not
themselves bound by reason of 1 Timothy 2.2
the commandment, to pray for their Prince, because the same was never taught
them. When I consider that an infinite number of us truly converted (in the
feeling of such a great benefit received at her hands) would give the Lord no
rest day or night, but still be begging of him to bless our virtuous Queen
Elizabeth with the blessings of a regenerat heart, and a prosperous quiet
government: when I call to mind, what an earnest and ardent affection, a true
Christian bears unto his Prince (especially who bestowed on him the means of
salvation) and the promise of God, annexed to such prayers, I cannot in duty
but beseech her Majesty not to be wanting unto her own safety even in this
one thing. Which should not a little move her, seeing it was of such great
moment to stir up Ezra. 6.10
Cyrus to the speedy erecting of gods honor at Jerusalem. Moreover you may be
assured, dread soueraign, both that we and our children for ever will bless our
God, that he has inclined mercy unto us in your eyes. And also our calling will
be a testimony of your burning zeal unto the truth among all the ages to come,
even to the enemies of your good name. Whereas on the other side the
continuance of our blind ignorance will be I fear me a blemish unto your credit
(in obedience I speak it) among our woeful posterities, and the enemies of God
for ever. For what will our children that rise after us and their children say,
when they shall be brought up in gross superstition but that it was not Queen
Elizabethes will, that we their Parents should have that true religion she
professed, made known unto us. Will not the enemies of Gods truth with
unclean mouths avouch that she had little regard unto true or false
religion any further than it belonged unto her profit? I would some of them
did not slanderously cast abroad amongst our people, that she cares not
whether the gospel be preached or not preached. If she did we also should be
most sure to enjoy it after twenty eight years and upward of most prosperous
reign. These things derogating from her Majesty's honor in a most villainous
sort, must be withstoode thorough her self and this whole assembly, by making
provision for us betimes of the food of our souls. Because I see this most
notably detracteth from her, I cannot in duty but repel and gainsay this
slander, and with as loud a voice as ynck and paper can sound, affirm and
publish that she would have the truth made known unto al her people, and wish
al of them to be prophets. Which thing I trust in God shall be manifested unto
the woorld even at this Parliament, wherein Wales shall be allotted unto Jesus
Christ for his inheritance. And good reason why it should be so, because
thereupon stands the mainteinance of her credit. Of all the men in the world
therefore she may be least beholding to them that will not deal earnestly in our
behalf. And we the inhabitants of Wales may think that very strange that
one suite, tending generally to the benefit of us al, will not be granted
unto us in twenty eight years, and that under her Majesty, whose good will
toward us is no Iesse we are assured then to the rest of her subjects. If we
doubted hereof, behold at this time, opportunity is offered to take away all
suspicion. Where-as the neglecting of our cause (being general as it is) will
not be without some occasion of jealousy, as though we were contemned and not
accounted of but as thrown into the most baren corner of the land, so thought
unworthy to have the seed of Gods word sown amongst us, unworthy to have the
service of the same God with her Majesty and the rest her subjects. You that
are godly wise counselors in matters of estate, look whereunto the shutting
out of our most humble petition may tend. For all the good faithful service
that ever her graund-father, father, brother, kings of eternal memory, her
sister or her self have found at the hands of any of our nation, we beseech
her this one reward, that we may enjoy the word of God, and leave it for an
inheritance unto our children, with this memorial also, that it is Queen
Elizabeth's reward as well for the faithfulness she her self found in us, whereof
we are already by her prosperous Reign recompensed, as also for the good will
our poor parents have declared to the loffe of their lives unto her noble
progenitors. This would never be forgotten, and I know it will be answered
again with the forwardst readiness to yield dutiful service unto her highness
that any prince could hope for at the hands of her or his most loving subjects.
It might grieve us the less to be denied the gospel, unless the same were the
inheritance which our forefathers the Cymbrubrittons many hundred years ago
possessed in this land. For although at this day we cannot call true religion
by the right name, yet are not our superstitious observations the blossoms of
that ancient truth our forefathers professed and sealed with their blood. But
the impes of that lifelesse and brutish stock of Rome, planted in England by
Augustine that proud friar, whose tyranical proceedings our divines in Wales
resisted even to the loss of their lives. That these trash be but of small
continuance among us in respect of the antiquity the truth has had, I prove
because the vetie mother of them, the execrable Mass, was but yesterday, as it
were known unto us. Showed by two reasons. First among the cartloades of
oaths which we have, our people cannot tell for their lives how to swear by
the mass. Secondly we have the mass at the end of none of our holy days. For
Christmasse, Candlemasse etc. we name the day of the nativity, the holy day
of Marie etc. Which things do prove the Mass to have had but cold
entertainment among us, but within this later age wherein ignorance and
idolatry by the just judgment of God took such deep root in England, that
it can over our land also. The equity then of our petition appears also in
that we ask nothing but the possession and inheritance of our fathers to be
restored unto us, which they could not alienate from their children. This were
a sit place to stir up my dear countrymen to be earnest in obteining that
jewel which is worth all their riches besides, being their own right: but
their forwardae, in other causes persuadeth me they will not be slack in the
matter of the soul. And why should they not be earnest? Do they not see our
danger to be so manisest that no wise man would spare either words or life to
be delivered therefrom? Are they not assured they shall be heard? The reason
amongst many that might persuade them of her Majesty's readiness to yield unto
their petition is this. Either it must be said that her highness would not have
the Lord honored with our salvation that hue in her days, and that she enuieth
us that good, nay enuieth herself, yea rejects the infinite reward in the
life to come, and assurance of safety, with diverse other benefits in this life
freely offered unto her, for adding us unto the kingdom of his son (which
assertion I know they will detest and gainesay:) or that she greatly longing
for the honor of God and our unspeakable good, desirous of the crown that
shall be given her in the life to come, will be most careful incontinently
whatsoever may ensue, to plant the word in Wales. This later is to be embraced
and affirmed. Neither can it be said that she will take leisure herein, for that
were plainly to say, her Majesty waied not the honor of Jesus Christ, because
many a thousand of us should die before he were known to be a savior of
distressed souls. She has otherwise learned Christ, and therefore knows
that the Lord must not stay man's leisure when he would have any thing
performed toward his service. If one will not do it, he can find another whom
he will honor ^^^h the deed. She has learned that it is to w^^ken the Lords
omnipotency and to teach him wisdom and discretion to go no farther in a
matter required by him than man's reasons sees good likely to come thereof.
She assures her self the Lord is discreet and wise enough in commanding, and
therefore will do h^^ will though her kingdom should be endaung^red. For he
sufficiently recompenseth the loss that befalls to any, while the execution
of his will is attended upon. This course she took at her first coronation.
This course I doubt not she will take at this Parliament, even this I say: for
who knows whether the Lord Jesus means to keep his before we have a second
proclaimed? Will you therefore good gentlemen (I speak unto you my fathers, my
brethren, my kindred, and what name of love else can be invented, my dear
countrymen) be mute where there is no question you shall be hard, unless the
fault be in you? Indeed it concerns us poor inhabitants of Wales very nearly
to be hard, as well in respect of our present misery, as of the wonderful
calamity that is to fall upon us. Our case now is to be especially pitied
in respect of the inner man. For how many souls do daily starve and perish
among us for want of knowledge? And how many are like still to tread the same
path? It grieueth me at the heart to consider how hell is enlarged to receive us.
And here the Lord knows and our sovereign with this most honorable assembly
shall know that I do not complain withour cause. For our estate is such, that
we have not one in some score of our parishes, that has a saving knowledge.
Thousands there be of our people that know Jesus Christ to be neither God nor
man, king, priest nor prophet: o desolate and forlorn conditiom! yea almost
that never heard of him. If any by the great goodness of God be called, this
came to pass not by the diligence of their pastors which are either dumme or
greedy dogs that delight in sleeping, as says the Prophet (a few honest me^
excepted) but either extraordinarily through reading, or by means of their
re^^^t and abode in some corner of the Church of ^ngland where the gospel is
preached. And l^^g ^ay it be preached there, to the glory of G^d, the felicity
of our soueraign, and the eue^^asting good of that whole nobility, and people
those kindness toward strangers, the Lord will ^ot forget. And our Godremember
Queen Elizabeth herein, and wipe not out her kindness showed toward thy people,
show mercy unto her, i^ that day good Lord, and forget her not in this life
also, seeing by means of fostering thy Gospel in her land, some of us a people
not regarded* have known the remission of our sins, even of our great sins.
Let this never be forgotten good Lord. I am carried I know not whither from my
purposed intent. These latter sort are some few gentlemen, or such like. The
rest of our people are either such as never think of any religion true or
false, plainly mere Atheists or stark blinded with superstition. The later are
of 2 sorts. The first crew is of obstinate idolaters that would fain be again
in execrable Rome, and so hold for good divinity whatsoever has bin harched in
that sacrilegious nest. But these may do what they will with us: for nether
civil magistrate nor Bishop will control them. They may be, even of the
Parliament house, least that congregation should be without some Acha^, that
might give the Lord just occasion, to execrate his whole host. Hence flow our
swarms of south saiers, and enchanters, such as will not stick openly, to
profess that they walk, on Tuesdaies, and Thursdaies at nights, with the
fairies, of whom they brag themselves to have their knowledge. These sons of
Belial, who should die the death, Leuit. 20.6. have stricken such an astonishing
reverence of the fairies, into the hearts of our silly people, that they dare
not name the^, without honor. We call them bendith u mamme, that is, such as
have deserved their mothers blessing. Now our people, will never utter, bendith
u mamme, but they will say, bendith u mamme u dhun, that is, their mothers
blessing (which they account the greatest felicity that any creature can be
capeable of) light upon them, as though they were not to be named without
reverence. Hence proceed open defending of Purgatory and the Real presence,
praying unto images etc. with other infinite monsters.

The other sort is of good simple souls, that would full gladly learn the way
unto salvation, and spend their heart blood, for the safety of their godly
Prince, in who^ they do claim more interest then the rest of her subjects
whosoever. And this is almost the only happiness they have. These poor souls,
because the Idol pastor can teach them nothing, entering more deeply with
themselves into the consideration of things, find by the small light of
religion we enjoy through the means of her Majesty, and by the instinct of
nature, that there is a divine essence who must be carefully and religiously
served and prayed unto for all blessings that would be obtained. Which things
they see unperformed publicly, therefore privately they assay what they can
do.

But woeful estate, they being not taught out of the word of God, what he is,
that must be served, and how he requires this to be done, invent unto
themselves, both their God, and the manner of his service: concerning salvation
they either think, that the Lord is bound to save all men, because they are
his creatures, or that al shall be saved at the later day, at the entreaty of
the virgin Mary, who shall desire her son, after judgment given, to save as
many of the damned as may be covered under her man till: this being granted
all the damned souls shall be there shrouded and so saved from helsiar. This is
the cause why our people make but a mock of sin. They think the soul only
shall go to heaven and not the body also, whence it comes that they say, they
care nor what becomes of their bodies, so their souls may be saved. They
ascribe sauadge cruelty unto God the father, because he punished man's sin so
severely, even in his son Christ, the Lord Jesus they commend. Nu wa^th
genuf^^him amy tady gwr ^r^ulon hinnu^onud cydymmaith da uwr mab: I care not
says one for the father that cruel man, but the son is a good fellow. Durst
we once conceive these base cogitations of our Prince, I know it would not be
tolerated. And I hope this religious and wise assembly will procure that the
Lord may have some more reverence at our hands. Because the poor creatures can
hear nothing at the mouth of their minister, how their sins may be hidden and
their iniquities covered, it is a common saying even among those who care not
for Rhomish Antichrist, that it was a good world then when a man might have a
pardon for his sins in such and such a place for one 4 d. They see no felicity
where mere ignorance of salvation is. A false persuasion thereof they think
better than none at all. Man must have religion true or false.

Our people learn one of another most blasphemous prayers. This they do so
much the rather, because in them they comme^d them selves, families, etc. unto
the tuition of some saint whom they think most favorable unto them and best
able to grant their petitions. My heart bleedeth to think how these villainies
with other ungodly songs are learned of good painful souls with greedines. I
know masters of families that teach these unto their households. If they meet
with any who can write and read, they will demand of him whether he can teach
them ever a good prayer against such a disease in man or beast. Ungodly welsh
books are fraught with these Idolatries. If conscience would not keep me from
uttering an untruth before my sovereign monarch, yet fear of punishment should
contain me. But this I protest before Jesus Christ who shall judge all even
according unto their words, and in the presence of all the world, that the
only staff and stay of al private religion among our people (the 2 sorts of
men before named I exempt, are latin prayers) praying unto Saints,
superstitious observations, with ungodly welsh songs and books. If these
things (...), meat Atheism would over grow us. Surely the reading ministry
has nor so much as wrought in the hearts of any almost, the persuasion of one
true God. It were folly to go about to heal the disease and let the cause
remains. Concerning that which is read, there is no man but thinks very
reverently thereof. And we praise the Lord that we have so much publicly by
means of his highness, whereas in the days of blindness we had nothing but
professed idolatry. Take but a view of our lives, and you shall see also what
effect reading has brought to pass. There be many sins essential almost
unto our nation. Profaning the name of God in common talk is prodigious, a^
affirmations or negations will bring thirty ^^^hes out of a great many. Some
shieres of South w^les have gotten them an ignominious name by this sin. I dare
write that which I durst not utter in words. They are called g^ur eig Du^.
Look the punishment of swearing Deuteronomy ^8.5^. Leuit (...) 15.16. This is the
(...) book Zach. 13. Look the Law of concealing an oath Leu. 5.^* and you sh^^^
find that the Parliament should have great ^^gard to damme the springes of
this sin by the word preached. What a hand we have had in adultery and
fornication, the great number of illegitimate and base born among us do (...).
I would our Princes and Leuit, had not beans chief in this trespass. The
punishment hereof in the Bishops court is derided of our people. For what is it
to the^ to pay a little money; or to run through the Church in a white sheet?
They have made (...) and songs of this vulgar penance. Neither justice of peace
not minister will see the execution of the laws provided in this case. Though
they did, seeing the Lords ordinance is not observed, it would not prevail.
The seat of judgment in our common courts is turned into wormwoode. A man
cannot have his right in a year or two, though his evidence be unanswerable.
They have gotten many shifts, and when al fails one will stand viz.
excommunication. The plaintiff without al right may be excommunicated in the
Bishops court, and so not absolved in a whole year. Al which time he is no
person fit to prosecute his right in the common law. It is irksome to think how
hardly a poor man can keep any thing from the eues of great countenance.
Though he sees his own sheep or other cattle feed within two miles of him in
some men's pastures, he dares not ask them. Quaffing and surfeting is too too
common. Al are become Ismaels. Every man's hand against them, and theirs against
all other. Church men and all will have their right by the sword, for by the
word they never seek it. These things I do not set down to disgrace my dear
countrymen. I bear them another heart. My purpose is to show that all the good
politic laws in the woorld cannot wash away these our stains. The nitre
that washes purely the word of the Lord must do it. A conscience must be
wrought in our people, else they will never leave their idolatry, swearing,
adultery, and thee uery. They that know the country know how little hold the
straightest and seue rest laws in the world will take on a great many. If it be
the will of the Parliament therefore we shall be bettered, let the word be
preached among us. We have preaching. How often? Quarterly. It is not so* For
to that one parish where there is one ordinary quarter sermon, we have twenty
that have none. The number of fit preaching ministers in wales can easily prove
the truth hereof. We paietithes always, and therefore we should have
preaching always, for he that labors not must not eat. 2 Thessalonians. 3.8.10.
continual preaching is Gods ordinance. Ephesians. 4.12. therefore man must not
dispense with it. Confer Romans 8.9. with Ephesians. 13.2. Tim. 4.2. Acts.
20.18.19.20.31. 1 Thessalonians. 2.10.11. Heb. 5.12. Acts. 20.16. Colos. 3.16. 1. Pet.
1.23. Matt. 9.38. The several reasons drawn our of these places of Scripture
may prove the necessity of continual preaching, either in respect that it is
Gods decree, or that man's nature requires it. They that dense this may learn
their duty by Jacobs diligence in keeping of sheep Genesis 31.40. So may they that
set others to take the oversight of the Lords sanctuary Ezec. 44.8. and
blush. Preaching is granted convenient, but so as reading will serve the turn.
I marvel the face of mortal man will be so brazen as to affirm this, the
immortal word of god loudly gainsaying it, 1 Cor. 1 21. Romans 1.16. Iam. 1.21. I
will not light a candle before the sun. Though preaching be granted necessary,
and the word read no means to salvation: yet there be three difficulties
that infer an impossibility to have the same in Wales.

The word in welsh neither must not can be gotten. Must nor, because al
should be brought to speak English, of the condition the truth were made
known unto them, I would it were brought to pass. And shall we be in ignorance
until we all learn English? This is not her Majesty's will we are assured.
Raise up preaching even in welsh, and the uniformity of the language will be
sooner attained. But why can we not have preaching in our own tongue? Because
the minister is not able to utter his mind in welsh. He may. For we have as
many words as in any vulgar tongue whatsoever and we might borrow from the
latin etc. The strange words would become familiar thorough custom. They that
defend the contrary are slow bellies and not well minded to do their country
any good. A good excuse for the soul quelling non resident. Admit we cannot
have welsh preachers, yet let us not be without English where it is
understood. There is never a market town in Wales where English is not as rife
as welsh. From Cheapstow to Westchester (the whole compass of our land) on the
Seaside they all understand English. Where Munmoth and Radnock shiers border
upon the marches, they all speak English. In Penbrok shier no great store of
Welsh. Consider Anglisey, Ma^gy^^u C^^rnaruon, and see if all these people must
dwell upon mount Gerizzin and be subject to the curse, because they understand
not the English tongue. The second difficulty is want of sufficient number of
ministers. The answer hereunto may be diverse. First the harvest is the
Lords, therefore if he be sought unto, laborers shall be sent Matt. 9.38. And
extraordinary blessings may be expected, if his ordinance shall take place and
man's removed. Might it please her Majesty and the Parliament to take this
course, the Lord would raise those saviors Haba. 21. that are unlikely in the
fight of man. Further the a Universities are able to send out at this time
three hundred for the work of the ministry able me^ every way with a little
practice. We need not have all welsh preachers, therefore these also might
serve our turns, and it would be very hard if a dosen of them were not of our
own people. Thus many being now provided for, would be such an incoragement
unto students, that at the years end twice as many would be ready to consecrat
themselves to this holy labor. What an encouragement also would this be for
men to send their Sons to the Universities, whereas they could no sooner
send them thither, than Colleges would have places void for them? Now alas
our Universities decay in number of students. They that are already placed,
either dally with their studies, or not apply them at all to divinity, because
they see no end thereof. Some bound by reason of their fellowships to enter into
the ministry, will make any shift to be dispensed with, nay they will give ever
their places rather than undergo this calling. The reasons hereof be two.
First the id^ll priesthood has made the most glorious function under the sun,
most contemptible. Secondly they see the minister has no assurance of that
living whereunto he is inducted. Every tristing matter it now made deprivation.
If it shall please har highner and the Parliament to decree that euer^^ godly
learned minister may have as good assurance of his siuing for term of his own
life, as any subject in the land has of his fee simple, unless he be found
such an offender as his ministry will be a reproach unto the Gospel, I doubt not
but the ministry would be soon furnished with able me^. A number of the idle
drones now in our ministry would become fit for that work in one year, if
preaching were but here and there scattered among us, and they weekly driven
to exercise. Where it may be seen that their undoing is not intended, but
their good. There be many worthy men in the Church of England, that now
exercise not their public ministry, these would be provided for among us. I
hope they will not be unwilling to come and gain souls unto Jesus Christ.
Private men that never were of Vniuerfity have well profited in divinity. These
no doubt would prove more upright in heart, as the Leuits in the like distress
2. Chr. 29.34. then many of our learned men. For the preaching in Welsh, order
might be taken that our breethren which are of the ministry in England should
be sent home. Their flocks might be otherwise provided for, and they depart
with consent: Because the necessity of the Church requires it.

One of the 2. Universities since that joyful 17. day of November 1557. have
sent into the common wealth, 3400. Graduats: all these number of graduats, a
good course being taken, might have bin found in the ministry of her majesty's
own planting, and not so few as 2. thousand ouer-plus might have bin employed
in other functions. Four-hundred of these would have been since that time well
placed in Wales, whereas at this day we have* not 12. in all our country that
do discharge their duty in any good sort. The proof hereof I offer to stand
unto against all gain-saiers.

I hope this will be considered of. If not, we may be eight and twenty years
more without the word preached. The last difficulty is the want of maintenance
for our ministers. This is but a mere shift to bereave the Lord of his honor,
and us of salvation. Ezechia and Iosia could allege the like, better than we
can. The people of the Jews being in captivity, had nothing of their own to
build the Temple: yet because they sought the Lord in truth, he sturred up
Cyrus to provide for them out of his own revenues, Hesra. 6.8.9. So would he
stir up Queen Elizabeth, if we sought him with an upright heart. They whose
hearts the Lord has touched, would thresh to get their living, rather than the
people should want preaching. Our gentlemen and people, if they knew the good
that insueth preaching, would be soon brought to contribute. They should be
constrained thereunto. Salvation were not bought too dear with the very flesh
of our arms.

The honor we publickely yield in Wales unto our god, the word preached being
not among us, if the lord be said to allow of (which were blasphemy to conceive)
he can be proved to be a mere Idol. If to dislike, where is that son of Adam
that will presume to offer him that which he regards as the killing of a man,
until he may be provided for in a better sort? Her Majesty and this honorable
assembly know that the service of the eternal is not to be disperised withal,
and therefore out of hand will see the erecting thereof, which shall never ^e
do (...) as long as any excuse will be admitted to hinder the word preached. If
impropriations and Nontesfidencies were not tolerated, a teaching minister in
Walls might live well by the Church. Is it not intolerable that some of our
Gentlemen should have 6. impropriate livings?

Our earnest and humble petition unto her Majesty and this high court of
Parliament is, that it could please them to decree, that the tenth part of
every impropriat living in Wales, may be bestowed to the maintenance of a
teaching minister: which is so reasonable, that I hope it will be granted And
that the^ minister finding her Majesty sufficient security, may be her farmer
in every impropriat living, that belongs unto her highness within wales. We
humbly entreat, that the same order may be taken with all improptiations in our
coun^rey whatsoever.

Non-residencies have cut the throat of out Church. Some that never preached
have three Church liuinges. Many of our liuinges are possessed by students of
either of the Universities: who never come amongst us, unless it be to fleece.
This I hope will be tolerated no longer: seeing it is the very desolation of the
Church, the undoing of the common wealth, and a demonstratiue token, that the
Lords will watch over us to evil, and not to good: Our petition is that none
whosoever ma^^ possess (...) one living, and that al may be constrained to be
resident on their charges. These reasonable petitions concerning Non
residencies and impropriations being granted, a great many liuinges will be
ready to entertain a learned pastor. Thus I hope all the difficulties that
seemed to hinder preaching unto us are taken away.

But I marvel what will be said to be the cause why we have not had public
reading in welsh to any purpose as yet. The old testament we have not in our
tongue, therefore the 1. lesson is read in English unto our people in many
places that understand not one word of it. This reading is taken to be the
blasphemous mass. And they give it the very name of the mass. u mau yr
offairiad ar y ffere^, (say they, when the first lesson is read,) that is the
priest is at mass. One man seen in the original by the blessing of God would
be able to translate the whole in 2. years: more hands would make more
speed. The small prophets in welsh might he read unto us until we obtain the
whole, which shall be ready for the Press whenever it shall please her Majesty
and the Parliament to call for them.

Our humble petition is that the whole work may be set upon incontinently,
and that some order may be taken for the charge of the impressio^. The dialect
that every sheire has almost proper unto it self, should not hinder this
work. For it preaching were in every Parish, the people would be stirred up
to read the word privately in their houses, and so become acquainted with the
phrase. Our ministers though never so ignorant, yet all understanding English,
might easily remedy this, by conferring the Welsh with the English
translations, and so where they understood not their owneroung, the English
might direct them, and they their hearers. But they are far from taking this
small pains. I would some of them in ^0. years had learned to read welsh at
the first sight. They have made the word of God of that base and contemptible
account with many of our people, that they will ask to what end many things
even in the new testament it self are set down. Because they want preaching,
some points of the high mysteries of salvation seem unto them to be but
vulgar and common, things not beseeming the wisdom of the great God. Bring
some place out of Peter, Paul etc. and their answer will be, ^eth a wodhon ni
puneu bod hwuyn d^edud gwir eu paidio? What know we whether they say true or no?
Is not this our case lamentable? The faculties and dispensations of our Non
residentes, whose absence do imprint these skars of spiritual misery unto us,
will not deliver us from death. No they will not shild us from the temporal
punishments that we now sustain (which is our second misery) for want of their
diligence. We feel the Lords hand many ways against us at this time in regard
of the scarcity of all things, and especially of victuals, and great number of
poor. Every man among us was either wont to sow as much corn as served his
family all the year, or to make as much of his sheep and other cattle as might
buy the same. The unseasonable harvest 1585 yealded very little Corn.
Therefore many were able to sow nothing the last year, because they had not
bread corn, much less seed. The winter 1585 destroyed al their cattle well
near, so that now the very sinowe of their mainteinance is gone. Many that
lived well and thriftily, are feign to give over both house and home, and to go
a begging. They were driven the last harvest to all the shifts in the world. As
to rub the standing come being not half ripe to make them some bread thereof.
This famine is for our sins, the Lord without our repentance faith it shall
continue. Read Deuteronomy. 28.15.17.18. Amos. 4.8.11. It weer folly to continue in
our sin, for the lord will make us sick again in smiting of us. Mich. 6.13
Leuit. 26.40. As long as the Lords house lies wast in our land, we shall sow
but mere salt.

Haggai makes this out of controversy. Read the whole prophecy. All the
politic Laws in the world, is not able to amend our estate until the Lords
house be builded, and those sent among us who may teach us by prayer, and
fasting, to humble our selves before our God. This was the counsel of Joel even
in the like case, and this we must follow, or abide the smart of it. It were
strange that our estate being so many ways pitiful, would nor be redressed.
You shall find it as yet more lamentable, by entering into the consideration of
that which is like to fall upon us. Here first I will not say, that the estate
of that kingdom is very ruinous, where there is not a preaching minister. 2.
Chron. 15.2.5. God forbid that we ever should have occasion to say, that we
have no Prince, Hosea. 10.3. Ezra. 7.23.
because we fear not Jehovah: as did those wicked ones in Hoshea his days.
Artashash was afraid that the Lord would be angry with the King, and his
children: because speedy provision was nor had for his true service in
Jerusalem. Confer: Prou. 14.18, with Hose. 7.13. and see whether the estate of
that Prince whose people transgress against God as we do even in policy is
very dangerous. Ioshiah was gathered to his fathers, because he should not see
the misery that was to fall upon a more relligious people than we are. Think
not the Lord to wink all this while at our great sins. Nay think rather that
the Lord will throw as with a sting the inhabitants of our land, because our
pastors are become beasts and have not sought Jehovah Ier. 10.18.21. There be
two Archplagues (undoubtedly to be expected for) of us the inhabitants of
Wales, if our petition be not granted. The first indeed containing all the
exquisite torments that may be invented: yet leaving a place for the latter. In
a word it is the putting out of that small light of religion which we have,
the cutting off both of us, and our posterity from belonging unto the Lord. The
reason hereof is this: if the knights of our shiers and Bishops etc. will not
show themselves desirous to return unto the Lord with earnest labor for the
word preached, then they do as much as if they said, the word spoken unto us
in the name of the Lord we will not hear, but we will do whatsoever goes out
of our own mouth, as did the wicked Jews, Ier. 44. But what was replied unto
them? Verily this: Verse. 26. Behold I have sworn by my great name says
Jehovah, that my name shall be no more called upon by the mouth of any man of
Judah in the land of Egypt, saying Jehovah lives. Our sins being like unto
theirs shall be surely rewarded alike. The other punishment is the utter ruin
of our land, the rasing of our names from under heaven, that we shall be no more
a people. Jeremy makes it but a small matter with the Lord to ouer-throw a
kingdom for the sins of the people therein. Chap. 18.7.8.9. So does Amos
9.8. We have not indeed as yet a barren womb given unto us, but I fear me we
have brought forth children for the murderers. Though we bring forth
children, yet will the Lord slay the dearest of our bodies: yea woe unto them
says he when I depart from them. Hos. 9.21.17.

Account not these I pray you (whom I have before named) to be the visions of
the days afar off. Ezech. 12.18. but tremble and fear least the Lord say
the words in our days and perform the^. Think rather the Lord to expostilate
with us: as he did sometimes with the people of the Jews. O you inhabitants of
Wales, why will you die says the Lord? Why should I give you for a terrible
plague to all the kingdoms of the earth? Ier. 12.7. Why should I forsake mine
house, leave mine inheritance, give the dearly beloved of my soul into the
hands of her enemies? Ier. 3.12.13. etc. Thou disobedient (says the Lord)
return, and I will not let my wrath fall upon thee, for I am merciful. Be thou
instructed least my soul be dismembered from thee, and I make thee a land
without an inhabitant. Ier. 6.8. Think these speeches I say to belong unto you
and us, and in respect of them be vehement. The calamities of us your kinsme in
the flesh, yea your own and your childrens will force you (or else you are
unnatural) to unfold our grief unto her Majesty and this assembly. Our case
is pitiful you know! Our life short, we know not how soon the Lord will call for
us. How soon he will make an end of al. If we have not more knowledge than as
yet we have enioied means to come by the same, we can hope for nothing at his
hand but that deadly voice, I know you not. You have both Herod. in Vra^. (...).
persuasion and necessity, which drive wise men, to take great matters in hand,
to prick you forward. Throw down your selves before her majesty, and this
honorable assembly, and plead for your lives and your peoples: rise not
thence, until your suite be yielded unto. We poor people look for nothing
else but destruction, except our God grant you favor, at this very instant
time, in their sight. I with in the Lord, that if we perish, we may perish our
selves alone: and that Queen Elizabeth and her counsel with the estate, and
the whole communalty of England, may in a good conscience testify before the
Lord, and say, Deuteronomy. 21.17.
Our hands have not shed the blood of these men; neither have our eyes seen
it. I do most earnestly beseech the Lord Jehovah (for his Christ's sake) who is
great and wise in counsel, severe in punishing sin: yet abundant in mercy,
and kindness toward the bruised, and humble soul, to turn his wrath from us,
to give her Majesty and this honorable court his spirit to direct them in
every action according unto his word, to make all the enemies of his truth and
Queen Elizabeth like Ier. 29.22.
Ahab and Zedechiah whom the king of Babel burned in the fire, continue her
reign over us, hasten the coming of his Son Christ Jesus. Amen. Amen. Yea
come quiokelie Lord Jesus.

To the reader.
Some rumor of the speedy dissolution of the Parliament enforced me from the 32
Page or there abouts (so much being already under the press) to cut off more
of the book by two parts than is now in the whole. The nearer I came to the
end, the more have I made. I regarded not herein -- Amphora coepit

Institui, currente rota cur vrceus exit?

The oversight I hope has not been very great: if any, I heartily crave
pardon. How tedious and vngainful it was for me to disme^ber the whole and sow
together the torn parts, let other men judge. Some thing spoken of in the
Epistle, could not be well performed. Page 30. l. 22. Read, through-out his
dominion.


