THE CHARGE OF God and the King, To Judges and Magistrates, for execution of
Justice.

In a Sermon preached before Sr HENRY HOBART Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas: and Sr ROBERT HAVGHTON Knight, one of the Judges
of the Kings Bench, At the Assizes at Hartford.

By William Pemberton B. D. and Minister at high-Ongar in Essex.

2 CHRONICLES. 19.6, 7. 6. And he (Jehosaphat) said to the Judges. Take heed what
ye do: for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the
judgment.

7. Wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it:
for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor
taking of gifts.

LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Samuel Man, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Swan. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE FRANCIS LORD VERVLAM, Lord Chancellor of England, one
of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
AND TO THE REVEREND Judges, and worthy Magistrates: the spirit of wisdom,
counsel, and fear of the Lord.
THE wisdom of God does thus profess and proclaim to the sons of men; Prou.
8.15, 16.
By me Kings reign and Princes decree justice. By me Princes rule and
Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. Hereby giving man to wit, that the
higher powers, Romans 13.1.
or eminency of authority, and order of magistracy, supreme and subordinate,
(...) 1 Pet: 2.13.
is the ordination of God. Which howsoever it be called an ordinance of Man in
respect either 1. of Man the subject, by whom it is exercised. or 2. of Man the
object, about whom it is conversant. or 3. of Man, the end to whose good it
tends; yet is still the gift and institution of God, the primary author and
provident ordeiner. For there is no power, Romans 13.1.
but of God: The powers that be are ordained of God, to which submission must
be yielded by inferiors for conscience sake to God. v. 5.
Which well-ground Maxim whosoever shall deny, he is worthy to be thrust out
with Nebuchadnezzar to live among beasts, Dan: 4.32.
(unworthy the society of men) until he know that the most High rules in the
kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. He that is higher than
the highest, Eccles. 7.8.
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15.
the most mighty Creator and most wise disposer of all things, Dan. 2.21.
who remoueth Kings and sets up Kings, has instamped his image of
sovereignty in Kings and Caesar's, set the Crown upon their heads, put the
scepter into their hands, and created them chief Monarchs, in their
territories and dominions, over all others, next under himself. And from and
by them (through the like impression made) God deriues unto other Prime persons
under them, their eminent dignity, in places of lawful authority. So that
Vice-Royes, and all others, in their several ranks of government, do bear
the stamp and impression of God, and the King, more or less, accordingly
answerable to their distinct and several orders and degrees.

Moreover; the better to establish and ratify this wholesome ordinance, in this
excellent eutaxie, and to grace and safeguard the persons of these Delegates,
as sacred and inviolable, in their commissiue authority. God honors them
with his own style and title of Gods; Psalm. 82. v. 1.6. v. 7.
not as if they were such of their own nature and being (for so they are but
men, and die they must like men, and remain accountant to him, the great God,
for their dealings toward the meanest man) but through his grace communicating
thus far his regencie unto them. And so they are as Gods among men (as
bearing Gods image in their power over men) and Gods unto men, Hom, homini
Deus. (...).
as a common good of Gods providing (in faithful dispensation of their
function) for the good of men.

Yet further; as Magistrates are Gods creation, and ordination, in regard of
their function; so are they dependant on God, for ability to the execution of
their function, which they receive from his effectual dispensation and
providence. Counsel is mine (says wisdom) and sound wisdom: Prou. 8.14.
I am understanding, I have strength. Mortal men must in no wise glory in any
their own strength or wisdom, with the proud King of Assyria, lest it prove
costly to them as it did unto him. Isai. 10.12, 13.
From Gods gracious gift they receive their annoynting, other hearts with Saul,
1 Samuel 10.9.
understanding hearts with Solomon to judge the people. 1 King. 3.9, 12.
And thus invested with these singular endowments, as with princely diademes,
Job 29.14.
and richly furnished with those heroical virtues, of wisdom, counsel,
fortitude, and fear of the Lord, they grow undaunted for courage, and constant
for resolution, in undertaking and undergoing of weighty employments; faithful
in dispatch of worthy services; unweariable for endeavor in speedy
performances; and invincible for patience, in enduring oppositions, and
clamors, of all those sons of Belial, who despise dominion, Jude v. 8. 2 Pet.
2.10.
speak evil of dignities, or will not yield obedience to wholesome laws, nor
submit their necks to needful discipline.

Finally; that all may be well, and all, say we, is well that ends well. The
goodness of the end does highly commend the goodness of the act. Now the end
of all acts in Magistracy (as well as in Ministry) must be squared by that the
Apostles Canon, let all things be done unto edifying: and nothing must be done
idly or unprofitably, (...). Basil.
tending to no good end and purpose. Governors must therefore in all their acts
and designs, aim at the right end and scope of government, the glory of God
in the good of men. Which end shall be most happily achieved, if they shall
principally eye and respect both the Tables of Gods law, whereof they are the
Great-Lords Keepers. Religion or piety to God, in the first Table, the basis
and foundation of a truly-prosperous polity: And equity and justice to man,
in the second, the nerves and sinews of humane society. Thus when Magistrates
aim at these ends in government; that religion be entertained, the Gospel
countenanced, and piety promoted; and, that innocence be defended, right
preserved, and vice punished; and, that all be righted, none wronged. Then
shall Church and Commonweal jointly and mutually live and love, grow
prosperous and renowned, and God shall have glory from the well-ordered
communities of men, and men felicity in blessed communion with God.

Now all prosperous success, in use of best means for atchieuing these ends,
must be expected and fetched from the blessing of God, (...). Joh: 3.27.
without whom no mortal man can ever prove happy. For a man can receive
nothing unless it be given him from heaven: No counsels of man prove
healthful and successful, unless God assist, and give a blessing. Which
meditation is the argument of that heavenly hymn, compiled by David for his
son Salomons use, or by Solomon himself, Psalm: 127.
instructed of God with deep wisdom-politicall, for his own: v. 1.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it; except
the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain. It is in vain for
you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows; for so he
gives his beloved sleep. The building of the house, the watching of the
City, early vp-rising, and late downe-sitting, assiduous labor, and carking
care are all in vain, unless God assist and give a blessing. And so does
Gregory Nazianzene most elegantly paranomaze the sum and substance of that
divine Psalm. (...)
(...).
which memorable Distick I thus, in homely English, express.

If God give good success, envy can not prevail.
If God deny success, labor can naught avail.
If God from heaven shall bless and prosper, what force or fraud below can
cross or control? But, if God from heaven shall cross and curse, what power
or wit of man shall not prove vain and frustrate? The fencing of Kingdoms,
and safe-guarding of Countries with wholesome laws and political
constitutions, with Armies and Nauies, with trenches and bulwarks, with leagues
and alliances; yea, with infinite heaps of gold and silver (which Dionysius
esteemed the adamantine bonds of Empires) is all in vain, Adamantina vincula
imperiorum.
unless God assist and give a blessing. Most deliberate counsels and best
designed attempts fail of good success, for want of Gods blessing; to rebuke
the pride of man's presuming weakness. And weaker means used, in want of
stronger, through divine assistance, work wonderful effects; to correct man's
diffidence, and to work dependence on God: according to those precepts and
promises. Psalm. 37. v. 3.
Trust in the Lord and do good: so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily
thou shall be fed. v. 4.
Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of
thine heart. Commit thy way unto the Lord; v. 5.
trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. And according to that most
memorable practice: we know not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee.

And that the flourishing state of Commonwealths springs out rather from the
blessing of Gods divine providence, then from the best forecast of humane
prudence, History, the witness of times, and light of truth, does plainly
testify. To which also Heathens do give their suffrages from the dim sight of
humane observation. Vbi non Deus sed mortalis aliquis prae st, ibi malorum
nullu^ est effugium. (...). 4. Dei open and auxilio multo magis R^mpubl. Remanam
quam ratione hominum and consilio gubernari. Cic. pro Rabitio.
For so Plato professes of Commonweals in common: Where not God but some
mortal man is president, there is no auoydall of any evil. And Cicero of the
Roman state in special: The Roman state was prosperously governed much
rather by the aid and help of God, than by man's reason and counsel humane.

And in a word, that nothing can be well done, and happily succeed in City or
family, Church or Commonwealth, without the good will and good work of God,
Ephesians. 1.11.
who works all things after the counsel of his own will, S. Paul does
intimate, when he earnestly exhorts, That first of all supplications, 1 Timothy 2.
v. 1. v. 2.
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all conditions of
men: for Kings and for all that are in authority, that, through Gods good
blessing on their good endeavors, we their subjects, in our inferior condition,
may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

The sum of all, in short, is this: Kings as supreme, and other governors as
sent by God and them, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
do receive their high places, and princely graces, their function and
execution, vocation and dispensation, authority and ability, and all happy
success and good fruit in government, for the weal and welfare of themselves
and theirs, from that all-wise and all-ruling Monarch, great Counselor, and
Lawgiver, the essential wisdom, the son of God, Isal. 9.6. Jam: 4.12.
who (with the Father, and Holy Spirit, one true God) is the blessed and only
Potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy: 6.15.
the King eternal, immortal, invisible, and only wise, 1 Timothy 1.17.
to whom from them all in all their designs is to be given, as the maine end
of their government, all honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Now, Right Honorable Lord, and Reverend Sages, most wise and worthy
interpreters of Law, and Dispensers of Justice, great Guardians, under God and
King, of Church and Commonwealth, as I freely acknowledge to the glory of God
and honor of the King (for which I bless God on the knees of my heart) that
God has blessed this Land with many true Worthies, on Benches in Courts of
equity and justice (brightshining stars, restless in motion, in their orb of
government:) so I most humbly beseech you to give leave to me, your servant in
the Lord, (without your censure) from sincere affection, and dutiful respect
to your persons, to put you in mind of that which you know right well (being
so well furnished with wisdom humane and divine) and I am well assured (on my
small observation, and short experience) you endenour to practice (through the
spirit of grace inspiring and inabling you) for discharge of that trust reposed
in you in your public employments, in this body politic, by our gracious
GOD, and our religious KING.

The thing is this.

Since the God of heaven and earth is the first mouer, in his supreme orb of
government, all you his secondarie mouers, in this your orb of government, in
this heaven of our polity, ought to move after the will and ordination of God,
and not (as in that other Heaven) by any rapt motion from your private
affection, nor yet irregular from inordinate passion, nor by that of
trepidation for fear of mortal man. You must in your motion run the same
course, or use the same end with God himself; namely, the glory of God, in our
good of Church and Commonwealth, which, as the lower earth, are preserved and
cherished, with heavenly influence, through your well-ordered and well-ordering
motion. And such subordination will surely cause an heavenly harmony, and
heart-pleasing consent, in a circular revolution thus.

God is the ordeyner of our King, the King the image of God, the Law the work
of the King, Judges interpreters of our Law, Magistrates with them dispensers,
Justice our fruit of Law dispensed, this fruit of justice the good of the
people, the good of the people the honor of our King, this honor of our King,
the glory of God, the ordeiner, orderer, and blesser of all. And so in this
regular and circular revolution, all motion begins in God, and ends in God, for
man's felicity, and Gods glory, infinitely, and eternally.

Great, you see, is your honor: as great is your charge. A double charge; from
God, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 18, 19, 20.
from King. God charge the King: God and King (whose Ministers and
sword-bearers you are) have charged you. Romans 13.4.
Your office then of Magistracy (as ours of Ministry) is not so much nomen
honoris as oneris. Aug: de Ciuit. Dei l. 19. c. 19.
Your desire must therefore be, not so much praeesse, as prodesse, to bear
rule as to profit, (...). Luc: 21.25.
to be benefactors, for the good of men; that is your end, who are public
Patrons, and oracles of your Country, Havens, and Refuges to poor distressed
ones. Your symbol must be that of Alphonsus, Alphons. Neapolitan. Rex.
The Pelican with her own bill picking and drawing blood out of her own
breast, with this inscription, Pro lege and pro grege: Magistra^us virio
ostendit. Arist. ex Biante.
Herein will Magistracy show your manhood.

Lastly, where as these matters of judgment are disposed and dispensed not by
your selves alone, but by many other inferior organs and instruments, who need
due inspection and daily information; (...). Hom. (...).
as interpreters of Law instruct them; as Moderators of Justice direct them; as
charged your selves of God and King to do justice, lay great charge on them;
yea, as armed with power coactiue, by virtue thereof (as far as shall be
lawful and needful) as Guardians of equity, urge them to do, what God and
King, law and conscience, equity and honesty exact at their hands; that this
chaste Virgin Justice be not by them deslowred, Hesiod.
that conscience of crime (in unrighteous dealing) may not inwardly Hieron.
epist.
wound their consciences at home, nor their name and family outwardly
besmeared with just reproach and ignominy abroad: But that good right be
maintained, good conscience discharged, good name preserved; that God may be
honored, (...).
Gods people benefited, the Commonwealth cherished, the Church enlarged, our
communion with God and society with men may become most comfortable, happy, and
blessed, while judgment and justice are equally dispensed of all manner persons
under God and King, as from God, by God, and for God; as is more largely
declared in this ensuing Treatise; which, being heretofore once uttered by me,
and now drawn into public by effectual persuasion of others, I now make
bold to present to your Honors, and Worships, because it concerns you all,
though for manner not so worthy (as I well could wish) your learned wisdoms
view and approbation. Well hoping, that, in your priuacie and retiredness from
your weighty employments, you will please to peruse it, covering what faults
and slips you epsy therein, with your robes of love, and Christian Charity, 1
Pet: 4.8.
not looking at my want of discharge of my duty (which I ingenuously
acknowledge, and sue for pardon thereof at the hands of God and you) but at the
better discharge of your own (whereto this my poor labor, as a weak mean,
would further): For so you stand charged of God, and the King: Take heed
therefore what ye do, 2 Chronicles: 19.6.
for ye judge not for man but for the Lord. And the Lord be with you in the
judgment. Amen.

Your Honors, and Worships, in all duty, to be commanded, William Pemberton.

The Charge of GOD and the KING.
DEVTER. 1.16, 17. 16. And I charged your Judges at that time saying: Hear the
causes between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his
brother, and the stranger that is with him.

17. Ye shall not respect persons in judgment, but you shall hear the small
as well as the great: you shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the
judgment is Gods: and the cause that is too hard for you, bring it unto me, and
I will hear it.


ALL the counsels and works of God (the most mighty Creator, and most wise
disposer of all things) do proceed from the good pleasure of Gods will,
Ephesians. 1 12.
which is the cause of all causes; and tend to the glory of his name, Voluntas
Dei omnium quae sunt ipsa est causa. Aug: de^en: contra Manich: l. 1. c. 2.
Prou: 16.14.
which is the end of all ends. And that in the manifestation of his mercy, in
the gracious salvation and happiness of some; and of his justice, in the
deserved condemnation and misery of others. And this our natural and temporary
life, which we live on earth, is, in the counsel and decree of God, a
praeparation and degree to a better life. And in the elect, to omit the rest,
to a life spiritual and supernatural, begun on earth in this time of grace,
and continued in Heaven, in that eternity of glory. This life well led, in
faith and obedience, does highly advance us to felicity and happiness: This
life ill led, in infidelity and sin, does deeply depresse us into misery and
wretchedness.

The entrance of Laws.
Now that man on earth might live well, God did give him a Rule to live by. This
Rule is the Law of God (the rule of piety, the square of equity) first
instamped in man's nature in his created innocence. Antequa^ scripta fuit in
hominum legthus, in mentibus vigebat. Ambr^^ lib. 4. de Abra: hamo Patriare!
cap. 4. Ephesians 4.24. In libro aduersus Iudae^s.
For what was that Image of God in man consisting of righteousness, holiness,
and truth, but Lex primordialis, a primordiall Law, (as Tertullian speaks)
exactly requiring and absolutely inabling the performance of duties of piety to
God, and of equity to man, both in habit and act; and that in sincerity and
perfection of them both? And what was the Moral Law proclaimed on Mount Sinah,
Exodus 20.
after that man had defaced Gods image, by transgressing his command, but this
primordiall Law renewed and repeated, as an absolute and eternal rule and
square, of piety to God, Exodus 31.18.
and equity to man, which God with his own finger did ingraue in two Tables
of stone, and gave unto Moses for the use of his Church?

This Moral Law requires observation, according to the (...), or exact
perfection thereof, but it gives no ability to perform obedience. It shows
what man now ought to do, what once he could have done; but not what he now
can do, nor what it will enable him to do; but accuses and accurseth every
man, as guilty of sin, for the least transgression of it. Whereupon God in
mercy, to relieve man's misery, to this law of works given in Sinah, Exodus 20.
did add another Law, (as the Apostle styles it) the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27.
Is^^. 2.3. Mich. 4.2.
given in Sion, which promises life and blessedness to all that believe in
Christ.

The law of works, called the moral law, is grounded on nature, and may be
called Lex timoris, the law of fear; because, through our impotencie, it does
terrify and affright us.

The law of Faith (which is the Gospel) is grounded on Gods grace, and may be
called Lex amoris, the law of Love; for God so loved us, Io^: 3.16.
that he gave his Son for us; and it effectually works the love of God in
us, and reftoreth us again to blessedness with God.

Man does again recover this blessedness with God, while he is driven from
himself and his sins, by the fearful threats of the law moral, and is
allured unto Christ by the sweet promises of the Gospel, this law of Faith;
and is daily renewed by the spirit of grace unto conformity to the law of
works, which still remains, as a Rule of good life (requiring obedience of
faith, Aug: lib. 3. ad Bonifacium c. 4. and contra Faustum Manich.
in way of thankfulness) till Gods glorious image be again repaired in us, and
that eternity of glory* be conferred upon us.

In the mean time, for the space of this life, many disorders and misdemeanors
remain still in the world. For the greater part of men will not be reformed:
the better part are but in part sanctified. These sin of weakness, those of
wilfulness: both have need of all good helps, for reformation to good, or
restraint from evil.

Whereupon God has in wisdom ordained Humane Laws, and has appointed Kings,
Custedes and vind^ces vtriusque Tabulae D^ut: 17. Esa. 49.23.
Princes, and Magistrates to be keepers of both the Tables of the Moral Law:
Nursing-fathers and Nursing-mothers unto his militant Church, and constant
Defenders of the Christian Faith.

And all their good Laws both Ecclesiastical and Civil are backs and props
unto Gods holy Law, and, in their due and faithful execution, effectual
means to procure the observation thereof. And, in a word, of all good Laws,
whether written or unwritten there is a twofold end or scope, as namely, they
do respect and aim at, either piety and godliness from man to God, that a
blessed communion may be maintained between man and God; or equity and
justice from man to man, that a comfortable communion and sweet society may be
preserved between man and man.

And surely, these humane laws, of Kings and Rulers, being wisely enacted* and
duly executed, by Judges and Magistrates competent, and faithful in the
execution of their function, are sovereign helps for the cure of vice, by
inflicting punishment on malefactors; and to allure to virtue by conferring
rewards, and defending of well-doers; and to right every man in his righteous
cause, that every man may enjoy his own; That so we may lead a quiet and a
peaceable life, 1 Timothy 2.2.
in all godliness and honesty. And to this purpose are we to pray to God for
them, v. 1.
and for this end are they designed to this function by God; Romans 13.1, 4
and for the better discharge of their office and duty, they receive a charge
from God and the King.

And so to descend to our present purpose, and to apply my self wholly to time
and occasion; these words, of this Scripture, do commend to our view, a
special Charge given by GOD and the KING to Judges and Magistrates for
execution of justice.

This Charge (I say) first is given of God; for Moses was an holy Prophet of
God, and spoke nothing but from the mouth of God, or by inspiration of the
Spirit of God, and therefore this is the Charge of God.

Secondly, Act: 7.35. Bertram de politia Iudaica cap. 5. ^^utr.
I call it the Charge of the King; for Moses was Prince and chief Ruler of
Gods people: his authority was Regal, his power Sovereign, not differing in
nature, but in name, from that of a King.

In this Charge we may consider, 1. The giving of the Charge: And I charged
your Judges at that time, saying. 2. The Charge given: Hear the causes
between your brethren etc.

giving of the Charge, we may observe, 1. The person that gave it, Moses, I
charged. 2. The persons to whom it was given, the Judges, your Judges.

3. The thing given, for nature, a Charge. I charged.

4. The time when it was given, at that time, namely of their election, and
designation to their function: And I charged your Judges at that time, saying.

given we may observe, 1. Instructions or injunctions given to the Judges,
which are two. First, to hear causes deliberately, Hear the causes. Secondly,
to judge righteously, and judge righteously.

2. The parties between whom they must hear and judge, propounded, first, in
relation to the Judges, your brethren: secondly, in relation among themselves,
between every man and his brother, that is, of the same Nation, of the same
Religion: neither only so, but (as the meaning is more plainly opened) between
every man and the stranger that is with him. A stranger, for kindred, Nation,
or Religion, is yet a brother for common nature, and humane condition, and
therefore must have right done to him as being a brother.

3. Admonitions or cautions against pestilent impediments, which are frequent
enemies to equity and justice; and they are two.

First, Acceptance of persons, on sinister respects: Ye shall not respect
persons in judgment, but you shall hear the small as well as the great.

Secondly, Fear of men's greatness who will be offended at justice: You shall
not be afraid of the face of man.

4. Reasons to enforce the performance of the injunctions, and observation of
the cautions: 1. for the judgment is Gods. 2. The charge is from God, as in
the first words, I charged. As if he should have said; God has charged you to
do right; God will maintain you in doing right; therefore hear deliberately,
judge righteously, accept no man's person, fear no man's face, but do right to
the small as well as the great; to the stranger as well as the brother.

5. A case of reservation of judgment in causes too difficult, by consultation
or appeal to the chiefest Judge: And the cause that is too hard for you bring
unto me, and I will hear it.

And this I take to be the intent and substance of this Charge of God and the
King, given by Moses directly to the Judges of Israel, but in them to all other
Judges and Magistrates; yea all other officers, all ministers and instruments
of justice (for the hand of Justice has many fingers) as Counselors,
Pleaders, Advocates, Sollicitors, Shiriffes, Jurors, witnesses, and the rest.
And it does merely concern, both God and King, Church and Commonweal, and
every state and person in them both, and affords fit matter for this present
occasion, and profitable direction for all such purposes. In speaking whereof,
that I may say something of every thing, I must be short in all. And in all and
every thing, I do most humbly crave, Gods powerful direction, that I may be
able to speak; your favorable attention, that I may be heard; and Gods
gracious blessing upon that which shall be spoken and heard, that it may
redound to Gods glory, and to our profit and comfort, and so I proceed.

First general Part. Giving of the charge.
The first general part formerly propounded, is the giving of the charge: And
I charged your Judges at that time saying. I. Point. The Persons who gave the
Charge.
And the first particular therein observed, was the person who gave it, I, that
is, Moses. This one person Moses sustaines a double person: 1. God.
First of God, as he was a Prophet of God, and spoke from the mouth of God. 2.
The King. Prudentiss^mus L^gislator, ^ustissimus Princeps, ac Propheta maximus.
Philo in vita Mosis.
Secondly, of a King, as he was the chief Ruler and governor; and so it is
the charge of GOD and the KING.

First this was the Charge of God; for Moses the man of God, was (as was said)
an holy Prophet of God, immediately called of God, to this holy function;
immediately assisted and directed in his execution by God: and what he enjoined
to this people, he received it from God; from Gods mouth, or by inspiration of
his Spirit, or by some such special and infallible information of God.

Moses elected Judges to help and assist him in judging of causes (with
variety and multitude whereof he was ouer-charged) and this he did by the
wise and godly counsel of his father in law Iethro, Exodus 18.
yet upon consultation also first had with God, and express answer from the
heavenly Oracle. For so Iethro advised him Exodus 18.23. If thou shall do this
thing (that is, elect some assistant Judges) and God command thee so, then
shall thou be able to endure. And the conscience of Moses consulting with God
did give testimony to this advertisement of Iethro as the counsel of God: and
therefore this election of Judges by Moses was in deed and effect, the
election of God; and this Charge given to these New-elect, was accordingly the
charge of God. Whence it follows as a ground of all that I have to speak,
that

The charge for right execution of justice given to Judges by the Prophets of
God is to be accounted the charge of God. Doctr.
This charge God gives sometimes immediately with his own mouth: Exodus 10.
thus God proclaimed the Moral Law, which conteines all the grounds of equity
and justice, by his immediate voice; and delivered to Moses not only the
Ceremonials, but also Judicials by his immediate direction: and by Moses unto
the Church, as Leuit. 19.35. Ye shall not do unrighteousness in judgment,
in line, in weight, or in measure. And Moses in the execution of his weighty
function, did consult with God, in his heavenly Oracle; as did also David, and
others, 1 Samuel 3.7, 8.
in cases of difficulty, not expressed in Gods word. And God directed Joshua,
Josh. 1.1, 2.
after the death of Moses.

God gives this Charge sometimes by his instruments, as Prophets, Apostles, and
Ministers of the Gospel: By Prophets, as by Moses to these Judges in this
place; and so by Isaiah to the Judges of Judah, Is. 1.17. Seek judgment,
relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. By the
prophet Jeremiah to the King of Judah and his servants, Ierem. 2.2, 3. Execute
ye judgment and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of
the oppressor: and do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the
fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood in this place. And
Chap. 21. v. 12. O house of David, thus says the Lord, execute judgment in
the morning, and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor.
By the kingly prophet David, Psalm. 2.10. Be wise now therefore, o ye Kings: be
instructed ye Judges of the earth. By the prophet Zachary to the Jews, Thus
speaks the Lord of Hosts, Zach. 7.9.
execute judgment, show mercy. And again, Zach. 8.16.
Execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates.

By his holy Apostles unto Christian Magistrates, as the Apostle S. Paul (one
for all the rest) sets down the office and charge of a Judge or Ruler, Romans
13.3, 4. saying, Rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evil:
again, The Ruler is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him
that does evil.

Lastly, God gives this charge by the Ministers of the Gospel, who are his
Ambassadors in matters of God, to declare his will to the people of God. And we
(Gods ministers) stand charged of God (as Timothy of St. Paul) before God, 2 Timothy 4.1. 1 Timothy 5.21.
and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that we observe all that God
injoynes us without prejudice, and we must do nothing of partiality, but must
divide the word of God aright, 2 Timothy 2: 15.
dispensing Gods mysteries as his faithful stewards, and giving to our Lords
family, to each one his due portion, Luc. 12.42.
in due season: and so prescribing to Judges and Rulers their duties from God,
as we our selves expect to be judged of God; and we must not dare to corrupt
the word of God; but as of sincerity, 2 Cor. 2.17.
as of God, in the sight of God, so ought we to speak in Christ: and so I
desire to speak unto you.

Wherefore, right Honorable and beloved in the Lord, Use.
let me entreat you from the Lord, that you receive from us, who serve God in
this function, our charge for justice as the charge of God; not measuring the
weight of our embassage by the meannesse of our persons, but weighing the
worthiness of our calling, and giving entertainment to the truth, which we
speak according to Gods word, not as the word of man, but of God; always
remembering that of our Savior to his Disciples, and in them to us; Behold, I
send you. and, He that hears you hears me; Luc: 10. v. 3, 16
and he that despises you despises me. And that worthy saying of our most
learned and religious King in a solemn disputation in the University. The
King himself ought to obey the Minister, At Cambridge March 16 14.
tanquam spirituali medico ex verbo Dei praescribenti, as to a spiritual
Physician prescribing to him out of the word of God. And this accords with his
Majesty's instructions to the Prince his eldest son; (...) page 10.
When any of the spiritual office-bearers in the Church speaks unto you any
thing that is well warranted by the word, reverence and obey them as the
Heralds of the most high God.

And so much of this, as the Charge of God: Now I come to it as the Charge of
the King.

2. The King gives this Charge.
The second person whom Moses susteineth in giving of this Charge is the person
of the King; for he was designed chief Ruler and Judge of Gods people: his
authority was Regal, his power Sovereign, though he governed also by others
as assistants and counselors.

Whence Kings and chief Rulers may take pattern for their practice, Doctr.
to give special Charge to their Delegates and Deputies, to execute just
judgment unto the people. For so Moses the chief Ruler gave charge to these
new-elected Judges and Rulers to hear and indge righteously the causes of all
men. Such a charge, for a farewell, did holy King David give unto Solomon his
succeeding son, 1. King. 2.2, 3. I go the way of all the earth: be thou
strong therefore, and show thy self a man. And take heed to the charge of the
Lord thy God to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes etc. When he
further injoynes him, according to his wisdom to execute justice on Ioab and
Shimei, and to show mercy and kindness to the sons of Barzillai. The Egyptian
Kings were wont (as Plutarch reports) by the custom of their country, to
give an oath to such as were appointed their Judges, that they should not
speak or do unrighteously in judgment, though the King himself should charge
and command them. Which commendable practice Traiane the Emperor did worthily
imitate, and gave a drawn sword to the Pretorian Lieutenant before all his
Nobles, saying unto him: Si bonus fuero pro me vtitor (hoc gladio) sin malus
contrame. If I shall be good use this sword for me, if evil, against me. or
thus: Hoc gladio pro me vtar is, donec iusta fecero: si iniusta secero, contra
me vtaris. As long as I shall do those things which are just, use this sword
for me: if I do things unjust, use it against me. A fact and speech most worthy
an Emperor! whose example, at least in the scope thereof, is fit to be imitated
of every good King; who ought to acknowledge, that God has advanced him, as a
little God, ^s^l. 82.
to sit on the Throne, and to rule over all others for the common good of all.
The oath which the King administreth to Judges, binds them to strict
observation of justice, as it is recorded in the stature of the 18. of Edward
the III.

Ye shall do even law and execution of right to all his subjects rich and
poor, The oath of Judges 18. Edw. 3 printed anno D^mius 1578. p 106.
without having regard of any person. And that ye deny to no man common
right, by the Kings letters, nor none other man's, nor for none other cause, and
in case any letters come come to you contrary to the law, that ye do nothing
by such letters, but certify the King thereof, and go forth to do the law,
notwithstanding the same letters. And this is agreeable to the commandment of
Antiochus the King of Asia; That if letters came from him, or his Nobles to
interrupt the course of justice, they should pocket them up, supposing them to
be unwittingly written, and so to proceed in a strict course of justice.

A good King gives streit charge for execution of justice, because he knows
that the power of government is as well onus as honos, a burden, as an honor,
ordained for the common and vninersall welfare of all his subjects, Salus
populisupr^ms le^^ est^.
whereof account must be given to God. And he is always in his own estimation
Magnus reip. seruus, Colimus Imperatorem, vt homine^ a Deo secundum, and sole
Deo minorem. Tertu^. ad Scap. Super Imperatore^ nox est, nisi s^lus Deus qui
fecit Imperatere^ Optat. contr. Parmenian. lib. 3
the great servant of the Co^mon-weale; for place and authority advanced, and
that most worthily, above all both persons and states; and yet in princely
clemency respective of the meanest, like a kind Master, or (...) Homer. (...).
Xenoph.
(...) Gueua^a. good Father. For a good King differs nothing from a good
Father: who, as he is maximus, the greatest, so is he optimus, Par^m vllum
super terra^ non babet. Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. ham: 2. Patriae parens.
the best; a common, yea an universal good, who promoteth peace and public
welfare, accounting all his felicity, as he is a Prince, to consist in
well-gouerning his Commonweal, and in bestowing his life, for the good
thereof (if need require) as the Emperor Alexander Seuerus professed of
himself.

Now then, as it is the highest dignity, and most nearly annexed to the
Royal Crown of a Christian Prince to have the title of prerogative to be
Defender of the Christian Faith, and to have supreme authority over all causes
and persons Ecclesiastical and Civil: so it apperteineth to him by that high
authority to manifest his care for the common good, as in making and executing
of good and laws for the promoting and establishing of Religion, and Justice:
Rex quia h^mo est, D^mino ser^it viuen^o fideliter: quia v. ro^tiam R^x est,
seruit, l^ges iusta praec^pi^ n^^s and con^^ar^a prohibentes, conuenienti
vigore sanciendo. Aug: epist: 50. ad Bonisa. ium. Idem contra Cresconium l. 3.
c. 51.
so also in electing good Delegates, and competent Judges and Ministers of
justice: and in charging and obliging them by all bond of duty to use their
authority to promote the public good, in examining and deciding all causes
and controversies, with righteous judgment and due execution of justice, which
is the very life and soul of good and wholesome laws.

And thus much of the person who gave the Charge, GOD and the KING: Now of the
persons to whom the Charge was given, Judges and Magistrates.

Your Judges. II. Point.
That is not only Judges in the most strict and streit notion and
signification of the phrase; but all Magistrates also and Ministers of justice;
at least, by true and necessary consequence.

And most meet it is surely that such a strict charge should be given by God
and the chief Ruler, Doctr.
to such as were elected and designed to be Judges. For they are, for trust,
keepers of the Law; and, for their office, speaking laws; and, by their power
and authority under God and the King, principal swayers and dispensers of
equity and justice. And as Masters and Pilots in the ship of the
Commonwealth, who sit at the stern and guide it forward, through their
wisdom and fidelity, in an even, a prosperous, and succesfull course, unto
the desired haven of peace and prosperity: But through their careless neglect
and heedlesse ouer-sight, they cause fearful shipwreck and miserable ruin.

And you know right well, that when Judges and Magistrates become wise and
faithful, in deliberate sanxion and due execution of good and wholesome laws
and statutes, that then, by their good means, and Gods good blessing, Gods
laws are backed, his ordinances established, piety is promoted, equity
preserved, the Church is made pious, the Commonwealth prosperous, our
communion with God and society with man becomes most comfortable, happy, and
blessed. But when Rulers and Magistrates do swerue in government, growing
careless and negligent, ungodly and unjust, abusing their authority or
neglecting their duty; then thorough the just judgment of God, and malice of
the Devil, and the unbridled fury, and unbounded outrage of lewd, and savage,
and unreasonable men, all things in Church and Commonwealth grow disordered
and confused, and finally fall (unless godly wisdom in Rulers timely prevent)
into fearful ruin, and dreadful desolation.

Wherefore for the prudent preventing of this so fearful evil, and provident
procuring of that so hopeful good, all Rulers and Magistrates, yea all
ministers of justice, (Sheriffs, Counselors, Advocates, Jurors, witnesses,
and the rest) (who are but men, and subject to sliding, of wilfulness or
weakness) had need to receive their charge and direction, from God and the
King, for the better discharge of this important business, for the glory of
God, who has highly exalted them, and for the good of others, over whom he
has set them: for quo sublimior gloria est, Cyprian.
eo mayor and cura est, the higher is their honor, the greater ought to be
their care, and inlargeth the sum of their future account: Hieron epist. ad
Heliodorum de (...) vi^ae s^litariae.
for cui plus creditur, plus ab eo exigitur; to whom more is committed, of him
more is exacted.

III. Point. The nature of the thing given, a Charge.
And thus much of the persons, to whom this Charge was given: Now I proceed to
the third particular; which is, the nature and quality of this thing, which
Moses gave to the Judges, which is a command, a precept, or a charge. I charged
your Judges.

Now this being a Charge given of God and the King, Doctr.
who are in degree the highest, it does charge the conscience in the highest
degree, and exacteth employment both of body and mind, for the exact discharg
of this office and duty; and that in such sort, that an approved account may
be well and readily made, not only to the King and principal Ruler, but also
to God himself, the King of Kings, and Judge of Judges, Exodus 18.25.
even the Judge of the whole world. And for this cause it is religiously
provided, that an oath of the King, yea of the Lord is administered to inferior
Judges, yea to Jurors and witnesses, the ministers and instruments of justice,
for the faithful discharge of this weighty duty, so heaui-charging, if not
ouer-charging, the souls and consciences of all, who bear any part in the
matter of judgment.

Wherefore, Use.
by virtue of this Charge, let all be admonished who have the least finger in
matters of justice (for it does not concern the Reverend Judges alone) let all
(I say) be admonished in the name of the Lord to account themselves charged to
such performance of duty, as whereof they must be accountant to God and the
King. And therefore let religious care be had of all both Judges, ministers and
instruments so to demean and behave themselves, as sincere and faithful
servants of God, and trusly and loyal subjects to the King, that they may
receive for their pains, to their credit and comfort, both humane and divine
applause and commendation.

And thus much of the nature of this speech, in that it is a Charge. Now time
and desire do hasten me forward to consider the time when this Charge was
given.

IV. Point. The time when this charge was given.
[At that time] that is, as soon as these were elected Judges. In the fortieth
year, the eleventh month, and the first day, after their departure out of
Egypt. Two months and a few days before their entrance into the land of
Canaan, where this their authority was to be exercised; and not so long before
the death of Moses the servant of God, their principal Ruler, who dyed the
twelfth day of the twelfth month, as may be collected out of Deuteronomy. 34. and
Josh. 1. and 4.

O consider, I beseech you, this charge of Moses to the Judges, how fit, how
timely, how seasonable it was.

1 As Soon as they were selected and designed to this office, that they might
deliberately meditate and fore-bethinke themselves of their duty and charge.

2. Before execution of any part of their function, that in the beginning
thereof they might lay such a good foundation, that they might the more
hopefully expect successful proceedings.

3 A little before their entrance into the land of Canaan (their promised land)
that their inheritance might not be polluted through violation of justice, in
their first possession thereof, and habitation therein.

4 And a little before the death of Moses, their chief Prince and Lawgiuer,
that they might not be left destitute of direction for matters of judgment,
after the loss of so worthy a Governor.

Wherefore timely and seasonable ought to be the charge which Kings and Princes
give to their Delegates, Doctr.
the Judges and Magistrates: and which Judges and Magistrates give to the
People their inferiors; even in the entrance of their function, before
execution, that they may not swerue from justice, through ignorance, for want
of direction; nor transgress through presumption, for want of admonition. And
so timely and mature ought to be the charge, instructions, and admonitions of
Parents to their children, of Masters to their servants, and of all Superiors
to inferiors under their charge. But to apply my self only to this, this
time and occasion.

I only observe that its prudently provided (which is constantly practiced)
that our reverend Judges of Assise (having received first instructions from the
King) make way in their entrance unto judicial process, Use.
by giving of their charge: wherein they do with great learning and piety,
give such wise directions, such grave admonitions, and such needful and
seasonable exhortations to the body of the Commonweal, whom these businesses
do concern: that unless men be simple, they cannot be ignorant, and unless
they be wilful, they shall not make default, in discharge of the duty and
office wherein they are employed.

And so much of the first general part of this text, the giving of the charge.
Now I come to the second, and principally intended, the Charge which was given;
the tenor whereof is this: Hear the causes between your Brethren, and judge
righteously, etc.

Second general Part. The Charge given.
I. Point. Instructions, and Imunctions.
In this charge given, there come first to our view, the Instructions and
Injunctions, which are given to the Judges, which are in number two: to hear
deliberately. to judge righteously.


And for preparing of our passage to the handling of them, we are to consider
by way of Preface: First, what are the Causes to be heard and judged: Secondly,
what is the Rule of righteous judgment.

first: the Causes which fall into the consideration of Judges, are (by Plato)
reduced to two heads: Omnia iudicia aut distrahendarum controuersi^rum, aut
puniend orum maleficiorum causa reperiae sunt. In disceptan^^ controuersijs,
tuenda disciplina. Justinian.
to do Injury: to do Evil: and (as Cicero does accordingly write) All
judgment was devised either first for the deciding of controversies, or
secondly, punishment of malefactors.

The matters then (as our reverend Judges also tell us) are Civil, or
Criminal, that concern right between man and man, or punishment of crimos.
And therefore to give to every one his own, and to redress injuries is a
principal office of justice distributive. And to punish malefactors in causes
criminal, is an office of justice vindicatiue, as necessary for the good of
the commonwealth as the other. Now this charge is to be observed in all kinds
of causes, whether trespasses or crimes: 1. hear: 2. judge righteously. 2. The
rule of righteous judgment is the Law; for the Law is a silent magistrate, and
the Magistrate a speaking Law: Now the Law, this rule of judgment, is Humane,
or Divine; and the order for conformity of judgment must be this.

Man's Law must be subordinate to Gods Law; the Judges sentence to man's Law,
and therewithal to Gods Law. Leges cu^ fuerint instit^tae non licebit indici
de ipsissed secundu^ ipsas ^^dicare. Aug.
Laws being once well established, the Judge must not judge of them, but by
them, as an Interpreter or them: and the Interpreter must have the same meaning
with the Law maker; otherwise (wresting words strictly, contrary to the
meaning) summum ius becomes summa iniuria, strickt law, flat injustice.

These things being premised, the directions or injunctions given to the Judges
are two: first, to hear; and second, to judge. Within which three degrees of
judicial process (which is the lawful handling of the action) are included
or comprised: first, Hearing; secondly, discussing; thirdly, sentencing of
causes: upon which (as a consequent) follows execution: or thus, first hearing
of the cause, secondly, giving of the sentence, thirdly, execution of the
sentence pronounced; which some take to be meant by that clause, Ye shall not
fear the face of man. But under correction, we may take it thus: These duties
as three degrees in judicial process, are given in charge by Moses to the
Judges: first to hear causes wisely and deliberately: secondly, to sentence
the causes heard, justly and equally: thirdly, to execute judgment according
to sentence given faithfully and exactly: or more briefly thus;

Three degrees in judicial process.
The judicial process has three degrees; to hear justice; speak justice;
do justice.

To which are required three things in a Judge, an eye of knowledge, a tongue
of truth, an hand of power. And this is also the order to be observed therein.

1 There must first be hearing, before the sentence be given, else how can the
sentence be just?

2 Sentence must be given before execution be done, else how can the execution
be warrantable?

3. Execution must follow upon sentence given, else to what is such process
profitable? But when causes are deliberately and discerningly heard, so as the
truth is seen as in the clear glass of wisdom: when Sentence is justly and
equally given, as the cause bears weight in the balance of equity. And when
sentence is thoroughly and exactly executed, as with a sharp sword of
sufficient power, then are these injunctions and directions of Moses faithfully
observed, and sufficiently performed.

The first degree. To hear justice.
The first degree in judicial process is the hearing of justice, or of the
cause to be judged: and this must needs be first; else no just sentence can be
given. Right judgment does presuppose sure knowledge. You know the saying; Si
iudicas, cognosce: If ye will judge, Senec. Trag.
take notice of the cause, for the cause must be known before it can be
judged, and first heard, that it may be known. Qui statuit aliquid part
inaudita altera, aequum licet statuerit haud aequus erit. Senec. Plaut. Genesis
11.5. Non humano modo hoc intelligamus, sed vt per hoc erudiamur, nun q^a^
temere fratres condemnandos, neque auditu solo iudicandu^, nisi pluribus
argume^tis prius certi reddamur. Omnia enim ideo a Deo fiunt and ob hoc tanta
ad erudiendum humanu^ genus vtitur sermonis attempera^ione. Genesis 18. v. 20. v.
2.
And he that shall give sentence, either party not first herd, though his
sentence prove equal, yet is he not an equal Judge. The Lord himself
observes this order of process, where its said That God went down to see the
City and Tower which the Nimrodians had builded. On which place Chrysostom
does well observe, that Gods spirit does declare by an (...) (or humane kind of
speech) that men ought not to condemn their brethren before certain knowledge
and notice of their cause. And before the final sentence of destruction be
passed on Sodom, the Lord first takes notice of their estate; saying; Because
the cry of Sodom and Gomorrha is great, and because their sin is very
grievous; I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it: which is come to me: and if not, I will know. The
Lord who knew all things of himself, will also take notice, as by judicial
process, thereby, as in a Table, to commend to our view, as in a lively
picture or perfect pattern, the order to be observed in judicial proceedings
for humane profit and constant imitation. And thus God first heard the
Israelites groan under the burdens of Egypt, Exodus 2. v. 22.23* 24.
and then, and not before, he sent deliverance.

To teach all Judges, Doctr.
who bear Gods-Image and title in their office, to follow him, as their
pattern in the execution thereof; not precipitating sentence before due
consideration, and well-weighing, and discerning the equity of the cause: for
if God did so, who is the knower of all things, who cannot be deceived, misled,
or corrupted; much more ought men give diligence hereunto, who are daily
subject to be mistaken, through ouer-sight, to be misled by affection,
transported through passion, precipitated with prejudice, and deceived with
colorable pretenses, and glosses.

But here I shall not need to prescribe to our reverend, godly, and
well-experienced Moderators of Justice, but only point at such things, as they
know, and which, on occasion, I have sometimes observed, to be religiously
practiced, in their judicial process: and this I shall the rather be bold to
speak, that inferiors of less, both knowledge, experience and conscience,
may take notice of such virtues, for due approbation of them in their betters,
and respective imitation of them in themselves.

Hearing is either 1. simple hearing. 2. Discussing.
Now this hearing which tends to the notice of the cause, is either a simple
hearing of both the parties, or else an accurate discussing, and examining of
their evidences and proofs.

The first is the equal hearing of all persons, both actor and reus, 1.
Hearing.
plaintiff and defendant, Small as well as great. Ier 26. v. 2.3.4.12.16.
This was observed in the arraignement of Jeremiah the Prophet, whom the
Priests and Prophets apprehended and conuented before the Judges, and accused
capitally as worthy of death, for denouncing Gods judgments against Judah at
Gods command: Ieremiahs defense was accordingly heard, and he acquitted by the
Princes and Judges. Ioh. 18.29.
Pilate thus far demeaned himself well in the case of our Savior, while he
would not give credit to the Highpriests accusation, but would hear the
poor defendant, as well as these plaintifes, though men of chief place and
authority amongst them. Nicodemus did reason like a worthy Judge, and prudent
Magistrate; Does our Law condemn any man before it hear him, Ioh. 7.51.
and know what he does? But the rest, his unjust and unequal Brethren, did
take him up very sharply for it, and resolved to condemn Christ absent, and
unheard in his just defense; whereas the most gross, and most vile malefactor
ought first to be convicted, by two witnesses at the least ( Deutr. 19.15.)
before sentence of judgment be passed against him. (...). Demosth. (...). Ante
meridi^m causam conscito cum perorarint ambo praesentes. 12. Tab.
He that answers a matter before it be heard, it is folly and shame unto
him, says the Wiseman. Prou. 18.13.

It was the equity of the Judges by the law of the Athenians, Ne: visum nec
auditum hominem damnare nefas vlti^um censetur; Ammon. Marcel. Nulla mayor
iniuria quam indicta causa aliquem iudicare.
to hear both parties alike. And an Iniunction set down in the 12. Tables, at
ancient Rome: Before midday take notice of the cause when both the persons in
presence have pleaded.

And it was always accounted a most heinous offense, Lucianus. (...) Plato in
Demodico ex Poeta.
to sentence, or condemn men, their causes not first heard. And prudent
provision is made by all good laws, that judgment be not given before the
cause be heard. 2. Discussing. Iudicantem oportet cuncta rimari, et ordinem
rerum ple^na inquisitione decurrere, quousque ad veritatem perueniatur. E
lentherius.


As there must be a simple equal hearing of both the parties; so must there be
an accurate examination and exquisite discussing of the cause. This is the law
of God. Deutr. 13. ver. 12.13. That if the Judge have heard of an abomination
done (as the seducing of Gods people) he must inquire, make search and ask, and
that diligently, (great is the emphasis and weight of the words) and if it be
found certainly true, then must he punish. Deutr. 17.4.5.6. Ioshuah. 7.22. 1.
Sam. 14.43. Jonah. 1.8.10.
Ioshuah would not condemn Achan upon Gods Lot, and his own confession,
until he found (by search) his confession to be true: Not Saul Jonathan; nor
the Mariners Jonah taken by lot, until examination and hearing of their answer
and defense: Ioh. 7.
and Nicodemus does take it an express point in Gods Law, That a man ought not
to be condemned upon bare hearing, no not till it be known what he has
done. Thus did righteous Job, in his legal process. The cause that I knew
not, I searched out, Job. 29.16. And thus far did Pilate well in the cause of
Christ, Act. 25.27. Act. 24 22.27.
Ioh. 18.30. And Festus the President of Caesaria, and Foelix his Predecessor
in the case of St. Paul. And Salomons wisdom was experienced and admired in
that first case of the two harlots, who contended for the child, 1 King. 3.
when after strict examination, through a wise invention and semblance of
dividing the quick child, he did extort a confession from the true mother, by
strange commotion of her natural affection. And God himself does often
inculcate this as the duty of the Judge: The Judges shall make diligent
inquisition: Deutr. 29.18.
and for this cause they had need both to have, and use those excellent parts
of wisdom and understanding, which God requires of them, and bestows upon
them. Deutr. 1.13.

How needful and helpful in judicial process is the exquisite and accurate
discussing of the cause, it may appear by this; that the more exactly the
cause is discerned and known, the more just sentence may thereof be given, as
Great Demosthenes did well observe.

Wherefore there are required (as you know right well) in a Judge or Magistrate
in hearing of causes, that they may be equally heard and exquisitely discussed,
Things to be observed in hearing of causes.
sundry things to be observed and practiced.

attention to the matter in hand, that no material proof or important reason,
tending to euince the equity of the cause, through heedles neglect be omitted
or let pass, without observation and notice taken thereof. For as one well
learned and experienced says well: In eo sape quod aures praetervectum est,
status causae versatur. Joan. Bodin. de repub.
In that ofttimes which passes by the ear, does the state of the cause
consist.

moderation and ordering of the process; that impertinent digressions, odious
invectiues, and calumnious imputations among pleaders or witnesses, used to
prejudice the contrary person or cause, be seasonably interrupted, and sharply
rejected, and that neither party be hindered, by his adversaries rash
interruptions, and caused to omit, or conceal, what may make for his purpose,
and to clear the equity of his just and equal cause. It is the part of the
Pleader or Advocate, Arist. lib. Rhet.
only to declare whether the thing be so or not so, done or not done; whether
just or unjust the Judge himself must know.

And here I desire the learned and experienced Moderators of justice to
consider, whether (for the most part) the wrong-doer be not the more peevish
and clamorous, and best armed with Pleaders and Advocates against the innocent?

There must be invincible patience, and unweariable forbearance, of the
slownesse of speech, dullness of conceit, rudeness of behavior, and other
infirmities and weaknesses of many the meaner and inferior sort, whose
testimonies for others, or defenses for themselves, in judicial process, are
of necessity required. Such wants and defects must be passed by with
charitable forbearance and compassionate respect.

unquiet affections and inordinate passions, of hatred, love, envy, an ger,
rash zeal, or the like, must be quite put off, and wholly laid aside. Desire
and anger are ill Counselors, worse Judges. Consultores sunt p^ssimi cupido
and ira. Salust. Amor turbat constia. Hieron.
Love troubles counsels. Envy never speaks well (that is justly) says our
common Proverb. Yea, all inordinate affections blind the eyes, and prejudice
judgment, and therefore all dealers in judgment, especially the chief
swayers, must speak (...), without affections. It was the oath of the Heathen
Judges, as the Orator does report: Audiam accusatore^ and r^um fine affectibus
and personarum r^spectione. Demosth.
I will hear the plaintiff and defendant with an equal mind, without
affections and respect of persons.

memory to recall such evidences as were of most moment on either behalf; and
wisdom and knowledge, and a kind of dexterity in conferring and comparing
cause with cause, and reason with reason; and judgment and learned skill in
the laws, both divine and humane, to weigh the proofs in the balance of
justice, and to discern and distinguish of just and unjust, that so the cause
may be fitted for sentence: else cannot the sentence prove just and equal,
Isai. 5.20.
but good shall be called evil, and evil good; the wicked shall be absolved,
the innocent condemned. For that of Augustine is certainly true, Ignorantia
Iudicis est calamitas innocentis: Aug. de Ciuit. Dei l. cap. 29.
The ignorance of the Judge is the calamity of the innocent. It was the speech
of a learned man, Quis est qui nescit tam multa in boni iudicis officio posita
esse, vt seritissimos etiam ac diligentissimos fugiant?
very well seen and experienced in this kind; Who knows not that so many
things are required in the office of a good Judge, that they easily escape the
most skillful and diligent? And therefore in a word, it may be discerned, by
the understanding Judge, which of the scales is of greater poise and weight.

But for want of these and such like observations in this first degree of
judicial process, 2 Use.
there was much injustice and sin committed by Judges and Magistrates in the
case of Genesis 39.14.
Joseph, of 2 Sa^. 16.13.
Mephibosheth, of 1 King. 21.13.
Naboth, of Am s 7.10.
Amos, of Mat. 26.59, 60.
Christ Jesus, of Act. 6.13, 14.
Stephan, of Theodor hist. Eccles. l 1. c. 29. Socrat. lib. 1. c.
Athanasius, and very many others, as Histories do record, and experience does
declare.

And thus much of the first degree of judicial process, of the hearing of
justice: Now I proceed to the second degree, which is the speaking of justice:
and judge righteously.]

After the cause is discerningly heard, The II. Degree. To speak justice.
then is judgment to be justly given, and sentence to be equally pronounced:
(...).
not according to affection and favor; but according to justice and truth:
according to the prescript of wholesome law, which is the square of equity; the
law (I say) of Man, and the law of God. For as the law of the King, who is the
Head of the Commonwealth, is the life of this body Politic: so is the law of
God the soul of the law of the King; and as the law of the king ought to be
conformed to the law of God, which is the right rule indeed of equity and
justice: so the sentence of the Judge must be conformed to the law of God, and
the King, that it may be an equal sentence. For the Law is nothing else but a
silent Magistrate, and the Magistrate, a speaking law, or a speaker of law. And
a Judge or Justice is a speaker of justice, and iudico is ius dico. Judex hine
dictus, quod ius populis dicat, quod iure disceptet, id est, (...) iudicet:
iudex in quo iusi^tia des^d^ratur, esse nequeat Iudex Isidor.
And therefore a Judge or Justice, in whom justice is not, is not a Judge, but
by equivocation. It is the injunction of the law divine: Judges and officers
shall thou make: and they shall judge the people with just judgment. Thou
shall not wrest judgment. That which is altogether just shall thou follow.
Deutr. 6. v. 18, 19, 20.
Worthy an Emperor was the profession of Justinian, which I would commend to
your godly imitation: Aequam me vtrique parti, tam in disceptandis
controuersiis, quam in tuenda disciplina praebebo. N^utri par^i praeter (...)
and sas ad^^ctus ero. quod si haec non o^ser^au^ro, onu^i^us incommodis ero
exp^situs, tam hic quara in futuro se^ulo, in borre^ do indicio magni Domini
Dei and salu^toris n^stri Jesus Chrisii: habeboque parte^ cum Judah, and lepram
c^m Huzziah, and trem rea^ cum Cain.
Aequu^ me vtrique parti tam in disceptandis co^trouersiis, quam in tuenda
disciplina praebebo etc. I will show my self equal to both parties; as well
in deciding of controversies, as in defending of discipline. I will favor
neither part beyond law and right, and if I shall not observe these things, I
shall be exposed to all discommodities, both here and in the world to come, in
that dreadful judgment of our great Lord God, and our Savior Jesus Christ,
and I shall have my portion with Judas, the leprosy with Huzziah, and
trembling with Cain. O memorable sentence worthy to be engraven in the very
heart of Judges and Magistrates, with the point of a Diamond, yea with the
finger of Gods spirit. And so much of this.

Now we are come to the last degree of the duty of a Judge in judicial
process, The 3 Degree. To do justice.
which is the doing of justice, or execution of judgment pronounced.

After the cause is discerningly heard with the ear of justice, and the
sentence equally pronounced with the mouth of justice, then must execution be
exactly done by the hand of justice; both in rendering to every man his right,
and also in freeing the innocent, and punishing malefactors. For unless this
exact execution do follow, the former process is altogether fruitless, and
tends to no profit or good effect. But in matters of controversy the party
oppressed stands still vnreleeued, after all his cost and painful travail.
And in matters of crime, enormities and disorders remain still unreformed. And
in both, both Church and Commonwealth stand fearfully surcharged with the
guilt of many sins. And often for want of due execution of judgment by the
sword of the Magistrate, the sword of Gods wrath is unsheathed against a Land;
especially for the releeuing of the helpless oppressed, and in revenging of
bloody and crying sins.

And thus much of the instructions and injunctions given to the Judges, and of
the three degrees of judicial process, which are the three duties of a good
and worthy Judge.

Now follows the second particular observed in this Charge, II. Point.
Parties between whom they must hear and Judge
namely the parties whose causes are to be heard and judged, which are set out
in relation: First to the Judges, your brethren. Secondly, among themselves;
Between every man and his brother] that is, (as was said) of the same Nation,
of the same Religion: neither only so, but of the same nature, And the
stranger that is with him: a stranger for kindred, nation, or religion, is yet
a brother for common nature and humane condition, and must have right done him
as being a brother.

Your Brethren] The name brother is a name of special relation, and notes out
a special vicinitie of one unto another, and some degree of equality one with
another.

The persons whose causes are to be heard and judged are brethren to the Judge;
not, indeed, in function, or equality of condition. For herein are Judges and
Magistrates exalted above them, Romans 13.1.
and for this cause they owe reverence and respect to the Judges.

As for Anabaptisticall conceits, Confutat.
which deny lawful Magistracy, and would bring in unseemly paritie, and
confused anarchie, they are to be utterly renounced, and far abandoned out of
the hearts of all true Christians; and that ancient law is to be embraced,
which calls it sacrilege not to reverence and obey the Magistrate: and those
who do contemn the Magistrate, do contemn even God himself (who is the
ordeiner and mainteiner of magistracy) as the Lord himself says unto Samuel.
1 Samuel 8.7.
Yet is the Judge to account them his brethren: Brethren (I say) in common
nature and humanity, brethren (it may be) in grace and Christianity;
brethren, both in humane condition, and christian profession.

Which consideration ought to stir up Judges and Magistrates unto alacrity and
cheerfulness in execution of their function; Doctr.
seeing all their employments and travels therein tend to the good and profit
of their brethren. Now what study is too incessant? what travail too
toylesom? what labor too great? what time too long? what tolerancie too
tedious, in procuring the weal and welfare of their brethren? Especially,
seeing they are set apart to this honorable employment, by ordination and
injunction of God and the King, who have highly advanced them above their
brethren, to be Judges and deciders of their persons and causes. Cypr.
Quo sublimior gloria est, eo mayor and cura est: The higher is their glory,
the greater should be their care. Wherefore I beseech you from the Lord, most
reverend Judges, hear the causes, and judge righteously between your
brethren, for they are your brethren.

But if one only or some few were brethren to the Judge, and not the rest, Nemo
fere est, qui sit bonus index in suis rebus. Arist. polit. lib. 3. Insitu^ est
mortalibus cunctis, vt se and sua ament, and sint benigni in suis causis.
Senec. Lege decernimus nemine^ sibi essi indicem, aut ius dicere debere. Imper.
Cod. lib. 2. tit. 5. Qui iurisdictioni praeest neque sibi ius dicere d^bet,
neque vxori, vel liberis, vel caeteris quos secum habet.
then were he not a fit and a competent Judge, for then were the case in some
sort his own, and few are fit Judges in their own causes. For its inbred in
all mortal men, to love themselves and their own things, and to be kind and
favorable in their own causes. And therefore the ancient laws of Emperors
forbade that men should be Judges to give sentence for themselves. And it is an
assertion of that great Lawyer Vlpian, that no man ought to be Judge for
himself, or his wife, or children, or the rest that are near unto him.

But now the parties are all brethren among themselves, as well as to the Judge;
and that in nature, nation, and profession of religion, as the Jews were, and
as we are. And why should men contend, seeing they are brethren? why should men
defraud, oppress, rob, spoil, maime or murder their brethren? It is a very
great both sin and shame, that men of the same Nation and language, who live
under the same King and laws, who enjoy the same liberties and privileges,
who are linked together in neighborhood and acquaintance; yea, who partake in
the same community of grace and communion of glory, should not live in love
together, and keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, Ephef. 4 3.
but defraud, oppress, and injure one another.

And if, through their own corruption, and Satan's malice, they fall at
variance, discord and controversy, then surely such as are designed and
appointed by God and the King to perform and execute the most honorable office
and function of Judges and Magistrates, ought to use their best endeavor, to
compound controversies, to right wrongs, to punish crimes, and by all good
means to procure both public and private peace, that all men may live safely,
quietly and lovingly together, because they are brethren.

Lastly, suppose any be a stranger, for particular nation, or profession of
religion, yet is he still a brother in common nature and humane condition; and
therefore must have justice done to him, as being a brother, both unto the
Judge, and unto his neighbor.

Hear and judge righteously between a man and the stranger that is with him]
All men were created one in nature, reasonable creatures, all were instamped
with the image of God, all retain their simple nature, though all have not
recovered Gods image, but remain corrupted; and all must have justice, for its
founded in nature. Yea and for a Christian Judge not to do justice to an
Ethnic or pagan contending with a Christian, were to abuse his function, to
blemish his religion, to harden the Pagan in his infidelity and sin: And not
to right a Christian contending with a Pagan were, besides the abuse of his
function, to neglect his duty to one dear to God. Fit it is that he should
receive equity and justice at the hand of the Judge, who has found grace and
mercy at the hand of God. Among the Jews there was one Law for all, for the
stranger, and for one of their country: if either sinned, either must be
punished. Leuit. 24. v. 16, 22.

The sum of all is this. All men are brethren to the Judge himself,
therefore he must in love and duty labor to relieve them all. All are
brethren amongst themselves, therefore he must have equal respect for righting
of them all.

Wherefore, as Moses from God said to these Judges, so I, from the same God,
say unto you all, most reverend Judges, and all ministers of justice, Hear and
judge righteously between your brethren, and between every man and his
brother, and the stranger that is with him.

And so much of the persons: III. Point. Admonitions or Cautions.
Now I proceed to the third particular observed in this charge, namely, The
admonitions or cautions given to the Judges, against pestilent impediments
which are frequent enemies to equity and justice, which are in number two.

1. Acceptance of persons, for sinister respects. 2. Fear of men's greatness,
who will be offended at justice.
The former admonition or caution is against that principal impediment of
justice, The first impediment of justice.
acceptance of persons; which is set down 1. Negatiuely, so that the vice is
forbidden, Ye shall not respect persons in judgment. 2. Affirmatively, so that
the virtue is commanded; You shall hear the small as well as the great.

Acceptance of persons, (...)
unjust and unlawful, is such by and outward respect had of the person, as
does nothing make for the equity of the cause; and yet draws the Judge, Iuror
or witness, or other ministers of justice, to do unequally in case of
judgment, by reason of his unequal respect to the person: as when men's unjust
and unequal causes are favored and furthered, for amity, enmity, hatred, or
love, for bribes, wealth, kindred, authority, or the like: and where causes
are overthrown and persons condemned for want of friends, money, or such
outward respects, though their causes be just or persons innocent, or not
deserving such severity of censure. This accepting of persons is iudiciorum
pest is, the plague of judgments, and flatly forbidden in Gods sacred word,
Leuit. 19.15. Ye shall not do unrighteously in judgment, thou shall not
respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty; but in
righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor. Partial pity is not to be
showed to the poor and base, because he is poor and base: and partial favor
is not to be showed to the rich and honorable, because he is rich or honorable:
but according to the equity of the cause, must be the equity of the judgment.
Prohibitions of the contrary are frequent in Gods word: Thou shall not speak
in a cause, to decline after many, to wrest judgment; Exodus 22.2, 3.
neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his (unrighteous) cause. It is
not good (that is, it is very ill) to accept the person of the wicked, Pron.
18.5.
to overthrow the righteous in judgment. The like is found Prove. 24.23, 24.
Prove. 28.21. The Lord does detest this abominable sin Esa. 61.8. I the Lord
love judgment, and hate robbery for burnt offering: that is, though a thing
gotten by perverting judgment, were put to the best vie that can be, as to a
sacrifice to God, yet God does abhor it. Yea the Lord accurseth to the pit of
Hell, such as pervert the judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and widow
Deutr. 27. And denounces a fearful woe against them, who justify the wicked
for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him. And
for such sins God sends most fearful visitations. Icrem. 5. Amos 6.

Whence this abominable sin does spring is better known by bad experience,
then by tongue or pen can be expressed. It commonly sprowts out from the
poisoned root of bribery; and therefore they both are ordinarily forbidden in
one period of speech, by one breath of the Lord: Deuteronomy. 16. v. 18, 19, 20.
Thou shall not respect persons, nor take a gift: for a gift does blind the
eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. and therefore
covetousness, the root of all evil, is the stepmother of justice, 1 Timothy
6.10.
as Augustine well speaks.

It arises also from many other grounds, as from love, friendship, hatred or
envy, wrath, and rash zeal, impatience, and such like affections and
passions; which blind the eye, or transport the will, so far that the person
affected therewith does swerue from the rule of equity and judgment. Let him
put off the robe of a Judge, Exuat personant iudicis qui induit ami^i.
who puts on the cloak of a friend; its Ciceroes prouerbiall sentence. They
cannot judge worthily of such as are under them, Digne de subditis iudicare ne.
queunt, qui non merita causaru^, sed person^rum odium and gratiam sequuntur.
Greg. moral.
who follow not the merit of the causes, but the hatred or love of the persons.

Whencesoeuer it arises or whatsoever is the ground of it, sure it is a great
and grievous sin, and requires both speedy and exact reformation. For the
remedying whereof some of former times would have causes propounded without
mention of the parties: others had their Judges covered with a veil, that
neither plaintiff not defendant should come in their sight: others did
exercise judgments in the night: others did judge before the Attars of their
Gods. But to omit those heathen devices for reformation of these evils, and
that famous example of Traiane the Emperor, of whom it is recorded, that he did
never man wrong in justice, neither at any time had affection or passion in
giving judgment: we who are Christians have better grounds of restraint,
namely, the fear of God, and the direction of his word, and the examples of
godly and conscionable men. Consider two, of Moses and Samuel, who could in
good conscience appeal to the Lord, for the clearing of their uprightness and
uncorrupted integrity; and whom I persuade my self you (reverend Judges) do
religiously imitate, and desire to be like unto. Moses.
Lord I have not taken one Ass from them (says Moses) neither have I hurt one
of them. Deutr. 16.15. And thus Samuel pleads for his integrity: Samuel.
Behold here I am (says he to the people) witness against me before the Lord,
and before his anointed: whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken?
or whom have I defrauded? or whom have I oppressed? or of whom have I received
any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith, and I will restore it you. And they
said, thou have not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither have thou taken
ought of any man's hand. Be therefore, and continue such as you should be, and
such as I doubt not but you are, men fearing God, Exodus 18.21.
and hating covetousness. O, let the fear of God be in your hearts, and these
godly examples before your eyes, and pray with David, for your selves, unto
God. Psalm. 26. v. 9.10.11.
Lord gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men, in whose
hands is mischief, and their right hand is full of bribes: And keep that
holy resolution of David, and thus promise unto God; As for me I will walk
in mine integrity: redeem me, and be merciful unto me.

The second impediment of justice.
The other impediment and enemy of justice, against which these admonitions and
cautions are given, is fear of men's greatness, who will be offended at
justice; ye shall not be afraid of the face of Man.

Great men are not always good men: and great-good-men, are not (always) so
good, as not to defend or favor any unrighteous cause. Sometimes they grow
partial in cases of judgment: and if Judges and ministers of justice be
fearful to offend them, they shall hardly deal well for good causes of mean
men, for fear of the persons of great men.

Pilate hearing, Ioh. 19. v. 12. In hominum gratiam iustitiam peruertit, and
ius inflectit. Pluris facit imperatoris Romani quam Dei gratiam. Facit contra
propriae conscientiae testimonium, and oris sui enunciatum.
and fearing, that he should not be accounted Caesar's friend, if he should
let our Savior Christ go, was so quelled with fear, that contrary to his
conscience and his own mouths restimonie, he did adiudge our Savior Christ
(though innocent) unto a shameful and opprobrious death. And, sure it is, this
servile fear troubles the mind, distracts the thoughts, and corrupts
judgment, and makes the mouth to speak against the conscience, to clear the
wicked, to condemn the innocent. And therefore for the preventing of such
fearful corruption, God required these properties in Judges, that they should
be men of courage, fearing God, Exodus 18.21. Prou. 1.7.
etc. The fear of God is the beginning of Wisdom, and foundation of other
most excellent virtues: Among the rest, of undaunted courage, and makes
resolute in good and godly causes: Facile a iusticia deniat qui in causis no^.
D^u^ sed homines pertimescit. Chrysostom. Pietate sublata, fides tollitur.
Cicero. Eusebius. de vita Constant lib. 1. c. 11. Genesis 20.11.
whereas he does easily slip aside from equity and justice who stands not in
fear of God, but of men says Chrysostom. For take away piety, fidelity is
gone: as we see in the unrighteous Judge. Luc. 18. v. 2.3. And as Constantius
Chlorus, Father of Constantine the Great, did well experience in his
Counselors and Courtiers. It was Abraham's conclusion: The fear of God is not
in this place, therefore they will kill me.

Wherefore (to conclude this) these pestilent impediments of equity and
justice, this and the other, being far removed, by Christian courage, fear
of God, and hatred of covetousness, I most humbly beseech you in the name of
the Lord, both Judges and Magistrates, and all ministers of justice, Isai. 28s
17.
Lay judgment to the rule, and righteousness to the balance. Let judgment be
brought forth in truth, and let the glory of justice extend it self like a
flowing stream. Let judicial process equally proceed in hearing,
sentencing, executing of judgment without needless protraction, and unjust
delay: and for the better inducing of your godly minds hereunto, consider the
reason annexed in this Charge, for the judgment is Gods.

IV. Point. Reasons for observation of the Injunctions, and Cautions.
[For the judgment is Gods] The reason why Judges and all ministers of justice
ought to perform these injunctions, and observe these cautions, in judicial
process is this; for the judgment is Gods: yea, and to annexe unto this. that
which was premised: The Charge is from God.

And to speak hereof but paraphrastically for breuities sake: The first reason.
[The judgment is Gods]

1 The Ordinance of judgment is the ordination of God, by his wise and
immutable counsel and decree. Romans 13. and must be used faithfully, as the
ordinance of God.

2 The Person who judges is a person sent of God, by his most wise and
provident dispensation. God made thee a Judge, Magistrate, Iuror, or Witness,
by his gracious ordination, or provident permission, and thou must deal
faithfully as the minister of God.

3 The Person sustained by the Judge is Gods: for he is the delegate deputy
and minister of God: and though for nature, condition, and quality, but a man:
yet for title and office, and authority, a God, and must square his judgment
to the will of God. Psalm. 82.


4 The causes and persons to be judged, are Gods, man's life is Gods, his goods
are Gods, the man is Gods, and God is his Father, or master, but surely his
owner, and must be dealt well withal, as belonging to God.

5 The judgment, as (if it be righteous) God did effect it, so will he
approve, auow, defend, and reward it. and therefore it must be such as may be
auowed of God.

The second reason.
And now to end where I first did begin: The Charge is from God, for the doing
of justice, and he does enjoin and require the doing of judgment; and will one
day call to account for what is done, not only by his Deputy, that little God
of thy Conscience, who will sentence thee secretly, if thou do amiss.

But he that is higher than the highest, Eccl. 5.7.
the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, the righteous Judge of quick and
dead, will judge thee openly before his dreadful Tribunal. God will bring to
judgment every work, Et quid faciet de iniustis iudicijs; qui ipsas quoque
iusticias iudicabit, qui cuique merita recitabi^? Bern. Epist.
with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil, Eccles.
12.14. And what will he then do with unrighteous judgments, who will then
judge even justice it self, who will recite to every one his own deserts? The
Lord of judgment will come, Veniet, inquam, veniet Dominus iudicij, vbi plus
valebunt pura corda quam astuta verba, conscientia bona quam marsupia plena:
vbi iudex non fa^^etur verbis, non flectetur donis. 2. Cor. 5.10.
will come I say, and there pure hearts shall prevail more than subtle words,
good conscience than full purses: when the Judge shall not be deceived with
words, nor led with rewards: but will give to every man according to his
works: and every one shall receive according to that he has done in the
body, whether it be good or evil.

Thus by Gods gracious assistance and your Christian attention, I have spoken
somewhat of the principal parts and passages of this charge of God, and the
King, to Judges and Magistrates, and all ministers of justice: as namely, first
of the instructions and injunctions for right hearing and judging: secondly, of
the persons whose causes are to be heard and judged: thirdly, of the
admonitions and cautions against pestilent impediments which are frequent
enemies to equity and justice, accepting of persons, and fear of men's faces:
fourthly, of reasons to enforce the performance of the instructions and
observation of the cautions? There only remains the case of reservation.

Now that judicial process may be rightly conformed unto this charge of God
and the King, it must be ordered with great counsel and wisdom, and
depends much upon the wisdom and faithfulness of all the ministers and
instruments of justice; but lies most in the wise discretion and religion of
the Judge; who must wisely consider all reasons and circumstances, for the
prudent ordering of such important affairs, both in matters of controversy,
and punishment of crimes. In both which I would entreat you from the Lord, In
judicial process, two things principally to be respected.
that you would have most special regard that there be mature progress, in
judicial process: 2. and also equal moderation in punishment of malefactors.

1. Mature progress.
The former of these, which I would commend unto your care, is mature progress
in judicial process, in hearing and sentencing, and executing of sentence,
with all ready dispatch and convenient speed, without procrastination, or
unjust delay.

The Lord himself enioynes this unto Judges. Deutr. 25.1. If there be a
controversy between men, and they come into judgment, that the judges may
judge them, then shall they justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked.
[Then] that is, maturely without needless delay. Our Savior, in the Parable,
does note it as a mark of an unjust Judge, who is void of all fear of God,
Luc. 18.
and regard of man, that he deferred to do justice to the importunate widow.
Judges and Magistrates must in no wise be like unhappy Faelix, Act. 24.27.
who left Paul in bonds in hope of bribes: but like unto Festus his more equal
Successor, who hearing that Paul was kept bound at Cesaria, promised to go
very shortly thither, and the very next day after his coming thither, Act.
25.6.
conuented him, examined and handled his cause, though he failed in the
process of this business, for fear of the Jews.

This unjust delay of judicial process, has been an old and ancient
corruption: for reformation whereof, sundry Decrees were made by those worthy
Emperors, Constantine, Justinian, Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius,
against procrastination and dilatory courses, in matters both of controversy
and crime.

In matters of Controversy, thus Justinian does define. L. Properandu^ C. de
iudicijs Justin. Imperat.
Properandum nobis visum est ne lites pene fiant immortales, et vitae hominum
modum excedant. In causes of controversy it seems good to us that have be
made, least causes depending become immortal, and exceed the measure of the
life of man. Causae pecuniarum, et ciuiles omnes, quocunque nomine veniant, and
cuiuscunque sint quantitatis, non vlterius quam ad triennij spacium extendi
iubentur. ibid.
And what a great and grievous both sin and shame is it, especially in
Christian commonwealths, that the Son, the aged Son, should not live long
enough, to see an end of the tedious suits of his entangled Father, who trod a
maze in his endless prosecution of Law, for the relieuing of his still
vnrighted wrongs?

In matters of Crime, so said the ancient Laws, Sic C. L. 1. de custodia
reorum Constantinus imp^edicit.
statim debet quaestio fieri, vt noxius puniatur, innocens absoluatur.
Arraignements ought speedily to be made, that the guilty may be punished, the
innocent absolved: and again, De his quos tenet carcer inclusos aperta
definitione sancimus, vt aut conuictos velox poena subducat, aut liberandos
custodiadiuturna non maceret. Imp. p. p. p. Gratian. Valentia. and Theodosius,
decernunt.
Concerning those who are in prison, we do by express definition enact, that
either speedy punishment shall make away the guilty, or continual
imprisonment shall not wast the innocent.

Our Laws no doubt for decision of controversies are both as perfect and
express as these: and therefore is it not a foul offense, and a fearful
sin in any Judges or Lawyers, or other ministers of justice, to set to sale
their heads and tongues, their wits and words, their places and functions, for
the warping and weauing on of the web of controversies, and protracting of
causes, through needless delay, for private respect of gain, favor, or envy;
without due regard to common equity, or public tranquillity, or weal and
welfare of Church, and Commonweal.

Reasons against unjust delay of judgment.
In this case its too true; Delay breeds danger: danger of Undoing to the
party oppressed: danger of presuming, to the person oppressing: danger of hurt
to the party procuring delay: and danger of ruin to Church and Commonweal.

It grieves the heart, Reas. 1.
and excruciates the soul of the party oppressed, to bear such a cruel and
detestable injury, when under plausible pretense of Law, judgment, and
justice, he is not only delayed from his right, and spends himself in
prosecuting for it: but withal incurres suspicion of one wicked and unjust, as
if he himself were the doer of the wrong. He that shall thus oppress the
just in his righteous cause, does touch the apple of Gods own eye, which is a
fearful and dangerous sin, and provoke the Lord to revenge the oppressed.

Grief constrains the just, 2
who find no relief, by just order of law, to take unjust and unlawful
courses, as calumnies, quarrels, contentions and brawles, to relieve and
remedy their vnrighted wrongs; and sometimes, through impotencie of humane
affections (especially in women more conquerable of passions) poysonings, and
murders of their oppressing adversaries; and so with danger of their lands and
goods, they endanger the loss both of bodies and souls; and shall not the
unjust occasioner of such evils communicate in the sin, and partake in the
misery?

Hereby is a wide flood gate opened and enlarged, whereby hatred, 3
contentions and capital enmities are propagated and diffused by partners and
kindred, over whole families, villages, Cities, Countries, and Kingdoms, which
administer matter for mutinies and slaughters. For the contentions of the proud
are shedding of blood: Sirach. 27.16.
and their scouldings are grievous to hear. And is not hence danger of ruin
to the State? And who is the cause of all this mischief, but hinderers and
peruerters of equity and instice?

Or if such outward mischief do not hence ensue, 4
yet hereby is Gods worship and exercises of religion (as by an evil spirit
and hellish fury of discord) disturbed and poisoned, while men's minds are
distracted and exasperated with continued lawings, and dissentions: so that
they can neither hear the word with attention and profit; nor pray privately
or publicly with devotion or zeal: nor receive the Sacraments with any quiet
or comfort. And shall not the unjust hinderers of judicial process, from
final deciding of actions and controversies, stand guilty, before the
Tribunal of God, as disturbers of divine worship, and breakers of spiritual
peace?

Hereby is justice it self profanely abused, 5
and God himself the God of justice, and prescriber of equity, most impiously
contemned and monstrously dishonored, as if he himself were unequal or
unjust. For when his Delegates and Deputies do pervert judgment, they make God
himself (as much as in them lies) to become author and approuer of their
detestable impiety.

All Indges, Counselors, 6
Attourneyes, Sollicitors, Sheriffs, Jurors or witnesses, or other ministers
of justice, who by corrupt abuse of Gods sacred ordinance of justice, open a
flood-gate, or window to such enormities and evils, shall themselves be
convented (unless they repent) before the most dreadful Tribunal of God,
there to be convicted and sentenced for their fearful offenses.

All innocent persons, who have bin oppressed, 7
yet by piety restrained from unjust revenge, and preserved, by Gods grace,
from unlawful remedies, shall yet in private put up their complaints with
sighs and groans to the Judge of Heaven, who as their kind patron and
powerful protector shall take vengeance and punishment on such malefactors, as
have not relieved but unjustly oppressed (and that under pretense of law) such
helpless ones in their distresses and miseries. The soune of Syrach in his
Ecclesiasticus (though it be not Canonical) describes this very well,
Ecclesiast. 35.
saying. v. 12,
The Lord is Judge and regards no man's person -- but hears the prayer of
the oppressed. 13.
He despises not the prayer of the fatherless, 14,
nor the widow when she powers out her prayer. Do not the tears run down
the widows cheeks? 15.
and her cry is against him that causes them. (for from her cheeks they do
go up to heaven, and the Lord which hears them does accept them. Yea the Lord
in the Scripture is frequent in denouncing of punishments and judgments on
peruerters of justice. Ier. 5.29. Amos 6.12, 13. Habac. 1.3, 4, 5. and else
where.

These things being so (beloved in the Lord) that grave advice and godly
exhortation of King Iehosaphat to Judges appointed by him, is worthy to be
painted on the walls of all Courts and Iudgment-seats; yea to be engraven in
the hearts of all Judges and Magistrates and ministers of Justice 2 Chronicles.
19.6. Take heed what ye do; for ye judge not for man but for the Lord; who
is with you in the judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon
you: take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor
respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. and remember this charge of the Lord
and Moses: Hear the causes of your brethren and judge righteously.

2. Equal moderation of justice.
And thus much of the first thing much to be respected in judicial process,
which is mature progress, or speedy proceeding therein: Now follows the
second, which is mitigation or moderation of the severity of justice. And to
speak of it as far as it extends to the exercise of civil discipline and
punishment of malefactors. As judgment must proceed according to the prescript
of law: so must great wisdom, discretion, and religion be used that it be so
guided between just clemency and needful severity, that the sentence be
equal, and tend to public good.

Proemijs and poenu. Solon. Quando ciues omnes poenaru^ metu a malesicijs
abstiments, and benesicioru^ praemy^s inritati officium facere stude^t. Demost.
(...).
The Common weal (as one well said) is contained in two things, rewards
punishments. and then does it flourish (as another observed) when all the
Citizens or subjects thereof abstain from cuill-doing for fear of punishment,
and are invited to do duty in hope of reward: and that it may flourish, its
the duty of the Magistrate to punish the bad, and to reward the good.

Its rather to be wished than hoped, in this our corrupt estate, that all would
abstain from vice for love of virtue, and hope of reward, Meliores sunt quos
atrigit amor, sed plures quos corrigit timor.
and for good conscience rather than for fear of punishment: but so servile
and vicious is the nature of man, that it has need to be curbed and
restrained from evil, by threat and execution of correction and punishment:
and therefore punishments are provided, that evil ones might be taken out of
the way, Vt his tollantur mali si esse nocentes volinrint, aut emendentur si
per negligentiam aliquid admiserint Sen c. de ira lib. 1. L rispiciendum de
poenis. Nesp sl^a sitauitas conciomor, aut vtihor harmonia* quam seucritas cum
comitate co^iuncta. Plutarch. in Phocion.
if they will needs do harm, or may be amended if through neglect they did
amiss.

In proceeding to judgment against malefactors, mercy and justice must meet
together, clemency and severity must kiss each other. There must be a
merciful clemency, yet joined with justice, and a just severity, yet
moderated with equity, lest strict law prove flat injustice: neither is any
sweetness more seemly, or harmony more profitable, than is severity joined
with humanity. Judgments thus moderated, do please both God and man. --
Moderata place^t hemintque deoque.


The Stoickes assertion is not consonant to reason, that all sins are equal:
nor Dracoes bloody laws consonant to justice, that all crimes are to be
punished with death. there are degrees of sins, and of punishments: Spare must
be made even of the basest blood. Pareimonia debet esse etiam vilissimi
sanguinis. Senec. de clem: lib. 1.
Life is dear, death terrible, and the lives of men must be precious in their
eyes, who deal in matters of life and death. And a verdict of death must not
be brought in upon slight suspicions and uncertain proofs. It were better a
guilty person were causlesly absolved, then that the innocent should be
unjustly condemned, that is a sin, but this is impiety, a much more heinous,
and more grievous sin. Which I desire the Jurors would look unto, who, not
seldom, offend, and that grossly, in this kind, in bringing within the
compass of death, such as of right ought to be acquitted. In this case that
rule is safe and good: Placuit in omnibus rebus potiorem esse iustitiae
aequitatisque quam stricti iuris rationem. lib. 1. C. de iudicijs.
Its better to have respect to justice and equity than to strict law. Rashness
in condemning men is to be avoided: for he almost condemns willingly that does
it quickly. and too much severity must ever be abandoned, for he does punish
unjustly that punishes too much.

Yet for all this there must not be such clemency as does prejudice equity:
for so, sin shall abound, and if justice press not the unjust, then shall the
just be oppressed with injustice: and the harmless, help-lesse, and innocent
sheep shall be exposed to the rage of wolves and rauenors. Too much clemency
breeds impunitie, and causes liberty and licentiousnes in sin. In this case
the Judge must not be milder than the law: for wholesome severity, which common
reason does suggest, and public order exacteth, does excel the vain show of
clemency and mercy. There is both a punishing mercy, and a sparing cruelty.
Such clemency is but a merciless pity, as arms malefactors against the
innocent. He hurts the good that spares the bad. Bonis nocet qui malis parcit.
sos. Scalig. Non est inhumanit as sed potius su^^ma quaedam est hum^nitas, cum
malti paucorum animaduers^one saluantur.
and therefore its well concluded by Justinian in his Novel Constitutions: It
is not inhumanitie, but rather special humanity, when many are saved by the
punishment of a few. Judgment must pass with needful severity against
notorious and evident malefactors; as for treasons, poysonings, murders, and
the like heinous crimes; vt poena ad paucos, metus ad multos perveniat: That
punishment may fall on a few, fear on many. For some few must needs be
punished, that more may be terrified, and all may be amended, or restrained
from evil. This is the sentence of the Lord himself against a
falsewitnesse-bearer: If the witness be a false witness, and have testified
falsehood against his brother: Deutr. 19.16, 17, 18, 19, 20
then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother. So
shall thou put away the evil from among you; and those which remain shall
hear and fear, and from henceforth shall commit no such evil among you. And
thy eye shall not pity, but life shall go for life --. and the moral law does
eternally establish that the wilful murderer should die the death. Genesis 9.6.


I acknowledge indeed that famous Emperors have been much admired for clemency
and pity; Suet. Vesp.
as Titus Vespasian, who wept for just executions. and whereas the Emperors
themselves used then to judge of life and death, Tranquil, in Tito.
he was hardly drawn to give judgment at all, and utterly unwilling to
condemn any to death. Mauricius, who by his good will would not have so much
as a Traitor die. Euagr. l. 6. c. 1.
Augustus, in prudence second to none, yet being to examine a parricide, began
thus: ^an. Bod. de rep. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Certe patrem non occidisti: Surely thou have not slain thy father. In which
words he did not only instruct the guilty person what he should answer to the
Prince and Judge, but also in admirable humanity did pardon the parricide.
Theodosius, Socr. lib. 7. c. 22.
who was wont to wish that he could recall to life such as had wronged him.
Nero himself, otherways cruel, who being asked to subscribe to a sentence of
death, gave this answer, Vtinam liter as nescirem, I would I could not tell how
to write.

But be it granted that Clemency is a princely virtue (as the King of Bees is
without a sting) and Bounty another, Nihil est quod Imperatorem melius
commendat gentibus, quam Clementia. Antoninus ad Coniugem. Valcatius in vita
Cassij.
which winnes much love: for which cause Titus Vespasian was accounted the love
and delight of mankind: yet excess herein is no virtue but a vice, when it
hinders the current of needful execution of justice. And nothing is so
contrary to the office of a Judge as such mercy, when the Judge becomes more
mild than law in sparing the execution of notorious malefactors. Such impunitie
of gross offenses, is (as one says) a most certain argument of the perishing
estate of a Commonwealth. Punishments duly executed are the sinews of the
wealepublike. (...). Demosthenes.


True, indeed, in cases of difficulty there must be inclination to mercy. In
lesser offenses (once or seldom committed) mitigation of severity. Frequenter
qui peccant and lugent, veniam vix merentur: Such as often offend though they
mourn for their fault, yet scarce deserve pardon says Augustine.

And Christian compassion in severity of censure commiserating the misery of a
guilty person, beseemes a Christian Judge, who (when he pronounces the
sentence of death) may with Augustus, Seneca in lib. de Clementia.
ex imo pectore suspiria ducere; fetch deep sighs from the bottom of his
heart, and be more sorry for them, than they are for themselves: yet law must
have course, justice must be done, that evil may thereby be taken away, that
others that hear may fear, and do no more so presumptuously; and that the
land stand not before God guilty of blood: lest Gods sword be unsheathed, and
his hand strengthened to the revenging of so great and so sinful conniuencies,
when impunitie is permitted to bloody crying finnes. In few words to conclude
this point: As those Judges or Magistrates are not to be imitated, who in
acerbitie of punishments affect the opinion of severity: so neither those who
by too much facility seek love and affect the opinion of lenity. Both these
are faults in the extreme, swaruing from the office of a Judge, l. resp^^iendum
de poenis.
as ancient laws do teach and declare. Equity walks in the golden mean
between rigorous severity which punishes any too much; and cruel mercy
which spares a few to the hurt of many.

Application of the doctrine to sundry orders of Persons.
Now it remains that I should apply this charge, for justice, of God and the
King, given by Moses to the Judges of Israel, to our Honorable and Reverend
Judges here present: neither to our Reverend Judges alone, but to all those
ministers and instruments of justice (sundry persons of different quality) who
concur as assistants in the dispatch of this business. But because my speech
has already passed the bounds of the allotted time, I seem urged by
necessity to forbear the same, and to commend the particular application
thereof, to your private, devout and godly meditations. yet hoping your
wisdoms will redeem a little time, by cutting off some lesser occasions; I
will make bold to speak a little to the principal of those persons, whom this
charge does so nearly concern.

My Honorable Lords, you the reverend Judges of these Assizes, 1 To Judges.
I shall not need to speak much unto you: because the Lord in mercy has
bestowed upon you (to speak (as I am well persuaded) without flattery) a
great measure of wisdom and piety to deal in matters of judgment justly and
conscionably, and you have right well approved both to King and Country your
fidelity and sincerity in execution of your function; in so much as we bless
God for you, and pray to God to bless you, that you also may continue a
blessing unto us. Yet give me leave to put you in mind of this your charge
from God and the King: Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge
righteously. Your wisdom and long experience have taught you well, that that
of Chrysostom is very true: Ipsam causae inuenire iustitiam grande opus: Lib.
3. de Sacerdotali dignit. cap. 18.
inventam vero nulla iniquitate corrumpere labo riosissimum: To find out the
very justice of the cause is a great work. and therefore you had need to be
very circumspect therein. and when its once found out, then to corrupt it by no
iniquity is a most laborious thing, and therefore you had need to be very
upright therein.

And that I may join with the reverend Judges, those worthy magistrates, 2.
To Justices of Peace.
the Justices of Peace: you well understand what a fearful sin it is to turn
judgment into Wormwood, Amos. 5.7.
and to leave of righteousness in the Earth. Ames 6.12.
To turn judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into Wormwood.
Ier. 5.28.
To ouerpasse the deeds of the Wicked, to execute no judgment, no not the
judgment of the fatherless, to execute no judgment for the poor. What a
fearful sin were it for any of you to suffer through your neglect or
partiality, just judgment never to go forth: Heb. 1.4.
but the wicked to compass about the righteous, and wrong judgment to
proceed? These are fearful sins in Judges and magistrates, for which the
Lord did sharply threaten, and severely punish his own people.

Wherefore, I earnestly beseech you from the Lord, continue still, if you have
begun, to be men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, Exodus 18. Esaias. 1.17.
and hating covetousness. And seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge
the fatherless, and defend the widow, that you may safely prevent such
fearful sin and woeful misery.

Your calling is honorable, ordained of God, as a sovereign antidote against
evil, and promoter of good: Your persons are selected to this function by God.
The person you sustain is the Son of God, who has honored you with the
title and authority of God, who is present as chief President in the
assemblies of Gods. Your judgment which you give, is the judgment of God, and
he will auow, and defend both it and you, if it be just: he will renounce both
it and you, if by your wit, or will, it be unjust, as unbeseeming his Majesty,
who is justice it self.

3 To Counselors.
You the Advocates of justice, as Counselors and Pleaders; I beseech you to
endeavor in the fear of God to clear your selves of those two imputations
which sometimes are laid upon some of you: how justly upon any of you that are
present, not I, but God and your own consciences can tell you: namely first,
that there is no cause so bad, but by your shifts and pretenses you can make it
seem good: secondly, nor no cause so good, but by your unskillfulness or
unfaithfulness in handling, you can make it seem bad.

Turpe est defendere quod non mihi consliterit iustum esse. Gregor.
Consider (I beseech you) that it is a very foul thing resolutely to defend
what cause you know not to be just: but when you perceive and know it to be
unjust, then by querkes and devises to cloak and ouer-shadow falsehood, and
wrong, and (against conscience) to outface both truth and justice, in the face
of the Court, and Iudgement-Seat, before Gods Minister of Justice, yea, God
himself, it is a most horrible and fearful sin. This were to call good,
evil; and evil, good: Esa. 5.18.
to instifie the wicked for a reward, and to take away the righteousness of
the righteous from him: yea to draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin
as with cart-ropes. Against which many fearful woes are denounced. Remember
(I pray you) that worthy example of the learned and upright Lawyer Papinian,
who being desired by the Emperor Antoninus Caracalla, to defend his fratricide
of his brother Geta, answered boldly: Spartian.
Non tam facile est excusare fratricidiu^ quam facere. Its not so easy to
defend fratricide, as to do it. And he would rather dye, tha^ undertake the
defense of an unjust and unrighteous cause.

And if you have taken on you the defense of a good cause, do not by your
ignorance ouer-throw it, or by your unfaithfulness betray it, and make your
poor client pay full dearly for your oversight in forms of prosecution.

But be advertised (I pray you) by virtue of this charge, to hear and judge
righteously. Inform your selves thoroughly in the state of the cause, and deal
faithfully with your Client in relating what you think of the equity of the
cause, and issue of the controversy. And if it be bad, let it not by any your
means be prosecuted with cost, lost with infamy, or won by iniquity, and
flat injustice.

If good, let it not want good success, by your neglect or oversight, or want
of countenance and fidelity in pleading: or become more costly, by your
procrastinations. But use your best endeavor, that right may be found with
moderate expenses: that law may prove a special and speedy remedy of wrongs,
and not a trap or engine to catch and ensnare men; as men of all sorts do
commonly complain. Then though your poor Client do not enrich you with his
fees, yet shall you be no loosers when you have made up your reckonings; but
what is wanting in the poor Clients small fees, shall God himself recompense
in your great accounts, and bestow upon you not a temporal garland, but an
eternal crown of glory for your virtue and well-doing to the people of God.
(...).


4. To Witnesses.
You Witnesses, who shall for true testimony to the truth, take a solemn oath
of God and the King, and calling upon the glorious name of God, vow damnation
to your souls, if you speak not truth. Know that a fearful curse is gone out
from the Lord, upon all such as shall so solemnly take his glorious name in
vain.

A false Swearer is guilty two ways, Ch^^soss. in mat 5. and est. 22. q 5.
cau. quicunque.
both because he takes Gods name in vain, and because he takes his neighbor
by deceit: yea a false witness is obnoxious, and offends against God, whom he
contemns; the Judge, whom he seduceth; the party, whom he wrongeth by his
false testimony; yea, to his family, which he hurts; and to his own Soul,
which he condemns.

O be not (I beseech you) so traiterous to God, so treacherous to the Judge, so
injurious to your brethren, so hurtful to your posterity, so desperately
prodigal of the blood of your own souls, as having laid them to God for
pawnes of truth, you will wittingly, and willingly, swear, and forswear,
against God and truth, King and Judge, neighbor and family, and your own
selves, as lewd, and godless, and graceless sons of Belial.

But being called hither by God and the King, to this service of your Country
(all you that have taken or are to take an oath) swear in truth, Ier. 4.22.
in judgment, and righteousness. These three, if they be wanting, its not so
much an oath as a perjurie. Discharge your oaths unto the Lord. Be not so
silly as not to conceive the truth: nor so forgetful as not to remember truth:
nor so subtle as to deceive both others and your selves by false
witnesse-bearing against the truth. Know what you testify: testify what you
know. The whole truth, and nothing but the truth. The whole truth: be not
afraid of the face of any great man, who may sit on your skirts for speaking
the truth. Nothing but the truth: do not accept men's persons in judgment. Be
not corrupted with friendship, nor suborned with reward. Shake off vain fear,
cast off vain hope. Witness for small as well as for great: for Stranger
as well as for brother: give a plain testimony to truth and verity: So shall
you have the testimony of honesty for your credit among men: The testimony
of good conscience for comfort in your selves: and testimony from Christ at
the day of the great Assise, as fit to inhabit in his holy mountain for ever.

5. To Questmen, and Jurors.
The charge of God and the King to all Quest-men, and Jurors, is the same in
effect with that of the Witnesses, that they hear and give verdicts
righteously, discharging their oaths unto the Lord.

Far be it from you (my brethren) to be such as some common Jurors are, of
some, said to be; so quick of conceit, as that they know the case before they
hear it, and so ready of resolution, that they know which way their verdict
shall go, as soon as they know the party whom they would pleasure or please,
to be the plaintiff, or the defendant, before the cause be opened, or
evidence produced. But as the Law does presume you to be Gentlemen of choice
for wisdom and integrity, and yeomen of good note for truth and honesty,
experienced in Lawcourses, and cases to be tried: so be diligent in sifting
and examming all proofs and evidences, ready to conceive and acknowledge
apparent equity, and conscionable in bringing in an approved verdict, not
partial nor unequal in hope of reward, or for fear of danger: for favor to
your friends, or envy to your adversaries: but such as may be allowed of God
and men, to your credit and comfort, and the public good.

Lastly, you, my brethren, the body of the Country, 6. To the body of the
Country.
who seek in these places of judgment, the face the Judge, to have your
causes tried in matters of controversy; or else are brought hither to be
judged in matters of crime. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord. Whatsoever you would that men should do unto
you, even so do ye to them.

For matter of crime, 1. Pet. 2.17. Psalm. 34.13. 1. Pet. 3.11.
take those exhortations: Fear God: honor the King: Eschew evil, and do
good: Practice piety toward God, equity toward men: Live holily as good
Christians in a Christian Church: live blamelessely as good subjects in a
Christian Commonwealth. Avoid those capital crimes, and shameful courses,
which bring men to censure before these judgment seats. And, to speak
particularly, Romans 13.3.
If thou will not be afraid of the power of the magistrate, do that which is
good, and thou shall have praise of the same, whosoever thou art. But if thou
do evil, then be afraid; for he bears not the sword in vain: for he is
the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him which does evil. Art
thou then a traitor to the King or Commonwealth, a wilful murderer or
poysoner of thy brother: Then the sword of justice must be sheathed in thy
blood, that evil may be taken away: that the land be not guilty of thy foul
offense: that others may hear and fear: that sin may be punished in thee,
and prevented in other that hear or see thee.

If thou receive censure for some smaller offense, learn by this thy censure
to amend thy life, lest a worse thing hereafter befall thee; for thy iterating
of thy sin, will increase thy punishment.

In case of controversy, I beseech you all to observe these rules: seek
peace, and follow after it: follow peace with all men. Defraud not one another.
Public interest vt lites iniustae atque inanes coerceantur; ne Magistratus
querelis atque causis nihil^ occupetur, neue ciues temere iuter se rixentur,
pacemque turbent. L. 21. ff. si certum petatur.
And if controversies arise, use all good means for the speedy compounding of
them, that the Iudgement-seat be not troubled with every trifling brawle, and
needless suite.

And whereas none are more ready than you to cry out of Lawyers, Atturneys,
and such men, as unconscionable in perverting of justice, as unreasonable
extortioners, and extorters of fees, as defrauders and vndoers of the
Commonweal: scraping to themselves the fat of the land etc. Take heed that
the fault and cause of these evils, do not first issue and spring out from
your selves; from your peevish and wrongful and reuengefull dispositions.
Whosoever thou art therefore that complaynest of others, take heed lest the
fault be found in thy self. Prosecute no bad cause, of hatred to hurt another,
but only good causes, and that of necessity to relieve thy self. Pack no
Iuries. Suborne no witnesses. Bribe no Judges, Lawyers, nor ministers of
justice: use no calumnies, forgeries, or unjust protractions, or vn-warrantable
practices for the effecting of thy purposes in unlawful proceedings: for if it
fall out thou be justly cast in thy bad cause, then shall thou bear an heavy
burden of just punishment for thy wilful prosecution of thy unrighteous suit.
Or if by force or fraud thou prevail against equity, then (which is worse)
thou burdenest thy self with the fearful guilt of double iniquity. And
though thou get the day in the place of judgment on earth; yet shall thou
loose the day at Gods Iudgement-seat in Heaven.

Application to all jointly.
And now at length to grow to a final conclusion of all; these things being so;
as Iehosaphat that most worthy servant of God did charge those Judges whom he
had made: so do I a poor Minister of Christ, in the name of the Lord charge
you all that have the least finger in matters of justice (as Reverend Judges,
worthy Justices, Counselors, Jurors, witnesses, and the rest) Take heed what
ye do: ^. Chron. 19.6.7.
for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment.
Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it: for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts. And as Moses to these Judges of Israel in this place: Hear the
causes between your brethren and judge righteously between every man and his
brother, and the stranger that is with him. Ye shall not respect persons in
judgment; but you shall hear the small as well as the great. you shall not be
afraid of the face of man: V. and last point. Of reservation of judgment.
for the judgment is Gods.

Now I should proceed to the case of reservation: And if the cause be too hard
for you bring it unto me, and I will hear of it. But of this I say no more but
this. That whereas these causes and matters of judgment are far too great for
any of us, who of our selves cannot think a good thought: Therefore let us
appeal to God, and to his Throne of grace for his assistance and blessing in
these weighty affairs of Judgment.

O blessed Lord God, Father of mercies, and God of all grace, grant (we humbly
entreat thee) to our Judges and Magistrates, heavenly wisdom, christian
courage, godly fear, uncorrupted integrity in hearing and judging: to all the
ministers and instruments of justice and equity, vprightnes and good
conscience in prosecuting and promoting of actions and causes: to all the
people loving affections and peaceable dispositions one toward another,
thankfulness unto thee for this thine ordinance of judgment, and dutiful
obedience to the rules of piety, justice, and equity: that so vice may be
punished, virtue encouraged: injustice may be removed, equity maintained: The
commonwealth may be prospered, the Church enlarged; our poor souls may be
saved, and thy great name glorified, in the manifestation of thine abundant
mercy in our felicity: and that for the merits of thine only Son, and our
only Savior Jesus Christ, the righteous Judge of quick and dead; to whom
with Thee, O Father, and with thy Holie-Spirit, three glorious Persons, but one
only true and everliving God, be ascribed of us, and of thy whole Church, all
Honor, Glory, Praise, Power, Majesty, Dominion, and Thanksgiving, from
this time forth for euer-more: Amen.

All glory be to GOD.
FINIS.

