A SERMON OF THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD.

Preached at Paul's Cross, the 25. of October. 1607.

By JOHN PELLING Bacchalaur of Divinity.

PROVER. 4.13. Take hold of instruction and leave not: for she is thy life.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Nathaniell Butter, dwelling at the sign
of the Pide Bull near S. Austins gate. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND RELIGIOUS LORD, THE LORD EDWARD SEIMAVR EARL OF
Hertford, and to the right Honorable and virtuous Lady, the Lady Frauncis,
Countess of Hertford, Gods abundant graces and blessings, for this life and
for the life to come.
RJght Honorable, my singular good Lord and Lady; your Honors both having from
time to time exceedingly comforted, and encouraged me in my labors of this
kind, J rest assured, you will gladly accept and protect to your utmost, this
sermon of mine published, my good Lord, at your command. Whereas some of good
sort, and judgment, moved your Lordship to put me to it, for a further good to
Gods Church; and whereas also your Lordship out of your honorable and
religious care, procured the right reverend father in God, the Lord Bishop of
London, my especial good Lord, to require it of me; and seeing hereupon his
Lordship has vouchsafed to peruse it, and by his authority has allowed it;
having duly waighed all this, J profess that I account, God has had a
directing and a working hand in all, and have therefore obeyed, leaving all
excuses, which I might probably have made: even so Gods will be done. When a
public good in a man's calling, is likely to be effected, excuses for private
respects, in my conscience have no place.

Had I but imagined in time, that it should have come to this at length, by
Gods help it had been better, and yet his goodness it is, that it is no
worse: it is truth, and it is needful, that J dare and do avouch for my part:
to take it well, and to use it well, may make it good and profitable, for your
Honors first, and so for others, to whom God shall give opportunity and grace.

J have been earnestly moved to set it out as I preached it; of the words (I
am sure) I have mist very few, of the matter nothing.

Your Honors are well known to to pray together, to hear sermons together,
to receive the communion the blessed body and blood of Christ Jesus, and that
in your public Parish Church together; God grant more of your state, for
examples sake, for their own souls sake, and for Gods glory sake, to do the
like. If together also your Honors will be pleased, sometimes to read and
confer seriously of this divine matter, here consecrated to your Sovereign
good, let me be blamed, and most severely censured, if you find cause, to
repent your well bestowing time, and pains this way.

The Lord God of mercies fill your noble hearts with heavenly graces, and power
upon both your Honors, and all yours his richest blessings, for his dear
son Christ Jesus his sake. London the 25 of November. 1607.

Your honors most bounden and devoted chaplain, JOHN PELLING.

1. PETER. 5.7. Cast all your care on him, for he cares for you.


BEing to provide me for this time and place (right honorable, right
worshipful, and well-beloved in our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus) I have with
Gods direction (I trust) settled upon these words for my Text, which I have here
read unto you. I mean by Gods help, not to idle out any time in handling
them, your faithfulness in hearing on your part, may with Gods blessing prove
to you well worth the while. Observe therefore I pray you, the words, the
doctrine, and the use. The words importe a commandment, and a reason to
induce men to obey it. The doctrine, is the doctrine of Gods providence, which
all that talk of, understand not the truth, nor the depth of. The use is so
manifold, and profitable, that any good man may be diverse ways bettered by
it; either he may be informed of that he knew not, or be resolved in that he
doubted of, or be put in mind of that he remembered not, or be persuaded to
that he affected not, or be comforted in his sorrows, or be moderated in his
joys, or be encouraged in his well-doing, or be deterred from evil: some, all
these ways, some, by more then these may be singularly benefited, God in all
duly served, and his name glorified.

The words importing the commandment are, Cast all your care on him; the words
inciting men to obey it, are these, For he cares for you. Next before my text
we read, Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt
you in due time, and so comes in my text, Cast all your care on him, it must be
meant, on God, for he, that is God, cares, that is provides, for you, for you
most especially, and most beneficiallie, that cast all your care on him.

For men to cast all their care on God, presupposes men's taking some care for
themselves, and implies that men should not ouercharge themselves with care,
nor build upon their own, but upon the care that God has of them, who is
better able to provide for them, then they can for themselves. So that to care,
and to care moderately, and to account it a man's best providence, to depend
most upon Gods providence, is that which we are here commanded, and incited
unto.

Since no man can care, in that measure or manner, nor rely in all his courses
upon Gods care, Gods providence as he ought, either not knowing, or not duly
considering what Gods providence is, we will by his assistance, plainly and
truly deliver the doctrine, touching that great matter: plainly that it may
be understood, truly, that it may be believed, and so by Gods grace also well
applied and used.

In opening this doctrine, I must show first what Gods providence is, 2. what
things are subject unto it, 3. Gods manner of working by it. In the writings of
the godly learned, we find it thus described, Prouidentia Dei, est actio Dei
externa and temporalis, qua omnia et singula quae sunt, conseruat, et quae
fiunt omnia and singula disponit ad finem quem ipse determinauit, secundum
libertatem voluntatis suae, idque vt in omnibus et singulis glorificetur. The
providence of GOD is an outward and a temporary action of God, by which he
does preserve all things that are, universal and singular, and does dispose of
all things general and particular, that are done, and does determine the end of
them, according to the liberty of his own will, and that to this end that in
all things general and particular he may be glorified. And thus, Prouidentia
Dei est eternum, et immutabile decretum Dei, de rebus omnibus et singulis, ad
suos certos vsus et fines perducendis, secundum illum ordinem quem ipse
praefiniuit ad suam gloriam. Gods providence is an eternal and an immutable
decree of God, touching all things whatsoever, universal and singular, to bring
them to their certain uses and ends, according to that order which God himself
has appointed to his own glory.

That these descriptions of the providence of God have some diversity in them,
they must not be thought absurd; and though they have some sembla^ce of
opposition, they must not be thought false: for well looked into they give light
one to the other, and well understood they nothing cross, but every way
strengthen each the other. The diversity that seems is rather in words then
in matter, the one peradventure expressing more then the other, but both the
truth. The opposition that seems, is that Gods providence in the former
description, is said to be an action of God, an outward action, and temporary;
in the latter, that it is called an eternal and an immutable decree of God.
How can it be an action of God, and a decree too, how temporary and yet
eternal and immutable?

There are to be considered in the providence of God, three degrees,
praescientia rerum omnium, voluntas rem quamlibet ad suum finem perducendi, et
actualis eiusdem voluntatis exequutio. God his foreknowledge of all things
whatsoever, Gods will, to bring every thing to its certain end, and the
actual exequution of that his will. The two former of these his foreknowledge,
and his will importe his decree, and that in God is eternal, and immutable:
the latter the exequution of his decree, and that is outward and temporary.
Now some handling the providence of God, define it as it is a decree of God,
some as it is his exequution of the same decree. They that handle it as Gods
decree, must needs set down those properties, which do necessarily accompany
his decrees, eternity, and immutabilitie: they that handle it as it is the
exequution of the same decree, must needs set it down as it is an action, and
that temporary, yet both agreeing: for they that expressly handle the action,
presuppose the decree, and they that expressly handle the decree, imply the
action: I, to make my treatise the more full, express both.

For a sum of all, to show what Gods providence is, consider we yet, four
more particular degrees, which are, first Creatio rerum, the second Conseruatio
rerum, the third Gubernatio rerum, the fourth Ordinatio rerum, the creation or
making of things, the conservation or maintenance of things, the
uncontrollable command and government of things, the orderly setting and
appointing unto all things their several and certain ends. All these in
order, are Gods providence, his decree eternal for all, and according to the
same decree his actual exequuting all in time. Thus much as briefly and as
plainly as I can possibly, to show truly, and fully what all true christians
are to take Gods providence to be. Next what things are, they that are subject
unto it?

They are all mankind; elect and reprobate, all men's actions, words and
thoughts, good and bad: all courses men take, all matters men take in hand, and
all their events, prosperous or cross: all creatures whatsoever, great and
small, all in all universal, special and particular, are subject unto Gods
providence they are according to his eternal, and immutable decree, in time
begun, continued, guided, and brought to their ends, to his glory.

Let us take a view of David's 104. Psalm, there shall we find what things are
within the view of Gods providence, that in wisdom, that is, in his
providence, God made, maintained, governed and ordained to set uses and ends,
the heavens spread like a curtain, and light to deck all as with a glorious
garment. The Moon to keep her seasons, the Sun to rise, and to know his
going down, the clouds carried about like chariots, and the winds as with
wings, his Angels ministering spirits, the foundations of the earth immovable,
the deep covered, the waters standing sometimes, and sometimes flying at his
rebuke; The voice of his thunder to terrify, the hills to go up to, the valleys
to go down to, the springs sent into the rivers, and the rivers to run among
the hills, For the beasts of the field to drink and quench their thirst. Grass
brought forth for cattle, and green herb for the service of men, bread to
strengthen, wine to glad man's heart, and oil to make him a cheerful
countenance, the day for him to labor in, and the night for him to rest in,
the souls to inhabit the air, and to sing among the branches; the sappie
trees, the tall Cedars for birds to rest in, the fur trees for the Storke,
goats to have refuge on hills, and to Conies in stony rocks; the Lions one
while to roar after their pray, and seek their meat at God, another while to
get them away together, and to lay them down in their dens. The great and wide
sea also with the creeping things therein innumerable both small and great: God
appointed the ships to pass them, and the Leuiathan, the greatest fishes as
Whales, and the like to make their pastime in them. O Lord (says David)haw
manifold are thy works, in wisdom, that is in thy providence, thou have made
them all, they all wait on thee, that is, depend on thy providence, things
that need meat, to have it in due season, at the opening of thy hand, and thy
filling them with good. Thus does the glorious Majesty of the Lord endure:
Thus does the Lord rejoice in his works, in the works of his providence,
beginning, maintaining, governing them, and bringing them, to their due and
several ends. Touching man himself more particularly says S. Paul, Act. 17.
In him, that is in God, we live, and move, and hane our being, more
particularly yet, the Prophet David, as of himself, so of every good man
living, in his 139. Psalm. O Lord thou have searched me out and hnowne me, thou
know my down sitting and my vprising, thou understand my thoughts long
before, thou art about my path, and about my bed, and spiest out all my ways:
For lo there is not a word in my tongue but thou O Lord know it altogether,
thou have fashioned me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me, my
reins are thine, thou have covered me in my mothers womb. I am fearfully, and
wonderfully made, my bones are not hid from thee, though I be made secretly,
thine eyes did see my substance, yet being imperfect, and in thy book, that
is, in the book of thy providence, were all my members written, which day by
day were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them, that is, none of them
perfect. Whether then shall I go from thy presence? If clime up into heaven
thou art there, If I go down into hell thou art there also, If I take the
wings of the morning and remain in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there
also shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me, If I say
peradventure the darkness shall cover me, then shall my night be turned to day,
the darkness is no darkness with thee, but the night is as clear as the day,
the darkness and light to thee are both alike. All this is true of good men,
so is it of bad men too. King Solomon in the 15 of his Proverbs teaches, that
the eyes of the Lord in every place behold the evil and the good. God is not
properly said to have eyes but by an (...), after the manner of men. His eyes
are taken for his all-viewing providence, in every place, Court, City and
Country, public and private, God beholds and observes the evil and the
good, men and women, actions and intents, whatsoever.

Our Savior himself in the 5 of Matt. says expressly, that God makes the Sun
to arise upon the evil and upon the good, and sends rain upon the just and
the unjust.

I will conclude this point with an observation of S. Chrysostom, Vt nauis
sine gubernatore. As a ship without a governor, is for no service. And as
another notes well, Vt corpus sine anima, as a body without a soul can do
nothing: Sic mundus, so the world could never be created as it was, nor
continue as it does, and has done, nor be governed as it is, and has been,
nor come to the appointed end it shall it self, and all things therein, Sine
Dei prouidentia, without the providence of God. God works all things,
according to the Council of his will: amongst all the rest, all things
concerning all men, and so us here from the highest to the lowest. Thus much of
those things which are subject to Gods providence.

Now to the third point, the manner how God works in his providence, which we
are to know and acknowledge to be Vniuersaliter, specialiter, and
particulariter, not generally only, but particularly too: secondly Immediate
and mediate, not immediately always by himself alone, but by means also many
times, when it pleases him: thirdly, Immutabiliter non mutabiliter, so
necessarily, that it can be no otherwise then he will, and he does nothing
contingently: fourth and lastly, Been non male, he works in every thing well,
in nothing ill.

Not generally only, but particularly also, God had a work with Jonas, when he
charged him to go to Niniuie, when Jonas was shifting and shipped to go another
way, God sets a tempest to work at sea against that ship, God cast the lot
upon Jonas to be cast out, God provided a Whale to receive Jonas, and to set
him safe on shore. Again, God charged him for Niniuie, guided him thither,
provided for him there. Gods hand in his providence, working particularly, is
most evidently seen in this story.

The like on Herod eaten up with worms for his pride; and on Pharaoh plagued,
and confounded for his obstinacy and hardness of heart. The like on Job,
strangely afflicted for his trial, and more strangely crowned for his
patience. The like on many other whom books do report, some notable
particulars of; the like no doubt, on all men living, though men use to observe
nothing but strange matters that befall them; but God is as particular in his
ordinary works amongst us, as in his extraordinary; ordinary and
extraordinary to him are both alike.

The next point is that God works in his providence immediate without means*
yea against means, and sometimes mediate by means. Without means, God
created the world of nothing, he preserved Moses forty days on the Mount
without food, and the Israelites forty ycares in the wilderness without
change of apparel. In tempests at sea many times, when men look every hour
to be cast away; In extremity of sickness, when Physicians and all give a man
off; In dangerous childbirths, when women be at their wits end; in many
desperate extremities of this life, when we see no means of help in the
world, it is found diverse times, that GOD comes in with his immediate
helping hand and turns tempestuous storms to fair weather, deadly sickness
to safe recovery, most sorrowful travels to joyful deliueries, the bitterest
iarres amongst friends, to sweet contentment, the greatest neglect and foulest
disgraces (vnde erued especially) into highest account, and dearest savor.

The Kings heart says Solomon in the 21. of the Proverbs is in the hands of the
Lord as the rivers of waters, and he turns it whither soener it pleases him.
As Kings hearts, so all men's else. Our God (says David) is in heaven, and has
done whatsoever pleases him: as he has done, so does he still, and will do,
howsoever it pleases him, with means, or without means, or against means,
means or no means to God, are both alike; only as in his providence he has
disposed how things shall be brought to pass, so it must be. That he works
against means, is the strangest, but it is as true as the rest. In the 14 of
Exodus we read that the sea divided for Moses and the Israelites. In the 2. of
Kings. 2. That the river of Jordan divided for Elijah, and Elisha. in the 10.
of Iosuah, That the sun stood still for Iosuah. In the 3. of Daniel, that the
fire would not burn Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego. In the 6. of Daniel, that
the hungry Lions would not touch Daniel. In the 12 of the Acts, that neither
Iron chains, nor an Iron gate could hold Peter. In the 28. of the Acts, that a
venomous viper could do Paul no harm. If all the wicked of all the nations
in the world, should band themselves against the Lord, and against his
anointed, our Prince, his prophets, his servants, God can dash them all, as it
pleases the Lord, so only come things to pass, blessed be the name of the
Lord.

Now it follows to be showed, that God works by means, which I cannot
declare better, then by showing what means he uses in his works: as first
his Angels, that sometimes appear visibly to men, as they did to Jacob in the
32 of Genesis, when he was in his journey, he calls them the host of God;
sometimes not seen at first but afterward, as in the 2 of Kings. 6. Chap. the
Prophet Elishas man at his Masters petition to God, had his eyes opened, that
he saw the mountains covered with horses and Chariets of fire, which were
Angels sent for the Prophets, and Gods peoples defense, against the mighty
host of the Aramites; sometimes, and most commonly not seen at all to men,
yet always in a readiness for Gods service, and his childrens preservation, as
in the 18. of Matt I say unto you (says our Savior Christ) that their Angels
always behold the face of my father which is in heaven.

As it was with those little ones Christ there speaks of, so is it with ail
Gods children. God keeps angels to wait upon them, though we have no
proof for every one, one: yet have we for that which is as good or better.
They are all, always in such a readiness, at Gods commandment for man's good,
that David says in his 34 Ps. They always pitch round about them that fear
the Lord, to deliver them. and the holy ghost in the 1. to the Hebrews
teaches, that they are all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for
their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation.

When they are seen, they have some shape given them for the time; that they
are not seen, it is for that they are spirits, which are invisible to men;
seen to men or unseen, God sees them, and uses them, and they are his
mighty means to preserve and to destroy: The bad Angels and all, God uses to
punish sinners, and for the trial sometimes of the best men, as of Ioh.

Besides Angels ministering spirits, God has the heavenly bodies with their
light, motion and iufluence, which they have all of God to work under him, in
the world, as in his Providence he has appointed. Moses in the 1. of Genesis,
and David in the 136 Psalm. teach us, that God made the Sun to rule the day,
the moon and the stars to govern the night. God himself in the 38 of Ioh,
testifies of a set course of the heavens, and of a pourefull rule of theirs
over the earth; of the Pleiades and their sweet influence, the stars (as
learned and godly men take it) which bring in the spring time. Of Orion and the
loosing of his bands, a star which brings in winter, of Mazoroth and their
times, the 12 signs: of guiding Arcturus and his sons, which are likewise
noted to signify the north star, and those thereabout.

In the 9. of Ioh, we read of Gods countermanding those great Rulers of the
world, the sun to rise or not, and of God his closing up the stars as under
a signet

Besides the heavens, God has other his creatures too, as his effectual
means to the maintenance, government and ordering of the whole. In the 2. of
Hosea, God says, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, and
the earth shall hear the corn, the wine and the oil, and they shall hear
Israel. That is, God is the fountain of all excellency, of power and virtue
to the heavens: the heavens shed down their influences into the earth, the
earth gives nourishment to the corn, juice to the wine, fatness to the oil,
all these are to enable and stir up man with gladness, and cheerefunesse, to
serve under God in his providence, as he has appointed.

How men are this way, God his means may appear by a view of men's states in
this land, public and private, Their government and their maintenance.

In public, the king in his kingdoms is immediately under God, over the
Church and common wealth, he exercises his sovereign government assisted by
his Council. Under the King, over the Church, are the Arch bishops, and
Bishops, and the rest of his Majesty's ecclesiastical governors.

The Common wealth is to be considered as it is in peace, or as it may have
wars. In wars are noble men especially to be generals, men of worth only to
be captains, commanders, and officers. In peace, Cities and great Towns are
ordinarily governed by their Majors, Aldermen, and others of the better sort;
Countries abroad by the Peers of the Land, the Judges of the land, the
Justices, and inferior officers under them.

Private houses, are either for learning, or for houskeeping. In societies of
learned men, the heads and ancients, are to govern the younger. In those that
ave for houskeeping, and hospitality, are the husband and the wife to rule
their farnilie, children and servants. In great men's houses, chief officers in
their places, are to command the rest of the household. I hus for government.

Now for maintenance; the King is to have it royally of his subjects, the
Landlord rightfully of his tenants, the Churchmen liberally by the Church
livings, the Lawyers and Physicians duly by their fees, the Soldier is to
live on his pay, the Merchant by his traffic, the husbandman by his flock
and tillage, the crafts man by his hands, the servant by his wages, the poor
and impotent, by alms and benevolence. I cannot remember all, but you may see
by these, how God does use men, his means, for government, and maintenance one
of another.

The next note is that God works immutably: first God is immurable himself,
the Holy ghost teaches it us in the 1. of James, With God is no variableness
nor shadow by turning. In his essence he is immutable, Malachi 3. I am the Lord
I change not. In his decrees, the 19. of the Proverbs, The Counsil of the Lord
shall stand. In the execution of his decrees Esai 14. The Lord of hosts has
sworn, saying, Surely like as I have purposed so shall it come to pass. That
nothing shall prevent him, or prevail against him, the 27. of the same chap.
The Lord of hosts has determined it, and who shall dis mull it and his hand is
stretched out and who shall turn it away. That this holds not in some places
only but in all, again the same Prophet at the 26. verse of the same 14.
chapter: This is the counsil that is consulted upon the whole world, and this
is the hand stretched out over all the nations.

Now notwithstanding all this, that we see the Sun does rise and set, the
Moon does wax and wane, the sea does ebb and flow, the year has winter and
summer, that weather proves fair and foul, grass green and withered,
flowers fresh and fading, fruits ripe and rotten, that men in their minds,
prone off and on; in their bodies, sick and healthie; in their states, rich
and poor; in years, young and old; All these changes, and all else, argue not,
that in God the creator there is mutatio voluntatis, but that God does velle
mutationem in creatura, God wills the change in the creature. The effects may be
diverse, yea contrary though the cause be one. The cause of all effects is
God, in him there is no mutabilitie, though multiplicitie of power, God
determines second causes. So that in respect of God, there is no casualtie of
effects, though there be variety. Whatsoever God ordains in respect of God
is necessarily that, that it is; it can be no otherwise. God works immutably
in his providence.

The last note touching the manner of Gods working in his providence is, that
he does all things well, nothing ill. God commands in 1. Cor. 14. That in his
house which is his Church, All things be done honestly and by order. As in the
Church, so will God have it in the common wealth too, and as in public states,
even so in private houses also. In the same chap. 33. ver. God is said not to be
the author of Confusion. In the 9. to the Romans there is a question asked,
whether there be vnrighteoushes with God, the answer is in the same place, God
forbid. It is true, that is in the 11. of Wisdom, God has ordered all things
in measure, number and weight. And it is worthy to be noted which is in the 1.
of Genesis and so often repeated at the Creation. That God saw that it was good,
and when man was made and all, that God saw all that he had made, and lo it
was very good; as it was with his works of Creation then, so is it, and so
has it been for his preserving and governing of things since, and so will it
be for his bringing things to their set ends always. When God looks upon all
the works of his providence, lo they are all good; howsoever by man's
degenerating, there is malignitie in the world, yet Gods work in all (as he
has a work in all) be things never so many and manfold, is good.

If there were defect, disorder, deformity, or iniquity in any of Gods
works, his words in the 104 Psalm. touching this matter could not be true,
that The glorious Majesty of GOD shall endure for ever, the Lord shall rejoice
in his works.

But somethings are so small and vile, that they seem unworthy Gods gteatnesse
and excellency: vt vermiculi, pulices, culices, worms,, fleas and gnats; some
things seem for no use, no end, as snow, hail, and rain into the sea, some
things are so unseasonable and excessive, that they rather do hurt then good,
as glutts of wette in seed time, or harvest, and scorching heat, and dries
when grass should spring and grow.

Some things are so violent, and inordinat, that they seem deadly mischievous,
as fire, sword, famine, pestilence, shipwracks, inundations; some strange,
improbable, against all reason, preposterous, as wicked men to flourish, and
insolently to bear sway, good men to go to wrack, and wrongfully to be kept
down.

Some so dolorous, so beyond all measure miserable, that thousands seem to
have just cause to with the world rather had never been, then one thing should
have befallen, that if it had pleased GOD, might easily not have bin; viz.
Adams fall. What good has man, what rejoicing, what glory has God by any of
these, especially the last? That God had his hand in all these we cannot deny:
but let us take heed, we be not so weak, or so hardy, for our lines so much
as in a thought to tax GOD in his providence for doing any thing amiss in all
the world.

For their satisfaction that are willing to learn, we will by Gods help give
answers to the doubts before cast, and such answers, as well taken, and well
applied, may give resolution to any doubt of this kind that can be moved.
Where David begins his 148. Psalm. with O praise the Lord of heaven, praise
him in the height. I pray you note, that he goes on, reckoning up not only
the holiest, the likeliest, and the most glorious creatures, in heaven and
earth, but even the very unlikeliest that a man could imagine, the dragons
that seem and are mischievous; all depths, for all that some of them seem and
are to us bottomless; fire for all it is felt merciles; bail, snow and
vapors, for all they seem superfluous; wind and storms for all they are
tumultuous; the very beasts and cattle, for all they are unreasonable; the
creeping worm, for all it so contemptible; these all fulfill his word, that
is, do that in their kind, which God by his secret operation inableth, and
directs them unto: This, men ought to know and acknowledge, and not to be
ignorantly, nor obstinatlie contentious.

How can these things praise the Lord? Quum ipsorum consideratione laudatur
Deus, ipsa laudant Deum. When by man's due consideration of these things, God
is praised, then do these things praise the Lord: Vos considerantes dracones,
when you consider the drag^os, take good notice of him that made the dragons,
and when you do wonder at the dragons, and at the greatness of God that
makes the dragons, then do the dragons out of your mouths, praise the Lord.

Quis disposuit membra pulicis et culicis? who has disposed in order the
parts or limbs of the flea and gnar, they have their proportion, they have
their life, their motion, they fly death, they love life, they seek after that
they delight in, they shun and they avoid, that which troubles them, they
have sense, they are quick and active in a motion that is kind unto them, Quis
disposuit ista, quis fecit ista? expauescis in minimis? lauda magnum. who has
made, who has ordered these? art thou at thy wits end considering these little
creatures? O give praise to the almighty Creator, Quifecit Angelum in coelo,
fecit vermiculum in terra: he that made the Angel in heaven, made the little
worm on the earth: did he make the Angels to creep upon the slymie ground, or
the worms to be glorious in the highest heavens? Distribuit sedibus
habitatores, he has rightly distributed to inhabitants their dwellings,
eternal habitations to immortal creatures, to corruptible creatures,
corruptible places. Totum attend, totum lauda. Consider all the order of Gods
works, thou shall see cause enough to praise God for all. All this most
excellently has S. Augustine, upon the 148. Psalm. Again the same godly and
learned father, Quare in mare pluit, why raines it into the sea? Quasi non sint
etc. as though there be not (says he) Gods creatures fishes there which are
refreshed and cherished with the rain water. At quare pisci pluit, et mihi nou
pluit aliquando? why does it rain to cherish the fish, when man lacks rain
sometimes? vt cogites that thou may think, thou art in the world as in a
desert, in a journey, not at home; Vt amarescat tibi haec vita, that this
present life may grow distasteful unto thee, that thou may be desirous of the
life to come; or else that thou being a sinner may be for thine amendment
well corrected.

But why do lightning and Thunder beat upon the mountains to no purpose, and
not strike down the thief that robs there? that were some justice;
peradventure God seeks the conversion of that thief. Even thou thy self
sometimes (says that good father) when thou schoolest thy child, do beat
the ground to make him afraid; but sometimes God strikes the true man and lets
the thief go; what then? vndecunque mors pio bona est, howsoever a good man
comes by his end, he dies well. And thou know if the wicked man repent not,
he is reserved for other manner of punishments in an other world, and thou
little know the shame and torments which peradventure he shall abide before
he goes out of this.

Quicguid ergo accoidit, whatsoever therefore happens otherwise then we would
have it, know, that it is not otherwise then God would have it. It is according
to his providence, his order; and though we understand not why things are made,
why this or that is thus, and thus done, or disposed, let us attribute thus
much to the providence of God, that it is not done without cause, nor without
good cause; so shall we not blaspheme.

The conclusion is, Quum ceperimus disputare, when we begin to make dispute
about the works of God, why this is, and why that, he should not have done
this, or that was ill done, vbi est laus dei, perdisti Halleluiah, where is thy
praising the Lord, thou have lost thy Hallettuah, thy praising the Lord. To
this purpose very divinely, one of the most godly and learned of all the
fathers, S. Augustine upon the 148. Psalm.

By this we may perceive, that even the smallest creatures in their kind
magnify their Creator, that that which seems to the ignorant and inconsiderat
needless and unprofitable, is indeed necessary and beneficial. And besides,
that when God by any means takes away our provision here, it is to weane us
hence, or to chastise us with want, for abusing plenty; with war, for
abusing peace; with sickness and weakness, for abusing health and strength;
with false friends, for abusing true friends; with unkindness where we love
well, for our ingratitude to him, that loves us better: with crossings in our
business, for our negligence in his service: and ye any of these, or all these
are but gentle and loving corrections to his children, for their amendment: but
with the graceless and impenitent it is not so, let them ruffle it never so
much for a while, bewate their end, plague upon plague remains for them, which
they shall not be able to avoid; for God fails not in his uncontrollable
providence, to see them paid that they have deserved.

This perplexed David at the heart, as we may read in his 73. Psalm, when he
says, My feet were almost goue, my treadtings had well nigh slipped, and why? I
was grieved at the wicked, I do also see the ungodly in such prosperity. and I
said then have I cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence,
all the day long have I been punished and chastened every morning. Yea I had
almost said even as they, then should I have condemned the generation of Gods
children: then thought I to understand this, but it was too hard for me, until
I went into the sanctuary of God, there understood I the end of these men,
namely how thou do set them in slipperie places, and castest them down, and
destroyest them. O how suddenly do they consume, perish, and come to a fearful
end? That which David learned in Gods sanctuary, that he teaches us in this
Psalm. It is worth the remembering, and applying by your selves.

We read in Genesis a notable work of Gods providence, in Joseph, how God
brought him to great honor and conforted him on every side, how God provided
him to provide for old Jacob, and all his. The means used were some very
mean, some very unlikely, and some almost impossible, yet all in Gods order
direct, and by his power effectuall-Who would have thought, that of a boy
keeping sheep in Chanaan, one should come to be the chiefest man under the
King in Egypt? that a dream or two (a thousand to one but so many idle
fancies) should import and presage matter of such weight, consequence and
state? that brethrens hatred should be the way to brethrens love? that to be
bought and sold as a bondslaue into a strange Country, to be cast and kept in
prison as a malefactor, should be the way to liberty, to more then liberty,
to a place of highest honor in the Court, in all the Kingdom? So God wrought
it and ordered it for Joseph.

And touching Adams fall, and so touching any actual sin, there is Actio, and
there is Prauitas actionis, the action it self is not sin, God is the author
of the action, the deformity or iniquity of the action, that is sin, and
that God is no author of.

The godly learned illustrate this familiarly thus, The rider causes the horse
to go, the horse goes lame; that he goes, the rider is the cause, that he
goes deformedly lame, that is of the horse and not of the rider. The soul of a
man is it that causes the body to move; The body has received some wound, or
festers with some old sore, it moves, it moves deformedly, lamely, the motion
is of the quickening soul, the lamenesse is of the wounded or corrupt body.

But touching the sin, is God no way the author of it? No way in the world,
as it is sin: For first to be able to sin argues impotency, which cannot be
found in omnipotency, and to cause to sin is to bring forth more properly a
defect, then an effect. But God hardened Pharaohs heart: not by making it hard
that was not, but by denying him grace to mollify his heart, which God is not
bound to give him, nor any man; But answer the Prophets words in the 3. of
Amos, Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it. I answer,
that this is meant of Malum paenae, not culpae, of punishments which are just,
and which God justly inflicteth upon sinners to their smart and grief, not of
any evil, that is, of any offense or fault that God commits or causes any to
commit. What was Absoloms in cest? It was both a sin and a punishment, a
sin in Absalom, a punishment to David: the punishment was just and of God,
the incest sinful, shameful, that was Absoloms.

Take with you this rule in our learning, in divinity, which is a sound rule
in this case Cum eiusdem effectus plures sunt causae, aliae bonae, aliae malae,
effectus ille respectu bonarum causarum, bonus est, respectu vitiosarum malus.
Admit there concur diverse causes to one effect, that effect in respect of
good causes shall be a good effect, in respect of vicious causes evil. But God
at least permits sin as it is sin, or he does not permit it; If he
permit it not, how can it be? If he permit it, either he does it with, or
against his will: If against his will, how then is God omnipotent, that he
cannot stop it? If with his will, how then is God all goodness, that he will
not stop it? If it be neither with nor against his will, but that he lets
things go, never heeding them off or on, where is his providence that works so
carefully, and so effectually in all?

I answer. First, that Gods will is considered as it is sometimes occulta
secret, sometimes as it is manifesta reueiled, always as it is iusta, just.

Secondly, that sins are not measured by the secret will of God at all, but
by his reueiled will, which is his law; and therefore though we grant a
permission in Gods secret will, of that which is sin, yet God in that, wills
nothing as sin, for as nothing can be done against his secret will, so no
sin is measured by it, and therefore nothing is to be called sin with
respect unto it. This being certain, then still I say, that sin as it is
sin, is not of God.

But how can any thing be against Gods revealed will, and not be against his
secret will, they being one? as they are diversely considered; to be secret and
to be a revealed are diverse considerations; in one and the self same respect,
nothing can be against the one, and not against the other; but in diverse
respects it may be, one thing may be Contra voluntate^ reuelatam, against Gods
revealed will, his law, it being the rule of right and wrong, to the creature,
the measure of sin: and yet not praeter voluntatem occultam not besides Gods
secret will, it being not to the creature any rule of right or wrong, but it
respects every thing whatsoever, sub ratione boni, as it is good, as it is a
mean to Gods glory, and so reductiue, whatsoever it be, it is good.

And further we are to know and acknowledge that to permit that which is
vnexcusably sin in man, is not sin in God, fo we have an other infallible
rule in divinity, Quum is qui permittit, inhibendi poteslatem habet absque
vlla obligatione, vt and is cui permittitur agendi absque vlla coactione, Actus
vtrobique est voluntarius, in priore absque culpa, in posteriore absque
excusatione, when he that permits has power to forbid, and is free from any
tie to permit or not to permit, to forbid or not to forbid, and that he which
is permitted has power to do without constraint, the action in both is
voluntary, in the former that is in GOD the creator, without sin, in the
later the creature man or Angel without excuse. But how can GOD any way permit
sin, and yet be no way the author of sin? fist sine approbatione without
approving it, 2. denegatione gratiae, by denying the party grace, and leaving
him to himself, as God may do if he will, and it is therefore justly done
because he does it, 3. peccatum determinando ne latius serpat, by limiting it,
that it shall not go so far as the tempter, or the sinner would. Lastly
ordinando, as in Adams fall, the Devil wrought most subtly tenta^do, man
wrought actually peccando, God wrought prouidently dirigendo; Satan in malice
tempted man to sin to despite God, man in folly sins to please himself,
God in his providence directs al, to the showing of mercy by sending his
son to redeem some, and to the showing of his Justice in bringing confusion
on them that dye without redemption. Gods mercy and his justice, tend and*
work both to Gods everlasting glory, which is the maine and most blessed end
of all.

Yet had it not been better, that Adam had been created better, that as he
was created bonus good, so he had been created immutabiliter bonus, immutably
good? I answer no, for first look how God created him, that was best, and
therefore best, because he created him so: then to be immutabiliter bonus,
immutably good is an essential property of God. It were very simple, for any
man to imagine that the creature man, or Angel, should be made the creator, God.

To conclude this point, our God with whom we have to do, is the Loxd, dominus
primus, supremus, (...), liberrimus. The first, the highest, sole Lord of
himself, and most absolutely free; the first before all in eternity: the
highest above all in infinite Majesty: sole of himself, he depends on none,
but all of him; he is absolute at his own liberty, his will alone is an
absolute warrant for him to do withal under him whatsoever he will, to make
or to destroy, to make poor or rich, to exalt high, or bring low, to reject
or save, at his free pleasure, he is subject to no controwle or check, say he,
do he, decree he, execute he, what he will, where, when, and on whomsoever.

And if any man will, let him with any thing a good mind look into any the
works of God, any one, the unlikeliest to man's reason, yet shall he find it
without defect, deformity, disorder, or any iniquity, if he consider it wholly
and entirely togethe; compare the beginning with the end, consider the means
determinatly working, from the beginning to the end, you shall find that he
has done, and does all things well. As in the working of Arras, tapistry or
the like, in a loome or frame, you shall lee here a leg and there an arm, and
yonder a head, a very imperfect piece of work, if there were all: but when it
is finished, every part brought in, as it is at last in due proportion, then
behold the cunning head and hand have brought it to an excellent work: So
consider Gods works, not piecemeale, but wholly and entirely part not the
beginning from the end, nor these from the means where God uses any.

Consider David's adultery and murder, Peter's denialls and cursing, but
withal the hearty repentance of them both. Consider fair Absolons death, but
with all his treason; Sampsons eyes cruelly pulled out by the Philistines, but
withal his blind lust to lewd Dalilah. Consider the little children torn in
pieces by bears, but withal their mocking of Gods Prophet. Consider Adams
fall, but withal Christ promised. Consider Christ's ignominious death, but
withal his glorious resurrection. Take one thing with another in all Gods
works, I say to any man as Augustine says, attend totum, lauda totum,
consider the whole, and it will well appear, that God is to be praised, that
God has done and does his part, in every part aright.

Eliphaz in the 5. of Job discourses the whole chapter through of this
argument, of gods working in his providence, especially upon man, the last of
his words are, lo thus have we inquired of it, and so it is, hear this, and
know it, for thy self; we have enquired as he did at God, so it is as from
God you have heard, you have heard it all, let every man know it for himself,
that is, let every man make a good use of that, which touching this great
matter he has heard, for he is now vnexcusably if he know it not.

First therefore you must account this doctrine true, necessary, profitable and
every way a good doctrine. Being true as it is infallibly true, then not to
believe it, is erroneous, to argue against it, is impious, to delight in
discourse about it, without any care or purpose, to settle positiuely in it, is
vanity profane curiosity, the way to blasphemous Atheism.

It being also a necessary doctrine, then to be careless whether ever one
hear of it or not, let God in his works do, or in his word speak what he
will, not to account it concerns a man, but let the world go which way it
will, never to trouble ones head about such matters, this is dull stupiditie,
near to a dead fearing of the confcience, near to a reprobate sense. It is so
profitable a doctrine, that well learned and well used, it informs a man's
understanding with the knowledge of God and himself; it conformes the will to
religious resolutions, it reformes the courses of a man's life, to christian
obedience, it arms a distressed and an injured man with patience, it humbles a
man full of prosperity, that he burst not with pride; it tempers a man given
to his lascivious and luxurious appetite that he shall abstain: it cooles,
nay it quenches a man's fiery and sudden fury, that he shall do no mischief:
it pacifieth ones deep conceived displeasure, and otherwise implacable offense
taken, that a man neither works nor meditates revenge; it makes men make a
conscience of their doings, for their gain, for their delight, for their
preferment, for any way having their will, their purpose. It makes men remember
whence they came, consider where they are, what they do, and whither they
shall; it keeps men the more innocent that they do no harm; It makes men the
more wary that they take no harm; it teaches men how to live well, and how
to die well, which is next to eternal felicity, line he poor or rich, in
high or low estate, die he in his flourishing or decrepit age, of what disease,
by what means, at home or abroad, at sea or land, when, where, and howsoever.

A doctrine so true, so necessary, so profitable, must needs be good; Why then
should any mislike it? no man living can disprove the truth of it, nor avoid
the necessity of it, nor do well without the benefit of it; yet some like it
not, or if they like it, they like it in part not wholly.

Some like not to be always within the view of Gods providence, to be in his
eyesight, in his awful presence still: some like Gods providence to be
maintained by it, but not to be governed by it. Some will not say but they
like himself, but they are not contented with these and these his means, they
will try their own devises, though indirectly to mend their means. Some like
prosperity maruelously well, but they are made for no crossings. Some like
their beginning and their course hitherto, up and down, one time with another,
but they would hear some of no end, some of no sudden end, and some of no
lingering death. Some profess they are pleased with Gods government, but would
none of the kings supremacy. Some like not the Judges of the land, nor the
laws of the land, not the execution of justice, alls too sharp, too severe.
Some bear the King his civil government very gently, but cannot away with his
ecclesiastical government.

Some mislike one thing and some another, some would have this alteration in
the state, and some that; but he sins damnably in abusing the doctrine of
Gods providence, that wholly or in part approues not that, which God has so
well established for good: that believes not, that esteems not, that receives
not the doctrine of Gods blessed providence, that submits not his Judgment, his
actions, himself unto it, to be rectified by it, as every way good.

A second general use is to keep Gods order in preferring one thing before
another, and in joining some things with other. Men ought therefore to prefer
God before means, heaven before earth, the soul before the body, reason
before affection, public matters before private, religion before policy,
Gods glory before man's. Men ought not preposterouslie to inuert Gods order;
nor in any wise to put those things asunder, which God has appointed to go
together; as faith and works, benefit of laws and obedience to laws, a good
magistrate and a good man, desert and reward, mercy and truth, righteousness
and peace, knowledge and conscience, thrift and a true balance, delight and
temperance, adversity and patience, wrong taking and charitable forgiving,
honor and humility, wealth and beneficence: benefits received, and
thankfulness, any charge in the Church or common wealth, in public or
private, and saithfulnesse; good preparation in time, and an happy end at last.

A third general use is, to account this doctrine not a matter of speculation,
but of practice, the more we know to do the better, the more we learn of Gods
providence oner us, the more prouidently to line all our days under him; which
is, he careyng for us, he providing for us, our casting all our care on him, in
all our providence, our depending upon him. To cast all out care therefore on
him, is to care as he commands and not otherwise, to care for that he allows
and for nothing else, to care that we use good means well and not amiss, and
to care for successes so, as that we leave them wholly to God. This is rightly
to cast al our care on him, and this is to be rightly provident.

To which there are required three things, memoria praeteritorum, cognitio
presentium, precognitio futurorum. remembrance of things past, knowledge of
things present, and foreknowledge of things to come. These things seem hard,
(as to some any good things will) especially the last; now every man would be
accounted a man of judgment, them I hope he remembers things past, compares
them with things present, and observes correspondencies, dencies, and
differences, he cannot then but foresee many consequences. Like causes are like
to bring forth like effects. He that forgets all past, neglects all present,
foresees, forecasts, preuents, prouides, nothing to come, may wanton it a
while, but shall want at last; may state it awhile, but must stoop at last:
may have his full desire a while, but shall have his due deserts at last. For
lascivious prodigaltie to bring penury, aspiring pride, to have a fall,
sinful beginnings and lewd courses, to have sorrowful and shameful ends, it
has been, so it is, and will be. It is a blind wretched and an unpardonable
folly, for any man to be partial in his own particular, to look carefully
neither back, nor forth, to be only for the present, and but in consider at in
that too. As God will have a man to be, not careless, so does he not allow all
caring: They in the 4. of the Prou. that cannot sleep except they have done
evil, are like enough to be full of care. Ahab in the 21 of the first book of
Kings taking his bed, and leaving his meat, either of anger, or grief, or
greedines (a devouring sickness of these days too) and all for Naboths
vineyard, had his head, and heart no doubt full of perplexing cares; and
Iesabell his wife* that cheered him up and compast the matter with forgerie and
blood, she had care enough, but such caring God likes not. The dogs lickte up
the blood of Ahab at last, and of Iesabell too; they gnawed her bones, there
could nothing of her be found, when they came thinking to bury her, but her
skull, her feet, and the palms of her hands. Neither al their care, nor al
their greatness could keep the^ from the curse of God brought upon their
heads, for their bloody purchase. No tyrannous oppressors beating their
brains, how they may draw, ingrosse, enclose all to themselves; no shifting
companions that live by their graceless wits, must think that God takes
charge of their cares, to bless them with success to their desires. Our
provident man is an honest man, that couets not another man's, that cares and
prouides to have for himself and his, bur without wronging of any.

Believing and righteous Abraham in the 22. of Genesis, when Isack put out a
word to him as they were going together, Behold my father, the fire and the
wood, but where is the Lamb? Abraham being resolved whatsoever became of
himself, or his son, that Gods commandment must be obeyed, his promises
would be performed, and not being able to reach by any reason to the
possibility and secrecy of Gods work in this, he answers, My son, God will
provide, as if he had said, we must depend upon Gods providence, that must
satisfy thee and me, God knows what he has to do, he sees what we do, God
will provide for us, doing that which he commands. Let us go on our way, and
cast all our care on him, for he cares for us. So let any good man resolve,
that what God commands must be done; a man so resolving always, be sees no
other but it will go hard with him sometimes; But let God have his sacrifice in
thine heart, resolve above all things in the world for his service, and God
will provide for thee, both to be able to serve him, and to provide for thee
and thine in his measure, in better sort it may be for the particular, then
thou can now think.

A man may care to have about him, to leave behind him, this is providence; but
he must have a care that his gathering be without doing wrong by violence or
fraud, this is obedience; both must go together where men cast all their care
on God, and look that God shall care for them.

But men shall be tempted to the contrary. In the 4. of Matthew, and in the 4.
of Luke, the Devil is said to tempt our Savior Christ himself having him at
an advantage (as he thought)in this world, in humane nature, and at a time
(after forty days fasting) hungry, subject unto Gods providence, he thought
to make him sin against it, as either to trust wholly to means and those
indirect (make bread of stones) or to trust wholly upon Gods providence without
means ( Cast thy self down hence from this pinnacle) or the end of all Gods
glory to set it at naught; showing him all the kingdoms of the world (if it
were but in a vision that is all one) H showed them him in the twinkling of an
eye, and said unto him, all this power will I give thee, and the glory of
these kingdoms, for that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will, I
give it. If therefore thou will worship me, they shall be all thine. Our
Savior shakt him off at last, and it was time, Hence from me Satan. If our
Savior Christ had not been even providence it self, he had hardly prevented
Satan's most mischievous subtlety. Here was every way laid for him: Had he
been covetous, here was a world: had he been ambitious, here were all the
Kingdoms of the world: had he been tyrannous, here was all the power of
those kingdoms; had he been popularly vainglorious, here was the glory of
all the power of the kingdoms of the world, not showed him only but offered
him; not driving him out with lingering expectation, all is offered him at once:
not at any hard rate, but of free gift: and lest there should be doubts made,
that Satan's offer was greater then he was able to perform, he says it is all
his own, delivered him, and least it should be objected, it was delivered him
to keep and not to do away, he says it is his to give, if he will: and least
it should seem restrained to some one, he adds, To whomsoever I will, I give
it. Least it should be thought there were too many, that would look for it, he
says, They shall be all thine: and least this should be condemned for
prodigal folly, there is a soucraigntie reserved, If thou therefore wilt
worship me: who would stand for so small a matter, when his gains and
advancement should be so infinite? the whole world could afford no more, and who
would wish to have it all for less? All this, nay half this, to a man not
very provident had been enough to have made him forget all matter and ceremony
of Gods glory. But by that we have here learned, we find in the offer to be
no good intended, the condition impossible so much as with safety, the title
Satan pretended to have, was false; the delivery never made to him, the gift
was by no right in him, the show of all was but a snaring devise, the offer of
earthly kingdoms, to make him loose his heavenly kingdom, the offer of power
on earth, but to surprise him with the power of hell, the offer of so great
glory, but to bring upon him the more shameful confusion. That labor of
Satan's was lost, he prevailed not against our Savior.

But does he now cease? is he not as subtle, as strong, as stirring, as
tyrannous as ever he was? is it not his soliciting still to have men mistrust
Gods providence, and build only upon means, be they never so indirect? or
presume upon Gods providence, and so tempt God, contemning his means? or to
forget giving God his glory, and therein to give Satan a worship? and thereby
men to loose their part in Christ Jesus? know we not that he is called in the 2.
to the Corinth. 4. the God of this world? in the 12. of John the prince of this
world? in the 2. Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephe* the prince that rules in
the air, the spirit that works in the children of diso bedience? in the 12
of the Revelation, tho read dragon? in the 3. of Genesis, the serpent? in the
13. of Matthew. the enemy? in the 8. of John, the father of lies and a murderer?
in the next verse after my text, a roaring lion seeking whom he may denoure?
do we not learn by all these scriptures that he is set to destroy man, body
and soul? It is he that causes schism, heresy, and hypocrisy, in the
Church; disorders, and rebellions in Common wealths; ambition in Princes
Courts; corruption in Magistrates, refractarie disobedience in subjects;
loosenes in youth, peevish morositie in old age; gredinesse and oppression in
the rich, unthankfulness, impatience and shifting in the poor and needy;
superstition in the simple, profaneness in the witty; discord in families,
falsehood in trust and friendship, abuse of meats and drinks, pride in
aparell, excess of ease and sportings, impediments to well doing incitements
to ill; and he takes his advantage, by fitting tempting suggestions inwardly,
to every humor, and by presenting pleasing objects outwardly to serve every
man's appetite.

Satan is he whom Solomon speaks especially of in the beginning of the 23.
of Proverbs, When thou sit to eat with a Ruler, consider diligently what
is set before thee, and put the knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given
to thine appetite: be not desirous of his dainty meats, for it is a
deceivable meat.

Let Satan make never so fair shows, his end is sin and destruction; any
thing a provident man will strive hard with himself rather then come to that.
One would think it impossible, that any, whom Satan entertaines with his
sweetest with his most delicious sins, if the party knew he would bring him
to incurable wounds, known to come of no honest cause, that he would bring
stinking rottenness upon his filthy hairy, or filthier vnhairy scalp he would
never have the heart, (one would think) to go on still in his wickedness. It
is withal the devils allurements, though he would not be mistrusted, as with
that wine Solomon speaks of in the 23. of his Proverbs, It goes down
pleasantly, but in the end thereof it will bite like a serpent, and hurt like a
cocatrice. And as with the bread of deceit, in the 20 of the Proverbs, it is
at first sweet to a man, but afterward his mouth shall be filled with
gravel. And as it is with the slothful in the same Chapter, The slothful
will not plow because of winter, therefore shall he beg in summer, and have
nothing: So it is with any iniquity, Satan draws men unto, he will make them
believe, they shall never be spyed; but the truth is, that the ways of man,
are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his paths. His own
iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the
coards of his own sin. Pro. 5. Ioab in the 2. of Sam. 3. came to Abuer, he
took him aside, in the gate to speak with him peaceably, and smote him under
the fifth ribbe, that he died. The same Ioab, the 20. of the same book, came to
Amasa, saying art thou in health my brother; and took him by the beard as
though he would have kissed him, but Amasa took no heed to the sword in Ioabs
other hand, for therewith he smote him in the fifth ribbe too, and shed out his
bowels to the ground.

He that knew Ioab had served twoe so before, would not trust him (for all his
complementing) to make the third, if he were any thing a provident man. We know
the Devil does* thus still, what improuident men then are they, that will
trust him at all, that can think the Devil means any man any good?

You look not I hope, for one to come from the dead, to tell you what
torments, those desperate wretches suffer in hell, which knowing in their life
time, the Devil would mischief them, would yet needs follow him. Neither
would any man here, willingly (I think) see a hand writing before him, thou
art weighed in the balance, and art found too light. David himself
peradventure, but that he came to him with a parable, would not have heard so
patiently as he did, Nathan the Prophet saying unto him, Thou art the man. It
may be some care neither for GOD nor Devil, if they will hear neither the Law
nor the Prophets neither Christ, his Evangelists, nor Apostles, neither will
they hear, to any purpose any other. It may be some, if they had any fear
stricken into the^, would think more awfully of God, and his providence then
ever they did. The asmightie may shoot an arrowe of his hot pestilence, at the
heart of that man, if the striking of others will not serve, that may. It may
be some man (and he is not the worst) feels his conscience so griping him, for
forgetfulness of his dueie to God, this way many times, that he says between
God and himself; I am the man, I am the man that have sinned, and by Gods
grace do verily purpose amendment. The best of us can be no better minded.
Then men and brethren what shall we do? What ever we have done, let us
hereafter, neither presume upon gods providence, for our defense, preservation,
and maintenance, but use means in time; no unlawful means at all, nor
lawful means unlawfully, we must use them as Gods means, accompting them of
no power without him. Except the Lord build the house, their labor is but lost
that build, it, Except the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in
vain. Nor let us put our trust in means, as lame Asa did to physicians, whereby
he was noted both to distrust and to displease God. Let no man trust in his
riches, He that trusts in his riches shall fall. Prou. 11. Let no man trust
to his own wisdom, Trust in the Lord withal thine heart, lean not to thine
own wisdom in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thee in all
thy ways. Pro. 3. And let us be more thankful unto God and man, for the
happiness we have, and have had, especially by the gospel so long, so
sincerely, so freely preached, so soueraignly established, even exclusive, all
other religions kept out. No nation in the world, before Christ's time, nor
since, till this latter age (we in this land) ever had the like; nor at this
time is there under heaven, the like glorious christian monarchical state;
which is absolutely the best, O praise the Lord of heaven, praise him in the
height.

And whereas, we have obtained so great quietness, and so many worthy things
have been and are done unto this nation, through the providence of GOD,
raising up mighty means thereto, we are to acknowledge it, under God, wholly
and in all places, with all thanks, to have come, from the sacred, noble, and
blessed government of this Church and commonwealth. O that our religious
thankfulness and endeavors, had been or were now answerable to Gods
incomparable goodness, the abundance and excellency of his means amongst us.
And we must be more peaceable too, if we keep Gods order, then we have been
many of us. As much as lies in us, we must have peace with all men, we must
seek it, we must ensue it. Blessed be the peacemakers, for they shall be
called the children of God. our blessed Saviors own words in the 5. of Matthew.
only by pride does man make contention, but with the well advised is wisdom.
Prou. 13. what wisdom? the wisdom that is from above, which is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without judging, without hypocrisy. James. 3. But men must do as Gods spirit
guides them; try the spirit whether it be of God, if it be, there is unity
in it, there is peace with it, and there is a bond upon that peace, that it be
duly kept, especially the public peace. And for private wrongs done, we
must not be so reuengefull as commonly we are, striking and stabbing. We must
acknowledge Gods hand in the greatest injuries that are done us, and for our
good if we have grace, as David in the 16. of the 2. book of Sam. being cursed
and rayled on to his face, he accounted that God had a stroke in it, he
revenged it not, and when an other would have done it for him, he would not
suffer it. when wrongs are offered us, we may seek redress by lawful
means, revenge by none.

Men's pointing the field, upon their private quarrels, is not justifiable before
God, a christian man can have no sufficient warrant for it, it is barbarous.

Thou art disgraced; it may be thou have deserved it, then what wrong have
thou? or thou have not deserved it, there is place for patience, for charity; but
that's base: but that's not so, let King Solomon (that was thy better I am sure)
teach the. It is a man's honor to cease from strife. Pro. 20. and it is a man's
glory to pass by an offense. Prou. 19. and he that is slow to anger is
better then the mighty man, and he that can rule his own mind, is better
then he that wins a City. Prou. 16. It is indeed a sinful tempting of
GOD, that men without cause do adventure their lives, it argues a man
dissolutely resolute, there is the fairest of it.

But God has appointed every man his end; true, therefore stay till it come.
why that may be the time, and the place: yet thou may be guilty of thine own
death by seeking it, and God may punish thee with final impenitencie for thy
desperatues. But thy purpose is to kill, and not to be killed. That Is worse,
for then thou art guilty of an other man's death, and thine own too. But thou will fly or get thy pardon; thou can never fly from Gods presence, and though
thou gettest thy pardon for thy murder, yet thou may be damned for it: and
for all thy flying thou may be taken, and for all thy suite thou may miss
thy pardon. Then thou will repent, God may forgive thee. God will not forgive
thee, unless thou very heartily repent thee, which thou art not sure to do
when thou will.

But thou do not mean to kill, nor to be killed. Ah, thy heart faints thee;
nay but thou art bold upon thy skill, and thy judgment: thy adversary may put
the besides both: but thou know thou art too good for him; many have made
that reckoning, that have come short home. But thou have often tried and been
tried, and art safe: thank God, and leave there. But thou may be provoked;
thou may fairly, because honestly refuse it. But that is against thy nature;
tell not me of thy nature, I tell thee of Gods grace, and thy duty. Say what
can be said, there is no providence, no well advised wisdom, no christianity
in it.

But can no man warrantably without tempting God, put his life in hazard? One
may, if he be assalted when he cannot avoid it, that is necessity. If a man be
at sea upon good occasions, he is in his way, he follows his vocation; or if
a man be called to serve his Prince or Country in battle, that is honorable.
And if a man be set apart to suffer for Gods truth sake, that is glorious.

Some can be content to put up injuries, and to hold their lives precious
enough, but they are overwhelmed with sorrows which come upon them whether
they will or not, for the loss of their goods, their friends, their children.
Let them remember Jobs losses greater then theirs, and his patience greater
then his losses, in the 1. of Job. Let them remember what he did and what he
said, when his sorrows came one upon another neck unto him, he arose indeed
and rent his garments, and shaued his head, and fell down upon the ground, he
had sense of his grief, but he worshipped and said, Naked came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked shall I returue thither, the Lord haih given, and the
Lord has taken it, and blessed be the name of the Lord.

Some are otherwise poor, distressed, and diseased, and have noe comfort in
the world. Let them remember Lazarus in the 16. of Luke. that lived and dyed
(for this world) most miser ably, but his comforts after wards made amends for
all. but God was present at hand with them: so he is with us; and can help us,
and we know that all things work together for the best to them that love
him. Romans. 8.

But touching this point that God has appointed ted every man his end, what
express scripture have we for that? In the 14 of Job, we read touching every
particular man, words thus spoken to God Are not his days determined? the
number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed his bounds, which he
shall not pass.

If it be so, were it not yet better that men might know the time? why? for
preparation against the time: that is somewhat: for it is seen indeed, men do
prepare themselves to death when they find they can live no longer, and part
of their preparation is, in their affections to leave this world, and to desire
heaven, but that is not so good, to be content to go, or to desire heaven, when
we can stay here no longer.

The right preparation is before extremities come, considering the certainty,
that such a time will come, and the uncertainty when; seeing it may come at
any time, men are to prepare, that they may be ready at all times. Very few
do so; it is too true, but all should do so. It is Gods order, our Savior
himself has set it, in the 13 of Matthew. Take heed, watch and pray, for ye
know not when the time is, as if he had said directly, the less you know the
set time, the more ought you to be always in a readiness, by taking heed
that ye be not taken at unawares; by watching for the time, come it whenever
God please: by prayer to God for grace, and mercy, grace to cast all our care
on him, mercy that he would care for us, that whether we live, or die, sooner
or later, we may be the Lords.

Thus much of the words, a commandment, and an inducement to obedience; the
doctrine, Gods providence, what it is, what things are subject unto it, and
Gods manner of working by it; the use, our being provident, in settling our
judgment, in observing Gods order, and in christian practice. I have instanced
in some particulars, you may apply it to many more. Let these words of my
mouth, and this meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, and
effectual in this audience, O Lord my strength and my redeemer. To God the
Father, God the Son and God the holy Ghost be ascribed all honor, power and
glory, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

