A DESCRIPTION OF S'HERTOGENBOSH: Written in the year 1540, by Simon Pelgrom
of S' hertogenbosh, in his life time Prior and Provincial of the Order of
Guilhelmines.

Together with The principal points and passages concerning the last Siege.

ALSO, A Register from day to day, of that which has happened, as well without
as within the Town, from the first beginning until the latter end of the said
Siege.

Translated out of the Dutch Tongue, and printed according to the Original.

LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourne, dwelling at the South entrance of the
Royal Exchange 1629.

A Description of S'hertogenbosh: Written in the Year 1540.
Together with a Register of all the principal passages in the late siege of
the said Town, 1629.
Unto the Worthy, Worshipful, and Discreet Lords, Chief Baily, Presidext,
Sheriffs, and Councillors of the renowned Town of S'hertogenbosh.
THe place whereupon the Town of S'hertogenbosh is built, has heretofore
(according to the common presumption) been a Boscage or Wood, kept for the
Hunting of the Dukes of Brabant; of this Boscage the Town has the name of
S'hertogenbosh.

This Boscage was an even and recreatiue place, fruitful of wild Dear, as of
Hearts, Hinds, Wild Bores, Wolves, Hares, Rabbets, and such like: wherein were
many little water-brookes, Orchards, and Herbs.

In this Boscage the Duke had made a Cottage, as-well for his Dogs and
Horses, when he went a hunting, as also for men to be at shelter from the rain
and great heat. This same Cottage was after this named the Hanse-wint, or in
English the Grayhound, and is yet upon the Marketplace.

The Hunters of the Duke had made a Ditch round about this Hutte, for to be
assured against the forces of their Enemies; because there was a great
difference risen between them and the Hunters of the Count of Meghen, for that
they were come under the Jurisdiction of the said Count, following not only
their Dogs that were astray, but also by reason of the great heat, their
Game. Wherefore they were very much beaten and hurt by the Counts Hunters, for
daring to hunt in another Hunting place. The Duke took this very ill so that
he forced those of Meghen to hang those dead Dogs by the hinder legs on high,
and for reparation of their fault, to cover them with Corn.

The place of this Boscage was fit for many uses, having in the midst a
common River, where resorted (as if it had been a common Haven) many men, there
to receive their goods which they had bought.

The Kempenlanders, Peelanders, and their neighbors, were wont to bring their
Bees toward the farthest dominions of Gelder, for that that Land has a sweet
air, and was very fruitful of Corn, Blossoms, Ypes, or Broomes blossoms,
being very good food for the Bees. This Nation bringing over their Bees in
Hiues, and trading with the Gelders Nation for Corn. Beans, Pease, Cheese,
and such like Wares, they have chosen this place as the fittest, where they
came in great number with their Boars, and Carres: for to receive those Wares
they daily bought. And it happened then that this place, by reason of the great
trading more and more did increase, wherefore many came thither.

There were then no public Tauernes for to lodge the Iourneying Trauellor, so
that they were forced to lie in the Field, unless they would go to the next
Villages and Houses. A certain Trauellour, being weary of this misery, was
minded there to build, and was the first that builded there a Public Tavern,
near the old Diese, about the Geertruyde-Bridge, who was, by reason of the
many Guests, and good trading, in a short time grown very rich: which was no
wonder, because it was then a peaceable time, and the people came there in
great number, as well from the Gelder quarters, principally from Bonuneler,
Tielerweert, Maes, and Wael, as also out of the quarters of Brabant, namely,
from Brussels, Louen, Antwerpe, Kempenland, and out of all the Towns and
places situated there round about, for to trade with their Merchandise in this
place.

By reason of this good success and welfare of this Vintner, (like men being
of nature artificers) there came more yet to build their dwelling-places there:
so that there were built many Houses. These then were the first luckie
beginners of the Town to come.

Even as those that prosper are hated, misery only is freed, so the prosperity
of this people has been hated by the Burgers of Heusden, because this Trading
and Merchandise was wont to be with them. These Burgers then fearing that such
a luckie beginning, and great multiplication of these new builders should do
them not small, but very great hinderance, and that their Town, for want of
men and trading, would come to nothing: therefore they thought how to prevent
it, and by what means they might best hinder it. After they had well meditated
these businesses, and judging, that their longer staying would be but a
hinderance unto them, they concluded together to fall upon these new Builders,
and caused them to depart: who having gotten fit opportunity, they did fall
very secretly upon them, caused them to depart out of the place, and beat
down their new Buildings to the very ground, for to hinder these speedy
beginnings; which otherwise would have put down all the trading of their Town.

This attempt was to no purpose against the Fortune: for that the people did
not forsake this place by reason of the said damage and hinderance, but
shortly after this returned thither again, and did build again new houses in
the old Field: for which the jealousy of the Burgers of Heusden did increase
more and more, and would not leave them at quiet, but fell for the second time
again upon them, destroying their houses, and caused them to retire a great
way off that place, to the end that their last intent should not be greater
then the first.

These people being twice destroyed and ruined by the Burgers of Heusden, they
were forced to be stragglers here and there, which did grieve them much, having
no means to resist them; yet notwithstanding continued still in their
opinions, and did look always for a better occasion, having in mind the
saying of the Poet Virgil:

O passi grauiora dabit Deus his quoque finem. On friends: let greater perrits
past
Give greater Courage now at last;
And God (who does all what he wills)
Will set a period to these ills.
And expecting after darkness the light, were minded to seek other help and
assistance: They made their complaints unto the Duke of Brabant, who (they
knew) would assist those that were in misery; and manifested also their cause
unto the Burgers of the Brabandish head Towns, and did together require help
and assistance, that they might be assured against the forces of those of
Heusden, and to be restored in their former place, that they might build up
again their pillaged and ruined Houses.

In this they were not deceived of their hope, because these Brabandish
Burgers, having regard unto their request, condiscended unto them, and promised
truly to help and assist them, so that hereafter they should not any more be
hindered of their good intent.

The Illustrious Prince alleged this reason in the common Assembly, That he
was willing to provide unto the same for time to come, but that he was now much
troubled himself with Wars, and great affairs, and therefore did put the
said cause to the disposition of the Brabandish Burgers.

The three chief Towns of Braband, namely, Louen, Brussels, and Antwerpe,
took this Cause in good earnest upon them, and considering well of it, they
found fit to build there the fourth chief Town, to the end that the
Brabanders forces might lie upon 4. Pillars.

By the command of the Prince, they began there to make there three Ports or
Cates in a round, which were ended in a short time: each chief Town builded
one Gate. Those of Louen about the Market place, near the great Hospital,
which is now the Prisongate. Those of Brussels, the Crosse-gate, which remains
still in Orten-street. Those of Antwerpe the Vrouwe-port, or Gate, about the
Wild Bore, which in the augmentation of the Town, was taken away by the
Burgers.

The Forces were made in favor of these new Inhabitants, because that their
Enemies and haters should no more in time come to spoil nor ruin their
building, nor to make them retire any more.

These chief Towns were specially minded hereunto, to the end that the
Gelders might be forced to stay in their Dominions* for that the Brabanders
most times were forced to maintain Wars against them, about whose frontiers,
the Towns, Villages, Houses, and goods of the Brabanders are situated, which
were still very much spoiled and ruined by this Gelder Nation.

These then have been the beginnings of the new Town, and the first
foundations.

When these Gates, in manner aforesaid, were built so freely, there came so
great a quantity of people to build and dwell therein as if under the
foundations there had been Mines of Silver.

These new Inhabitants taking anew their courage, which they had lost by reason
of the pillaging and destroying of those of Heusden* they builded again new
buildings, setting the Houses one close to the other, and the number of the
same increased daily more and more, and so fast, that they at last, with the
assistance of the Prince, did make a Wall and Ditch round about the Town, and
strengthened it with a stone wall, so that they were able to resist their
enemies.

As the number of the coming Strangers did very much increase, and the Town
prospered, so they began to build other new buildings.

The Princes Court was the principal, and most costly builded, situated over
against the Butchers Hall, where there is now the Tavern called the Swanne.

The House Rood enburgh is also built by the Commonwealth for the gracing of
the new Town, and it was a great while the Treasure-house of the town.

The Towne-house was built as well at the charges of the Prince, as also of the
Burgers.

The Burgers of S'hertogenbosh being come in such a wished state, began to
statute Laws, and to make a Magistrate, to bring the River through the Town,
to make new streets and ways, and to make much one of another, wherefore they
have gotten great Liberties of their Prince, as by the Letters thereof more at
large may appear.

All those that come to dwell there, although they were broken and Bankrupts,
they got liberty of the Prince, wherefore it did happen, that there came many
out of the Land of Cleefe, Guilicker-land, Gelderland, and out of other
neighbor places, to take their residence there.

This said Province yields very strong and bold Women, so that these
Strangers brought with them very bold Women, which for the most part had
command over their Husbands, and did make away the common goods in despite of
their Husbands: Therefore the Prince gave unto this Town this Law, That the
Women without their Husbands may not dispose of any of their goods: but that
the Husband, without the knowledge of the Woman, has full power to sell and
dispose of their goods.

There were not as yet any Churches built in the new town, but the
Orten-Church, situated near the Diese, has been a great while the Parish
Church, which was long before built by a Gentleman, who being strayed by the
tempest of the Sea, landed there first of all; for that the Sea was wont to
come in that place, as appears by the name of that place, called Ooort-Duyuen.

There were also no Cloifters in the town, the Friars were the first that
began to build there, and builded a small dwelling house; after this they took
a bigger place near the Princes Court, and enlarged their place of residence,
after the manner of Cellekins, and they have also built a Church, which the
Burgers have used a great while for their Parish Church They were not yet tied
to any public promises.

Shortly after this there came many men and women from several Regions in the
same town, after beginning of this town, (as hereafter more at large shall be
declared) they have built there their Houses and Cloisters.

The Town was in a short time so increased by reason of the loving and
friendly Burgers, that every one thought it should have been a second Rome, and
were forced because of the multitude of men, to enlarge the Town, and make it
bigger, that the multitude of the Burgers might the better dwell therein.

In the year 1300, when the augmentation of the town was intended to be
enlarged, the said town was therein assisted by the Prince, and by the
Province of Brabant. The Burgers did make new Steeples in the precinct, with
new Gates, they did also make new and wide ditches, and new Walls, and
ordained new Streets to be made; they brought the River the Dommel, and the Aa
in several places through the Town, and provided further all that which was
needful for the augmentation of the Town.

This new town was presently multiplied with new Burgers, which according to
their state, builded each for their commodity new houses: and did so increase
in riches, as if they had got to the riches of Cresus; by which means it
happened, that there were built so many fair and costly Cloisters, holy
Houses, and costly buildings, so that the most part of the new town, is built
with Cloisters, Churches, Chapels, and such like Houses.

In the year 1380. there were laid the foundation of the great and renowned
Church called St. John's Church, the ground-place of which, together with the
streets situated there round about, from the prisoner-gate to the
Hintemer-gate, is called the Hintemer sant, because the said place heretofore
has appertained under the Vilage Hintem.

About that time there were built several public and private Houses, as holy
Churches, Hospitals, and diverse Houses for the poor, which daily increased by
reason of the riches of the Burgers, and their liberality. Which things
several to declare, should be too long, and needless.

These Burgers are, by reason of their civil carriage, wisdom, and courtesy,
come in great favor unto every one, being faithful to every one and did
deceive no body, neither were chargeable unto any: Their friends were welcome
unto them, but they did resist their enemies: for as the unquiet and
unpeaceable Gelder Nation, when they were about the building of S'hertogenbosh,
did spoil the Brabandish Towns and Villages, setting on fire their
Countrey-houses, destroying their Lands, taking away their Horses and Beasts,
and ruining all that whereby they could come; Likewise they (some while before
the building of the Town) did fall upon the Village called Oosterwicke, near
the Town, and have quite pillaged the same, and set on fire all the trees:
These Burgers of S'hertogenbosh have after that, with their own power,
resisted the said Gelders Nation, and have not only kept them from coming
abroad, but also have fallen in their own dominions, and have forced them to
lay down their Arms.

But as every thing in this world is not everlasting, so this Town also has
suffered many several damages and alterations, and was twice almost burnt
down. The first and greatest fire was in the year 1419, on the 28 of June:
the second fire in the year 1463 the 17 of June, at the Heusdens Fair. The
first fire began in the Verwer-street, near the sign of the Brass* Kettle:
by which fire, the Towne-house, and all the Papers and Writings, were
altogether burnt. The second fire began near the sign of the Falcon in the
Hintemer-street, where the top of S. John's Church and many Images were also
burnt.

The name of the Duke of Braband, by whose command the town of S'hertogenbosh
was built, we have forborne to set down in this History, because of the
diversity of the Historians, and have kept this different till the last. The
common presumption is, that the Duke Godfrey in the Cradell, has been the
Founder of S'hertogenbosh, which is confirmed by these words:

GodrIdVs dVX e sILVa feCIt oppidVM. The Duke Godfrey has of a Boscage built a
town, in the year 1184.

Others presume that Henry the first son of Godfrey the third has built this
town.

The History written before the Chronicle of Saint Truden, says, In the
County of Peeland is a Boscage, which the Emperors have given unto the Church
of Vtricht, whose right has appertained a long time unto the Counts of
Gelderland, which said Counts have given the same Boscage unto their friends,
and have sold the Village called Vucht unto the Duke Henry van Looteringen, who
has built upon Oortens-dyck, a town which is now S'hertogenbosh.

Others say, that in the time of John the second, and John the third Dukes of
Braband, there were first made Walls about this place by one William de Bosco,
Knight, son of Gerlacus de Route, who did live in the year 1313, when the
Geerlinger Bridge in the Hintemer street was builded, and got the name of it.
This Knight dying, gave unto the Lord of Erp, the Cloister called Clarissen in
the Hintemer street, and made his only heir the Lord Francis, in September,
Anno 1335.

Some say also, that the place of this Town heretofore has been a Boscage or
Wood, appertaining unto the Duke of Gelderland, who has given this place unto
John the second son of John the first Duke of Braband, for a Gift at his
Christening, and that the Town of S'hertogenbosh is situated and built on
this place.

They say also, that the said Duke John has fold and assigned the said Boscage
unto the said William de Bosco, from whence he has gotten his surname: And
that this William de Bosco has been the first that has made Walls about the
Town, and admitted every one that would come and live there.

Although it seems that these three opinions are contrary one to another,
notwithstanding, they may very well agree together, yea concur one with
another,

As concerning the two first opinions, every one can well judge it: for that
Henry the second lived in the yeeee 1185, when his Father Godfrey did reign.
And it is the use of all Historians, that when Kings and Princes reign during
their sons lives, that all that which happened in such a time, is written
both of the Fathers and children.

Concerning the third opinion there will not be much difference, for that it
is to be understood of the principal part, namely, from the Prisonergate to
the Pinappels and Saint Anthonies Gates, Against this does not contradict, that
it is not mentioned there of the beginning of S'hertogenbosh, for that it is
the biggest and fairest part, having in his ringle the great S. John's Church,
the great Hospital the Holy Ghost, or the Spint, the Gregorians Fraterhouse*
the Sister of Ortens Cloister, the great Begging-Cloyster, with many other
Cloisters three following the rule of Saint Augustine, and one of Saint
Benedictus, one of Saint Clara, and many beautiful Chapels, as, Saint Jacobs
Chapel, which is now a Parish Church, one of Saint Anthonies. The
Synechdochies manner of speaking is, where a part is taken for the whole, it is
very common unto the writers.

Laftly, it is known, that in the time of the said Knight, William de Bosco,
the Town was augmented, as by the Letters of the Duke of Braband, and of the
Magistrates of S'hertogenbosh, more at large may appear.

Thus far Simon Pelgrom of S'hertogenbosh, Prior and Provincial of the Order
of Guilhelmines.

THis Town of S'hertogenbosh did from time to time increase so much, that at
the last it was grown to be the head or chief Town in the fourth quarter of
Braband, under whose obedience are these four Counties, as Kempenland,
Peeland, Maaesland, and the Land of Oosterwicke; in which Counties are situated
the Towns of Helmont, Eyndsoue, Megen, and Grave, having besides these under
their command 72 Villages, in the which are one hundred and one Parish Churches.

S'hertogenbosh lies upon the River called the Diese, 6 Miles from the Mase,
12 miles from Rauensteine, 9 miles from Heusden, and 36 miles from Antwerpe. It
is by nature a strong place, because of her situation, and low grounds round
about, which lies most times under water, specially in the Winter, except on
the Vuchter side, Southward of the Town, where, for the highness of the Land,
the Town is sortified with 2. Royal Forts, the one lying near the Town,
being the smallest is called St Anthony: The other lying on the
Vuchters-heyde, having five Bulworkes, Francebray Counterscarps, and a double
Ditch, named the Fort Isabella. Eastward of the Town lies a Royal Fort
called Pettler-Sconce, toward which they must come by water through the Hekell,
because it lies as it were in a Mire, having on the one side a small moore or
damp, then follows high ground, but on the other side Iow fields, being still
under water.

Notwithstanding that these Lands round about S'hertohenbosh lie most times
under water, they are good and firm Lands, sandy and hard ground, which is
for the most part of summer very dry* in some part of it is sown summer Corn,
as Oats and Barley, which are sometimes ouerflowed by the high waters of the
Maes, and suffer sometimes damage, which is hardly recovered, except it be by
an extraordinary dry Summer.

Through this Town run also several waters, or small rivers, having their
beginnings out of two several streams, the one being called the Aa, the other
the Dommell, or Domale: which two Rivers in this last Siege were stopped by the
command of his Princely Excellency about the Trenches, who making the water to
come round about his Works, through a new made ditch, about 30 foot wide. The
water in and about the Town was stayed with two stone beeres on the Bulworkes,
next to the boome, as also on the boome it self, with a Sluice door, else it
would have run in a great part, yea almost round about the Town, if the said
River had not been stopped.

In the year 1577. on the 21 of September (in the time of the government of
Don John) the said Town being by the command of the general States, released
from the Dutch Soldiers, which lay in the Town, remained on the States side
till the year 1579. without any Garrison, notwithstanding, the States used
great diligence to assure this Town with Garrison, according to the agreement
made at Vtricht. Albeit that at last, by reason of the differences amongst the
Burgers, (for this cause) and of the departure of those that were minded
toward the States, is turned on the Spanish side* and so remained popish,
wherein came a great number of Ecclesiastical persons.

On the 19 of January, in the year 1585. there was made an enterprise upon the
said Town, by the Count of Hohenloo, they were already in the Town, but were,
by reason of the bad carriage of his Soldiers, and the good courage of the
Burgers; beaten out of the Town back again, with the loss of many men,
slain, hurt, and taken prisoners, and so remained vnmolested till the year
1601. the first of November, upon which day, the said Town, by the command of
the high and mighty Lords the States, was besieged, under the Conduct of the
Illustrious Prince Mauritius of Nassawe of famous Memory, and was with great
diligence entrenched round about: but because of the great extraordinary frost,
he was not only hindered of the approaching, the getting of Victuals.
Munitions, and other necessaries, but also those that watched in their
Sentinels, were dead frozen: therefore the said Prince broke up his said
Leager, and departed from thence the 27 of the same month of November.

In the year 1603 this said Siege was again undertaken on the 19 of August:
but because the Archduke Albertas did lie ready with a great Army of
Soldiers, for to seek his fortune upon these Lands, therefore he followed the
said Prince on the 21 of the same month, leaguering himself on the East side
of the Town, in the which at that time there was but a small Garrison, and
besides they did refuse to take in any Garrison upon the request of the
Archduke saying that they themselves were strong enough to resist their
enemies: but there was, by the practice of the said Duke, put into the Town
about 3000 men, against the Burgers will, who thereupon did mutiny: wherefore
some of them were punished. His said Excellence seeing that the said Town was
thus provided, did with good order break up his Leager, and lest the Town on
the 5 of November, in the same year, as likewise the Archduke, departing
every one in their Garrison. The Governor, the Lord Anthony Shets, Lord of
Grobbendoncke, remained in the Town.

The High and mighty Lords the States general, with the Illustrious Prince of
Orange, having nothing so at heart as the welfare of these united Provinces,
and the good Inhabitants of the same, have in the beginning of this year 1629,
kept several Assemblies with the Illustrious Prince of Orange, for to have
ready all things necessary for a brave siege, having therefore to that end,
sent betimes in the beginning of the year, through the River the Wael, up
toward Nimmegen, and to the Sconce S'Grauenweert, some Bridges, and slat
bottomed ships with Ordnance, Munition, and other warlike provisions.
Whereupon, in the midst of the month of April, the Garrison followed, who
had their Rendezvous about the said Sconce.

The Illustrious Prince, the 24 of April, in the morning betimes, at six of
the clock, with a good resolution, departed from the Hage, with valiant and
brave Followers, taking his way toward Vtriclat, so toward Arnhem, and from
thence to S'Grauenweert, where his Excellency finding his Troops ready,
departed with great diligence for Mockerheyde, putting there on the 28 of the
same month his Army in Battell-aray, where they that night lay in the Field.
The 29 of the said month, early in the morning, marching further toward the
Town called Graus, over the Bridge, right to the Besh, before which Town that
night the Prince sent some number of Horse, and the next day, being the 30, he
beset the same Town: then his Excellency came with his whole Army before the
Town, after Dinner, at 3 of the clock in the afternoon, taking his quarter,
with 134 Companies, at Vucht, lodging in the house called Heyms-house.

His Excellency had further separated the other chief Quarters as follows:

His Highness Count Ernst at Hintem with 50 Companies.

Count William of Nassaw, Governor of Heusden, at Orten with 32 Companies.

The Lord of Bredrode about the Pettler Sconce with 26 Companies.

His Highness of Solms at Engelen, near Creueceur, where the Ships lay with
Munition and Victuals.

The Lord Pincen coming in the Leager on the 11 of May, he is commanded to
take his Quarter at Deuteren: Further, the Quarters were appointed and made up
in a very short space.

In the matching toward the Bosh, the said Prince took the house called
Heeswicke, situated 6 miles from the Bosh, in which were 60. men.

The Governor Grobbendoncke being advertised that the Leaguer was coming for
the Town, seeing also some of our Horsemen, notwithstanding, would not believe
that it was intended upon him, but thought that it was intended upon Breda; yea
durst freely say, that the Prince would not begin such a vile deed: but
shortly after this, seeing him make his Quarters, and that our Soldiers came
nearer the Town, and forced his Soldiers to retire in the same, began to
think upon his own fault, that the said town was not sufficiently provided
of men, Ordnance, and Gunpowder; he could a little while before have gotten
from Luike many thousand pounds of Gunpowder, but he left it for want of money.

These tidings being come at Brussels and in Braband, did make great
alterations there: the Arch-Duches did presently send Post by Post to Spain,
caused all the chief men of War to be assembled, and gave order for payment:
that with all speed the soldiers should be brought in the Field.

Grobbendoncke did presently write for men and powder, and that there should be
haste made for the releeuing of it.

Certain renowned chief men of War of the Spanish side, said, (as is told
me) with laughing mouth, that Grobbendoncke was like the bold men, which say
that they are not afraid for the Devil, jesting at all times with him, yea,
would feign see him, but being in such a case, they are as much afraid as
others, wishing that they were released from him: so it is with him, for that
he oftentimes did say, that he would very feign have us to come and see him,
wishing that the Prince Frederick durst do so, he would show him what a man
he was, thinking that other chief men of War were not so courageous: But
now, seeing him before the Gates and Walls of the Town, he is as all the
rest, wishing that he would go away.

The first of May the Illustrious Prince did condescend, that many, women
Beggins, and servant Maids, should depart out of the Town. The Horsemen which
lay within, thought also, without permission of the Prince, to depart out of
the same, but were forced to retire back again.

Between the 4 and 5 of the same month, came into the Town 800 men, secretly
along Vlimen, near Deuteren, by the Kee-Sconce, and so got in through S. John's
Gate, going in some places up to the midst of the body in water: for which his
Excellence caused also there to be made a broad way of Bauens, with a Bulwark
from the Vuchter-heyde along through the Moors, near the Vogel-key of
Grobendoncke, until the Quarter of Pinsen being garnished with many Redouts
made of Wood, and is called the Hollans Walls which way of Bauens is made out
farther along the River called the Bosh-sloot, to the Village called Engelen.
And so with this all the Leager round about is finished within the space of 8
or 10 days.

The 5, Captain Drop was put as Admiral oven the shallops.

The 8 of this said Month there were fetched some half Curtowes out of the
ships at Crenecour, and were brought to the Leager, for to be planted upon the
Batteries.

Those of the Town began also to labor very earnestly on their Works without
the Vuchter-gate, making their Batteries higher, but shot very little. About
this Town the Lord of Bredrode began to make a Sconce over against the
Pettler, and all the Works were by the command of his Excellence, made higher,
thicker, and the Ditches wider.

The 12 the Dommell was bespoken to be stopped, or to make a Damme over it.

At night, those of the Town came out with two shallops upon the Quarter of
Count Ernst, thinking there to take some Prisoners, but they having misfortune,
did speedily retire back again, whereupon they of the Town did shoot with
Ordnance and Muskets, but did small hurt.

This Leager is presumed to be between 60 and 70 thousand men strong, whereof
were 70 Cornets of Horse.

The 14, about forty flat-bottome Turfe-shippes were fetched from S'Grauenmoer,
near Breda, and were brought in the Leager, for to make of the same
Ship-bridges. The 15, those did salley upon the quarter of the Lord of
Brederode, but were caused with forces to retire back again. The 16 are those
within come out again with some shallops, upon the quarter of Count Erust, but
were feign to retire without doing any thing.

The 20 we began to make a Trench between Engelen and Creueceur, for the
security of the Horses: and all other Trenches with double bankets or
feet-benches: the foot of the Trench was about 16 foot thick, and the upper
part 6 foot. Near the place called Vliemer brugge over against the highway,
is made a Fort which can hardly be taken, to resist those of Breda that would
come out. On the 23 there came a Messenger with Letters, which was followed by
ours, so that he was drowned; whose said Letters were delivered unto the
Prince. The 27, 28, 29, and 30 of the same month, we shot on both sides very
fiercely though there was but small hurt done.

The first of June, those of the great Fort Isabella did make a salley upon the
French Battery, but were at last forced to retire.

The night following, those of the Town did make three several fires upon the
steeple of the Church, weighing the fire three times up and down. The French
did fall upon the Enemies, and caused them to retire, and got many Shouels,
Spades, Swords, and other things.

The 3 and 4 those of the Town made again a fire upon the steeple of St John's
Church: And the 5, 6, 7, and 8 of this Month, there was little done on both
sides.

The 9, ours of the great Battery did shoot upon the Town and the little
Sconce above 140 shot. The same day those of the Town came out with two
shallops upon the Quarter of Pinsen, thinking there to take some Horses, and
men which were at work, but were hindered.

The 11 there arrived in the Quarter of Count Ernst yet 18 or 19 Companies of
new Scotchmen.

The 12 and 13 little happened.

The 14 His Excellency, with the Lords the States, went upon the Battery, and
caused a Mortar to be set on fire, which stood upon the same Battery, which the
first time did not work very well: but the second time much more, so that for
the dust we could scarce see the said Sconce: the little Sconce was likewise
battered: and between the 13 and 14, there were again made 3 fires upon the
steeple.

The 15 there were thrown into the Sconces six Granads, whereof the second
did work very well, so that the Hurts did fly in the air. The same day, the
water of the Dommell was let go in the outmost ditch round about the Princes
quarter.

The 16 at night, those within did make a salley, (coming through the Hintemer
Gate, upon the Works of Count Ernst, causing the Watch to retire to the
Battery: notwithstanding, they were forced to retire. The 18 there were thrown
into the little Sconce two or three Granads.

The same day at night, the English were busy to fill the ditch of the little
Sconce. The French were at that time also very busy, making that night three
bints of their Gallery near the great Sconce. The next night those of the
Town did very fiercely throw with hand-Granads and firing with pitch hoopes.

The 20, ours did labor in open day upon the Galleries, and did throw 8
Granats into the little Sconce, which caused all that they came near to fly
in the Air, the men did withdraw themselves into the Counterscarps, to save
their lives. Those of the town did make three several fires upon the steeple.

The 21 there were Granads thrown again into the little Sconce which was
thereupon very much beaten with Ordnance.

The 22 at night, the English were very busy upon their Gallery, which was for
the third time set on fire by those of the Sconce: notwithstanding the said
English were very courageous, beating their enemies out of their Counterscarpes
in the ditch, where many of them were drowned.

The 23 the English were again very forward with their Gallery: likewise the
French, who did set on fire a Mine near the great Sconce.

At which time Count Henry van den Bergh did muster his men, and was found to
be about 25000 men strong, as well of foot as Horse.

The 24 and 25 happened very little.

The 26. there was upon three several places in the Leaguer a fire, namely in
the Horsemens Quarter, in the Quarter of Brederode, and in the Quarter of His
princely Excellency, amongst the English, where there was done the most damage.

Count Henry van den Bergh being a marching up, did lodge himself in
Langhestraet, at Sprang, Waelwicke, Druynen, and Loon-opt-land. His Majesty of
Bohemia came this night in the Leager, and went with His Excellency to see all
his Works. The 27 came the Horsemen of Count Henry van den bergh at Vlymen,
showing himself on several parts of the Leager, from Vlymen to Cromvoort. At
night there was an Allarum in the Town.

The 28 there was in the Quarter of Count Ernst again a fire in two several
places. At night, Count henry van den bergh showed himself near the Three
Sisters, near the Hollands Wall: amongst which ours shot 10 or 12 Cannon shot,
whereupon they did presently retire. Our Soldiers were in battell-array all
this night. The 29 there came some Soldiers in the Leager, which were run
away from the Enemies, complaining of hunger and great dearth. The 30 the
Spanish did hide themselves in the Wood behind the Ynffer-Sconce, who got some
Wagons with Bauens of our Leaguer, and about 40 prisoners: They took also the
Houses Burtell and Hesop, the Soldiers which were in the same, came with their
full Arms and baggage into the Leager: besides, they came betimes in the
morning with 2 shallops from Vlymen, to the three Sisters and Hollands Wall, to
sound the depth of the water; whereupon the whole Leager came in battle array.
Some that were run away from the Enemies, declared, that in the Spanish Army, a
pound of Cheese was worth 12 Stiuers, and a Kan of Beer 6 Stiuers, and all
other things accordingly.

The 2 of July, Monsieur Fama was hurt with a shot through the body, and dyed
immediately. The 4 at night, the Spanish came again upon the Leaguer, amongst
which we played very fiercely with our Ordnance from the outermost Batteries:
whereupon they were forced to retire, leaving behind them some dead men and
hurt. At that same time they thought also to break through along the Wall of
the Dommell, but were also hindered of it. Those that we took prisoners,
complained of great hunger, misery, and bad payment. This was the tenth time
that they tried their fortune against the Leager, which made us to stand every
night in Battell-ray. This night those within the Town did make again three
several fires upon the steeple. Also we took prisoners some of the Boores
which did measure the depth of the water, and thought to bring them through it,
of which two were hanged in the Quarter of his Excellency: The one was a
Borrow-master of Beckhonen, and the other a Boore of Vucht: they confessed to
have received each 20 Gilders, and that they should have had with them 600 men,
which should have brought into the town each of them 10 pounds of Gunpowder.
The 6 the English and French have brought over their Galleries before both the
Sconces. Between the 7 and eighth those of the Great Sconce made a salley, but
were beaten back again, leaving behind them about 40 men as well dead as hurt.
The Spanish marched from Cranvoort, and the places there-about, toward Boxell.

The 9 the French have taken the Hornenworke of the great Sconce: there was
begun an inner Trench from the Quarter of Pinsen to the Three Sisters: likewise
from the Quarter of His Excellency to the Sconce of Brederode: and from thence
near the Cloister at Eyken-donck unto the Quarter of his Highness Count
Ernst, and are well provided with Redouts against those within. The 12 the
Coronelship of Mons. Fama late, is given unto Count Maurits of Nassawe. The 14
the 2 water-mils near the Diese, together with 21 other water-mils to be used
with Horses, were to be mended, therewith to make dry the lowland. The 16 Count
Henry vanden bergh marched up with his whole Army from Boxtel, making a Bridge
near Moock over the Maes, he himself remaining near Moocke. The 17 there
was a Boore taken prisoner, who thought to bring a Letter into the town, by
which Count Henry van den bergh commended unto the Governor Grobbendoncke to
keep good Watch, saying that he would take no advantage upon the Leager for
to relieve the town. Of this tenor:

MY Lord Seeing that it is impossible to beat away the Enemies out of their
Works, with the Men which I have ready, because he lies very fast, more then
ordinary fortified: I find it good to break up my Leager, and to transport my
self by the Jmperialists, who are already in Arms, and a great many of them
are departed for Wesell, as well of Horse as Foot, hoping to do such a notable
deed, that the Enemies shall be forced to fight with us; and that in that
cause God will make us to have the Victory, and that thereby the Town shall
be relieved, if you can keep the same yet for a time: which I would hereby
make known unto you. I pray you, when you have received this, that you then in
the night make a great fire upon the steeple of S. John's Church, moving the
same many times: and to make the next day a great smoke on the said steeple, by
which J shall know that this Letter is delivered unto you: and when this
Messenger shall depart again with answer, you shall then the night following
do the same token with fire, and then the day following again with smoke
along time. Mean while J rest,

My Lord, Your loving and faithful friend, Henry van den Bergh.
In the Leager at Boxtell, July 16. 1629. The Superscription is, To my Lord, My
Lord the Baron of Grobbendoncke, Knight of the Order of St Jacob Collonell of a
Regiment of Wallons, Governor of Shertogenbosh.




But this Letter being come into the hands of His Excellency, he did send it
unto the Lords the States of the united Provinces, with his advice what order
and what means there should be employed to hinder the design of the Enemies,
and he himself gave order to follow the Enemy with as many men as he could
spare out of his Leager, to continue and advance this Siege.

The 18 the Lord Dieden, Governor of Emmericke, has taken in the morning at
three of the clock, the great Sconce, finding in the same 10 Hogsheads of
Wine, 24 Tons of Beer, and some bread and Porke. The next following, the
Colonel Harwits got also the little Sconce, finding in the same much Armor
and Household Stuff.

The 24 the Prince heard that Count Henry van den bergh was fallen into the
Velewe, whereupon there were sent thither some of the chief men of War, with a
great number of Soldiers of Foot and Horse, for to secure the Betuwe and other
places from his Design. the 25 and 28 those within have with two shallops
brought into the Town some prisoners. The 28 arrived in the Leager the young
Prince of Denmark, who will stay there a while.

The 3 of August the Rush bridge was brought over. The 4 we took in the
Tanaille before the Vuchter gate, notwithstanding those within did beat us out
again. The 7 at night the said Tanaille was taken, and presently there was
made a Battery of the same.

The 10 at night there came two Boores out of the town, each with a couple of
Pigeons, and 3 Letters, which Letters were brought to the Prince: the tenor of
them was, that they were to be relieved within 3. weeks: the 13, 14, and 15
was on both sides very fiercely played with Ordnance, and some Granads were
thrown into the Town, which caused great outcries in the same. Those within
came out upon the Trench northward of Brederodens Quarter, near the
watermilles, thinking to cut through the same, which being almost done, they
were beaten back again Between the 17 and 18, those which came out with some
shallops, upon the Battery between Pinsens Quarter and the great Sconce,
spoiled the victualers; but found no Ordnance, because it is every night
brought under the great Sconce, and so returned back into the Town. The 19
there was a Mine sprung in the Hornenworke near the Hintemer end, which killed
many men; notwithstanding those within defended themselves three several
times, and kept the Victory.

After that his Highness Count Ernst had well beset the Betuwe, and other
places near the Issel stream, for to hinder the coming of the Enemies,
(which were already fallen in the Velewe) with brave and chief men, well
considering of all things: thereupon the Prince also did send thither men of
Horse and foot as many as his Excellency could well spare, showing himself day
and night (fearing not any danger) every where in the uttermost of the Works
and batteries; then there came on the 20 this joyful Letter, from the Worthy,
Worshipful man of War, Otto van Gent and Oyen, Lord of Dieden, etc. unto the
Illustrious Prince of Orange.

MY Lord, The bearer hereof, my Cousin Mederode, comes to bring your
Excellency report of the good success of the taking of the Town of Wesell.
The Enemy did leave at that same time 2 Forts or Sconces, without staying that
we should shoot upon them. They have bored to the ground their ships of War:
and having some Bridges upon the Rhyne, I have burnt part of them, which were
not fit. Here is a great number of Ordnance, and 13 or 14 Boats set upon
Wagons. I have, for the better assurance of the Town sent unto the Governors
of Rhees and Emericke, that they would send me some Companies of Foot. And if
your Excellence thinks fit. I wish to have a great many more men, wherewith,
etc.

In Wesell, in haste, August 19. 2629. My Lord, Your Excellencies humble and
obedient, Otto van Gent and Oyen.


Whereupon there was a general Thanksgiving through all the Leager for this
Victory; and we have made Bonfires after the Leager manner, as follows,

His Excellency commanded that none should begin before the Signal of the
Jacht before Creueceur was done. The Princess was her self upon the Walls of
Creueceur, and the Yacht played his Canon; then those of the Fort Creueceur did
play with 18 Pieces, and played those of the Redouts along the Bosh-sloot, then
the Lord Pinsen, then the great and little Sconces, and then the Ordnance about
the Quarter of the Prince of Orange; then after those the Quarter of Brederode
from his Fort against the Pettler, then his highness Count Ernst with his
whole and half Curtows, as also at Orten.

When the Ordnance had thus played at all places, then began likewise all the
Musketeers of the whole Leaguer. Those of the Quarter of his Princely
Excellency began first, and then they followed Eastward the one after the
other, round about the Leager, as a running Fire. The Pike-men, and servants of
the Horsemen did carry burdens of Straw upon their Pikes and staves going so
through all parts of the Leager, that it made a great light. When the second
charge of the Canon began, was cast into the Town a Mortar: the ships (lying
by hundreds together along the Diese) did make Bonefires with pitch-Barrels and
did hang out Lanthorns upon their Masts. In sum, it was like as if the whole
Leager had bin on fire. The 26 at night went forth 2 companies of Horsemen, and
200 Fire. locks, which met by the way a Conuoy that went for Breda, of which
ours killed some and brought prisoners with them 40 men and about 80 Horses
well furnished: Also a Ritmaster and a Lieutenant, with a Cornet: for the
Wagons was given security. The 30 a Boere or a carrier of letters was hanged
here in the Leager, after he had been imprisoned about 10 weeks. Between the
30 and 31, the Gallery on the West side of the Vuchter-gate was brought over;
and the ninth binte of the other Gallery on the South side of the said Bulwark
(which the ^4 was appointed to be made) was brought over.

The first of September, ours that were in the Bulwark, began to break from
the said Bulwark in the Walls of the Town, which was about 12 foot thick,
and there to make a Mine. On this day Monsieur Stakenbroeck and the Duke of
Bouillon, with ten Cornets of Horse, three Pieces of Ordnance, and some hundred
Fire-lockes, are marched toward the little town called Endhouen, and got the
same, with the Castle, which lies there, on the second of the same month, with
agreement, or composition. About 200 men, which did withdraw themselves from
thence in a Moore near that place, part of them were defeated by the Duke de
Bouillon, and about 160 were brought prisoners into the Leager. Between the 9
and 10 in the morning, the Illustrious Prince did ride toward the Mine which
he did cause to spring, and it did work well, springing to the Vuchter-gaete.
The English had the Watch there, who fell upon the Enemy with a great courage,
and did so beat them out of the same, that thee were forced to retire and
leave the Halfe-Moone; they defended themselves at the first well, but ours
fell on with a false Alarm, likewise fell the Enemies with all their forces
upon us, ours did retire somewhat back, so that the Enemies were deceived,
thinking that they had the Victory; whereupon our second Mine sprung, so that
arms and legs flew in the Air, whereupon ours fell on again, and did beat
them by force out of the halfe-moone, (as aforesaid) so that we took in all
their works on the Vuchter-gate: in which halfemoone we began to work at 3 of
the Clock, because those of the Town should not shoot in it, we began also
presently to mine in the stone Bulwark, where on the 11 our Mine sprung,
whereupon, by the command of his Excellency, some of ours did fall, only to
see what countenance the Enemies held, which came presently back again, and
our Soldiers presently lodged in the breach of the Mine. Thereupon came a
Drummer from the Enemies, he pretended to ask leave to dig out two Captains,
which they said were on led in our Mine: the Prince (who was present in the
Works) commanded to be looked for them, which was also performed: unto those
that looked for them, was given a Couinex-daller by the Spanish; but it was not
therefore that they did it, because the Drummer came presently again,
requiring to speak with some of our Officers, to report unto the Prince to
treat of a Composition; whereupon there came presently 4 persons of quality out
of the Town, to the Illustrious Prince, (who sat in the Gallery upon a little
bench, being accompanied with some chief men, though few in number) speaking
there with the said prince, requiring four days, mean while they would send
unto the Infanta, and in case of default of releeuing in that time, would treat
of the rendition of the town which was denied unto them; notwithstanding, they
fell to a treaty of a parley, and they have on both sides sent Hostages: mean
time many Burgers and Ecclesiastical persons showed themselves upon the Walls.

On the 13 of the same month, those of the Bosh did dine with the Illustrious
Prince, and after dinner did return with the Princes Coaches back again into
the Town, and ours came again out of the same town; those of the Town did
leave their Commission with us, the which, together with the resolution of the
Prince, the high and mighty Lords the States did carry with them into the Town.

On Friday the 14, after dinner, about 4 of the clock, the Composition of the
rendition of the mighty and renowned Town of S'hertogenbosh, is absolutely
concluded in the Leager, in the House where the Illustrious Prince was lodged,
and was by both parties subscribed, to the great joy of ours, as well among the
chief, as common Inhabitants. The Committies are joyfully departed one from
another; and those of the Town (after they had subscribed the Composition)
departed with the Princes Coach to the Town; which were these, to wit, Fr.
Michael Episcopus Buscobus: Fr. Johannes Moors, Abbas Bernensus: Johannes
Hermans, Deccanus Buscobus: R. van Voorn: T. vanden Velde: R. van Ireneuen: B.
Loef vanden Sloot: Henrick Somerts: Peter Huberts, Hercalt Heuel.

Mean while there came in the Leager many thousand of Burgers from several
Towns and places, to see the brave Siege, the Illustrious and Courageous
Prince of Orange, and the departure of the Enemies out of S'hertogenbosh; of
which many were forced to lie all night in the Field.

The 17 the Prince caused the men of War to be armed, and there were made 2
Tents near the town, wherein were the Illustrious Prince of Orange, being
accompanied with his Princess, his Majesty of Bohemia, and his Queen, the
Prince of Denmark, besides 40, as well Dukes, Counts, as Barons, where those of
the Town did march by them: First there came a Company of Horse of ours, where
those of the town did pass near: then followed the Wagons and Carres, with
sick persons, baggage, Jesuits, Nuns, and Friars of all sorts: betwixt
these was Grobbendoncks wife in a Coach (who was but three weeks out of
Childbed) with whom the Prince had a long Discourse. At last at night followed
the Governor sitting upon a Horse, between 2 Coronels of ths States: the
Footmen were 22 Companies, being about 2000 men strong, together with the sick
and hurt persons, whereof there were not above 1200 in health: there followed
also three Companies of Horse, brave and well armed.

Of our side marched again into the Town the Guard of the Illustrious Prince,
the Company of my Lord Beuerweert, and also the Company of my Lord Wits,
besides some other Companies. Also in the Petler Sonce many Soldiers. On the
18 there was put an Orange Ancient on the steeple of S. John's Church: there
came many thousand Burgers from without into the Town: the Burgers within were
reasonably well contented, saying that they had not had want of victuals during
this Siege, but only of Butter and Cheese, which was very dear.

On the same day came his Princely Excellency himself into the Town, but
returned presently again to the Leager: Many of the high and mighty Lords the
States general, and Deputies of the same, are come into the Town with
Coaches, and were welcomed of the Magistrates, and are lodged at the sign of
the Sun.

On Wednesday the 19 of this month, the Gospel of God was preached in 3
Churches, and his Princely Excellency, his Majesty of Bohemia, together with
the Prince of Denmark being present in Saint John's Church, where were baptized
three children, to which the said Potentates were Godfathers: namely his
Majesty of Bohemia of the first child, called Amelia; his Princely Excellency
of the second child, named Johannes; and the Prince of Denmark of the third
child called Mauritius.

The Lord God save and bless from henceforth his Princely Excellency, who has
carried himself in this siege as a valiant and brave Soldier, fearing no
danger, but presenting himself always personally, to the encouragement of his
Soldiers, and terror of his Enemies. There was never seen in any siege in
this Country, so many Dukes, Barons, Gentiles, and Volunteers, which did come
out of several Kingdoms and places, but only before this Town of which no
body can speak enough, being all done in a short time. And that the Enemies
must give him the honor, that when he came there with his great and strong
Army, he could attempt nothing upon him, but sent a Letter into the Town, and
so went away.

For this great Victory, which the Lord God has (this year) given unto these
Lands, there is by the high and mighty Lords the States general ordained and
commanded to keep a Fast, and day of Prayer, whereupon they gave out this
Letter.

Well-beloved, etc.
WHereas it has pleased the Almighty Lord God to show us his exceeding great
mercy and compassion over these Lands, that he not only has stayed the great
forces of the Enemies, the which according to all appearance, were like to
break through in the midst of the heart of our Land, with destruction of goods
and lives of the Inhabitants, together with the reformed Religion, as also of
the liberties, laws and privileges; but that he above all this has greatly
blessed these Lands, with the taking of the Towns of Wesell and S'hertogenbosh,
to the increase of his holy Word, and comfort of many, which have been many
years under the tyranny of the Spaniards, Therefore the high and mighty Lords
the States, have found very necessary to bid and command a general fasting
day, in all the united Provinces, Countries, Shires, and their associate Towns
and places, to be on Wednesday next within 14 days, which shall be the 10 of
October, stilo nouo, for to give hearty thanks, praise and glory unto the Lord
for all these undeserved blessings, and incessantly to pray, that he will give
unto the Inhabitants of S'hertogenbosh the true knowledge of his holy Gospel,
and to send to that and true and faithful Teachers. Also that the Almighty God
will be with the Army of this State, as a Lord of all things, for to beat away
the Enemies out of our Dominions, and to continue his blessings over us: Also
that he will defend from all evil and dangers his Excellency the Prince of
Orange, and to multiply his days wtih wisdom blessings and felicity, and to
conserve his person, and all his Army in health, to the glory of his holy Name,
and increase of his holy Word. Therefore we require, etc.

In the Hage, September. 24. 1629.

In the Town are chosen new Magistrates, and the old are released from their
Oaths done to the King of Spain. And Sir Philips de Thienen, Coronell over
the Regiment of his Highness van Brederode, is put as Commander over the
Garrison. The Burgers are also releafed from their Oath unto the King of
Spaint, and took their Oaths unto these Lands.

A Iournall or Day-register of that which is happened within the Town of
S'hertogenbosh during the last siege. Written by one of the Spanish side.
ON the last of April, 1629, the Enemies came unto the Sconce Creueceur, 150
ships strong. The first of May they came to Orten, and did presently entrench
themselves from Orten to Hintem, from Hintem to Dungen, and to Gastell, from
Vucht to Vlymen, unto the Bosh-sloot, where they brought about 50 ships with
Bauens, and further at Engelen, where they labored very earnestly.

The 5 there came from Breda, along Flymen, into the Town, between 8 and 9
hundred men, which went up to the middle in water.

The 6 we shot with a piece of Ordnance from the great Sconce amongst 15
Horsemen, of which some were flaine.

The 10 the Captain Dirck Busschieter with 12 men, did pierce through the
Coe-wall, which the Enemies (being strong 59 men) thought to hinder our coming
thither, but were forced to retire with the loss of two men.

In 14 days there is from without happened but very little: for they did
nothing else but entrench themselves. At this time the Butter began already to
be worth 10 or 12 Stiuers, and yet hardly could any be gotten. Whereupon the
Governor and Magistrates did command, that all Honey-sellers, and
spice-bread-makers should no more use or boil any Honey, upon penalty of 100
Dollers to be paid by them that shall be sound in fault, because they would
eat the Honey upon their bread. The Soldiers could hardly get any victuals,
for that they were so dear, wherefore it was commanded that the Porke should
be sold for 6 stiuers a pound, a pound of Butter for 6 stiuers, and a pound of
Cheese for 4 stiuers.

Until the 20 the Prince Frederick Henricke, had not shot with Ordnance upon
the town, but because many houses were to be broken down, and many trees for
to be used for his fortification.

The 22 the Prince caused to shoot upon the Orten-gate nine shots of Canon. We
saw also a battery made by the Enemies at Hintem.

Tho same day there went out two Messengers of ours, which returned for
Brussels, but could not get through, for that the town was already beset.

The same day all the houses were visited, and all the Corn that was in the
town was set down together, with the number of all the dwellers.

The 23 in the morning we saw in the air over the Town about Orten, two
Raine-bowes, with the back one against the other, with two Suns between the
said Raine-bowes, the one above the other, what the interpretation is, God
knows.

The 24 our Soldiers brought in 14 Horses of the Enemies, which altogether
were sold for 28 Gilders, yet more 3 horses of the Enemies for 4 stiuers and 8
pence, yet another for 3 stiuers: a little Carre of Hay did cost 60 Gilders.
The Enemies did shoot again upon the Town: and two messengers arrived here
through the Leager; their report was kept secret from the Burgers: we bought a
horse for a stiuer; and Mr. Pauwels gave a stiuer for the 4 shoes. There was a
Horse sold for a pipe of Tobacco, for which they could have had 12 pound
Flemmish two months before.

The 26 a Herring cost half a stiuer, an Egg one stiuer, a pound of Beef 5
stiuers, Mutton 8 stiuers.

The 27 was published, that no body should cut down any wood which was in
their Gardens, upon penalty of 100 Ducats, because the same must be used on the
Works in the Walks. The same day the Enemies did shoot through the
holy-Crosse-gate, into the house of Mary Grietmakers.

The 28 we fell upon the enemies Quarters at Vucht and 5 men were slain.

The 29 we fell out by the Vuchtergate, on the Hamer, and at night at 11 of the
clock we took from the enemies a Corpse de Guarde, wherein they kept watch.
The same day we skirmished a long time with the Enemies.

The 30 we made an undermine through the walls of the Town, safely to march
toward the Hintemer gate upon the Watch; This day the Enemies shot very much;
and a shot came through the steeple of S. John's Church, and also through the
steeple near the Boome.

The 31 the Enemies did shoot above 110 shot with half Curtowes, by which some
of the Burgers houses, and the Bishops house was damnified, though in this
month there were none slain by the shooting of Cannons, but only Captain
Ratelo, and a Gunner was hurt. The Mils have also till now ground.

The 1 of June, the Captain Dommell bergen gathered his Company for the first
time. This day and night the Enemies did shoot very fiercely upon the
batteries, and were approached to the Hintemer gate more then half a Musket
shot, where there were many Soldiers on both sides hurt and slain.

The second on Whitson Eve, we shot very fiercely upon the Enemies, specially
from the Hintemer-gate, and the outworks, so that every Muskettier did shoot
30, 40, or 50 shots, whose breasts were so blew that they could not continue any
longer. The Enemies did shoot down with their Ordnance many rare outworkes of
S. John's Church. Here arrived a messenger from Brussels, whereupon there was at
night a fire made upon the steeple of the said Church, for a token that the
said Messenger was safely arrived.

The 3. upon Whitsonday, we bought Beef yet for 7 and 8 stiuers a pound,
Murton for 8, 9, and 10 stiuers.

The 4 we fell out of the Town upon the Enemies Trenches toward Vucht, and
defeated many of them. And on the Hintemer gate, an ancient Soldier had his
head shot off.

The 5, on both sides, as well out as upon the great Sconce was very fiercely
shot, wherein the Dutch which were come out of Breda, did defend themselves
very manfully: wherefore they did mock those of the Bosh, saying, that they
were fit to fetch Merchants and Boores, where they do not fear to be beaten.
The same day Peter Cabusins, Constable, brought from the little Sconce into the
Town 2 half Curtowes. Before the Vuchter-gate a man had his legs shot off:
and a Boy, which came from the Sconce to the Town, to fetch there a bottle of
Wine, was slain in the Vuchter gate. At the same day, the silver S. John on
the Vuchter gate his back was shot in pieces.

The 6, a woman dwelling at the figne of the Handbow, being in her chamber,
both her legs were shot off.

The 7 the Enemies came so near under the little Sconce, that they in the
Works did drink one to another with a Kanne of Beer, and Tobacco, which they
did give one to another with their pikes, and fell prefently to shoot again.
The Beggins that were in the Cloisters, did make Cushions for the Soldiers;
and the priests made hearts to hang about their necks.

The 8 and 9 they shot very fiercely one against the other. On the 10 the
Enemies shot through S. John's Church, and did hurt a man which was confessing
his sins: the same day a man's head was shot off, and also a Soldiers ear;
there were shot to this day 1000 shot.

The 11 the Enemies came near unto the Sconce before the Vuchter-gate, and
took in the Hornenworke, with maine force.

The 12 was shot on both sides very fiercely on the Hintemer gate.

The 13 and 14 we did still continue our shooting, and took in some Works
from the Enemies, and brought into the Town 2 Rondasses. At night the Enemies
did set the Captains house on fire with their Granads, in the little Sconce,
where also flew up 4 Barrels of Gunpowder, and 100 Granads.

The 15 the Enemies thought to fill the ditch of the little Sconce, but were
hindered of it by ours, where there were slain that night above 30 of the
Enemies, and of ours were but 2 hurt. On the same day it was published at all
corners of the streets, that every one should break off the Lead which was
about their houses, and to bring it into the Towne-house, as also from the
water and pissing-places, which the Magistrates would begin first, and they
that did not perform it should forfeit both life and goods.

The 16 at night ours made a salley out with shallops upon the Enemies
Trenches; where they defeated 2 Sentinels, with some Soldiers, one that stood
a fishing had both his legs shot off.

The 17 we fell out on the Hintemer gate, upon the stone Bridge, and defeated
many of the enemies, we brought also in the Town many armours, and a Sergeant
of theirs.

The 18 we took on the place called Muntell, an Enginier, which was about his
Works, and we did cut off both his ears.

The 19 we skirmished fiercely one against another.

The 20 the Enemies thought to lay a bridge between both the Sconces, with
Bauins and Deal boards, which we did set on fire with pitch hoopes, and caused
the Enemies to retire.

The 21 the Enemies did fall very fiercely upon the works of the little Sconce.

The 22 the Enemies did all their endeavors to get in our Horne-worke, but were
forced to retire. And the Ancient Cornelis Berberts was killed with a shot,
which came from the Enemies.

The 23 early in the morning, the Enemies came twcie upon our Works of the
Sconce, but were forced to retire; they caused a Mine to spring, but did no
hurt, we did kill many with Flayles wherewith the Corn was beaten, we got two
that were hurt from the Enemies, which we brought in the Hospital to be cured.
The same day after dinner, the Enemies came again upon our Works, causing a
Mine to spring, together with one of ours, they played thereupon with half
Courtowes, shooting fifteen shot upon ours of the Sconce, there we very
fiercely skirmished, and the Captain Endenhouldts went first on with his
soldiers, giving them good courage, whereby he had got great honor, and
defeated many men.

The 24 there was very fiercely shot on both sides, and were thrown in the
great Sconce eleven Granads, which Sconce was very much battered, so that the
walls were almost filled with bullets.

The 25 Colonel Bastocke was killed upon the outworkes of the Sconce, who has
at all times carried himself very valiant.

On the same day, and on the 26, the Enemies did nothing else but fill the
ditches with wet Bauins of trees, part of which ours fetched out again.

About this time our horsemen did fetch grass from the Doncke, which ours did
dry, and made hey of it in the town, some Burgers having the watch on the
Orten-gate, of which some were a drinking in the house of Hanshen Vangenuchten,
where there came a Bullet of an half Courtowe through the top, which made a
breach that a horse could have gone through it, but there was no body hurt.

The 27 we did nothing else but fiercely shoot and fight.

The 28 we did fall out upon the Enemies Trenches, and upon their battery, but
we found there no Ordinance, for that they every night took away the same.

And ours fetched out of the ditches above 300 Bauins. The same day we played
with our Canon upon the Enemies Works, and we heard and saw (as the speech
went) the soldiers of Count Henry vandenbergh, upon the Broom field.

The 29 ours did shoot very fiercely out of the town, and fetched again at
night about 300 Bauins out of the Ditches of the little Sconce, where were
slain two of our Soldiers. The same day a woman's two legs were shot off,
and a boys thumb.

The 30 we heard much shooting about Dungen, by which we understood that the
Kings and Imperial troops were near* whereupon we shot very fierely from the
town. At the same time there came over five Dutch soldiers complaining that
in three days they had not eaten any bread, and would serve the Emperor.

Betwixt the 30 and 31, the Enemies fell fiercely upon the Horne-worke of our
Sconce, and played very fast upon them, but ours caused them to retire, in
which were slain a Captain and a Sergeant of ours.

The first of July we got tidings, that the Spanish upon the Dungen* had gotten
many prisoners of the Enemies which was esteemed to be above 200 soldiers, and
50 Wagons, besides some horsemen.

The same day the Enemies did shoot through the Priests Church in the Quire,
and also in Saint John's Church in the Organs, but did small hurt.

The 2 a woman, which was a drawing a Kanne of Beer, was shot with a Bullet of
a Canon, which took away her apron from about her belly, and brake the Kan in
pieces, without any more hurt.

The 3, the Enemies shot over the Market place, that the Bullet came in a
Chamber of the house, at the sign of the world. Also twice through a Mill. At
night in the Enemies Leaguer, was an alarm with Drum beating and sound of
Trumpets, because Count Henry vanden bergh prayed very fiercely with Ordnance
and Muskets upon them.

The 4. there was slain a Burger, named John Hendrixson as he was a measuring
the Priests Corn in the Laughed, which was the first Burger that was killed,
the second Burger was called Yougen Coert, which the same day being at the
Orten-gate, was shot in the head.

The 5 the Enemies threw Granads into the little Sconce, so that the Church,
being a little Chapel, fell down. The Enemies were also very forward with
the filling of the Ditch of the great Sconce.

The 6 at night 4 of our Land-souldiers went out in the enemies Works, and did
set on fire some Sconce-kornes, because they kept no good Watch. If we had bin
strong we had done a notable exploit.

The 7 (being the Bosh Fair) at night we fell out of the town in the enemies
trenches (when they did fill the ditches) some of ours were slain, and some
hurt on both sides.

The 8 ours fell on the Enemies works on the Hintemer gate, where was killed a
Captain, also many of the Enemies: from the 8 till the 14 the enemies
attempted nothing upon the Sconces and Town, but shooting and working, those
of the Sconce did also work against them, and separated the Sconce. About this
time two messengers went out, to wit, John Pleyte and Awy Awy, for to try if
they could go through the Leager; but saw no means to do it; so they came
back again.

The same day one of our Ancients (which in a salley was taken prisoner) came
out of the Leager home again, with a fair Hat and feather, and a silver
Sword: he said that it was given him by the Prince, who had also made him good
cheer. Also ours brought in some prisoners, being in poor clothes, they were
English and Scotchmen. The 14 the Kings Corn was sold to every one that would
have it for 18 Gilders the Met; the Soldiers got Bread, Cheese, Beer at the
Kings allowance.

The 15 a pound of Mutton was sold for 18 stiuers.

The 16 and 17 the enemies shot very fiercely upon the great Sconce, making
trial to take the same, but were manfully resisted.

The 18 in the morning at 5 of the Clock, ours caused a Mine to spring, and
retired then toward the town; whereupon the Enemies took in the said Sconce.

One of Captain Dirck's soldiers being before the Holy Ghost, upon the wall,
was shot with a Canon in 4 or 5 pieces.

The same day a soldier being on the Sconce, was shot in the head, that his
brains flew out, so that he knew not himself, and we could see nothing but
that he was dead; whereupon his Compagnons that were with him, carried him into
the Churchyard, laying him in a Chest to bury him; coming there, he lifted
up his arms and legs, and rose up out of the Chest, to the great wonder of
those that were with him, who carried him into the Hospital, there to be
cured. The same day, in the Shilders street, a woman's head was shot off, and a
Boy through the body as he sat a weaning. The same evening ours did retire out
of the little Sconce to to the town, fearing the enemies would fall upon them,
and for that they were needful in the town.

At night we fell out upon the Leager of the enemies and defeated 4 Sentinels:
and we brought through the Leager two messengers, having each some Pigeons with
them, for to bring us tidings: for that we had not had any Messenger in a
month, because that the enemies Sentinels did stand very close together, and
between them some water-spaniels, which (during the Wars) never was seen
the like.

The 19 Marcelis Andreesen standing at watch on the Orten-gate, had one of his
legs shot off: the same day there came two Drummers, having with them some
pickled Herrings to distribute amongst their Friends.

The 20 the Enemies did shoot very fiercely through S. John's Church, and upon
the rowne.

The 21 there came again into the town 2 Drummers to release some prisoners,
who had again some pickled Herrings for to give away: they took with them
many Horses which we had taken from them, and were sold amongst the Enemies,
because we had no food for them: the same Drummers brought tidings, that in the
Leager, some messengers that were sent by Count Henry vanden bergh toward the
town, were to suffer death. The old pickled Herrings were for 4, 5, and 6
stiuers a piece; Beef for 9 and 10 stiuers a pound; a bushel of Turnips
(which before the siege was sold for a stiuer) was sold for 5, 6, and 9 stiuers.

At that same day there came some other Drummers, which also brought some
Limons and Herrings to give away.

The 22 the Constable, Hans den ouden Clerk's Head was shot of. On the same
night there came a Enginier upon the Doncke, before S. John's Gate, for to
measure something, the which our Soldiers got and brought in, and was in great
danger to lose his life. At that time the enemies shot fiercely with Ordnance.

The 23 the Burgers on the Orten-gate shot fiercely upon the Enemies. This day
the Magistrates denied (for the first time) Gunpowder amongst the Burgers. And
one called Groen, sitting talking before his door, had one of his legs shot
off.

The 24, from the Hintemer gate, and Vuchter-gate, were shot by ours above 300
shot upon the Enemies.

The 25. (on S. James day) our Soldiers brought in 7 Boores, and a Boy, which
they had fetched near under the Enemies quarters; if the Boy had not cried,
they would have gotten a Wagon with women, who were come to see. This night
departed many Companies of the Enemies, and ours were in their Cops de guardes,
where they found no body. They brought a shallop full of Wheele-barrowes,
Shouels, Deals, and Wood.

The 26 the Burgers watches were altered out of the Gates, they were now
commanded to go upon the steeples on the walls of the Town. The same day the
Enemies made a great falley upon our Halfe-Moone; where there were slain many
of them, and 7 of ours, with 10 hurt: yet we were forced to leave the fame.

The 27 our soldiers fell out, and brought in again some Wheelbarrowes and
other things, with some prisoners and Horses: but the Governor commanded that
we should bring in no more Horses, because we had no food for them within the
Town.

The 28 a Bakers man coming at night homewards, going to bed, fell from the
Chamber, who rose up, and went again to the Chamber, and to bed, who in the
morning was found dead, and buried the next day: the Clarke hearing the dead
sighing, called some men, and there came presently by hundreds together, to
open the Grave, to fetch the man out; a Bachelor took him by the hand, and
drew him out of the Chest, but he was dead, and remained dead; his cheeks
were very red, and the blood ran out of his mouth, which many hundred men did
see; whereupon the whole town was in alteration. On this day fresh butter was
sold one Gilder a pound, and salt butter 30 stiuers, a couple of young Pigeons
for 24 stiuers, a Pullet a rixdoller, a pound of Mutton 20 and 24 stiuers,
candles 12 stiuers a pound, an Egg two blancks.

The 29 and 30 the enemies shot with Arrows, such as we shoot with Bows. This
day the Sho omakers and Lether-sellors did dry their Hides, because there was
no tallow to be gotten: the Tallow of the beasts was sold for 12 stiuers a
pound, which we melted together with oil of Turnips, to be eaten upon bread:
Also Mustard was mingled with oil of Turnips, to be eaten with bread: the
Horses which were brought in, did eat the leaves of the trees, and the
Constables did beat them from the walls into the ditches of the town; those
that could not swim over, were drowned.

The last day of the same month the Enemies shot in pieces on of the Mills.

The first of August the Enemies shot very fiercely with Cannon and Muskets
upon the Town; and the Burgers did much wonder that the Soldiers did keep
watch in the Fish-market, S. John's, and the Orten-gates* which were the best
Watches

The 2 the Enemies did a manfull salley on the Counterscarp before the
Vuchter-gate, but were forced to retire, with great loss of theirs, and 4 of
our s. The same day a child's head was shot off, and a woman's leg. At this
time the Ecclesiastical persons, as Paters of the Jesuits priests, Friars S.
John's Monks, Baselers, and others, did all together make up two Counterscarps
or works, behind the Sistets of Orten. We got also tidings that the
Imperialists were come into the Betuwe, and that they had taken Reuen, and
Wagemingen, but we afterward understood the contrary.

The 4 the enemies shot two shots near the Powder-steeple, so that a Mill fell
down. The same day the Enemies made a salley upon the foremost Works, on the
Vuchter-gate, with about 500 Frenchmen, amongst which were many Gentiles and
Volunteers: there were slain many of them, and they were forced to retire. The
Enomies shot many Granads upon the Molen-brugger-wall, so that every one did
retire from thence farther into the Town.

The 5 the Enemies caused a Mine to spring, and they fell in the fore-worke,
but were forced with the loss of some Soldiers and Volunteers, to retire
back again. The same day the enemies did send for their slain and hurt men,
among which were many Gentiles.

The 6 there was much shooting on both sides, upon and out of our foreworke.
The Enemies killed with a shot from the Donck, 5 men on the Vuchter-gaete, and
some lost their arms and legs: there were so many Granads shot into the
town, that the people were forced to retire deeper into the town, and were
much afraid: the Enemies fetched the earth with whole Baskets from the
fore-worke, and besides approached still.

The 7 the Captain Campaign commanded a great many prisoners of the Enemies to
go to the Donck, with the which he ran over unto the Enemies; with this
Campaign lodged always the Drummers, and he knew all that which passed by the
Governor in the town, which we do not doubt, but that he has manisested it
unto the Prince: they shot so fiercely with Granads, that we did not respect
the shooting of the Ordnance: and there were daily slain so many men, that I
leave to set down the number.

The 8 the Enemies came into our foreworke, which we left to save our
Soldiers, because there were daily many killed. The same day the Governor and
Magistrates, caused the Burgers to be assembled, propounding that the Vuchteren
wall should be entrenched, and the houses pulled down, unto which the Burgers
were unwilling, saying; if we could not hold the Sconces and out-workes, and if
our walls of the town cannot resist, what shall it be when our houses are
broken down, and we loose our grounds. And they said also, you have broken
down (without our consent) the Wind-milles, you may also do this if it do
like you.

The 9, there was offered by the Governor and Magistrates, that whatsoever
Burgers or voluntaries would go with the soldiers in the Trenches, for to
resist the Enemies, that they may do it freely, whereupon some said, if we do
it, it is more then reason that we should receive the Kings money and bread.

The 10 and 11 the Enemies shot many Granads, which caused great pitiful
cryings and damage.

The 11 the Governors and the Magistrates caused the Burgers again to be
assembled, propounding that it was certain that Captain Compagne had
manifested unto the Enemies the state of the town, and that there should be
chosen Commissioners, some out of the Clergy, some out of the Council of
War, the third from among the Burgers, what they would ordain to make and to
break, that same should be accomplished, unto which the Burgers would not
condescend; therefore the Governors and Magistrates required of them, that
they would subscribe an Act, that they could not coudescend unto the cutting
off, of the Vuchteren wall, nor also would not go to the Trenches, of which
there was nothing done. The Clergy was also assembled for to furnish money for
the payment of the soldiers.

The 12 the Enemies shot very fircely with Granads, of which one fell in the
Crosse-brothers-Church; the which destroyed all the seats, and all the Glasses
in the same Church. A Monk of about 80 years of age, was crushed in pieces,
so that there was found nothing but one of his legs, and a piece of his head.
This day there went three Messengers out of the town, from which the Pigeons did
return. The same day there were buried in the town two French Counts: the one
did serve the King, and the other the States.

The 13 there was very fiercely shot, and at night were sent into the town 11
Granads, which did great hurt to the houses and men, so that every one was in
fear: the same day the Governor and President assembled with the Lord Bishop,
to what end, is unknown to the Burgers: whereupon followed, that at night
there went out about one thousand men, for to cut through a damme, but could
not be brought to the effect. They brought in some prisoners, and killed some;
This night the Granads did much hurt to the men and houses.

The 14 in the morning the Enemies shot very fiercely into the town with
Grenads, that it was very lamentable to see, and rained some houses; of some
the heaues and tops were damunified very much.

The 15 the Enemies played very fiercely with their Canon.

The 16 the Enemies shot above 300 shot upon the Vuchter gate and street, and
about 25 Granads, so that the people could not go quietly in the streets; the
Crosse-Brothers were feign to retire out of the Cloister, and went by the
Friars to dwell, and to do their service. We got this day good tidings,
whereupon was commanded unto the watches to let fly all their Ancients as well
upon the gates, as the walls, for a token that we yet were well minded and
courageous.

The 17 the Enemies did nothing else but shoot with Ordnance, and threw 20
Granads in the town.

The 18 the Enemies brought many Bauins for to fill the ditch. They did also a
sally upon our Works before the Graefse-gate, which did endure from about 11
of the clock at noone, until 6 of the clock at night, where there were slain
and hurt many on both sides; Also there were some upon the walls, but were
forced to retire.

The 19 there were sent 5 Granads upon the Vuchteren-wall, and then it was very
quiet, but were brought near the town about 50 Wagons with Bauins, they shot
but with three pieces of Ordnance, though at night again with Granads, so that
the dead men which were buried, were dug out of their graves.

The 20 the Enemies shot very fiercely upon the Vuchter-gate and the Bulworke,
that there fell great breaches out of the said bulworke in the ditches; Also
some Sconce-kornes fell down* the same day assembled the Governor, President,
and the Captains of the Burgers, with the Lord Bishop, but to what end
remains secret. This day the Enemies did a sally upon the Works without the
Graefse-gate, where they were beaten back, and many men were slain and hurt.

The 21 the Enemies did again a sally upon the said Work, which ours were
forced to leave.

The 22 the soldiers of the Captain Dirck de leeue, brought in three horses,
with a Cornet, which they took prisoner (as they say) from Wyckde duersten, by
whom we understood that Count Henry vander bergh had taken Amersfort, and three
days after pillaged it, and left it. Also that the Enemies had taken with an
enterprise the town of Wesell.

The 23 the Enemies shot again very fiercely with Canon, but no more with
Granads, whereof we were glad: the Governors and Magistrates did ordain;
that the Burgers in the morning and after dinner, should work three hours. At
night the Enemies did make Bone fires, and joyful tokens for the taking of
Wesell, they played also with Ordnance and Muskets that never was seen the like.

The 24 the Enemies did come very near with their approaches.

The 25 the Enemies shot with granads upon the fish-market, so that every one
did put their household stuff into the sellors, and themselves went deeper in
the town.

The 26 the Enemies did fill a part of the Ditches of the town, and approached
every day very much, they threw with Granads, by which was set an house on
fire, upon the which they shot very fiercely, by which means many Burgers and
soldiers were slain: there came tidings that the Enemies had taken Santvliet,
but was not true.

The 27 in the morning betimes, two posts were sent to Brussels, which took
with them pigeons; we had not had in 7 weeks any tidings nor Messengers: this
day ours brought in the Drossart of Gorcums-man, with a brave horse, who said
that Gount John of Nassaw was with 16000 men about Endhouen, and that it was
intended upon Heusden. This day the Enemies were very much busy to fill the
ditches, and shot very fiercely upon Saint John's steeple, and with granads in
the Hintemer street, which caused great hurt on men and houses.

The 29 the Enemies began again to shoot with granads, specially upon the
Priests Cloister, where were some houses altogether destroyed: this day there
came a pigean in the town, which was a token that the said Posts were come
through the Leaguer, and out of danger. The same day the Governor and
Magistrates did command that the Vuchteren wall should be cut off; and the
Magistrates gave Beer unto the Pyoners: the Governors divided also muition
bread amongst the needy Burgers, if the town should be relieved, that then
they should pay it again within half a year; if not, they should not pay for
it. There was also sold Oil, Stock Fish, Rise, and other victuals, that were
bought for the Garrison, this was done for to get money. The Oil was sold for
25 stiuers the Kanne, a pound of Rise 4 stiuers, Stockfish 4 stiuer a pound.

The 30 the Enemies were busy to fill up the ditches with Bauens; of which we
set some on fire. The Enemies were so bold, that some looked over the Walls,
which came not well to pass for them.

The 31 we began to lose our courage, some Burgers refused to watch, and others
to work; thereupon the Magistrates commanded that the Burgers should watch of
two nights one: and unto those that did work was given Beer, Bread, and
Cheese, for that they should be the more willing.

The first of September there rose great alteration amongst the Burgers who
dwelled upon the Vuchteren wall, because there was given order to make a Ditch
on the Orchen, and through a Field behind Jacob Gysbrechts, in that manner to
cut through the said Wall; whereupon the Burgers (being 20 or 30 in number) went
to the President Henry Fransen van gessell, complaining unto him of the same,
who gave them for answer, Beat them away if they be there.

The 2 the same persons went into the Townhouse, where they got no contentment
according to their mind, returning homewards, said, There lie our Arms, we
will not watch, but keep our Houses and Vuchteren Wall, which was of more
importance then their watching or working.

The Enemies shot so fiercely upon the Coc-wall with Ordnance and Granads, that
many houses were thrown down: there came also a bullet through St. John's
Church, which damnified the whole Organs in our Ladies Quire.

The 4 the Enemies shot so many Granads upon the Vuchteren wall, that no body
could keep him there for fear of being hurt; the like was every where in the
town.

The Enemies came with their Galleries near our out-workes, which we have
before the Vuchter-gate, over the ditch into our Bulwarks.

The 5, 6, 7, and following days, the jealousy of the Burgers did more and
more increase against the Governor, his brother-in-law, and the President;
Many said publicly, We were commanded to provide our houses upon great
penalties, and now there is no Powder; We have many years brought up
Fortification money and Subsidies, for to fortify the Walls and town, now we
are well served, we have a rich Governor, a rich President, etc, the which
have cozened us very much, and such like injurious words; whereupon followed,
that upon the 9 and 10 the Enemies took in the halfe-moone before the
Vuchter-gate, and ours were retired into the Town.

The 11 in the morning, there sprung a Mine in the great Bulwark, which did
make such an alteration amongst the Burgers, that each cried for to parley:
whereupon some were committed, and a great many of the Burgers ran upon the
Walls, putting off their Hats, and so the composition was agreed upon, and
subscribed on the 14, and the Governor, with the Garrison, and many
Ecclesiastical persons, and some Burgers, marched out of the Town on the 17:
whereupon there was in the town great heaviness.

FINIS.

