THE APPELLATION OF JOHN PENRI, unto the High court of Parliament, from the
bad and injurious dealing of the Archb. of Canterb. and other his colleagues of
the high commission: Wherein the complainant, humbly submitting himself and his
cause unto the determination of this honorable assembly: craves nothing else,
but either release from trouble and persecution, or just trial.

PSALM. 35. 19, 20, etc. Let not them O Lord, that are mine enemies unjustly,
rejoice over me: neither let them vvinke with the eye, that hate me without a
cause. For they speak not as friends: but they imagine deceitful words
against the quiet of (...) land. And they gaped on me with their mouths,
saying (...) our eye has seen. Thou see it O Lord: keep not (...) far from
me, O Lord. Arise and wake to my judgment, (...) to my cause, my God, and my
Lord. Judge me O Lord, according to my righteousness: and let them not rejoice
over me. Let them not say in their hearts, O our soul rejoice: neither let
them say, we have devoured him. IEREM. 20. 21. The Lord is with me as a
mighty Giant, therefore my persecutors shall be ouerthrovvn, and shall not
prevail, and shall be greatly confounded: for they have done vnvvisely, etc.
ANNO DOM. 1589.

To the right Honorable, the assembly of the High court of Par^iament, JOHN
PENRI wishes the direction of Gods spirit, in all their consultations, that
they may so behave themselves in the setting forward of Gods glory, and the
good of the weal public: (as in the day, wherein the son of God, Christ
Jesus, shall in flaming fire, render everlasting perdition, to those that obey
not the Gospel) they may be found blameles in his sight. March 7.
THat which in regard of my private safety and quietness (right Honorable and
worshipful) I am bound before the Lord to perform, the same has the credit
and good report of the cause of God, in the promoting whereof, by his great and
unspeakable mercies, I have been employed whether I would or no, at this
present enforced me to accomplish. The care of procuring mine own safety (by all lawful ways) from the dangerous attempts of those that seek nothing else,
but mine utter overthrow and undoing: nature it self, and especially Gods
ordinance has laid upon my shoulders. The burden whereof I cannot reject,
unless I would show my self on the one side, more unnatural then the brute
beasts, which will never be guilty of their own damage for the most part, if
they see any way to avoid the same: and on the other side, to correct Gods
providence in refusing to try all the lawful means, which he has ordained and
appointed for the delivery of his children, out of the hands of their
malicious enemies. But seeing unto this care of my private safe guard, is also
joined the public clearing of Gods eternal truth, from all the slanders,
wherewith the iniquity of mine adversaries by my unjust trouble would take
occasion to stain the same: may not all men clearly see, that I am drawn
into this action with a twofold coard (which as the wise man says, is not
easily broken) of unanswerable necessity?

The unjust dealing of the Archb. of Canterb. and others of the high
commission, is such toward me, and of a long time has bin, as in the days of
peace and public tranquillity, of my gracious and dread sovereign Queen
ELIZABETH: I may now justly account my self, to be one, that in regard of
liberty and quietness, am unjustly bereaved of the former public benefit. The
cause why I enjoy not the same is, that my conscience will not suffer me (whom
the Lord of his infinite goodness, has enlightened with the knowledge of the
saving truth of his gospel) to behold with silence, the lamentable misery of
souls, wherein my countrymen the inhabitants of Wales live at this present,
both in respect of their great ignorance and the grievous deformity of gods
sanctuary among them. And I enjoy not the same, because unto my small ability,
I have labored and do labor to effect some redress of their foresaid
misery, by lamenting their case, showing unto them and your Hh. their grief,
together with the medicine, which the lord has sanctified as his own
ordinance to cure such maladyes. An unworthy president to be conveyed unto
posterities, that it should not be lawful for a man in the time of knowledge,
to lament the ignorance of his brethren, in the time of the saving health of
men's souls, to withstand their violent perdition, in the time of Sions
building, to lament and repair the ruins thereof. And that in a state
professing enmity unto the Romish religion, it cannot be safe for a man to
speak against the fornication of that strumpet and humbly to entreat, that the
holy temple may be cleansed of all her pollution. And yet behold, such is my
case for bewailing the spiritual bondage of my countrymen, for showing unto
them the way whereby they might be restored unto the glorious liberty of the
sons of God, for craving that they may be trained in this way, and for
mocioning that gods holy sanctuary among them may be purified, I am tested from
post to pillar, and permitted to have no assurance of quiet aboade in any of
her majesty's territories and dominions, by the men aforenamed, besides the
injurious imprisonment, wherein heretofore they have detained me for this same
cause. And to the end I may truly acquaint you of the parliament with my
troubles, and the true causes thereof, you are to understand, that the
beginning of these men's hatred toward me, did arise from the goodwill I bear
unto the glory of my God and the good of his church, and that the continuance
thereof, is for the same cause. For until such time, as the Lord vouchsafed
to use me (most unworthy, I acknowledge from the bottom of my heart) as an
instrument to motion the parliament, holden by prorogation, in the 29. year of
her Majesty's reign, in the cause of Gods truth, I was a man altogether
unknown unto th'Archb. or any other of the high commission, by whom I am now
persecuted. My suite then unto the parliament was, that the gospel of Christ
might in a saving measure, be made known and published amongst the inhabitants
of wales, my dear and native countrymen. The equity of this petition; I
manifested in a published treatise, allowed to be printed by public authority.
The supplication, Master Edward Donlee.
together with the printed treatise, were preferred by a worshipful gentleman
of my country, being himself a member of the house, who also showed the
equity of the petition, and in effect avouched the truth of that which in the
treatise was set down. The suit I was persuaded, would have been very
plausible in a christian state, and the parliament showed no disliking thereof,
though they sinned in the careless respect they had thereunto. Th'Archb. and
his associates were contrary minded, they thought the enterprise to be
intolerable. And yet was there no alteration of the established government of
Bishops at that time sought for. The dislike of the petition they did not
conceal, and therefore presently dispatched their warrants to call in the
printed books, and to enquire for the author. The books in number about 500.
together with my self, were fastened upon by the wardens of the Stacioners, M.
Bishop and Denham, accompanied with Cole the Pursiuaunt, whereupon being carried
before the high commissioners, I was for enterprising the former action,
charged by th'Archb. own mouth, not only to be a factious slaunderer of her
Majesty's government: but also to have published flat treason and heresy in my
said treatise, I was threatened very bloodily, and reviled upon in a most
unchristian sort, with earnest protestation, that they woondered how I durst
solicit the parliament in that petition. See the cursed and outrageous
prophanenes of these, whom the Lord has in his just judgment given over to
withstand the mighty power of his word! As though the matter were to be
astonished at, that they should be more forward in hindering the cause of Gods
glory, then meaner men should be to promote the same. If they had been the
true governors of Gods Church, they would have showed themselves the most
earnest favorers of that supplication. For it is well known, in what a taking
the country of wales is, for want of the true knowledge of God. And assuredly
they, who of intended malice withstood that motion, shall one day feel the
price and reward of their disobedience unto their never ending woe. Well, mine
offense in presuming to speak in the cause of God, oppugned by my betters, was
accounted so heinous, as in close prison I must be kept 12. days, at the
keepers uttermost peril. Before my departure from the commission,
understanding their intent to commit me, I demanded the particular cause why I
was so hardly dealt with. Answer was made, that they would examine me again
and then I should know. After a months imprisonment I was delivered without
any examination, or any mention of the crimes of heresy and treason
wherewith I had been charged. And so unto this day, I remain ignorant of any
expressed cause wherefore, they either took away my books, or debarred me of
my liberty, and ready by the grace of God, both to convince the high
commission of most injurious dealing in the premises, and to clear my self of
any crime they can lay to my charge, whenever, before you of this honorable
assembly, or any other equal judgment seat they darebe tried with me.

Since the time of my release, I saw my self bound in conscience, not to
give over my former purpose, in seeking the good of my countrymen, by the
rooting out of ignorance and blindness from among them. And as it pleased the
lord to increase this my care, so have mine adversaries augmented their rage
and fury toward me, and especially to the cause that I maintain. This furye
of theirs, at diverse times showed by many of their instruments, did especially
manifest it self on the 29. of January last. At which time one Richard Walton
having a commission from the Archb. and others, wherein all her majesty's
officers were chardged and commanded in her name, to assist the said Walton
to make entry into all houses, shops, etc: to apprehend all those whom he
should any ways suspect, and to commit them at his discretion unto the next
Gaol or prison, until farther order should be taken with them, came into the
place of mine abode at Northampton, ransacked my study, and took away with him
all such printed books and written papers as he himself thought good, what they
were as yet I cannot justly tell. And not contented to keep him self within the
immoderate limits of a larger commission, then as I think can be warranted by
law, he offered violence unto diverse persons, and threatened not only to
break open doors (having noe such commission) but also to until houses,
unless he could find me where in deed I was not. At his departure he charged
the Mayor of the town, who then attended upon him, to apprehend me as a
traitor, giving out that he had found in my study both printed books and also
writings, which contained treason in them. Whereas the books and writings of
geatest disgrace (eve^ in the sight of his master) which he could there find,
were, one printed copy of the demonstration of discipline, and an answer unto
master D. Some in writing, both which he carried away with him. The treason
contained in either of those books, is no other then that which Amasiah the
high priest at Bethel, found in Amos the prophet, Amos 7.
even the clear words of truth not to be abidden in a corrupt state of a
church I grant.

Behold now my Lords, and you the rest of this high court, the original and
continuance of these men's enmity toward me. And judge whether I have not great
reason, both for mine own safety, and for the clearing of the cause wherein I
stand, to use this lawful means of Appelation unto your Hh. and worships from
their tirannous and ungodly dealing with whom neither mine own innocence, nor
yet the equity of the cause can any whit prevail. They are known to be very
mighty, and have felt them very unjust and tiranous. The only justice which I
can expect from them, if I fall into their hands, is to be kept languishing in
prison during their pleasure, and never suffered to come to the trial of my
cause. If I hoped for any other measure, I should reason contrary unto mine
own experience, against which no conceit ought to take place.

In consideration whereof, being now by the lords providence kept out of their
hands, and that in the time of the meeting and assembly of the highest
council of this kingdom, I do in most dutiful and humble sort, make this my
just appelation from the Archb. of Canterbury and the rest of his colleagues in
commission, unto you of the honorable and high court of parliament, humbly
referring my self and my cause unto your determination according unto justice.
My only suite and petition is, that either I may have assurance of quietness and
safety, or that the causes of my trouble being laid open by mine adversaries,
I may receive condign punishment of mine offenses. Where it may be seen that
I crave no immunity, let me have justice and that is all I crave. This in
regard of your places you are bound to affoard me, If the high commissioners
can justly charge me with any crime, I do them a great benefit, and greatly
endammage my self, in appealing unto the parliament.
as in the day of judgment you shall answer before him unto whom no
unrighteousness is acceptable. I do mine adversaries no injury in appealing
from them unto you. For they may be assured of justice at your hands, if they
will adueuture to pursue their suite. And me they cannot blame in repairing
unto you for judgment and equity, seeing from their tribunal seat, I am like
to receive nothing else but gal and woormwood. If their cause against me be
good, if it be strong, if it be to be embraced, now let them not be ashamed to
bring it out into the face of the sunn, here they may be assured of justice,
without any suspicion of partiallity. My reasons used in my last supplication
unto your Hh. against their government are but a few, if D. Bridges, or any of
their side can answer them, I will grant my self to have oppugned the truth,
and so will destroy my self that which I have built amiss, otherwise they
show them selves to be but vpholders of a ruinous building, and the repairers
of that which wants a foundation. They can not refuse you of the Parliament
to be their judges, unless either they think much to be tried by you, or
because as it is in the proverb, they which do evil hate the light.

They will it may be, allege the prerogative of their commission to be very
large, what then? do they think, herby to have liberty to oppress whom they
will, do they think hereby to be above the parliament, whereunto al courts in
the land are and ought to be subject, and from whence the high commission
deriueth all the prerogative it has? Are al courts, yea and al persons in the
land subject unto the parliament only the Archb. and the high commission
excepted? What else were this but for them to claim a foreign authority unto
them selves, and to begin after the manner of their predicessors, to shake of
the yoke of the civil authority? From which suspicion as they would clear
themselves, so must they be content, to yield that the parliament may be the
judges between us. Except they be ashamed of their cause and their proceedings
therein, they cannot possibly refuse this offer of just trial. And no reason
they should, for they cannot pretend them selves either to be greater in power,
or more forward in good will to administer justice, then the R. honorable
assembly of parliament is well known to be. Though I fear me R. honorable and
worshipful, that the Lord will enter into judgment with you for the small care
you have to yield his son Christ Jesus his right in this kingdom.

If here they should demand by what authority, either I may lawfully appeal
from them, That I am bound to appeal and the Parliament to receive mine
Appellation.
or by what obligation your honors are bound to give ear unto my complaint:
although both be already showed, yet a farther answer unto both are to ensue as
follows. I appeal from them at whose hands I can receive no equity, Act.
25.
by the same commission, that the apostle Paul and the prophet Jeremy appealed
unto the civil magistrates from the usurped and tirannical high priests in
their days. Ierem. 26. 12.
The accepting of Paul's appellation by Festus an heathen judge, and the
delivery of Jeremy by the princes of Judah from the slanderous accusations and
wrongful proceedings of the wicked priests and false prophets (besides many
other unanswerable reasons) do necessarily bind me to appeal, and the
parliament not to deny me the shadow of their wings, under which I may be
kept from the violence of mine enemies. when Festus willing to get favor with
the Jews, used this speech unto the apostle will thou go then to Jerusalem
and there be judged of these things before me, Paul knowing that at Jerusalem
the malice of his enemies would be more likely to take effect then else where,
answered I stand at Cesars judgment seat, where I ought to be judged. If I
have done wrong, or committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to dye:
but if there be non of these things true whereof they accuse me, no man can
deliver me unto them, I appeal unto Caesar, his appellation was received of the
Pagan judge. Now my state being not in respect of danger, altogether unlike
the condition, wherein the holy Apostle was at this time, mine answer unto the
high commission is I appeal unto the parliament, where I ought to be judged.
If I have done any wrong or committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not
to dye. The parliament will not be partial in administering justice unto me
according to my deserts. But if there be nothing laid to my charge, but the
defense of Gods cause, and the oppugning of impiety and corruption, no man
ought to deliver me into your hands, who care not whom you aflict in the
maintenance of your own kingdom, I appeal unto the parliament. I am in
regard of my safety as necessarily driven thereunto, as the Apostle Paul was to
appeal unto Caesar, or rather more. For he might conceive some hope of justice,
when he was to be judged of Festus, who did not so mortally hate his cause as
the high priest and others his accusers did, whereas I am to have you for my
judges, who also are mine accusers, and sworn enemies unto the cause I appeal
to the civil state, I hope by their means to be heard and delivered from your
tyranny. As the prophet Jeremy was in the like case by means of the princes
in his time. The high priests and prophets judged him wor^hie to die, the
princes hearing his cause debated in their presence, delivered him out of
danger.

The whole action is set down cap. 26. of his prophecy in these words. Now
when Jeremy had made an end of speaking all that the lord had commanded him to
speak unto all the people, Iere. ^6. 6. 7.
then the prists and the prophets and all the people took him, It is no new
thing to find the supposed pillars of the church to be the most pestilent
enemies thereof
and said thou shall die the death. Why have thou prophesied in the name of
Iehouath, saying, this house shall be like Shilo, and this city shall be desolate
without an inhabitant. And all the people were gathered against Jeremy in the
house of the Lo^d. And when the princes of Judah heard of these things they came
up from the kings house into the house of the Lord, and sat down in the entry
of the new gate of the Lords house. Then spoke the priests and the prophets
unto the princes and to all the people saying: this man is worthy to dye* for he
has prophesied against this city as you have heard with your ears. Then spoke
Jeremiah unto all the princes and to all the people saying, the Lord has sent
me to prophecy against this house, and against this city all the things that
you have heard. therefore now amend your ways and your works, and hear the
voice of the Lord your god, that the lord may repent him of the plague that he
has pronounced against you. As for me: behold I am in your hands, do with me
as you think good and right: but know you for certain that if you put me to
death, you shall surely bring innocent blood upon your selves, upon this City
and upon the inhabitants thereof: for of a truth the lord has sent me unto
you, to speak al these words in your ears. Then spoke the princes and all the
people unto the priests and prophets: this man is not worthy to dye, for he
has spoken unto us in the name of the lord our god.

Let my cause now right Honorable, be weighed with the prophecy in this place,
thereby it shall appear unto you, that necessity is laid upon me to appeal
from mine adversaries, and that ye are bound to hear my cause, by the example
of these noble men. Jeremy was judged by his enemies worthy to die, and I assure
my self it was not their falt that he was suffered to live. They wanted but
power and opportunity to dispatch him. They did what in them lay when they
apprehended him, and adjudged him worthy to die for speaking against the
State. The princes hearing the greeuousnes of his accusation, thought them
selves bound to try out the matter, and sitting in judgment, heard the cause
equally on both sides, and so cleared the prophet. Now had Jeremy done well, if
hearing the grievous accusations of his enemies, he would not have taken
th'oportunitie offered him by the lords providence to have judgment at the
hands of the princes? he had not out of question, or had the princes don well in
believing th'accusations and slanders of the prists and false prophets against
him, and so in permitting the prophet to be debarred of his liberty, without
any farther examination of the matter, or had they done well in sitting still,
while the pore prophet and his mighty adversaries tried out the matter? They
saw an other duty to be required of them and therefore presently without delay
they help him that was ready to perish. The case is now with me as it was then
with the prophet: I am judged by th'Archb. of Canterbury and others in
commission with him, to be a man unworthy to live in any State And I have more
cause to thank the Lord for the peaceable government of her right excellent
majesty, the^ for any favor of mine enemies that I now breath above the
earth: I must either appeal from them, or be guilty of mine own blood. I
appeal therefore unto the high court of Parliament, and if ye therein
assembled, either credit the slanders of mine adversaries before ye know the
cause, or sit still in rejecting my just Appellation, and suffer them to
persecute me without a cause. Festus an heathen Judge, and the princes of
Iud^h, will rise up in judgment against you. For the same God that required at
their hands the delivery of his servants out of the hands of their ravening
enemies, requires of you the equal hearing of my cause. And if ye suffer me
to fall by their means, you shall bring innocent blood upon your own selves
and this whole kingdom.

My case at this time is the case of the poor, the fatherless, the stranger
and the widdowe, and therefore in that respect, ye ought to have a special
consideration of it. For not to deliver the widdowe and the fatherless from
the violence of the oppressor, when it lies in your power, what is it else but
for to oppress the poor the widow and the fatherles, concerning whom the
Lord has thus spoken, They are to be accounted oppressors which will not if
they may deliver the oppressed.
If thou vex or trouble such, and so he call and cry unto me, surely I will hear
his cry. And then shall my wrath be kindled and I will kill you with the sword,
and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. Either then by
granting unto me righteouse judgment, Exodus.22.23.
ye of the parliament must deliver me from oppression and wrong, or I must be
forced to account you among the number of mine oppressors. And you know, that
being oppressed and troaden down, I am bound to cry to the Lord for aid,
otherwise, I shall disobey his commandment, Psalm. 50. 15. Acquainting him with
my grief he has promised to hear my suite, what will follow thereof, you
cannot I am sure be ignorant. For then he has protested that his wrath will be
kindled against you and that he will devour you with the sword, and cause your
wives to be widows, and your children fatherless, do ye not then see your
selves bound to receive mine appellation with such a bond, as in wisdom ye
ought to take heed that ye incur not the danger thereof.

Although then I be a thousand degrees inferior unto mine adversaries, in
regard of outward things: yet by the mercies of the Lord, I have the upper
hand of them, in the goodness and equity of my suite. For I come unto you in
the name of God, most humbly entreating, and earnestly beseeching, that in a
good matter, even in my right, I be not overthrown by the power of
unconscionable enemies, and therefore many ways, I come not without
th'vnreasonable support of my peticion. I come even with that warrant, by the
virtue whereof the poor, the widow, the fatherless and the stranger are of
due to have their right against the mightiest potentate under the sunn. And
that is the commandment of the Lord of heaven and earth, concerning the
administration of justice without partiality: you shall have no respect of
persons in judgment says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
but shall hear the small as the great, you shall not fear the fuce of man, for
the judgment is Gods. And again, you shall not do unjustly in judgment. Thou
shall not favor the person of the poor, Leuit. 19. 15
nor honor the person of the mighty, but shall judge thy neighbor righteously,
These ye know are the commandments of the land, whereby ye are bound to hear
me unless ye think you may have respect of persons in judgment, for if the
Archb. or any of his associats came unto you to be heard against me, you would
easily condescend unto the motion. The like favor are ye bound to show unto
me, because you are to hear the small as well as the great, and ought not to
favor the person of the mighty. It is not unknown unto you, what the prophet
Esaiah spoke of the judges in his time, Esai. 1. 23. 24
because they would not help the fatherless to his right, nor suffer the
widows cause to come before them, would ye avoid the just desert of that
reprehension? Then I beseech you help me to my right, and suffer my cause to
come before you, least it may be truly said of you, that you execute no
judgment, no not the judgment of the fatherles and oppressed.

And albeit you will not do this in regard of my person which a^ as the
fatherless, as the poor and as the stranger, yet deny me not the same, either
in ^^spect of the cause of God for the which I am t^oubled, or in consideration
of the equity of mine adversaries, from whom I can neither hope for justice in
my trial, nor safety from danger. The cause of this my trouble and peril (as
before has been briefly touched) is only that the Lord vouchsafed me the
favor, to motion a redress of the great ignorance and corruption which at
this day reigns in the church within my country. And because I do not
conceile that which in conscience I am bound to lay open:namely, that the
blindness and ignorance of our blind and ignorant guides, the tyranny, unlawful
bondage, and unjust oppression of Gods church by ungodly, and tiranical Lord
Bishops, with the rest of th'vnlawful church gouernoures (who even by virtue of
their places cannot choose but oppress the church of God) are the ready and
direct way, not only to keep my countrymen from eternal life, but also to
bring the Lords wrath upon us, our prince, maiestrats, people, and the whole
kingdom. So that I am molested for soliciting the cause of God, the cause of
men's souls, the cause of her majesty, and the State, with whom the Lord
(with out speedy repentance) is not likely to bear any longer, for the
manifold corruptions of our church. I am molested because I cannot be content
that my countrymen should want the means of their salvation, and so run
headlong to their own eternal ruin, and because I am not silent at the
miserable profanation of Gods sanctuary, by swine and unclean beasts: I am
molested because I suffer not without any show of dislike, the holy ministry
of the Lord and the sacred government of his church, to be a pray unto such men
as are not worthy to live in any well ordered common wealth, much less in a
reformed church: I am molested because I hold it unlawful for any man to take
upon him the care, charge, and oversight of those souls, whom he cannot
possibly feed, guide, and direct in the paths and pastures of eternal life: I
am molested because with the holy Apostle Peter, I think it unlawful for any
minister to be Lord over gods heritage, 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2.
and think the judgment of our Savior to be sound, who held it unlawful for
his ministers to Rule like Lords: Luke 22. 25.
I am molested because I hold that which is set down Heb. 3. 6. to be true,
whereby I am enforced to confess, that as non but Moses or some other prophet,
by the express commandment of God, was to ordain th'officers of the church
under the law. So non but our Savior Christ, or his apostles in the express
written word, are to ordain the officers of the church government under the
new covenant. I am also molested, because (being constrained by the former
scripture, Hebr. 3. 6.) to acknowledge that our Savior left an external
government of his Church, and so is equal with Moses: and such a government
as cannot be changed by any but himself, and so is superior unto Moses. I am
driven to confess this unchangeable form of external church government
ordained by him, to be a government, the execution whereof, is committed to
these 4. officers: namely, Teaching Pastors and Doctors, governing Elders, and
ministering Deacons, because I find non other officers or offices, either
expressed or included in the New Testament: Apostles, Prophets and
Evangelists only excepted, which being removed out of the Church by the
Lord himself, the boldness of our Bishops and their defenders is intolerable,
in demanding why Pastors, Doctors, Elders and deacons, should be permanent:
seeing Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists were but temporary. As though the
Lord himself were not of sufficient wisdom to ordain what he thought good
in the government of his Church: or as though he were bound, either to continue
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, or to abrogate the other 4. offices, and
under the Gospel to have no government of his appointment, muchlesse
unchangeable. I am molested because I made it known, that to maintain a
Church government, which at the pleasure of man according to the diverse
estates of the Church may be changeable: is flatly to overthrow the
prerogative, whereby Christ Jesus is above Moses, in th'ordering of his own
house. Th'outwarde regement whereof, cannot be held chaungeable under the
Gospel, according to times, places, countries and states, but Christ Jesus
must be made inferior unto Moses, contrary to th'expresse decree and counsel
of the eternal God, Heb. 3. 6. Briefly, I am molested because I made it known,
that the government of the Church by L. Bishops and Archbishops, (being as they
themselves grant, a temporary government, fit for the Church in time of
peace, D. Bridges page 284.
but not of persecution, T. C. pa. 135. 76.
and never ordained by the Lord, but invented by man to prevent schisms,
etc.) is intolerable in Gods Church, because it makes Christ Jesus to have
ordained, either a changeable church government of his own house, or none at
all, and so to be far less faithful in Gods house then Moses was.

These and such like (my Lords) are the causes why th'Archb. and his, are so
bloodily affected toward me. And I have (as mine adversaries themselves
confess) alleged unto you the true cause of their hatred and enmity. For if
th'Archb. etc. were demanded by this honorable assembly, why they imprisoned
me, why they rifeled my study, and took away my writings, why they now seek
for me: their present answer would be, that I am an enemy to the present
government of the clergy, established by her Majesty's prerogatsue and the
consent of the State. And what is this in effect, but because I think Christ
Jesus to be more faithful in the government of his own house then Moses was.

I know in deed, that for this cause they give out, that I am an enemy to her
Majesty's government, a seditious and discontented subject, guilty of many
attemptes and practices against her royal prerogative, and one that intends
nothing else, but the utter innovation of the state: wherein I do acknowledge
the ancient The crimes vvherevvith.
and perpetual slander of Gods truth and his servants in all ages. Gods,
truth and his servants have been charged in all ages, are treason and sedition.
For it has been the continual course and practice of the devil at all
times, to lay matter of state unto their charge, that have gainsaid any of
those corruptions which his instruments have maintained in Gods holy service.
And if our Bishops should new refrain from this slander, then could they not
so manifestly discrie themselves (as they do) to be their natural successors,
whose rooms in this age, they supply in the defense of the kingdom of
darkness and ignorance.

Our Savior Christ was guilty of so many and so outrageous practices,
against the State wherein he lived, as Pilate the Judge could not save his
life, and be a friend unto Caesar.

This did the high priest openly protest against him, John. 19. 12. And can we
then marvel that his truth in this age among our high priests is subject unto
the same obloquie? Tertullus th'orator would not be tedious in accusing
the apostle Paul: if Felix of his courtesy would but hear him a few words, he
would briefly lay forth the cause of the Jews hatred toward the apostle in
this sort. Act. 24. 5.
Certainly we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mouer of sedition
among the Jews thorough out the world, and a chief mainteiner of the sect of
the Nazarites. The wicked Jews also Act. 17. 6. 7. missing of Paul and Silas,
drew Jason with certain other brethren unto the heads of the city crying. Act.
17. 6. 7.
These are they that have subverted the State of the world, and here they are
that gainsay the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is an other king on Jesus
etc: where I do the less marvel, that sedition and treason is laid to my
charge, for maintaining the truth, in as much as the Bishopps them selves in
their allowed translation of the great Bible, upon the fore aleaged place of
Act. 17. have given this note, namely. That the common and usual weapons which
the wicked use against the members of Christ, The Bishops note.
are treason and sedition. Their wicked slander against all that seek the
reformation of our church, and particularly against me, have verified the truth
of this doctrine, for as soon as any show their dislike of these corruptions,
with a desire to see Christ bearing sway in the church of England by his own
laws, they presently exclaim, that these are the men which subvert the state
of the Realm, and that gainsay the decrees of her majesty, affirming that
there is an other Sovereign, whose alone laws must be harkened unto, and
whose alone offices are to be allowed of in the government of the church, and
that is Christ Jesus the eternal son of the living God: in deed if to defend
the prerogative which he ought to have in appointing th'officers and governors
of his church, be sedition and treason, I do confess in deed, that after the
way which they call sedition and treason: so serve I the God of my fathers. But
this is non other treason then that where unto our Savior Christ and his
apostles before me have given their hands and consented: and none other treason
then that, whereupon all Kings and Queens do firmly lay the foundation of
their royal crowns and Scepters. And therefore ye of the parliament, ought to
be so far from being moved with these shameful reports, now raised by our
Bishops against Christ Jesus, against his truth and his members, as ye should
not permit such profane mouths, that presume in this sort, to whette their
tongues against heaven, and him that sits therein, to escape vnpunnished.
The forgers of these palpable untruths, confess themselves, that Treason and
Sedition are th'ordinarie weapons of the wicked against the members of Christ,
which in deed has been th'armour wherewith the devil in all ages, has
furnished his champions against the truth. And I cannot blame our Bishops for
being skillful in this accusation, seeing so many of their predecessors have in
the like cause, troaden the like path before them.

Amos no sooner began to utter the truth in Bethel, but Amasiah the high
priest there presently smelled out his dangerous attempts. And therefore like a
good subject in the singular good will he bare unto his Sovereign Lord,
Jeroboam the son of Ioash king of Israel, he waded farther into the matter,
and at length found Amos his treason and sedition to be so intolerable, as the
Land was no longer able to bear it. Especially seeing th'enterprises of the
prophet were taken in hand even in the midst of the kingdom, to stir up the
subjects to innovation, in regard whereof, the high priest saw him self bound
in conscience to send Jeroboam this message. Amos has conspired against thee,
Amos. 7. 11. 12.
in the midst of the house of Israel, the land is not able to bear his
words, for he has openly spoken that which the Lord has put into his mouth.
The like treachery in the place before set down, Ierem. 2. 6.
did the priests and the prophets find in Jeremiah: yea and such is the care
which the lims of Satan have of the civil maiestrate, that rather then kings
and princes should be honored with the maintenance of a perfect building of
Gods church, they can presently find no less then sedition and treason in
their purposes, that endeavor to further that work.

When Jerusalem began to be reedified, in the days of Artaxerxes, the men
beyond the river knew well enough, that the building of Gods church and
th'establishing of his true service amongst men, is straight way a wicked and a
rebellious enterprise. For which cause they sent word unto the king, that if
Jerusalem a city rebellious and wicked, should be once built, the kings tribute
thereby should be diminished, and because they had bin brought up in the kings
court, and that it was not meet for them to see the kings dishonor, they sent
him word, that if he would search the book of the Chronicles of his father,
he should find the true Church of God to have been always rebellious and
noisome unto kings and princes, and to have moved seditions of old: for which
cause also it had been destroyed. And further they certified him that if he
would suffer the church to be reedified, by that means the portion beyond the
river should not be his. Ezra. 2. 19.
Nor long after this time Nehemias with the Elders of the Jews strengthened
their hands to finish the building of Jerusalem. What says Sanballat, and
Tobiah a servant, what a thing is this you do? will you rebel against the
King? As if the building of Gods church could not choose, but be a rebellious
interprise. You see by these examples right honorable, that it is the lotte of
Gods servants, to be accounted, seditious men, and traitors unto princes and
states, whenever they do, but set their faces toward the building of the
Lords house, and you see apparently by these testimonies, that it is no new
found slander which the high commissioners have forged against me, but an
ancient quarrel of the Devil in all ages and times against Gods truth.

Which may be the better manifested if you do consider, if either they can
allege no reason of their accusation, or the same (if they do show any) is
because I afforad my bounden service unto the truth. 2. Infallible marks of
the enemies of the truth.
For th^se are infallible marks, whereby awicked enemy of the truth, and a
slaunderer of the members of Christ may be known, namely, that either he can
yeald no reason of his slander (because he thinks it sufficient for him in
that cause, to invent an untruth without any proof) or his reason shall be
because the servants of God, do faithfully employ them selves in the service
of their master, Rheum and Geshem accused Jerusalem of rebellion, so did
Sanballat accuse Nehemias, and the Elders of the Jews. But how proved they
their accusations? They need not to labor that way, because they slaundered
the church of God, and the true members thereof, against whom for the most
part, a slander without proof will be in steed of a thousand witnesses.
Jeremiah was accounted worthy to die by the prists and prophets in his time,
and what was their reason? Why say they, he has prophesied in the name of the
Lord, Ierem. 2. 6. 9.
saying, This City shall be made desolate without an inhabitant. Lo here my Ll.
the infalliable marks of the slanders and enemies of Gods children, and where
you find these marks give judgment accordingly. Now may it please your honors
to demand of the high commission, why they account me to be a disturber of the
peace of our church, and a seditious person. Either they will think them selves
not bound to give any reason of their accusation, because against those that
seek the wealth of Jerusalem, any untruth will be admitted, or their reason
will be because I hold it unlawful for them to live in popish callings, to be
Lords over their brethren, to smother the truth, to rob Christ of his honor,
and his church of her liberty, or to speak in their own words, because I
dislike the government of the church by L. Archb. and Lord Bb. established by
the prerogative of her majesty and the parliament. Hereby in truth declaring,
that in persecuting me a worm of the earth, they are employed in his cause,
with whom I fear me, unless they repent, they shall have their reward for
speaking evil of the truth. For what else do they, in giving out that I am a
seditious person, for oppugning the government of Archb. and L. Bb. and for
maintaining the government by Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons, but
affirm the defense of Gods truth, to be sedition, and the defense of the
liberty of his Church to be treason? Will the par^iament then suffer the
cause of God to be thus shameful^y abused, by wicked and profane men? Well my
Ll. though you receive not my Appellation in regard of my self: yet suffer
the truth to come before you. Suffer not the cause of God and his Church, for
want of just trial, to fall into ignomie and discredit. Let it never be said,
that Festus an heathen Judge, should be more favorable in supporting the
credit of Gods truth and the professors thereof, then the parliament of
England would be.

The spilling of my blood for this cause, though it be a matter to be regarded
of you that are in authority: yet I thank he Lord, it is not the thing that
I fear: For by his inestimable goodness, I find my self an unworthy wretch,
to be one of them, who in this cause are not afraid of death when it comes,
Job. 5. 21. 24.
and one of them that may laugh at death and destruction, because I know the
beast and stones of the field to be at league with me, and that everlasting
peace for ever and ever, shall be unto me of the Lords free and undeserved
reward. But the discrediting of the truth by my hard usage, is the thing that I
regard, and the spilling of my blood for defending the truth, and writing
against impiety, is it, that I fear me, will make this land an astonishment
to our neighbors round about us. Be it then, that my complaint at this time,
were not the complaint of the oppressed and the stranger: yet inasmuch as it
is the cause of Christ Jesus, for the which I am persecuted, you are bound to
receive mine Appellation. And here me thinks, the Lord demands of you that
are parliament me^, as sometimes he did of the people of Judah, what iniquity
you find in the Church government by teaching Pastors and Doctors, governing
Elders, ministering Deacons, that you have not only committed two evils, the
one in refusing that government: the other in choosing to your selves, these
broken pits, I mean the government of Archb. Lord Bb. which can hold in them
nothing profitable to Gods Church: but also think those that plead for Christ's
interest unworthy your protection and countenance, against the injust and
cruel enemies, and the cause wherein they stand, unworthy your defense? The
Lord I say, demands what iniquity you find in the government of his
son, that you have thus altogether rejected and forsaken the same, and cannot
abide (I speak now unto such as are enemies thereunto) to have it consulted
upon in your meeting. The best answer, which in this point you can make, are
of late published by the public authority of the Bishops themselves.

Let these reasons then be briefly examined, The Bb. reasons in the defense of
their hierarchy, and against christ's true government examined.
and see whether they will be a sufficient warrant for her Majesty and you in
the day of Christ Jesus, to refuse his government, and to embrace this
hierarchy of Bb. in steed thereof.

First, it is said that this hierarchy is established by the authority of
her Majesty and the parliament. T. C. Epist. page 2.
The Lord answers, that for this cause, the Navy of the Spaniarde of late,
threatened our destruction* and that for this cause we have had extreme famine
in all our quarters, dear years, and many an unseasonable harvest; and that
for this cause, he threatened to take away our dread soueraign (whom good Lord
spare in thy mercies, and crown with eternal blessedness for thy sons sake)
by so many conspiracies, as have been villanously attempted within our land,
and therefore warns her Majesty and you of this honorable court, that
unless you would feel his heavy hand unto your destruction, that this
wicked and pestilent government of L. Bb. should be no longer maintained by
your prerogative.

Secondly, T. C. pa. 16. and page 140.
it is alleged, that this government by Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons,
was invented by, they know not whom, and that it is not yet proved, that any
such government was in the primitive Church.

Why this is more then shameless impudency, Is not that proved in the 31.
year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, to have been at all in the primitive
Church, which our book of common prayer, in the beginning of her Majesty's
reign, testified to have been therein, and to show the necessity thereof,
declares that we are to wish for the discipline then practiced? Thus you may
see, that our Bb. to save themselves harmless, take leave when they think
good, Before the Commination on Ashvvednesdaye
to cross the book of Common prayer in that which is most true, and which
their own writings grant to be true, whereas they cry treason, treason, when
other men do not allow that which is amiss therein. And you may also see how
fit they are to lead others in the way of life, who are now grown so sharp
sighted, as they will swear, that at noone days they can see no light,
whereas in the very morning they themselves saw the vprising of the sun. But
to answer this point in a word, the Lord makes it known unto the parliament
of England, that his son Christ Jesus, was the author and ordainer of this
Church government, which unclean mouths affirm, to be invented by they
know not whom: yea, but our Bb. protest, that the opinion which now they have
of their own government will not be shaken, T. C. page 8.
until they be resolved in two points, whereof now they are ignorant.

First, that a direct commandment be brought out of the word to prove, that
there should be in all ages and states of the church of Christ, This is a
popish demand
one only form of government. Secondly, that some particular churches be set
down, wherein the desired government by Pastors, doctors, Elders, and Deacons
was practiced. The high court of parliament is here so^moned by the Lord of
heaven, to judge whether the iniquity of these men be to be borne with, who
blush not to speak euel of that upright way, whereof they acknowledge them
selves to be meetly ignorant, why would they not require a resolution of their
doubts, before they had gainsaid the holy ordinance of the lord, and accuse the
same as traitorous unto her majesty's government, and dangerous unto the state?
An answer to the Bb. 3. and 4. reasons.
but concerning the former of their demaundes, the Lord answers, that there
is a direct commandment in the word, whereby the church in all ages and
states, is enjoined to acknowledge the Lord Jesus to be superior unto Moses.

And therefore also that there is a direct commandment in his word, whereas
by all adges and times, are bound to have on only outward form of church
government. The latter question though it be a popish interrogatorie, is yet
satisfied without any great labor. For the church of Rome, Phillippi,
Ephesus, Romans 12. 6. 7.
Derbe Listra, 8. Act. 20. 28. and 14. 23.
etc. Phil. 1.
with many others mentioned in the word, practiced this government by Pastors,
Doctors, Elders, and deacons. And if Christ Jesus be as faithful in Gods house,
as Moses was, it is clear that no church, as before was touched in what age or
state soever, can have any lawful government established, but only this, by
Pastors, Doctors Elders, and Deacons, because no church under the law could
have any lawful established government but that prescribed by Moses.

Whereby the pretense that other churches professing the Gospel have not this
government, T C. page 82. Our Bb. 5. reason ansvvered.
is evidently showed to be nothing else, but a proof that other churches have
their imperfections and are not as yet so far built, as the Lord requires.
Asa was a godly King, and reformed many things in the house of God: yet the
Idolatrous high places remained al his days. These high places were the
blemish, and imperfections of his government. Now were it any reason because
he was a godly King, that therefore the spots of the church under him should be
the pattern of Iosiahs reformation, and that the high places should still be
continued? It must needs be so if our Bb. manner of reasoning against the Lords
holy ordinances be good and allowable.

In the sixth place the inconveniences of receiving this government of the
Lords ordaining are said to be so great, T. C. page 16 Our Bb. 6. reason.
that the attempting thereof might bring rather the overthrowe of the Gospel
here amongst us, then the end that is desired. If the receiving of the Lords
discipline, be inconvenient unto any state, that is not the fault of god his
ordinance, but the sin of men, which have made their estate out of square, as
Christ cannot be wholly received thereunto without their likely detriment. To
gainsay the truth, because an inconvenience will follow the embracing of it,
is an argument not to be heard of amongst christians. For our Savior Christ
him self affirmed it, to be no light matter to enter into the kingdom of
heaven, and therefore declares them to be unfit disciples for him, Luke 13.
14. and 14. 26.
that will not enter thereunto through many tribulations: yea and forsake all
earthly comforts, Matthew. 16. 24
much less the maintenance of their outward estate, Mark. 8. 35.
rather then not to follow him in all the ways wherein he requires their
obedience. To pretend inconveniences then, in this cause bewraieth an hollow
heart unto Gods glory. And yet it is not half so inconvenient to bring in
Christ's government, as it was to expel popery. If her majesty and the
parliament would agree to establish the same, al inconveniences would be soon
prevented. The fear of overthrowing the Gospel by that means, is a
slanderous surmise, and undutiful unto her majesty and the state, unless our
Bb. be guilty unto them selves of some such purposes, I know not why this
should be aleadged.

The inconveniences are, first the alteration of the whole state of the laws
of this realm, as the utter overthrow of the study of the civil law and the
alteration of the civil and common law. As though al these things could not
be helped by one act of parliament. Popery had more show and coulor of truth
to reason thus for it self, in the reign of our late Sovereign of famous
memory, King Henry the 8. So had heathen Idolatry in the days of Josiah, or
Hezekiah. They that use such arguments show them selves to be given over to
withstand the truth. I hope the Parliament will admit of no such reason, as
these are. Christ Jesus must not be allowed by his own laws to rule in state,
he must needs be decreede by our laws inferior unto Moses, and that because
we will not altar the state of our laws, we will not have the study of the
civil law overthrown. We must not greatly wonder, that papists and
Mahometists do keep Christ's holy and sacred verity out of their dominions:
seeing in a state professing the true God, such godless men are found, as
tremble not to publish and utter their ungodly conceits in this sort, against
Gods heavenly ordinances: and especially, seeing in a state professing the true
God, such pretenses are of force to keep out Christ's sovereign and kingly
government. I hope that you who are parliament men, see this kind of
reasoning to be such, as will stand in no account at the dreadful day of
judgment. That which is spoken of Ciuillians, is also slanderous. For they
live by temporal courts, and therefore it is not necessary that their
profession should decay, when the Antichristian government of Archb. and Lord
Bb. is expelled out of our Church. Further our Archb. and L. Bb. usurp the
determination of many civil causes, in the deciding whereof, Ciuillians might
be well employed. And is it more reason in deed, that the true Church of God
should want the use of Christ's holy laws and statutes, then the study of the
Civil law? O most shameful speech to be conceived, much more to be published
in print (and that by Bishopps) in the days of the Gospel. But what dare not
they publish, who profess themselves to gainsay the way of truth?

And therefore they are not ashamed to give out, T. C. page 8.
that the desired alteration of Church government, would bring the judicial
law of the Jews into our state. This is a lewd slander. For Christ's
government necessarily, requires no part of the Iewishe law, to be received
into any common wealth: but that which is moral.

It is further objected, T. C. page 87.
that the laws maintaining the Queens supremacy in governing of the church,
and her prerogative in Ecclesiastical causes, must be abrogated, or else
Christ cannot reign in our state. The reason whereof (right honorable) you
have heard before alleged, both by the Jews unto Pilate: namely, that our
Savior Christ Jesus, is a deadly enemy unto Caesar, and also by Rehum, and
the men beyond the river unto Artaxerxes. For as they noted, the building of
the true church of God cannot choose, but be an hindrance unto princes. For
Jerusalem is known of old to be a rebellious city. But remember then, O my
God, if they belong not unto thee, that thus slander the truth, and the
upright ordinances of thy son Christ Jesus, and if they be thine, convert
them speedily. My Lords, and you the rest of the parliament, as you have any
care of the glory of your God, see that the enemies of reformation, may either
decist from their forgerie against the truth, or prove their accusations. The
Lord will judge you, even as you judge his cause, now offered unto your
consideration. Wherefore as you will answer before him, and as you mean to have
any favor at his hand, deliver the cause of his son Christ Jesus from this
ignomie.

There is yet in this point, another fault found with the government of
Christ, It is reason that all states should be maintained saving the estat of
christ's kingdom.
and another great reason alleged, why the hierarchy of Bb. should be
maintained: and it is, that the one of the 3. states upon the authority,
whereof the laws of England have hitherto stood, cannot without great
inconvenience be now overthrown. Whereunto the Lord replieth, that the gospel
of his son, was brought into this kingdom by the 2. Estates, to wit, by the
temporal Lords of the upper, and the commons of the lower house: whereas since
a third Estate, vz. Lords spiritual (as they are called) was added unto the
2. former, little or no good has been enacted for the glory of God by that
counsel. And if our State had been contented, according to the order of
nature, to stand upon two legs, it is not to be doubted, but that all the
wounds and sores of our church had been healed, and Christ's discipline long ago
established to our comfort, and to the unspeakable good of our posterities.
Moreover, the Lord threateneth assuredly, because of this monstrous and
unnatural leg: whereupon our laws unto this day, are falsely said to have
stood, and by the power whereof, all the world knows, this kingdom to have
withstood the right of his soon, to lay our whole state even with the
ground, so that it shall have nothing whereby it may be vpheld. And L. Bb.
have no better interest to uphold our laws then Lord Abbots have. The state
may as well want the one as the other, and with as small inconvenience.

There is added as a conclusion of these inconveniences, T. C. pa. 8^
that it is dangerous to pick quarrels with laws settled: but there is no
danger to quarrel with the laws of Christ's kingdom. They of all other
princes laws may be securely quarrelled with, overthrown, and troaden under
feet without all danger, and yet in our state are they no quarrellers, that
abuse the son of God. The time will come, wherein it shall appear, that it
had been better for all such wretches, that the womb had been their grave,
then that they should have been given over to run into their own
destruction. Our state has well profited in religion, that now after 31.
years of the gospel enjoyed, T. C. p. 92. 93
Jesus Christ in demanding his own right, is now accounted a dangerous
quarreller against laws settled. This slander has been already answered. So
has the other set down page 92. 93. of this book concerning the likelihood
of altering our civil government into a popular state, if Christ were once
permitted to bear the full sway therein. The rest of the particular cauils
contained in some few pages of this book, concerning maintenance of the
minister by tithes, the inconueniencie both of the ministers election by the
people, and also of excommunication by the whole Church, are mere cauils, and
answered before in the general, and therefore here, needless to be stood
upon.

Now the high court of parliament has heard of all the iniquity that can be
found in the Lord, and his son Christ Jesus and you have heard of all the
reasons (your careless and wilful negligence to deal in the Lords matters only
expected) whereby hitherto you have been enduced to refuse the
church-gouernment, which he himself has laid down and prescribed in his
word, and to embrace in steed thereof, a confused and an imperfect constitution
of man's devise: whether these reasons set down by our Bb. themselves, will be
a sufficient warrant unto you in the day of judgment, to refuse Christ Jesus
to rule over you and your people, to maintain the popish hierarchy of L. Bb.
and to countenance their proceedinges, who are wholly bestowed (for the most
part) in persecuting and molesting those, who open their mouths in the cause
of God and his people, for the restitution of those laws and liberties into
our Church, whereof they have tyrannously bereaved it. But if you think as the
truth is, that these fig leaves, issuing out of the dark understandings of
wicked men, can serve you in no steed against the wrath of the lamb. Enter
more narrowly into this cause, grant the same, and those that stand in it
justice against their enemies, least it be laid to your charge, that you have
called good evil, and evil good, and lest it be laid to your charge, that you
account your own ways equal, and the ways of the Lord unequal, and that
you have executed no judgment, no not the judgment which concerns the
sincere and true worship of the eternal. Unto the equity of my cause, which
yet (as ye see) is not mine, but the Lords, let this also be joined, that mine
adversary can lay nothing to my charge, whereby I can be proved to have broken
any penal law of the land. I do think my self in the cause, wherein the
Archbishop, and the rest, that are joined with him, are become mine enemies, to
have incurred, the penalty of non of our laws, inasmuch, as I have not
transgressed the law of God. For I suppose my self to live in that state, the
laws whereof are to be accounted of no force, which make him punishable, who
before the Lord is an innocent and guiltless. The duty of a christian subject
draws from me this persuasion, that our state and government under her
majesty, established by the authority of this house, will not account any law
to be forcible, but that which is agreeable with the law of God, and that, non
are punishable by any law in force among us, but those only, who are
offenders against the laws of God. For with what face can it be avouched, that
he is to be punished, against whom the Lord does not command the sword to be
drawn. And thrice miserable is that state, wherein these laws are in force,
which command them to be smitten, which are not euel doers. Of which number
non are to be accounted, save those only who by violating humane positive
laws, break also the law of God. They that hold the contrary, are not worthy
to live in a christian state. They highly derogate from her majesty's credit,
and the good laws of this kingdom. And non can possibly hold such a position,
but those, that under a pretense of authority, either do or would take
occasion to oppress, and tiraunize over her majesty's subjects, Now mine
accusers cannot prove me to have broken the law of God in seking the
overthrow of their places, until they have first proved their own callings to
be lawful, according to the word, unto which time, if I could have bin assured
of quietness at their hands, this mine appellation had been needless.

Whereas now I am of necessity constrained thereunto as well for the reason
before mentioned, as also, because I can nether have assurance of safety, nor
just trial at their hands. I can hope for nether of these from them. For they
have wholly vowed them selves with all their might and maine, to slander,
assail, resist, and hinder, the cause of Gods honor, the salvation of his
church, in the defense whereof, farbeit but I should spend my blood (as by the
grace of God I will) when I am thereunto necessarily called, wherefore except
either mine adversaries (which I heartily wish) would leave the smothering of the
truth, and the unjust defense of their intolerable corruptions, or that I
should surcease, (which I trust shall never come to pass) mine endeavors, to
have the Gospel planted in my country, and the house of God cleansed from
pollution, I can look for nothing else but al extremities at their hands.

Hereby also it is manifest, that these men will be so far, from granting me
either any release from their tirannous Persecution, or yet equity of judgment:
as they cannot possibly yield either of the twoe, without the dangerous
inpairing of their own state. My course by the assistance of God I mean not to
alter. The cause of my poor country, I mean to respect as long as I live, and
never mean to give over, the discovering of those wicked men, who in this
clear light of the Gospel, detain the truth in unrighteousness. In my
supplication to the parliament.
If I may have (rather if Christ Jesus may have) justice against them, I have
lately proved unto you, that not one of these men, (I mean Lord bishops, and
whosoever depend upon them) ought to be maintained within these domminions.
Now seeing both the obtaining and also the soliciting of this suite, must
needs be joined with the impairing of the Archbishop of Canterburies estate and
the rest in commission with him, who sit in these unlawful chaires of Lord
bishops, or any wise depend upon them, how can they without their own
irrecouerable loss administer justice or grant quietness unto me? Do they
mean to yield unto the known truth, and to give over their places? Why then
am I molested by them? Do they mean to be still the men, which hitherto they
have been, that is enemies unto Christ's holy discipline, and government? Then
cannot they possibly affoard me any upright trial. For if they should, the
church of God would be soon disburdened of them. And in wisdom they cannot
let me go on quietly in my course, for the more the truth is opened, the
nearer are they to their fall. My cause being thus, what may be said of the
parliament, if I be not relieved by your means, in my most equal, most
reasonable, and most christian suite.

Yea but seeing mine adversaries, are so mighty, as they are known to be, and
this suite so vnl^kely to prevail against them in our days, were it not
better form, to let them runn on in their wickedness, then thus to strive to
mine own hinderance, and extreme peril in a gainlesse enterprise? And what
calling have I to deal in this cause? That is it I know that the Devil would
have, even to be let alone, and permitted quietly to carry all before him at
his own pleasure, without any controlement? As though the stones of the
street, had not a sufficient calling to gainsay the wickedness of men, when
the servants of God are tongtied. And either it must be said, that sin at
some age and time, has a commission to go uncontrolled, or that the meanest in
Gods church, may speak in the behalf of Gods honor, when other men are
silent, at the treading thereof under foot. The general desolution then, and
the oppression of Gods church in my country, joined with the deep silence of
all other men, do make it lawful and warrantable for me, to seek the
overthrow of Satan's kingdom, not withstanding, that I acknowledge my self,
every way unfit for so great aworke. And if it should please the Lord to stir
up any of place, and gifts, to deal in the cause, I would soon set my hand
upon my mouth and be silent. But I hope that the Archbishop, and his
brethren, are not grown to that pass, as they will take the liberty to
continue in unlawful callings, and to molest those, that gainsay the badd
course, because they see not what calling any one man can have to find fault
with their proceedings. And I hope that you of the parliament, considering the
equity of my suit, will vonchsafe me the hearing in so reasonable a petition.

Consider the matter which way you will, and you shall find mine Appellation on
all parts to be just: but especially in regard of the proceedings of mine
adversaries. The consideration whereof is not to be ouerpassed by the
parliament, if any portion of the equity, and justice, sometimes flourishing in
that assembly, benowd therein remaining. Their unlawful proceedings appear,
first, in that they assume unto them selves, the hearing of those causes,
wherein by virtue of their commission, they have no warrant to deal, whereat
the parliament cannot wink, unless they would suffer an Anarchie to take
root in our state. This they do in a double sort. For first as before has
been set down, they lay treason to my charge, and therefore send for me by
their pursiuants. What has the high commission to do, with men suspected of
treason? Is the place at Lambeth now become the palor, where traitors should be
araigned? The Archbishop of Canterbury, the bishops of London, Winchester,
Doctor Cousin, etc. now become judges in those causes? Whether they incurr not
the danger of law, by entering into such matters, as are not within the
compass of their commission, you of this honorable assembly are best able to
judge. The truth is that the Archbishop, and his associates, when I was
examined before them in the 29. year of her majesty's reign, enforced me to
clear my self upon mine oath, of the treason, which they gave out to be
contained in the 40. page of my book at that time written unto the parliament.
Tolerate this course, and what parloure or chamber may there be so private,
wherein the Archbishop and his assistants will not arraigne their seditious
traitors as they faulsay account them.

Secondly they presume to determine of those suites, the hearing whereof are
referred unto the higher courts, and ought not to be usurped upon by
inferiors, until the higher councels have declared, that they will not
determine of them. In this point, I had trial of their dealing the last
parliament. At which time they presumed contrary unto right and lawful custom,
and to the infringing of the ancient liberties of this noble house, to
arrogate unto them selves, the determining and final ending of that suite,
wherein I moved the parliament and not the high commission. And they wrongfully
imprisoned me in the time of the parliament, for becoming a suitor even in the
cause of God unto that assembly whereas by the privileges of this high
counsel, I was not to be molested by any, during your session, but only by your
honors, unto whom I became a peticioner. It nothing prevailed me to show the
high commissioners, that I was a suitor unto the highest court in the land, and
therefore not to be troubled by any inferior unto them, during the time of
their assembly, for the supplication which I had thereunto preferred. Neither
did it any thing avail me, to manifest it to be dishonorable unto this house,
and to their honors therein met together, that they should not be the judges of
those suits whereof they were entreated to consider.

The injury which at that time they offered unto the liberties of this
honorable court, (to commit, their tyranny to me wards) had not been so
intolerable unless they, who usurped unto them selves the deciding of my
cause, had been al of them members of this house. The persons then in
commission, were these. The Archb. of Cant. the Bb. of London, Winchester and
Lincoln: D. Lewine, D. Coosins, all parliament men at that instant. Now judge
whether it be not against all right, that some few of the inferior members in
that house, (of which number in respect of many, I might justly account the
men before named) should extort unto their private censure, the judgment of a
cause preferred publicly unto the whole parliament. The time has been,
wherein this high court would not have taken a meaner injury offered unto
their liberties, at the hands of any prerogative within this kingdom:
whether it stands not with the honor and credit of parliament men amongst
posterities, not to have their liberties thus infringed and diminished, by
inferior and baser courts: it behoues them that love their country, and
endeavor to maintain the wealth thereof to consider.

But whether this be behoofefull unto the state or no, I am sure it concerns
me not to be judged by that court, wherein I may not answer unto mine accusers
(being the second head of the injurious and intolerable dealing of mine
adversaries) but must be enforced upon mine oath to accuse my self. I am
ready to answer whatsoever they can lay to my charge, and therein desire no
other favor at your Hh. hands, then Felix a pagan judge and an infidel, Act.
23. 35.
offered voluntarily unto Paul the apostle, that is, to answer unto mine
accusers. This equal manner of trial which fellons enjoy at every bar in this
land, cannot be denied unto me with any reason. And because our law affoordeth
this equity unto known malefactors, the tyranie of the high commissioners is
unspeakable, in constraining men to accuse themselves. Porcious Festus an
heathen idolator, when the Jews would have judgment against S. Paul, before
they had by witnesses convinced him of any crime: Act. 25. 16.
answered, as the holy ghost notes, that it was not the manner of the Romans
(being Gentiles and ignorant of the true God) for favor to deliver any man to
death, before that he which is accused have his accusers before him, and have
place to defend himself concerning the crime. And may not the men, who
profess they know God, be ashamed in their own cause, for the favor which they
unjustly bear unto themselves, to imprison their brethren professing the same
religion with them, The manner of administering justice at Lambeth.
because they will not be their own accusers? And yet all the justice that
poor christians have at Lambeth is this. You are now sent for by Lords grace
here, and us her Majesty's commissioners, we grant in deed, that as yet we know
nothing wherewith you may be charged. For accusers you have none, neither were
you sent for to answer unto the^. For it is our manner to deliver men into
bonds (yea and to death if the cause so require) though they have no accusers
to convince them of any crime. And therefore you must here be deposed upon your
oath, to reueal whatsoever you know by your self, or any other of Gods
children her Majesty's subjects. Whereby it shall come to pass, that you shall
escape us narrowly, but ere you depart the court, we will find sufficient
matter to imprison you, and if you refuse the oath, to prison you shall go.
For we administer it, Ex officio, and so upon your refusal, we may imprison
you.

And will the high court of parliament suffer this bloody and tirannous
inquisition, to be practiced any longer within this kingdom? What can the
murdering inquisitors of Spain do more, then by this snare, inueigle men's
consciences, and constrain them to spill their own blood? It is well known,
that no such manner of iniquity can be warranted unto the high commission, by
the positive laws of this land. For in a criminal cause, they enforce no man
to be his own accuser. And against the law of God, (by which no man should be
punnished under two or three witnesses) and of nature, all men know this
manner of proceeding to be. For admit that the law of blasphemy were now in
force among us, and that a man in the days of his iniquity had blasphemed the
God of Israel, were it not both against the law of God and of nature (the
Lord having vouchsafed him repentance of his sin, and in his providence so
disposed of the fact, as no witnesses could be produced against him) were it
not I say, both against the word and against nature, for him in this case to
accuse himself? And yet the Archb. and his fellow officers, would either
imprison a man ex officio, for denying the oathe in this point, or compel him
to be his own unnatural murderer. O miserable judges, before whom a man must
needs, either transgress the laws of God and of nature, or thrust himself
into inevitable danger. If they say, it is to be presupposed, that without
just cause of suspicion, they will put no man to his oathe: therein they
protest no more then the Jews did in accusing our Savior Christ, and the
inquisitors of Spain, draw with them in the same line. For the Jews, they
thought much, John 18. 30.
that Pilate should demand of them, what accusation they could lay to our
Savior Christ's charge, and therefore said unto him, if he were not an evil
doer, we would not have delivered him unto thee. Where we may evidently see,
the wisdom and discretion of the enemies of God and his seruauts to be such,
as they never accuse any man, contrary unto right, equity and conscience. And
as concerning the Spanish inquisition, it is well known, that that holy house,
conuenteth no man, without great suspicion of heresy. No more do the high
commission, offer an oath unto any, without great cause, at the least, without
vehement suspicion of his enimitie to Lord Bb. and their government.

And they are not only most injurious, in them selves, but they commit the
execution of their tiranical proceedings unto those very often, which an
honest man would be ashamed to entertain in his family. To have a warrant for
the apprehending, and touching of whomesoeuer it please you to suspect, is a
charge of great waighte, and ought not to be committed unto any, but unto
such, as are known to have a rare and choice government, over them selves.
Otherwise if a lewd and an indiscreet turbulent fellow, be armed with this
overlarge and unbridled commission, is not unlikely but he will abuse half
the subjects her majesty has. And I pray you, what is likely to ensue
thereof? Even this. The intolerable vexation and bondage, of her majesty's free
borne subjects and people, and in time it is to be feared the great dishonor,
if not the contempt of laweful authority it self. The Archb. of Cant. with his
colleagues, sends abroad his warrant to apprehend, whomesoeuer the messenger
therein named does suspect. Ought not this weighty charge to be very waightely
handeled? What choice then make they of the messenger? Surely Richard Walto^ is
a man fit for the purpose. For they know his good behavior, approved
sufficiency, and wisdom to be such, as for his outrageous lewdnes, dishonesty,
and want of government over him self, amongst all the roisters in this land,
they could not chose a more known, and notorious lewd person, and more unfit
for so weigh ie a charge to be the pursiuant, he was sometimes bedle unto a
company in London, (of the black Smithes I think.) The office though but
mean, yet was that company ashamed, to have a person of that slanderous loose
behavior for their bedle, and therefore, for his detected crimes, here not to
be named, they put him out of his place, being ashamed to retain him. And yet
this is the man Right honorable, unto whose discretion the Archb. of Cant. will
commit the molesting and imprisoning of whomsoever he shall suspect. Admit that
among his c^ppes, some of his companions, do bribe him to apprehende the
honestest and best affected subject in a country, he may do it by his
commission, and for his known lewdnes he is not unlikely to attempt the fact.
The magistrate is to assist him. And when he has offered you this injury you
have your amends in your hands, for he did no more then by his commission, he
is warranted, and those who set him a work are the high commissioners, who
have a prerogative above law, as they would bear the world in hand. May not
her majesty's subjects then, think them selves to be in a good taking, when
their liberty shall depend upon the pleasure or disliking of such as are the
ofscouring and refuse of men. And I do think it nearly concerns your Hh.
of the parliament, to see that this abuse of the high commission by these men,
be no longer tolerated in our state. For what care the high commissioners,
how tirannously they deal with her majesty's most loving subjects, as long,
as they hope that no man's accusation and complaint, how just soever, though in
the behalf of the interest of Christ Jesus, can be heard and countenanced
against them? And therefore they are grown so insolent, as they dare enjoine
her majesty's officers, either at their commandment to work impossibilities,
or upon the peril to answer the matter before them. Form this insolency of
theirs it is, that of late they have in their mandatory letters, enjoined the
Major of Northampton, to surcease the execution of his office in the government
of that town under her majesty, and either to become their pursiuant, in
apprehending one of his neighbors, or else personally to appear before them
at London, and not to depart their court without special leave* his affairs
in her majesty's service, M. Sharp book binder of Northamton.
and the distance of Place between Northampton and London, nothing considered.
And yet required they of him that which he could not bring to pass, because
the party whom he was to apprehend, being well known to be a dutiful subject,
and for the love he bears unto Gods truth to have been heretofore so
cruelly? dealt with at some of their hands, by long imprisonment, and so evil
dealt with, as his cause coming to be heard before the Ll. of her majesty's
privy counsel, their Hh. judged the bishops proceeding against him, to be
against law and conscience, and so were the means of his delivery, the party
I say, now fearing the like injustice, that he sometimes tasted of, was
compelled with the hinderance of his family to absent himself from his calling.
And from this hope, that their procedings shall never com into question, it also
comes to pass, that they give out that I am an Anabaptist, an underminer of
the chair of the magistrate, a pestilent and a dangerus subject many ways. For
otherwise they would never have permitted by their authority any such books to
be published against me, M. D. Some table page. 3. line 20.
yea but I hold her majesty with many thousands of her best subjects to be
unbaptized, M. D. Some Epist. page 2
and the question between master Doctor Some and me is, whether such as were
and are baptized by popish priests and unpreaching ministers have and do
receive a sacrament. If mine adversary himself had not cleared me of this
accusation by his public writings, Page 53.
his slander might at the least have bin probable, whereas now his own
writings do give him and his allowers the shameless untruth. But how can
they be held no ministers, but that the Elements administered by by them, should
be denied to be sacraments? I trust the one may be held, and the other not
denied, with better reason by far, then the Archb. of Cant. can hold baptim
delivered by women, whom all the world know not to be ministers, M. D. Some
page 185. line 3. 31.
to be a sacrament. And how will master D. Some answer himself in this point,
which has confessed al vnpreching ministers both popish priests, and
protestant Idols, to be no ministers? M. D. Some table page 4.
But it is an Anabaptistical error to account magistracy for an human
ordinance. As though nothing ordained by man could be Gods ordinance also? Or
that the places Romans 12. 1. and 1. Pet. 2. 13. were irreconcilable? And that
it were a more Anabaptisstcal, and intolerable error in me, to affirm the
government and offices of the common wealth, to be human constitutions, which
is true then, for our Bishops to hold the government, and offices of our
churches to be the ordinances of man, which is most false? These and al such
accusations laid against me and Gods truth, as by the grace of God in mine
answer to master D. Some, which are it be long I hope to publish,
notwithstanding they have it in their hands, they shall be proved to be palpable
slanderers. So I do most humbly entreat you of this honorable assembly, in
regard of the Lords eternal verity, against which these untruths are given
forth, to see that either mine accusers shall prove these crimes, wherewith I
am charged, or cease to slander and trouble me for professing the truth. The
cause is the cause of God, as I have proved, it is the cause of the church, and
so the cause of many thousands, of the most trusty, most sure, most loving
subjects, that her majesty has, whose hearts by the repelling of this my
suite, must needs be utterly discouraged and thrown down? when they shall see
the cause of God to have taken no place in the highest court in the land. And
being the cause of God and his church, and that against sin, against
impiety, against that which is likely to be the undoing and overthrow of her
Majesty and our state: it desires no favor but to be heard, and to clear it
self, even in the presence of the adversary, that upon good grounds you may
either acquit it, or condemn it. It will prove it self by Gods assistance,
to be the author of no tumulte, no sedition, nor treason. It will also prove,
that no danger or inconvenience, can possibly ensue the receiving of it into
any state: and that the books and writings, sincerely favoring the same (for
any unsound, or any vnjustifiable books, that have bin published, which might
seem to yield any countenance unto it, the cause is not to answer) have not
been invented of late, or stamped by man's brain, but have had their beginnings
from the days of our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, and were penned by the
spirit of God himself. On the contrary side, it offers to convince the
adversaries cause, as an author of tumult and sedition from time to time, both
in Church and common wealth, as traitorous unto the Majesty of Jesus Christ,
a dangerous enemy unto princes and states, and the fourtaine of all confusion
and inconvenience, not to be repaired. And it offers to prove this cause
and side of our Bb. to have no other original and beginning, then the good
intents of man's invention, not warranted by the word, even corruption it self.
And to be now supported and maintained, only by the unlawful institutions of
man.

So that it is now manifested unto your honors, by how many ways you are
bound before the Lord to accept and give ear unto this mine appellation, and I
to appeal. Mine only hope is in you, be not unmerciful and pitiless toward
me. I am persecuted and oppressed for the cause of God, by those enemies, that
cannor possibly affoard me either upright judgment, or release from trouble,
without their own likely overthrow. I desire, but that which is most
christian, namely that I may not have them both for mine acusers and judges,
who before any seat of justice, dare not stand to their accusations against
me, and whom their proceedings with me, and always heretofore with the cause
I defend, do manifestly convince, that all truth and equity is perished from
among them. Either the cause, and their doings have no truth, no strength, and
no equity in them, or else they will now she we the same in your presence, non
have authority to exammine their proceedings, whether they dare this attempt or
no. I do here before Heaven and earth, before her majesty and this assembly,
before every estate in this land, and al ages to come, clear my self, and the
cause I defend, from the grievous and ungodly slanders, whereby they do
continually load the same. I offer my self, and my cause to be tried by any
lawful authority, so dare not mine adversaries, let them prove that I have
done any thing whereby in equity I deserve punishment, and I will not grudge
to sustain the same: So that mine adversaries be not my judges, and the judges
of my cause, unto whom they cannot choose but be utter enemies. I do not here
set down all, that could be said against them, and their proceedings, which
are most Antichristian and intolerable diverse ways. I omit that they are
fallen from evil to worse, since the beginning of her Majesty's reign unto
this hour, and that they are likely to proceed in this course (without their
restrainte) until they have brought the Lords hand to execute his vengeance
against us and our land. Their errors are grown intolerable, even in the
maine points of religion, and that contrary, not only unto the written word
of God: but even to the writings, that have been and are published by
authority, even by themselves. They allow a form of morning prayer, joined
unto all printed Psalms in meeter, allowed also by public authority. Therein
it is flatly and expressly set down, that it is not possible for any man
ordinarily to be saved, but by preaching: and yet behold these men, even our
Bb. especially the Archb. of Cant. have and do maintain, that men may hear,
believe, and so ordinarily be saved without preaching. And by the practice of
this monstrous error, Rom 10. 14. 1.
contrary to the word of God, Cor. 1. 21.
contrary unto the established, Iam. 1. 21.
and privileged doctrine, allowed and practiced in this kingdom in the
beginning of her Majesty's reign. They are the very known cause of the
perdition (without the Lords secreete and unrevealed mercies) of infinite
thousands of souls in this land. But although I say, that in their ungodly
proceedings, they neither agree with the Lord and his word: nor with themselves
and the received and established doctrine in our Church: yet I do here omit to
make any catalog of their damnable errors and practices. Only in this point I
wish your Hh. to consider, whether in truth, the words of the prophet Hosea
may not be truly applied unto our Bishops in England at this day, and the most
that depend upon them The prophet is a fool in all good ways, Hosea. 9. 7. 8.
the spiritual man is mad: The watchman of Ephraim should be with God: but the
prophet is the snare of a fouler in all his ways, and hatred in the house of
God, Zephan. 3. 4.
or whether with Zephaniah and Ezekiel you may not truly say unto them, Ezekiel.
13. 4.
that they are light and wicked persons, such as have poluted the sanctuary,
and wrested the law that they are like the Foxes in the wast places, and such
as have not risen up in the gapps, nor made up the headg for England, to
stand in the battle in the day of the Lord. And if you find these things to be
verified in our prophets and spiritual men, then also undoubtedly may it be
said unto England, the dais of thy visitacion (...) England are come, the
days of thy repentance are at hand, and England shall know it. Because thy
prophets for the most part are fools, and thy spiritual men are madd, thy
watchmen are as the snare of a fowler in all their ways, yea and they are the
very cause that the house of thy God is so hated, and detested of all estates,
as the building thereof is not regarded

It remains now right honorable, that I betake you unto the almighty, whose
cause is now in hand and before whom one day you shall give account of your
dealings in it, humbly beseeching, and intreting you, that herein, and in all
other matters of weight, you would take the holy man Job for a pattern, that
the same eternal blessing may fall upon you, which he enjoieth to his never
ending comfort with whose words I will end. And when the ear hard me, Job. 29.
11. 12. 13. 14. 15 16. 17.
(says Job) it blessed me, and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me,
for I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had
none to help him, the blessing of him that was ready to perish, came upon me,
and I caused the widows heart to rejoice, I put one justice and it covered me,
my judgment was a robe and a crown, I was the eyes to the blind, and I was the
feet to the lame, I was a father to the poor, and when I knew not the cause I
sought it diligently, I brake also the chawes of the unrighteous man, and
plucked the pray out of his teeth.

Your most humble suppliant, JOHN PENRI.


