VINDICIAE GRATIAE.

A PLEA FOR GRACE.

MORE ESPECIALLY THE GRACE OF FAITH. OR, Certain LECTURES as touching the
Nature and Properties of GRACE and FAITH: Wherein, amongst other matters of
great use, the maine sinews of ARMINIUS doctrine are cut asunder.

DELIVERED BY THAT late learned and godly man William Pemble, in Magdalen Hall
in Oxford.

AUG. de Great. and lib. Arbitr. cap. 16. Certum est nos velle cum volumus: sed
ille facit ut velimus bonum. -- Certum est nos facere cum facimus: sed ille
facit ut faciamus praebendo vires efficacissimas voluntati.

LONDON, Printed by R. YOUNG for I. BARTLET, at the golden Cup in Cheape-side.
1627.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Nathanael Stephens Esquier, Grace and Peace from
Jesus Christ.
SIR,
Books are more necessary in a state than arms: Arms are to defend us from the
invasion of foes, books are to preserve us from the infection of errors;
enemies can but kill the body, errors endanger the soul. There are crept into
the Churches, a number of false opinions; some that oppugn, others that
obscure the grace of God. The earth is of it self prone enough to bring forth
weeds, but should one withal sow tares, we should have much ado at harvest.
Our hearts are rank enough to breed errors, and our wits cunning enough to
defend them: but the scripture tells us, that the envious man comes and sows
the tares of false opinions; and of weeds tares are the very worst: since
therefore errors are so plenty, books cannot but be very necessary. It Is true
there be many, and it may be, according to the complaint, too many books
abroad already; because many be to little purpose, some little to the purpose:
but of good and learned books, books fitted to the errors and diseases of the
time (as this is) there neither be, nor well can be too many: Many errors
require many books. Nay, I may safely say, that many books are more necessary
now than ever; for that we are fallen into the very age of the Church, wherein
as diseases in the body, so errors, the sickness of the soul, do and must
abound: For errors are necessary evils in the Church, that they that are
approved may be made manifest, says Saint Paul, And this is all that Satan
has gotten by stirring up the corrupt wits and pens of many abroad (and some
at home) to write they care not what. Now we do begin to see, that Truth is
the daughter of time: Truth is never new, but let an old Truth be newly
proposed, and at first we suspect it, let it settle a little, and in time
truth gains ground, and wins upon the judgment and consciences of men; but
erroneous opinions just like new fashions, when they are first on foot many
doat upon them, give them but some time, and they grow stale and vain: so now
what by the decrees of Synodes, and the writings and preachings of the learned
Time, has brought it so about, that there are few Scholars or others that
mind these matters, but do begin to see through the conceits of the
Arminians. Though then this treatise might have been abroad sooner, yet I dare
promise that it comes not in too late; for he that reads it with judgment
shall soon see, that in the doctrine of Arminius, there is more wit than truth.

I do here commend it to your reading, as to one whom the Lord has made
willing to learn, and able to judge, as also under your name unto the good of
the Church, to stand as a testimony of my duty and love unto you, and of your
zeal and love unto the truth.

Yours in the Lord Jesus, RICH: CAPEL.

To all that love and desire the grace of God, and the glory of his grace in
JESUS CHRIST.
MY dear and beloved brethren in Christ, who are sensible of the dangers of
these days, and of the misery of this sinful age (wherein the heresies of the
old condemned heretic Pelagius, that notable professed enemy of Gods grace, are
again revived and raised up out of the bottomless pit, by the malice and
subtlety of the restless enemy of mankind that old Serpent the Devil,
working powerfully in and by that new upstart sect of Arminians, the Wolves of
this age, who coming abroad in sheep clothing, and bearing the name of
Protestants, yea professing themselves Preachers of the Gospel in the reformed
Churches, are indeed Pelagian heretics, and disciples also of blasphemous
Servetus and Socinus; yea and also have joined hearts and hands in many maine
fundamental errors with the Papists our enemies, of the Romish Religion and
faction) I doubt not but that as you grieve and sorrow in your souls to see
this smoke of pestilent heresies ascending upon the face of our land,
obscuring the light, and eclipsing the glory of our Church: so you do in your
hearts earnestly desire to be made partakers of such worthy works and painful
labors of Gods faithful Ministers, as are in all probability like to prove by
Gods grace and blessing most powerful and effectual means, both for the
establishing of your hearts in the love of Gods truth, and in the knowledge of
the true doctrine of his grace, and also for the confirming of your minds, that
they may neither be daunted with the reproachful calumnies and slanders, nor
troubled and entangled with the deceitful cavils and carnal reasons, which
these subtle Sophisters have devised against Gods sacred truth in our Church
professed: And therefore I do presume to commend unto you this ensuing
Treatise, which I (having occasion to peruse it while it was under the Press)
do perceive to be, as most necessary for these times, so also most excellent
and profitable for your purpose. For I find in it, first, the doctrins of
truth concerning the grace of God, and the powerful work of grace in the
effectual calling, conversion and regeneration of the elect, most plainly
propounded, and strongly proved out of the sacred Scriptures: Also true saving
and justifying Faith most accurately described and unfolded, with the whole
nature and all the special properties of it, by which it may be distinctly
known and discerned from common fading hypocritical Faith. Secondly, the
maine errors of Arminians and Papists, and their most gross absurdities about
universal grace, and man's free-mill, and power in working his own salvation,
truly related; their calumnies and slanders of our Churches doctrine, detected
and discovered, and their principal arguments, carnal reasons and objections,
with wonderful brevitie and singular dexterity answered and refuted. Thirdly,
by the way the authority, perspicuity and certainty of the holy Scriptures
strongly maintained, and Popish errors about the uncertainty and obscurity of
them, beaten down by strength of reason and by the Word of God, as by a hammer
that beats the rocks in pieces.

Though the style and manner of handling be somewhat Scholasticall, sitted and
applied to the place and persons where and among whom these Exercises were
first performed (to wit, in one of the Schools of the Prophets in the famous
University of Oxford): yet I assure my self that whosoever reads this book
with good attention and understanding, shall find the Authors meditations
therein so thoroughly digested, and the nature, properties and proper acts of
Grace and Faith so distinctly laid down and accurately distinguished, that he
shall reap to himself much profit and comfort thereby, and shall with me
admire the grace of God abounding toward the Author, in all wisdom, and in
all knowledge, lively sense and utterance of heavenly and supernatural
mysteries, far above all which can be expected from, or is ordinarily found in
one of his age and years. If, as we know trees by their fruit, so we may pass
our sentence upon the composer of this Treatise, by his work; we cannot
conceive or speak less of him, but that as he was from his childehood
trained up in the Schools of learning, and had profited above his equals in
the studies of the best arts, humane and divine, so undoubtedly he has from
his tender years been thoroughly disciplined in the Schole of Christ, and has
by much and daily experience of afflictions and manifold temptati^ns in
himself, and of the inward sensible operations of Gods spirit and grace in his
own soul, attained to this high measure of heavenly knowledge and
understanding, whereof he has here given us a lively experiment. It is not the
most strong out stretched arm of humane reason, nor the most swift and far
flying arrow of the sharpest natural wit, nor the far extended lines of long
continued studies, which can reach so high to these heavenly and supernatural
mysteries: It is only the holy Spirit of grace coming upon all these, taking
possession of man's soul, dwelling in him, and making him a new creature, which
brings this kind and measure of profound wisdom, and this distinct knowledge
of divine things: yea by the fiery trial of inward temptations only does that
blessed Spirit drive the thirsly souls of Gods militant Saints to dig and
dive so deep into the fountains of the sacred Scriptures, and to draw such
living waters from the very bottom of those Wells of salvation. In a word, as
the Apostle says of yongue Abel, that by Faith having offered up a more
excellent sacrifice than his elder brother Cain, he by it obtained witness
that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts, and by it he being dead yet
speaks, Heb. 11. 4. so I will not doubt nor be afraid to say of the godly
and learned Author of this Book (who having offered up to God in a public
place these exercises, as the first fruits of his heavenly learning, did not
long after leave this world in the flower of his age, and ascended up into that
supercelestiall glory, toward which he had ever bent all his studies and
desires, and which always he had sought after in the whole course of his
life) that by faith he, though yongue in years, has offered up a more
excellent sacrifice than many of his elder brethren; by which he being dead
yet speaks, and shall speak to future ages. And as hereby he shall obtain
witness of all Gods surviving Saints, that he himself was a righteous and
faithful servant of Christ, excelling in grace and virtue in the days of his
pilgrimage here on earth: So God also will testify of this his gift, that it
is holy and acceptable in the eyes of his Majesty, by making it powerful and
effectual to the begetting and increasing of saving grace, faith, and
knowledge in all such as read and peruse it with true Christian docilitie,
diligence and humble devotion. To the blessing of which gracious God I leave
this work, and to his grace commend you all; desiring in my daily prayers to
be and continue

Your brother, companion and fellow soldier in seeking the glory of Gods
grace, defending the truth of the Gospel, and fighting against the spreading
errors and springing heresies of this age, George Walker.

The Table of the chief matters contained in this Treatise.
ABilities of man are not to be measured by his own partial judgment page 145
Actions of grace and holiness how far they are in a godly man's own power 147
Admonition threefold about searching the Scriptures 217. etc. Affections
twofold, sensual, rational described 125 Affections not quickened nor stirred
up to love of goodness before conversion 125 Not rightly moved toward
Spiritual things but when thoy are affected spiritually 130 Articles of the
Arminian faith 53 Arminians how they err about universal grace 54 Their
errors about the work of Gods Word and man's calling 99 Their objections and
reasons answered 106. 107. etc. Their errors about the subjection of man's
natural affections to his reason, discovered 125. etc. They give large
allowance of grace to men unregenerate 127 Their absurdities therein 128 Their
gross errors about man's will discovered 132 etc. Their errors in holding that
conversion does begin and consist in the act only of believing 134 135. etc.
The dangerous issue and conclusion of their errors 136 Assent differs in degree
according to the diversity of the objects assented unto 169 Assistance
effectual, why denied by God at some times to the regenerate 153
B
BAptizing of Infants lawful 47 Belief how it differs from faith and trust
170
C
CAlumnies of Arminians and Jesuits 155 Calling outward and inward described
94 How the Arminians conceive of Calling 99 Catechizing needful, and useful
in the Church of Christ Preface, page 6 Certainty of assent in Faith springs
from three grounds, The first 206 The second 220 The third 222

Communion with Christ twofold 15 Conversion of a sinner to God 6. 7 The
causes of it 16. 24 The subject 37 The manner how it is wrought 27 It goes
before Faith 4 It signifies, First, Gods infusing of habitual grace. Second,
The regenerate man's actual employing of grace infused 89. 144 Conversion
mistaken by Arminians which is a cause of confusion in their writings 92
Conversion how to be truly discerned 115 Preparatiue means unto it 137. 138
How weak they are, and in a man unregenerate how they are said to be sinful
139 That they may be resisted, and how 140. etc. Cooperation of Gods Spirit
necessary in all holy actions of men regenerate 151 Corruption of nature, what
it is 5
D
DEsire of spiritual things after a natural manner is a corrupt desire 130
E
ELect men only are the proper subject of true conversion unto God 41 Evidence
of the Scriptures declared and proved 175. 176 Conclusions touching it, The
first 176 The second 182 The third ibid. 183
F
FAlling from grace and final resistance described. 142 Faith in Christ a part
of sanctification 10 The habit and act of it, and when it is wrought ibid. It
is not properly the root of all grace 12 There is some Spiritual life before
it 13 and some participation with Christ 15. 23 It helps forward and increases
grace and all gracious actions 14 Faith is commanded in the Moral Law 110
Faith Legal and Evangelical the same in substance and differ only in the use
and object 111 The excellency of Faith 158 What Faith or belief is in
general 159 How it agrees with, and differs from knowledge and opinion. 160.
etc. Three grounds of the certainty of assent in Faith. 164. 206 The first 206
The second 220 The third 222 Faith a degree beyond belief being an assent with
confidence and reliance 170 Faith taken in a special sense and as it is
Christian Faith described 171 Diverse acceptions of it ibid. 172 The object of
Faith described 172. etc. The subject, every reasonable creature 197. 198
Faith is in the whole heart, even in the will as well as in the understanding
199. 230 Faith which Papists call justifying, is the faith of devils and
reprobates 237 Faith foolishly distinguished by Papists into formed and
unformed 237 Faith without works differs in nature from Faith with works 238
Particular assent in Faith, and the root and cause of it 241 The object of it
twofold 244 Faith of the Elect wherein it differs from Faith of Hypocrites 247
Faith unfeigned 253. 254 Faith of Hypocrites does not assent to all Divine truth
at all times 147. 148. etc. Faith implicit of Papists confuted 194 Faith in the
particular promise of grace defined 257 The justifying act thereof propounded
and proved 258 How it is wrought 259 The comfort of it 260 Faith of the Elect
by what degrees of assent and essential differences it is distinguished from
other Faith 226 Temporary Faith 227 The causes of it 228. 229
G
GOD as Creator how far he may be known to natural men 65 Goodness of the
natural man not general 80 It resp^cts others more then himself 79 Grace
what the habit of it is 7 It is infused all at once 10. 11 The actions of it
appear sooner or later stronger or weaker in some 9 It is so firmly wrought
in the Elect that it shall never be blotted out 34 Grace preventing, assisting,
inciting, helping 13 By what means Grace may be quenched 37 Grace sufficient
for conversion not given to the Gentiles while they are out of the Church 55.
56. 57 Nor to all Christians in the visible Church 88. 89. etc. Grace of
conversion friuolously distinguished into sufficient and effectual 89 Grace
sufficient to conversion is always effectual, and effectual Grace only is
sufficient 91 Grace given to those who are within the Church, set forth in the
diverse kinds thereof 94 Grace does not rectify inferior faculties first 127
Grace sufficient to believe and turn to God is no other but the Grace of
regeneration 92. 93 It is not given to all 93 Grace preparatiue to conversion,
how it may be resisted 140. 141. etc.
H
HOly Spirit given two ways 26
I
IGnorance of the very time of our conversion no just cause of doubting and
fear that we are not converted and why 44 Illumination both natural and
spiritual, described 94 95 When it is not sufficient for sanctification of the
heart 101. etc. Common Illumination not given to all hearers of the Word 100
Image of God wherein Adam was made 4 Implicit faith of Papists confuted 194.
etc. Infants dying without Baptism may be saved 45 Infants are charitably
supposed to be regenerate in Baptism 45 Why they may not receive the Lords
Supper 49. 50 Infusion of grace has no concurrence of man's natural abilities,
but only requires in him a passive capacity to receive 32
K
KNowledge of Christian Religion must be always increasing and fruitful
Preface 14 Knowledge mere natural of the Moral Law brings little practice 70
Knowledge more certain then belief in things of the same kind 166 Perfect
Knowledge takes away all belief 167 Knowledge by sight so far as sight goes
takes away faith 191 Knowledge distinct and explicit of Divine things
necessary to the being of faith 192
L
LAw moral how far it may be known to a natural man 66. 68 Learned men
unsanctified fit to make heretics. pr. 19. 20 Love of God reaches to the
Elect before they be regenerate 17 Considered in it self it differs from the
manifestation of it to us 18 Gods Love to our persons and actions 19 Light of
nature well used by the Heathen does not bind God in Justice to give them
supernatural light 84
Means of common faith 229 Meditation of what things will stir us up to praise
Gods rich grace and mercy in our conversion 38 Ministers duty in preaching the
Word 113 Miraculous faith ground on immediate revelations. 173 Motions natural
and spiritual which are wrought by the Word described 95. 96
Natural man cannot by the most industrious use of all helps natural attain
to the least knowledge of God as he is man's Redeemer in Christ 64 His knowledge
of God confined within two limits. 65 How far his knowledge of God as Creator
reaches 65 He never goes so far in practice as he might and as he knows he
ought to do 71 He neither knows the cause, nor can judge aright of the nature
of sin. 74. 75 His virtue and goodness how far it goes, and is approved of God
76 He cannot possibly desire grace and mercy, and why 84 Necessity does well
stand together with liberty in the will regenerate 156
OBedience of regenerate men how it is made irregular 152 Obscurity in the
object of faith, as it is held by the Papists, confuted 187. 188. etc.
Observation of Gods mercies and judgments on our selus or other, a special
means to increase faith 223.
P
PAssions and affections natural not subject to reason 124 Plainness of
speech and matter to be used in preaching of Gods Word. Pref. 22. 23 Priesthood
of Christ, and how Christ and Aaron agree and differ Pref. 23 Promises the
object of faith 170
QValities in the reasonable soul differ three ways according to the
threefold state of man 4. 5
REgeneration improperly ascribed to the Word 97 Regenerat man has in him two
contrary qualies, grace and corruption; as he is spiritual he never resists
the work of grace 148 Resistance of grace in Regenerat men whence it flows
151 How the prevailing act of it is taken away 152 Why it preuailes many times
153 Religion breeds ciuility and knowledge of all arts 68. 69 Righteousness of
the natural man not acceptable to God 81 Rather negative then positive 79 More
outward then inward 76. 77
SAnctification how it goes before justification 21 It is infused into Infants
43 Wrought in a manner merely supernatural 29 Sanctification how it has man's
free will concurring to it two ways. 31 Man not a moral agent in it. 33. 34
Scholars how made complete Pref. 20. 21. etc. Scriptures freed from Popish
imputations of obscurity 177. 178. etc. How they are certainly known to be
Gods Word 208. 209 By themselves 213 and by the Spirit 214. 215 Sin what a
snare it has laid to entrap wicked men. 139 Spirit how far and in what respect
said to be quenched. 37 How infallibly victorious in the maine acts of
repentance and love 555
TRuth and goodness one and the same in natural things 203. 204
Universality of assent in true faith in respect both of object and time 146
Universal grace how maintained by Arminians. 53. etc. Their grounds and
arguments for it confuted. 58 Understanding of things necessary to belief of
them. 192 Understanding and Will do mutually include one another 202. 203
Vocation outward and inward 42 Inward may be in Infants 43
Will of God approving and effecting 108 Will regenerate is not neuter
between sin and grace, but constantly and altogether inclined to obey God 149.
All power of resisting taken from it by the Spirit 150 It wills necessarily and
yet freely 156 Will of man unregenerate vicious in quality 133 It has no
freedom to choose spiritual good 133. etc. Word of God only a passive
instrument of regeneration 96 How it works grace 98 When heard as Gods Word
116 Not preached with purpose to damn men 111 Work of the Spirit by the Word
how it is 97. 112 Work of grace preventing and assisting 35 The first makes us
good trees, the other makes us to bear good fruit 35 Works of natural men
how far approved of God 83 Works of regenerate men are their own though
performed by the assistance of the Spirit 32 Worship due from man to God in the
state of innocence was wholly Spiritual 73
FINIS.
THE PREFACE UPON HEB. 6. VERSE. 1. 2. 3.
TO speak without some Preface, where we owe duty and respect, is not less
unmannerly, than it is on the other side tedious and unpleasant to use long
Apologies. Unto my apprehension, such Prologues, how ever sleeked over, do yet
seele rough and uneuen, and smell rank of Lying or Flattery, when they are
most seasoned with artificial and trim conveiance: but of all, most
unhandsomely does this Rhetoric suite with such as plead Gods cause before
mortal men, who, if they will acknowledge their allegiance, must yield
attention upon a Sic dicit Dominus, without further entreaty. For your selves
(dearly Beloved, and duly respected in our Lord Christ Jesus) I verily
suppose there is none among you, who respects to hear his own praises; if
there be, I come not hither to give satisfaction to such their desire. And
touching my self, I say only thus much; It Is the vainest thing in the world,
for Albinus a Roman to write a book in Greek, and present it to Cato with an
Epistle Apologeticall: he will surely censure him for a fool, one Qui maluit
excusare culpam, quam non committere, who had rather do ill, and get a pardon
for it by an Apology, than be faultlesse and stand in need of neither. And so
I have done with persons: give me leave yet to make way unto our after
discourses by a necessary and real introduction, whereby we shall all learn
somewhat of our duties, and you my purpose and intention in this exercise.
Wherein to give way to custom more than necessity in this case, I will confine
my discourse to that of the Apostle, Heb. 6. 1. Therefore leaving the
principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection, not laying
again the foundation of Repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward God.

2. Of the doctrine of Baptism, and of Laying on of hands, and of Resurrection
of the dead, and of eternal judgment.

3. And this will we do if God permit.



THe holy Apostle having in the first and second Chapters discoursed of the
Divinity of Christ, and the glorious dignity of his person, together with the
excellent virtue of his Priesthood, in tasting death for all men, that so he
might bring many children unto glory; enters thereupon into a large Declaration
of the effect which these things should work in the Jews, viz. Repentance and
Obedience to the voice of the Messiah. This is prosecuted with much variety of
exhortation and argument, in the second, third, and fourth Chapters; after
which, the Apostle resumes his former argument of Christ's Priesthood in the
fifth Chapter, showing the similitude and disparity that was between it and the
Leviticall Priesthood. The Priests after the order of Aaron, were 1. Men, 2.
Men ordained for men in things pertaining to God, to offer gifts and sacrifices
for sins. 3. Men compassed with infirmities, the more feelingly to
compassionate and pity their brethren. 4. Men called to this office, not
intruders without lawful election. And hitherto Christ's Priesthood and Aarons
agree: He also was 1. the son of man, the man Jesus Christ. 2. the Mediator
between God and man. 3. a man of infirmities and sorrows, consecrate through
afflictions. 4. lastly, a man that took not the honor to himself; but he
that called him, said unto him, Thou etc. But now see the difference: 1. Aaron
was a man, and no more; Christ the Son of God too: 2. Aaron a sinful man
that must sacrifice for himself also, as well as others; Christ touched with a
feeling of our infirmities, and tempted in all things like us, but without
sin: 3. Aaron but a typical Minister, Christ a real author of salvation to
all that obey him: 4. Aaron a temporal Priest, a Priest only and no Prince, a
Priest after an inferior and successive order; but Christ an eternal high
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec, wherein there is neither
change nor succession, wherein Crown and Mitre, Kingdom and Priesthood meet
together in the person of Christ. Other differences there are, but the Zach. 6.
13.
Apostle falling upon the mention of Melchisedecs Priesthood, a point of a high
nature and hard understanding, he breaks off his dispute, and on the sudden
runs into an excellent digression, whereby to prepare the minds of the
Hebrews more heedfully to mark what was after to be spoken. This digression,
from the 11. verse. of the 5. to the end of the 6. Chapter, consists of three
parts.

1. A tart reproof of their ignorance and uncapablenesse of divine mysteries,
from 11. verse. to the end of the 5. Chapter. The Apostle tells them they were
dull of hearing; but that is not all, their ignorance was affected: they might
for their time and means have been teachers, and yet now they must be taught,
and, which is strange, the very principles of the Word of God. Notorious
truants, grown old in ignorance and age; but our Apostle is plain with them,
they were but children, and of the youngest size too, babes, infants,
sucklings: and if they take snuff to be thus disgraced, he will prove it to be
so; like a wise Nurse he knows what fits their diet, they must be fed with
milk, and that is childrens food; i. e. plain and easy doctrine for vongue
beginners, who are unexpert in the word of righteousness: not with strong
meat of harder and higher mysteries of religion which are for men of age,
which through long custom have their wits exercised to discern both good and
evil.

2. An earnest exhortation to increase both in Knowledge and Obedience; et us
be led forward to perfection: which is strengthened with a dreadful threatening
of vengeance against non Proficients and Apostataes, between whom there is no
medium, the condition of Grace being unlike to that of Nature, admitting no
degree of consistancy or stay between growing and decaying. This exhortation
reaches to the 9. verse of this 6. Chapter.

3. A sweet consolation against all discouragements that might hinder their
perseverance; by proposing unto them, 1. the examples of the old Saints in
times past, who through Faith and Patience now inherit the Promises. 2. the
stablenesse of Gods counsels and purposes; who has not only promised but
sworn to perform it: by which two immutable things, Gods Word, and Gods Oath,
we may have strong consolation, and firm ground whereupon to cast the anchor
of our Hope sure and steadfast to the end of the 6. Chapter.

You now see by this brief Analysis, whereto these words which I have read do
tend; namely, to a growth after a plantation, a finishing after a foundation
laid, to perfection after a beginning. These Ebrews had gone to school long,
and the principles of Christianity had been taught them a great while ago,
now 'twas a shame for them like children to be always in their horne-bookes,
and never take forth a higher lesson. The Apostle will now no longer favor
their ignorance; 'twas not infirmity but negligence in them: and therefore he
purposes to read them a harder lecture, and to stick no longer on common
points of Catechism, which he only names and so passes on. The words then
describe unto us the progress that Preacher and People are to make in the
knowledge and practice of Christianity. I join both together, because it is
manifest by the threatening and consolations following, that this exhortation
persuades the increase of obedience as well as knowledge, though the words seem
to speak most for the latter. This proceeding in Christian piety, is expressed
by an opposition of the two Termim or limits thereof.

1. Where it begins, and that is in the plain and fundamental points of
Christian religion, which must be known and left. [Therefore leaving the
principles of the doctrine of Christ.]

2. Where it ends, and that is at perfection, so far as is attainable in this
life, whereto we must strive [Let us boled forward, or go on unto perfection.]

The former part is amplified and expounded more at large in the next words,
wherein the Apostle declares,

1. What he means by [Leaving] the principles and rudiments of religion. We
must not learn and leave them, i. e. forget them, No. But we may not stick
fast there and go no further. He is an idle and unskilful. Architect, that
is always busy in laying of a foundation, but never reares up a building upon
it: and no less unprofitable is that Hearer or Preacher, who still is learning
or preaching naught but the first elements of sacred science; and this is that
he signifies by [not laying again the foundation] which by his and other
Apostles preaching had been laid before.

2. What he means by [the Doctrine of the beginning of Christ] (for so the
words run.) Now, that he here calls a foundation, from the use that
Doctrinall principles have in the spiritual building of Christianity, like to
that of a foundation in material edifices. Of these fundamental points, six
are here reckoned up as so many heads and common places of the ancient
Catechism, 1. Repentance from dead works: 2. Faith toward God: 3. the
Doctrine of Baptismes: 4. I aying on of hands: 5. Resurrection of the dead: 6.
Lastly, Eternal judgment.

The latter part, of attaining to perfection, is amplified two ways:

1. By the means that must bring us to it, which is Gods grace, not our own
or others abilities, [And this will we do if God permit.] 2. By its contrary
and the punishment thereof, viz. backsliding, in the verse following.
It is not my meaning to go over every particular, as they lie in the words,
nor to stand now upon the discussing of all the difficulties which trouble the
Text; but purposing to handle them hereafter, as just occasion shall offer them
unto us, I shall for this present commend to your observation, two conclusions
which the words naturally afford. The first shall be this:

That it is a necessary and useful practice in the Church of God, to teach the
doctrine of Christian religion plainly and summarily to yongue beginners.

I need not go far to make this good. Nature shows it: It Is in Grace as in
Nature, we are first babes in Christ, then perfect men: and the difference of
spiritual food, fetched from our natural sustenance, approves it. Children
must have milk, which is of effectual nourishment, but yet easy digestion:
Men must have strong meat, (...), solider or harder meats, who have teeth to
chew and stomachs to digest them; that is, larger capacities and riper
judgments, to pierce into the deeper mysteries of Divinity. Reason and
Comparison in all other knowledge teach the same, wherein infinite conclusions
are deducted out of a few Principles, which first learned, give light of
knowledge and strength of proof to every one of them: Your own experience
shall save me the labor of instances. If we look but to the words, the
excellent definition of Catechism which the Apostle here gives, yields us two
good proofs of its necessity.

1. Its the Doctrine of the beginning of Christ ((...) (...)) by some rendered
not unsitly for the sense, Sermo qui rudes in Christo inchoat, that gives
beginning in Christ. This entrance into the knowledge of Christianity, being
that means whereby Christ is first formed within us, and the seed out of
which that holy conception of his glorious Image is at first shaped in our
souls. A blessed institution of yonguer years, when Reason and Religion are
together molded and fashioned in tender minds; so that Religion shall not
only sanctify, but also perfect Natures abilities, which ever from their
first emploiment are as sinful as they are weak.

2. Its a foundation that bears up all the building, and though it make the
least show, is yet of greatest use. Nor is their heresy more damnable, who lay
any other foundation besides Jesus Christ, than their heresy is justly
reproveable, who build upon their own or others any speculations, without the
tried groundwork of infallible Principles, surely laid and thoroughly
understood.

If you will be pleased to take a brief survey of the practice of this
institution, you shall easily perceive that it is no new or needless
invention. In the ancient Church before Moses time, as the doctrine of Religion
was more obscure, so the manner of its delivery is somewhat uncertain; yet we
may not unfitly say, that all teaching then was but Catechism, when the
fathers to the children delivered by word of mouth so much of sacred truth, as
themselves had either received by tradition from the Ancestors, or learned by
new revelation from God himself. When the Church grew out of a family into a
Nation, and that as men multiplied, so ignorance and corruption increased; God
himself writes a Catechism for the Jews, describing a short compendium of
Religion in the two Authenticke Tables of the Law, containing Ten words; so few
and so plain, that the shortest memory and shallowest wit might easily
comprehend them. And withal, God now lays an express command upon his
people, both for themselves and for their children, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. And these
words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart; And thou shall
rehearse them unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in
thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and
when thou risest up. The word is emphaticall [Thou shall rehearse them
continually (...)] thou shall sharpen them by often and seasonable instruction,
giving an edge or point to the precepts of the Law, that they may pierce into
the minds of the unlearned. How carefully this strict injunction was afterward
observed, either by the Levites in public, or in private by masters of
families, we cannot certainly define, where Scripture is silent of both their
practices; but if we may judge of the carfulness of former times by the
carelessness of these, there is good cause to think, that both Levites in the
Synagogues, and Governors in their private houses were negligent enough in
discharging this duty. Yet we may well presume, that there were both of the one
and other not a few, whose godly industry in this particular, may justly shame
the impious slothfulness of Ministers and People in latter ages. Where will a
David and Bathsheba be now found, personages of highest quality, yet counting
it no disgrace to read a Lecture of religion and morality to a yongue Solomon?
You shall find their practice, 2. Chron. 28. 8. Prove. 31. 1. And Solomon
himself seems to give that precept out of the experience of his own most
excellent education [Teach a child the trade of his way, and when he is old
he shall not depart from it] though himself scarce did so. Yea, albeit
infinite corruptions have at this day deformed all religion among the Jews,
yet even to these times may be seen some prints of their ancient discipline
among them, whose children are in their tender years first taught the law and
books of Moses, and after that their Talmudicall Traditions, with such care
and industry, as their skill in Iudaisme at 17. exceedes the knowledge of many
among us in Christianity at 70. whereof, see the learned Buxd. Synag. Iudaic.
c. 3.

But come we unto those times when the Sun of righteousness arose, and the
knowledge of holy things shone in its full strength by the ministry of Christ
and his Apostles, and we may trace this practice by its apparent footsteps,
even from the first age of the Christian Church, and downward. The words which
I have read, are but a copy and brief description of the Primitive Catechism:
and the Apostle Paul commends to Timothies custody (...), a pattern and
delincation of wholesome doctrine, which he had learned from the Apostle, 2.
Tim. 1. 13. which also, Romans 12. 6. he calls (...) the Analogy of faith
contained in all fundamental points of sacred doctrine, with which all
interpretations of Scripture must bear due proportion. Now very necessity
drove them in those Primitive times, to draw religion into compendious heads
and short summaries, partly in regard of Infidels, who being converted to the
faith, were to be instructed in the maine points of Christian belief, a through
knowledge and open confession whereof, was required of them at their Baptism:
partly in respect of the children of Christian parents, who because of the
dangerous solicitations of Idolatrous Gentiles and Heretical Christians,
privily creeping in, to beguile by craftiness ignorant and unstable souls,
were of necessity to have their minds settled in the chief and general
conclusions of Christian doctrine, by which they might defend themselves
against all sophistical seducements. Both these, whether new Converts or yongue
Christians, were anciently called (...) till their Baptism and Confirmation;
and for such whose narrow wits could not comprehend large discourses, it was
needful to make use of Epitomes. Touching the word, we find it more ancient
than this custom, and more generally understood than of it only. In general,
(...) in its Metonymicall signification is to teach others viva vo^^, by speech
sounding into their ears; in special, to instruct any in the first rudiments
of an art or science: because such as are ignorant learn more by others
teaching than their own study. In the general acception, besides profane
authors, we find it used in the new Testament five several times, Luke 1. 4.
That thou might acknowledge the certainty of those things, (...) whereof
thou have been instructed, says S. Luke to Theophilus, rendering the reason of
the dedication of his Gospel unto him. Of Apollos, an eloquent man, and mighty
in the Scriptures, its said he was (...) instructed in the way of the Lord,
Act. 18. 25. and, Romans 2. 18. (...), instucted by the Law; again, 1. Cor. 14.
19. I had rather in the Church speak five words with mine understanding,
(...), that I might also teach others, than ten thousand words in a strange
tongue. But most notable is that place, Gal. 6. 6. (...), Let him that is
taught in the Word, make him that has taught him partaker in all his goods. In
all which places, (...) is no more than (...), to be taught or instructed, as
the circumstances of the Texts do evidently demonstrate. But in times
presently succeeding the Apostles, and since, the word has been usually taken
by Ecclesiastical Writers in the strictest sense, for the first instruction of
yongue beginners in the rudiments of Christianity: For now began the Gentiles
in great multitudes to join themselves unto the Church, and the number of those
that were to be Catechized daily increasing, gave occasion to the Pastors of
every Congregation to be more frequently employed in this business. And as
the burden grew heavier, so new means were devised for their better
institution. Hence, besides the Pastors and Bishops of the Churches, there were
some specially deputed to attend this office, who from their imploiment were
called Catechistae; and not only in the Temples, but also in Schools opened
for that purpose, did teach such as were rude and ignorant the elements of
Christian religion. Famous above others is that School at Alexandria in Egypt,
wherein so many learned men taught, and so many holy Martyrs and Confessors, had
their first education: There it was that Origin having first taught a Grammar
School, did afterward succeed Clemens in the office of Catechist; and such was
either the necessity of those times, or the excellent abilities of the man,
that at 18. years of age he took upon him that charge of public teaching:
(...) says Eusebius, (...) Hist l. 6. c. 3.
(...). Very yongue years; and I know not whether he got so much honor by his
learned teaching, as for his constant suffering, so many persecutions as were
raised against him in that City. Yet was he in account for both, in so much
that he was not only sent for to come into Arabia by the Governor of the
country, there to teach; but also being driven from Alexandria by troubles
there, he repaired to Caesarea Stratonis, there set up a School, and was
judged worthy to expound the Scriptures, and read Divinity in public, (...)
as the same Eusebius witnesses, Lib. 6. cap. 13. But I must not write a story
of him or others, who in those times bare this office in the Church; nor yet of
the Catachumeni, and the several constitutions decreed of in Counsels and
Provincial Synods, for their more convenient institution; of the time of their
admission to Baptism, and after that to the Communion, of the manner of their
being in the Congregation during the time of divine Service, where they were to
stand not mixed with the rest of the people, but severally by themselves,
(...), when they were to depart the assembly, viz. before the celebration of
the Eucharist, at which they were by no means to be present, though at the
Sermons and Prayers of the Church for them, they might be: of diverse cases
touching their Baptism, their relapses and recoveries, their phrensies and
possessions by the devil, their martyrdom before Baptism, with such like
queres and customs, of which now antiquated by time, we need not trouble
ourselves to make any curious inquiry. The Acts and Canons of the ancient
Councills, and Church Writers of those times make frequent mention of them; out
of whom to compile an exact Commentary upon this matter, is a work of longer
time than I can spare, and lesser commodity than will pay for the pains.

Yet one word of the manner of teaching that was used toward these Novices in
the faith: which, what ever it was in private, for the public seems not to
have been dialogue-wise by question and answer, after the fashion of these
times, but in a continued speech, with much plainness and familiar easiness.
That tract of S. Austins, de Symbolo ad Catechumenos, and these Catachismes of
Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem, which are preserved to our times, show us what
course they followed in writing and preaching (...), etc.
of Catachisme; the one being a plain exposition of the Creed, the other
nothing but Sermons upon the chief Articles of faith and points of manners,
which Cyrill preached extempore to the (...), or newly baptized in his Church.

If now we come down to latter times, when all the world was become Christian
in outward profession, we shall easily perceive, that when they wanted Conuerts
of the Gentiles whom they might instruct, these ages began by degrees to
neglect also the children of the Church. So that for many ages, whilst ambition
and tyranny in Churchmen wried their thoughts more to the advancement of their
own greatness, than to the furtherance of religion and godliness in the
Church, this sacred institution was even quite laid aside; and after that,
through ignorance, barbarism and superstition easily crept in, and soon
corrupted whatsoever was sincere either in Gods worship or good manners. And now
was this disease grown so desperate, that its thought incurable by those lazy
and idle shepherds, which wealth and superstition had bred up, and advanced to
the oversight of Gods flocks. I mean that Cloistred rabble of Monks and
Friars, who sacrilegiously parting those that God has joined together, made a
profession of Prayer without preaching, and thought by their devout oraisons to
bring men to heaven, how ignorant and wicked soever they were. Yet these were
the men whose lips must be thought to preserve knowledge, whose breasts must be
the oracles of Divinity, and in their heads must lie enclosed the more secret
and precious treasures of wisdom: but they were indeed wells without water,
deceiving the hope of weary and thirsty souls, empty clouds they were without
rain, that did not send forth one gracious shower to refresh the inheritance
of the Lord. And now these dreamers, in stead of curing the peoples ignorance,
which would have cost them some pains, take a shorter course, and fall to
commend it as a special virtue, and fruitful mother of true devotion. Which
base impiety, as it has been detestable to Angels, to men upon whom any the
least beam of saving light ever shone; so since the reformation, has the
shame thereof been sufficiently discovered, and cast upon the face of that
Romish Strumpet, though her whores forehead cannot yet blush at it. We see, and
now enjoy those holy ordinances of Preaching and Catechizing within our
Churches, revived and observed with happy success in the increase of all
piety. Our adversaries have seen it and sorrowed for it, to behold the industry
and care of the Churches in their provision for the due instruction of yonguer
and weaker Christians. And though they hope that their ignorance shall uphold
their Church against our knowledge, yet very shame has driven them to do
somewhat: for which purpose, a Catechism there was hatched in the Council of
Trent, and by it allowed, wherein of a little milk of Gods Word, and
superfluity of rank poison pressed out of the breasts of the Babylonish Harlot,
such food was prepared as was thought sit for the nourishment of her infants.

But I must hasten; what I have spoken touching this point, shall be as for
justification of our present exercise, so for a commendation of the pains of
those faithful and skillful worke-men in the Lords building, who have labored
by preaching and writing to lay a sure foundation of knowledge, before they
build up in the faith. I could heartily wish that those among us, whom either
ease or pride have made careless in this office, would be pleased to look
abroad into such congregations where this course is held, and to compare them
with their own and others where it is neglected: they should soon perceive how
fair and open a passage is made for preaching to follow after, where diligent
catechizing has gone before, and on the other side, how hopeless their
endeavor is who labor to imprint in the heads of their people the knowledge
of conclusions, before they have learned the principles of Divinity. If these
men complain and say, I have spent my strength in vain, and my labor without
profit, preaching long and seeing little reformation, I will not pity them,
who are like unwise Nurses; who when their children thrive not, lay the blame
upon their sickly bodies, when the fault is in their own indiscretion, who
feed them not with childrens bread; but force upon them stronger meat, which
they cannot digest but vomit up again.

And so I have done with my first conclusion; I come unto the second which the
words afford unto us, and it shall be this,

That the knowledge of Christian religion must be always increasing and
fruitful.

I couple both properties together, as both meant by the words of our Apostle
[Let us go on unto perfection.] He that knows all and does nothing, he
knows nothing as he ought to know; and he that does his Masters will and
knows it not, shall have no thanks for doing he knows not what. Science and
Conscience joined both together, make up a perfect man in Christ Jesus: perfect
indeed in all his parts, but yet imperfect still in every degree: and therefore
as they must be, so they must also grow together. Gods Spirit never arose upon
that man's heart by supernatural light of saving knowledge, where the light
grows darker and dimmer, and shines not more and more unto the perfect day,
till at last it illighten the soul, as the Sun at noonetide in its full
strength and brightness. Never was that man borne again of the immortal
seed of the Word and Spirit, both which are of lively and mighty operation,
who does not proceed from strength to strength, adding one grace unto another,
until he abound and be filled with all the fruits of righteousness. It is a
great eyesore to God, when he walks in the beautiful garden of the Church,
to delight himself among the trees of the garden, and to gather of their
pleasant fruit, if then he shall see any plant which comes not forward in so
kindly a soil, or which grows great and green, but bears no fruit at all:
Certainly, we may well think there is a canker at the root, and that it will
not be long, before such a tree be blasted by the breath of Gods fiery
displeasure, which in a moment shall consume both branch and root. You know
the doom; Take it away, why should it trouble the ground? and in this place of
our Apostle, the sentence is dreadful against non-prosicients. The earth that
drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs
meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing of God: But that which
bears thorns and briers is reproved, and is near unto cursing, whose end is
to be burned. For Heb. 6. 7 8.
the godly it is not so with them, they that are good will be better, he that
is holy will be holy still, he that is just will be yet more just. That of
the Psalmist is most heavenly: The righteous shall flourish like a Palmo tree,
and shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon: Such as be planted in the house of the
Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God: They shall still bring forth
fruit, even in their age they shall be fat and flourishing, Psalm. 90. 11, 12,
13. But no more in so plain a case: let us turn our thoughts for a while unto
some application to our selves and our present purpose.

For our selves, whose profession is to know much, and desire to know all; let
it be our chiefest study to become good Christians, as well as great
Scholars. You will find it to be no needless admonition, if you well consider
both how easy, and also how dangerous it is to be graceless, and yet
learned. Which unhappy separation how often it is made, the experience of former
and present times do witness, and both Church and State in all ages have felt
the mischievons effects of it. Let me but discover the dangers wherewith our
peaceable and happy course of life is yet encompassed withal, and it shall be
in stead of other motives to make us heedefull of our own welfare. Our
adversaries are chiefly two: 1. Our own corruption, which being once stirred,
works strangely. When civil education, moral instruction, and divine
knowledge in part, shall work upon a man unregenerate, they will begin to
awaken the conscience, rectify the distempered affections, and give an assay
to pluck up impiety and incivillity by the roots: but all together are too
weak, where the Spirit of grace helps not; and without its ingredient virtue
are like a potion that stirs the humors, but cannot purge them. Whence
corruption once moved becomes violent, the affections rage, conscience is
overborne, the light is resisted, all those bands wherewith sinful nature
might seem to be fettered, are broken like a thread of tow, and such a one
carried furiously beyond the limits of ordinary iniquity, to all transcendent
wickedness. For none so desperately evil, as they that may be good and will
not, or have been good and are not.

But this is not all, we have another enemy, and that's 2. Satan by his most
powerful instigations, contrived with much cunning, enforced with secret and
irre stable violence. Good reason this Lion should roar fierce upon so
hopeful a prey: a Scholar is at least one degree of eminency above the common
pitch, and his example prevails much on either side. If knowledge dare venture,
what should ignorance doubt? If learning cannot defend it self from
common-vices, how should rudeness and simplicity be safe? And thus he
perishes not alone in his transgression.

Again, this is like poison in the fountain, like a worm in the root, like
corruption and rottenness in the seed, when those that are Spes gregis, the
hope of present and after times, whose shoulders should bear up the glory of
Church and State, are themselves become vile, light, and vain persons,
corrupt, and corrupting children. Surely, the devil cannot work a more
compendious mischief, than to deforme those that should be the means of
others reformation. Think not then we are more secure from danger than other
men: nay, my Brethren, Satan has his quiver full of fiery shafts fitted for
all occasions, all affections, all callings; and we in our scholasticall
studies lie as open to the stroke of his spiritual temptations, as others do
in their civil and mechanical imploiments. I will describe some two or three
of those weapons of death, prepared for our ruin, and so pass on.

1. The first are grosser temptations to ill manners and open profaneness: For
some there are of a baser metal and more impure temper, fit to be employed
in any the meanest service the devil shall put them to. These shames of
learning and ingenuous education, who bring up an ill report upon these places
dedicated to piety and modesty, you may commonly see, and do I hope unfainedly
detest. But this way succeedes not in all, in whom learning breeds civility at
the least: there is therefore a second supply at hand of such poisons, as will
be more generally and easily swallowed: of which drugges, there are as I
conceive four most deadly.

1. Pride and self-conceit, a bastard begot betwixt a learned head and an
unsanctified heart; which being once conceived in the soul, causes it to
swell till it burst asunder with unthankfulness to God for the bestowing, with
envy, scorn, and disdain of men in the imparting of such gifts as may be to
them beneficial.

2. Surfeiting upon humane and inferior learning, with contempt of divine
studies. Think you that Christian Academies are now grown so holy, that this
age breeds no Politians, nor Lyps^, who are so far from being children of the
Prophets, that they are despisers of prophecy? True Humanists, that relish
nothing but what is of man, having the sacred Scriptures and mysteries of
Divinity in basest contempt, esteeming the simplicity of Faith to be
silliness and folly, the plainness of holy style to be but mere dunsery,
the familiar delivery of wholesome precepts, to be good, honest, and dry
matter. A bawdie Epigrame of some rank Poet, a drunken song of some Anacreon,
a flattering Ode of a Pindarus, a smart invective of some fleering Satyrist,
the obscure phrase of some cloudy-pated Lycophron, an acute moral discourse of
a Seneca, or a well composed story of some Tacitus, all these, any of these
deserve more study, relish better to those aguish tongues, carry with them
more life and quickness of sense, more strength of invention, more juice and
blood of sound knowledge and satisfaction, than the holiest ditty that ever the
sweet singer of Israel set, the most exemplary story that Gods Spirit ever
indicted, the most powerful Sermon that Prophet or Apostle ever preached, the
deepest mysteries that not flesh and blood but the holy Ghost has revealed.
Strange contempt. Is it possible that the creature should be thus ignorant of
his Creators voice, thus presumptuous to censure him of rudeness? But it is so,
the tongues, the pens, the practices of not a few discover unto us this
leprosy of Atheistical contempt of Gods wisdom, arising in their foreheads.
It Is well God has not left himself without witness, that he can speak
eloquently as well as plainly, But were it otherwise, yet were it well still:
and they would be found best Rhetoricians and Artists, that can learn Gods art
and not teach him. I proceed to a third danger, and that is

3. Profane study of sacred things, to know only not to do, to satisfy
curiosity, or give contentment to an all searching and comprehending wit; who
study Divinity as they would do other arts, looking for no further aid than
Natures ability, or as men do trades and occupations merely to make a living
by it, who read the Scriptures as we do moral authors, collecting what
pleases their fancy, to be scattered as flowers of Rhetoric here and there
for the garnish of their discourse, but no whit for sanctification of the
heart. In all these there lies a poisonous humor which banes the soul, and
you shall observe it, that there are few in whom is found, such invincible
hardness of heart, consciences so far stupefied and senseless in sin,
minds so devoide of all true touch of piety, as those, who frequently
conversing in holy things, do as often pollute them by unhallowed hearts.
There Is yet a fourth disease mortal to him that's sick of it, and also
spreading its contagion unto others, that is

4. Heretical or Schismatic opinions, bred and maintained by pride and
self-love, or some other unsanctified affection which men give way unto,
joined with bitter opposing of the truth. And heers a mischief able to trouble
a whole world: Councils, Conferences, Persuasions, Arguments, Edicts of
banishment, confiscation and death; all the wisdom of the Word, and power of
the sword joined together, shall scarce be able to put to death this monstrous
birth of an heretical brain, so tenderly cherished by the master and his
dear disciples.

Well then, you see in how slippery places we stand, and how easily we are
supplanted by that strong one against whom we wrestle: look but a little into
the story of times, and you shall plainly read your own dangers in others
misfortune. Never had Christ so much to do with any as with the learned
Scribes and Pharisees, who by malicious depravations, captious interrogatories,
secret practice, and open violence, most desperately resisted his Ministry, in
so much that our Savior professes the poor ignorant Publicans should go to
heaven before them, who had the key of knowledge, and would neither enter
themselves, nor suffer others that would, to come in. The Athenians were the
learned of the Grecians, accounted then the only learned nation of the world:
yet you see how course entertainment they gave unto the Gospel in the Apostles
times, scornfully despising the foolishness thereof, in comparison of their
own superfine wisdom; and in after times we know, that those Grecian wits
proved the most dangerous Heretics. It Is true, that the devil can make a
Mercury a lying deceiver of any wood; John a Leyden, Cn^pperdolling, or our
Henry Nicholls the father of the Familists, with such other blocks, are
instruments fit enough for a common disturbance: but yet for the general, in
all the shop of Hell, there is no anvile so well set whereon to forge, no
engine so apt whereby to execute any choice piece of mischief, as that man who
is learned and lewd. The Heresies of all times approve it, bred by men as
vicious as learned, even from Arius and upward, down unto Arminius. The fire
of persecution always burns hottest in the reign of some Julian: and none so
bitter cavillers against the Truth as a Libanius, a Porphyrie, an Appion, a
Cresconius. But once for all, and worst of all take the Jesuits of these last
times, who as they have almost ingrost all the learning and honor from the
rest of the shaven Friars, so exceed them all in villainy and impiety. Being
men, who of all others, are found to be the most impudent and shameless
perverters of truth, forgers of new and sublimated superstition, corrupters of
antiquity; and not content to live in their own element, most dangerous
intermedlers in all affairs of State, most mischeivous contrivers of the
destruction of Kingdoms.

Wherefore let me exhort you in the words of the Apostle, Grow in grace, in the
knowledge and acknowledgement of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And let me
beseech you, that you would be pleased so to order your courses, that your
learning may grace your religion, your religion may bless your learning: this
is but the half, the lesser, the worser half of Gods image and of a good man;
have both, and be for ever perfect Christians, complete Scholars.

Which that you may be, let me persuade you to two things:

1. To a constant and serious study of the Scriptures: But herein take heed,
that an holy and humble mind do always bear thee company. Think when thou
openest this book, thou see in the title of every book, in the contents of
every chapter this inscription, Holiness to the Lord. Nay, every line breathes
holiness, brings the very breath of that ever blessed and most holy Ghost. And
be assured, that a heart surcharged with covetous desires, ambitious thoughts,
voluptuous, unclean, and impure affections, is far un fit for the study and
meditation of these sacred writings, and shall never attain to the saving
understanding thereof. Again, be humble and not proud, sober and not curious:
neglect no helps of Nature or Art that may be gotten, nor rely too much upon
either, as foolish Anabaptists do on the one side, and presumptuous wits on
the other, whose stock will soon decay. Study to obey, not to dispute, turn
not conscience into questions and controversies, lest whilst thou art resolving
what to do, thou do just nothing. Draw not all to reason, leave something for
faith; where thou can not found the bottom, admire the depth, kiss the
book and lay it down, weep over thine ignorance, and send one hearty wish
to heaven, Oh when shall I come to know as I am known! Go not without nor
before thy guide, but let thine eyes be always toward that Lamb who only
can open this book, and thy understanding. And then, Blessed is he that
reads, and he that hears the words of the prophecy of this book, for the
time is at hand: Yea, the time is at hand when all shall be accomplished, and
we must be accomptable, when arts shall cease, tongues shall be abolished,
knowledge shall vanish away: Do but think now one thought what will be the
joy of thy conscience in that day, when thou may truly say, Lord, thou have
written to me the great things of thy Law, and I have not accounted them a
strange thing; or with David, I have hid thy Word within my heart, that I might
not err from thy Commandments.

2. This for your private, in the second place attend to hearing as well as
reading. It is a fault greatly reproveable in many, who despise all but their
own study; Gods ordinance of preaching, and a months pains of the learned
cannot do them so much good as an hours study of their own, who therefore out
of scorn of Gods ordinance and other men's abilities will keep home. And I
could wish that yet it were so, that whom God looks for at the Church, he
might find them in their studies: they should be though not so well busied as
they ought, yet not so ill employed as now they are. But I spare them in this
place, hoping that none hears me who does not hate this practice, and tremble
to cast such contempt upon the sacred office and ordination of the public
Ministry. I Will rather touch upon our private, an exercise of an inferior
nature, yet of excellent use and great necessity. Let that before spoken
persuade your attention and diligence in thriving by it; and besides that, know
the work of providence to be such, that how simple soever the messenger be
that brings it, yet Gods words will always accomplish that whereto it is sent,
in hardening or softening the heart. Here only let me commend unto your
acceptance and expectation a double plainness needful to be used:

1. Of style and speech, that matter may have leave to command words, and not
be constrained to follow them in servile attendance. How many excellent
discourses are tortured, wrested, and pinched in, and obscured through
curiosity of penning, hidden allusions, forced phrases, uncouth Epithites, with
other deformities of plain speaking; your own ears and eyes may be
sufficient judges. A great slavery, to make the mind a servant to the tongue,
and so to tie her up in fetters, that she may not walk but by number and
measure. Good speech, make the most on it, is but the garment of truth: and she
is so glorious within, she needs no outward decking: yet if she do appear
in a raiment of needle-worke, its but for a more majestike comeliness, not
gaudy gainesse. Truth is like our first Parents, most beautiful when naked,
it was sin covered them, it is ignorance hides this. Let perspicuity and method
be ever the graces of speech; and distinctnesse of delivery the daughter of a
clear apprchension: for my self, I must always think they know not what they
say, who so speak, as others know not what they mean. If they do it of
purpose, they are envious to others, and injurious to Nature: and the best
interpretation I can make of such misty and cloudy eloquence, is, that it
serves only to shadow an ignorant mind, or an ill meaning. It Is naught in all
discourse, about religion much more; as if the darkness of our understanding
were not hinderance enough, without obscurity of speech: and of all, I am sure
in this kind of exercise most un fit, where both matter and auditors require
plainness. Catechismes are pend like laws, in plain not eloquent terms, and
its a great absurdity in definitions and summary decisions to seek after tropes
and figures. Wherefore for curious discourses sitted to rub itching ears, let
AElians grave censure of Myrmerides (...), coaches with AElian. Vat. hist. l.
1. c. 17.
four horses, so little you might hide them undor a slies wing, or Callicrates
his (...), copies of verses written so small as a chery stone might hold them,
pass likewise upon them, they are to say the least, (...), a laborious loss
of time. Certainly, I find both the one and the other cendemned in Paul's
practice and the Jews example. He was learned, and spoke all languages, and
that exactly eloquently; if Gods teaching can do any thing more than a
Grammarians or Rhetoricians school, yet in case of preaching he would not do
that which he condemned in the false Apostles, but professes his opinion and
practice, 1. Cor. 2. 1. I came not to you with excellency of words or of
wisdom: and verse 4. nor stood my word and my preaching in the entising
speech of man's wisdom, but in plain evidence of the Spirit and of Power; and
he gives a reason for it, verse 5. That your faith should not be in the
wisdom of men [as wrought by man's perswasion] but in the power of God.
Again, Exekiel was an eloquent man, and the Jews took a pleasure to hear
him, but where grace wanted what could his eloquence help? Ye shall have it
in Gods own words, Ezekiel 33. 31. 32. They come unto thee as a people uses to
come, and my people sit before thee, and hear thy words, but they will not do
them: for with their mouths they [shew much love] n^rans.
[make jests,] and their heart goes after their covetousness. But it may be
Ezekiels utterance was harsh, and they were offended at it. No, it follows:
And lo thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant
voice, and can play well on an instrument; for they hear thy words, but they
do them not. This for speech, the other plainness is

2. Of the matter, that ye will give me leave to enquire after the old way and
to walk in it, I mean that plain path which the Scriptures have laid forth
before us, the easiest I assure me, to be found, the safest to travel in. Men's
writings are infinite, their opinions changeable, their resolutions doubtful:
and if we begin there, we are out of the way at the first entrance; and it is
hazard but we loose truth and our selves among so many turnings and windings
of errors, heresies, opinions, conjectures, quarrelsome contradictions,
disputes, and brawling controversies as we shall meet withal. Who would be so
troubled in his way to heaven, thus wearied and vexed with endless and
needless discourses, which like the envious Amalekites set upon us in our sore
travel toward Canaan, assaulting the simplicity of our faith, disquieting the
peace of conscience by strange decisions of doubtful cases, darkning the clear
light of sacred Scripture which shines dim through such painted glass, and
in brief, mingling the sincer^ milk of the Word with the noisome ingredients
of carnal reason, and corrupt affections? Surely, we do not believe when we
read that in the 12. of Eccl. v. 12. There is no end of making of books, and
much reading is a weariness to the flesh: if we did, we would hence learn to
see a fault, which an eager desire of learning, not well guided, draws upon us
all that would be scholars. A strange curiosity to pry into all books of the
same kind, thinking we never know the truth till we know what all men have
said of it. And are we certain then we have it? It were somewhat if twere in
learning as it is in bearing of a burden, where many weak men may bear that
which one or few cannot. But in the search of knowledge it fares as in
descrying a thing a far off, where one quick sight will see further than a
thousand clear eyes. It is most usual in comparing of humane authors: for the
Scriptures, its certain that they alone without other helps are sufficient
for our direction in all necessary truth, and were our hearts inflamed with
love of their excellent holiness, and our heads a little more acquainted with
study and meditation therein, we should find by experience that more light
shines in this sun than in all the stars of the Church, which do but
borrow their light from hence. For mine own part, I have always wondered at
the discord between the doctrine and practice of many Divines, who stiffely and
truly maintaining against the Papists the allsufficiency of Scriptures for
heavenly instruction, do yet in their private studies condemn them of
insufficiency, bestowing, to say the least, three parts of their times and
pains in the wearisome reading of those huge volumes of Fathers, Schoolmen,
and other Writers, for one part which they spend in the meditation of the
Scriptures. We love to seek gold among dross, when we may have it ready
tried and purified to our hands, yea pure as metal tried in a furnace and
fined seven times, as the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 12. 6. Blame not my resolution
to follow Salomons admonition; By these things my son be admonished, and to
go to the living not to the dead, to the Law and Testimony, the lively oracles
of God; ever speaking loud enough if we have ears to hear what the Spirit
says, and plain enough, if, as our Apostle speaks, we had our wits
exercised to discern both good and evil. You shall do me wrong to conceive
any such meaning by my words, as if I would dash out all writings of men with
one stroke, or condemn all Libraries to the fire: an arrogant impiety it were
so to think or speak of men's pains in writing, and Gods providence in
Whereof yet many as left unto us, as the Cananites among the Israelites.
preserving their books. No. I touch none but those who consult only with
flesh and blood, men like themselves, out of whose discourses they frame to
themselves an humane divinity, making such to be pillars that should be but
helpers of their faith: which how likely it is to fail in time of trial, I wish
them to forecast betime, before they feel it too late. Among you, my Brethren,
I suppose there is none who had not rather have his soul saved, than his fancy
pleased: and therefore will be willing to believe where God affirms, to obey
where he commands, without man's authority to convince your reason or persuade
your affections. And if so, I am eased of the most troublesome and least
profitable toil, the curious search and allegations of Authors: which if you
do expect, you overburden me; if I should promise, I should belie mine own
knowledge, and as I suppose, your opinion of my meannesse. Furthermore, for
deeper speculations, new-minted Divinity, or elder Heresies buried in hell with
their authors, or strange opinions hushed up in silence, it will be a wrong to
imbroile the minds of such an auditory, and to shake them with the
unseasonable blasts of doubtful disputes, before they have taken deeper root
in the faith. You must pardon me, I speak to those whom this exercise most
concerns, that are the yonguer in age and knowledge. And therefore I must
beseech you beloved, and much respected in the Lord, who are the elder and
stronger in the Lords stock, to give me leave to drive on in Jacobs pace, so
as I weary not, nor leave behind the more tender Lambs. I dare say we may
all at last come to Canaan, and yet break no company: He that gives to them
that want, takes not away from them that have: and you know that men may be
nourished with milk, though infants cannot live with stronger meat.

Finis Prologi.
THE NATVRE AND properties of GRACE and FAITH.
THe sum of all Christian duties is briefly comprised under these two heads,
Agenda and Credenda, Doing and Believing. Which the Apostle, 2. Tim. 1. 13.
makes the two maine parts of all wholesome doctrine; Hold fast the form of
sound words which thou have heard of me, in Faith and Love which is in Christ
Jesus. The Epitome of Love is the moral Law, briefly contained in ten, more
briefly in two precepts; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart;
and, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. The sum of Faith more at large
delivered in the Apostolical writings, is shortly drawn into that excellent
compendium which we now use, and call the Apostles Creed, containing the
substance of Evangelicall doctrine. Both these, Faith and Love, have one common
adversary, Satan, by whom they have been continually assaulted, and whether
more dangerously, it is not easy to determine: they seem both to be embarked
together in the same bottom; and if Conscience suffer shipwreck, Faith sinkes
too: and if Faith the most precious lading be thrown overboard, I doubt how
Charity will be able to make a saving voyage. As Paul said of the Mariners
attempting an escape in their dangerous passage, so I of those, Except Ac^^ 27.
(...).
they abide in the ship, ve cannot be saved: and you may observe it equally
difficult, to find an Heretic virtuous, or an Atheistical vicious liver, a
true believer. Wherefore the devil cares not much where he begins his battery,
yet if I be not deceived, he had rather enter upon the Church by undermining
the Faith with Heresies, than at an open breach upon good manners. Ill manners
find more resistance; there is fear of laws and rod of discipline to curb
them, they want their apologies and colorable excuses, and so lie open to the
reproof and hatred of moral honesty; they come accompanied with shame and
disgrace following at the heels, which hinders their appearing and
entertainment in public. But Heresy easily enters and quickly spreads abroad:
it finds favorers enough, having the advantage of men's common infirmity, who
are apt to entertain novelties, and take a pride to be singular, it comes
armed with reason and such justifications, as it thinks it needs not blush,
being painted over with the color of truth: lastly, it aims at the fairest,
the Leaders of the flock, whose authority and example speedily infects the
rest. With this weapon has the Dragon made war with the woman, raising up
even of her own children such as have fought against her by damnable Heresies
against all the Articles of Faith. Of which, part have been cut asunder by the
sword of the Spirit, and yet some again reviving, have been brought into the
field under new colors: part though convicted and: condemned, yet stand it out
under the support of tyrannical violence, and remain to this day in that
Augean stable, that sink or common sewer of the Romish Synagogue, whereto all
Heresies almost of former and latter times have made their confluence. Besides
a new breed of Heretical opinions, not plainly denying, but by consequent
overturning sursum vorsum the maine Articles of Christian belief: and
therefore are so much the mo^e dangerous, by how much the less easily they are
discernable in their damnable issues; So as the Doctrine thereof is no less
perplexed with strange disputes and difficulties, than the Grace it self is
continually assaulted by fearful doubting and distrust. Whether it be man's
infelicity to be ignorant of that which stands him in most stead, or the
devils malice to lessen our comforts in the use of Faith, by confounding our
understanding in the knowledge of the nature thereof, that so we might either
dangerously err, or discomfortably doubt touching the truth of it in our
selves, or Writers misexplication of that excellent grace through their, own
weakness or want of faith: sure I am, if any point of Divinity, this touching
faith is full of much obscurity and contention. It Is much, men should have a
grace so divine and powerful, and yet know not what it is, but as the Apostle
speaks of men, Faith is not of all, so may we say of Writers, All have not
faith that write of it, especially Popish Doctors, who speaking of faith but by
imagination, have profanely censured the faith of Gods elect, expounded by
Protestants according to Scripture, to be but a very fancy. Among whose
curious and Metaphysicall discourses of this subject, he that wants faith shall
never find it, and he that has faith may chance lose it: at least the life
and powerful practice of it, whilst his head is entangled in subtle and nice
speculations about it. For our selves, let it be our care so to speak and
judge of faith, as that most precious grace which is given us to save our
souls, not exercise our wits; the knowledge whereof by contemplation is most
empty and vain, without the real inhabitation of it within our souls. It
shall be my weak and yet best endeavor, by the help of Gods assistance, to
give you the knowledge thereof, so far as the word in manifold precepts, and
examples of the Saints, together with the pains of the learned have discovered
it to my poor understanding. In the unfolding of the nature of it I must spend
more time, than at first I purposed to do, because in this point some other
parts of Divinity are so interwoven and linked one with another, that without
the knowledge of all, we shall not clearly discern of any alone. Such are our
Vocation the forerunner, and our Justification the follower of our faith. All
that I have to say, I will reduce to these four generals;

1. Touching the antecedents of faith, namely our Conversion and Vocation: of
which so much, as shall serve to discover unto us the generation and birth of
faith.

2. Touching the nature of faith it self, wherein the being of that most
heavenly virtue consists.

3. Concerning the consequents and concomitants of faith, both in regard of
God, as Justification, and our selves, as Obedience, whereby we may be able to
judge as of the benefit, so of the truth of our faith.

4. Concerning the opposites and enemies of faith, the knowledge whereof may
arm us against them.

For the first, namely our Conversion, the knowledge thereof will give us some
light to find out how faith is wrought in us: which by Divines is made the
first degree of our Conversion, and last Terminus of our effectual Vocation.
However, a part it is, and that a principal one too, of our first resurrection
from the death of sin, to the supernatural life of grace. Which that it may
appear, we must distinctly consider of the threefold difference of such
qualities as are in the reasonable soul, and do either help or hinder it in
its operations. This difference is according to man's triple estate:

1. In the state of innocence man was created right or upright, Eccl. 7. 29.
and very good, Genesis 1, ult. endowed with such strength and integrity in all
parts, as did wholly dispose them to all operations conformable to Gods will.
His understanding, so far as was needful before his translation, had a
clear apprehension of the Deity in his nature, attributes and worship, as also
of the creatures in their essence and qualities. His will embraced and clave
fast unto God, whom Adam knew to be the author of his being and happiness. His
affections and all inferior faculties, obeyed without all resistance the rule
of reason and motions of the sanctified Will. This universal holiness and
perfection in the whole man, was that Image of God, or original justice
wherein Adam was created, but continued not. For in the second place

2. After his fall, for a punishment of his wilful transgression, God withdrew
from Adam this his Image, and stripped him naked of that habit of grace and
perfect holiness, wherewith he was before in all parts qualified: leaving
only here and there some few traces or lines of that excellent Character
unblotted out. And now in place of original justice succeeds original
corruption, being an universal depravation and disability of man's whole
nature, to work well and conformably to the law of his first creation. The
understanding is dark, erroneous, confused in the apprehension of natural,
stark blind in perceiving spiritual things. The will froward and averse from
affecting or choosing its chief good. The affections and lower faculties
disorderly, violent, untameable. And this universal corruption of man's nature
is that which we call the image of Satan, to whom Adam by his fall became like,
and in Scripture it is termed, The flesh, The old man, The sin that dwells
in us, The sin of the world, The law of sin, The law in our members, The body
of death, Concupiscence or Lust, also The first death of the soul, which Adam
died immediately upon his sin; in which death and separation of grace from the
soul, all Adams posterity remain dead and rotten till they be quickened again
by Christ. Whereas then the soul being of a lively and active substance,
works altogether by and according to its inherent qualities; where they are
only good, all the actions thereof are regular; where naught, there all its
operations must needs be crooked and incongruous: as in men unregenerate, of
whom the Apostle gives this definitive sentence, They that are in the flesh
cannot please God. And out of this root grows that fruit which we properly
call man's aversion or turning from God to himself, to Satan, to any creature,
yielding service and love to any but to God, to whom only he owes it.

3. But there is yet a third estate, wherein the habits of righteousness and
sin are not severed as in the former two, but coupled both together: and this
is in the state of grace, when holiness is again infused into our natures,
and corruption done away in part. Which work of the holy Ghost upon us, is set
forth by sundry appellations in Scriptures, all signifying but diverse
circumstances of one and the same thing. Its called the Spirit, the new man,
the new creature, our regeneration or A clean heart, a right spirit.
begetting again, our renascentia or new birth, our renovation or renewing,
the law of our minds, viz. renewed, the first resurrection from the dead, our
effectual vocation, our conversion; and in one word which compriseth and
expounds the extent of all the rest, Our Sanctification, which is nothing but
that Image of God, which we had and lost in Adam, restored unto us again by the
supernatural work of Gods Spirit, creating holiness or grace in our unholy
and graceless hearts. For then only are we renewed being made new men and new
creature, then only begot and borne again by the Spirit, then raised to life,
effectually called and turned from darkness to light, when we are sanctified
throughout by this new quality of grace brought into us, rectifying and
repairing every part of our whole man. In which state the operations of the
soul are mixed, neither simply good as in the first, nor simply evil as in the
second, but partaking of both qualities, according to the different habites of
corruption and grace, whereby the soul is depraved or perfected in her
working. Now the proper fruit of this renewed grace is our Conversion or Turning
unto God, when upon the infusion of spiritual life and grace, we begin again
to acknowledge our Creator, and forsaking our lusts, Satan, and the creature,
to fasten again our love upon God that made our souls, and best deserves our
service.

But yet touching this our sanctification or inherent righteousness, we are to
enquire a little more distinctly: and for the cleerer understanding of it, to
distinguish between

1. The Habit of Grace, 2. The Operations proceeding from thence.
The sacred habit of grace is one supernatural quality of holiness
universally infused into all the powers of the soul at once, and spreading it
self over all, leaves no part unsanctified, as corruption on the contrary
leaves no part untainted. And as this being one contains in it originally the
seed of every sin, so does the other of every gracious action. It is bestowed
on every elect person, through the work of the holy Ghost, who when he enters
to take possession of the heart by his quickening and sanctifying virtue, brings
life and holiness not to one only part, but to all at once. I say to all at
once, in the habitual renovation of every part: For grace comes into the soul
like light into the air, which, before dark, is in all parts at once
illuminated; or as heat into cold water, that spreads it self through the
whole substance; or as the soul into the body of Lazarus, or the Shunamites
child, not by degrees but all at once infused, and giving life to every part.
So is our new man borne at once, though he grow by degrees: that is, the soul
in our conversion is at once reinvested with the Image of God in all its
faculties: so that howsoever the actions of grace do not presently appear in
each one, yet the habit, the seed, the root of all divine virtues is firmly
reimplanted in them, and by the strength of this grace given, they are
constantly disposed to all sanctified operations.

The operations flowing from this blessed habit of renewed grace, are many:
For Grace as in all parts it works imperfectly during this life, so in diverse
parts it works diversely: or rather, because habits are not active per se,
thus, Every faculty having proper operations belonging to it different from
others, which it produces by the strength of its proper nature; if it be
perverted by corruption it does the action ill, if it be rectified by grace it
performs it well. As, to know, to assent, to choose, to desire, to joy, to
love, etc. are natural works of the understanding, and will, or reasonable
appetite. But when they shall put themselves forth to action, nothing will be
done in a right manner, nor directed to a right object, unless the faculties
be reindued with their Primitive perfection totally or in part. For this rule
is sure, Nothing can work as God would have it, unless it be such as God made
it. Now by the restoring of grace or Gods image, a man becomes in part like
unto that he was in his first creation, and consequently, the motions of every
faculty conformable to their first regularity. Well then, Grace like the Ocean
is one Element, but takes diverse names, according to the several regions and
parts of the soul which it washes and sanctifies, according to the several
objects about which they are employed, and lastly, according to the several
occasions that stir them up to action. As for instance; Grace in the
understanding is called spiritual wisdom in discerning of holy things; Grace
in the will is a rectified choice, and embracing of its right object, God and
his goodness; Grace in the affections are their pure and sanctified motions
toward their proper objects; Grace in the outward man is its prompt and ready
obedience in doing the commands of a sanctified soul. Now in all these parts,
albeit the seed of renewing grace be so deeply sown and rooted, that as S.
John speaks, 1. Ioh. 3. 9. it remains within us (the Image of God being
though more imperfectly, yet more firmly imprinted on the regenerate than on
Adam himself) yet the Actus secundi, the actual operations of this Grace
appear neither perfectly nor equally in every part, but show themselves sooner
or later, more strongly or weakly, according as the strength of sinful
corruption abates more or less, or as there is greater necessity and use of
one grace more than another: For the case is not altogether alike in our New as
in our Natural birth: here all parts are nourished alike, and grow
proportionably unto full perfection, if the body be healthy and of good temper.
But in the birth of the new creature it is otherwise; he is crazic and sickly
from the very womb: and first conception, infirmity and corruption hangs upon
every joint and limb of him: so that although life be in every part, yet every
part thrives not equally, nor is alike active in its operations. Its with him,
as with instants that are (...), Syderati, planet stricken, or as we say,
taken with some ill air, in whom some parts grow wearish and withered, whilst
others grow strong and lusty. All grow and have life, but those more slowly and
weakly; which diversity make the body somewhat deformed though not monstrous:
So in Grace every faculty is quickened with spiritual life and strength, and
yet one may have a more free exercise of this gracious power, than another,
which may be hindered and kept under through some stopping of the Spirit, some
ill humor unpurged, some corrupt custom, company, or example inclining it
another way. And this appears by manifest experience of that great diversity
of the degrees of grace which are found even in one regenerate man, who many
times proves eminent in some one or few graces, and yet in others attains but
to a very mean mediocrity.

This distinction between the Unity of the Habit, and Multiplicity of the
Operations of Grace infused, may be further cleared by comparison with other
things: as namely, with original justice, and original sin. That was but
one Image of God engraven universally in Adams whole nature, possessing and
sanctifying every part, which were thereby disposed at all occasions, to all
convenient and due operations without let. This also is not a particular but
universal Therefore it is our body of death, which yet has many earthly
members.
depravation, indisposing all parts to good, ill-disposing them to naught.
Which (as original justice should have been) is in all infants together with
life, but shows it by degrees and with much diversity, as with increase of
years, custom of education, force of temperature, strength of temptations
provoke and inslame it. So our sanctification being the restoring of original
righteousness, and doing away of original corruption, is for its inherence
one general habit sanctifying all at once, and working in every part a
gracious disposition to its proper holy performances, though the execution it
self be with much variety, as also hinderance and difficulty by reason of the
contrary habit of corruption.

Again, health is not a particular but universal (...) or right temper of the
whole body, which in diverse parts has diverse names, by which every part works
diversely, and all orderly: In a universal (...) on the contrary. And such are
the habites of grace and corruption. Lastly, as the reasonable soul in infants
has all its faculties entirely, though the exercise of each of them appear
not but in time by degrees, so in our regeneration, grace is entire even in its
infancy and first The new man is created a perfect man, though but an infant.
birth, though the operations of it are more or less according to our growth
in Christ.

Now, to make application of this to our enquiry touching the original of
faith, you may perceive by what is spoken, Whereof faith is a part, and When
faith is wrought in the soul: Namely, that faith is a part of our
sanctification As infidelity of our corruption. Gal. 5. 22.
, that faith is wrought in the soul then when we are regenerate by the
infusion of the habit of grace into our whole man. This will appear if we
distinguish between

1. The habit of faith, which is in general the renewed quality of the soul,
whereby it is made able to discern and yield assent unto, and also willing to
put affiance in all divine truth revealed.

2. The act of faith, when the understanding and will do actually know and
rely upon Gods truth and goodness. This is a fruit of the former, and
follows it in time; the former is a branch of the Image of God restored unto
us, a stream of the common fountain of sanctification, whence all graces
slow, a part of our inherent righteousness, as is most apparent: It being
impossible, that the understanding and will of man should be effectually
inclined toward their spiritual and supernatural object, to give credence
and put confidence in it, until such time as they be first rectified by
grace, and purged from their habitual inbred blindness and rebellion: Which
change when it is wrought in the soul by the Spirit of grace, sanctifying and
quickening it in all the powers thereof with spiritual life: then follow those
living actions of Faith, Hope, Love, etc performed by the strength of inherent
and assisting grace. Wherefore we are not to imagine that faith is infused
either Before, or without other graces, or that the soul is not at the same
time, and as soon disposed to love and fear God, as to believe in him, or to
Humility, to Patience, to Charity, to Repentance; as for Faith. The seed of all
these graces is sown at once; and for their habites they are co^vall stemmes
of one common root of inherent sanctity: though yet some of them shoot up
faster and bear fruit sooner than other. Those that do so are the two
principal graces of Faith and Repentance: the actions of both which seem to
appear first in the regenerate: which of them show first, I will not now
dispute; but certain it is, that the regenerate soul works here most lively
and stirring, and after the infusion of spiritual life the pulse beats
strongest in those arteries. The reason whereof I take it is, the singular use
of these two graces arising from the manner of our conversion: which being
wrought by the sight of sin and misery on the one side, and the
representation of grace and mercy on the other, of necessity draws the
newly-regenerate soul by strong motions immediately to conceive sorrow for,
and detestation of its sinful misery, and also to a vehement desiring and
looking after the promise of grace, which may bring it deliverance from an
estate so damnable. But in this point of the priority of one grace before
another, we may not be too bold nor curious: for as the working of the holy
Ghost is secret and wonderful, in making us wild gourds partakers of the sap
and sweetness of the true Vine: so is it not possibly observable in all or
the most, where, and in what branch this sap first buds forth into blossoms
and fruit. Hence this conclusion is to be observed.

1. That Eaith properly is not the root of all other graces, nor the first
degree of our sanctification and spiritual life.

Take faith in which sense we please, for the Act, or for the Habit: If for the
Act, the Habit is Before that, and the root of it; If for the Habit, that is
not Before, but a part of our sanctification, nor yet a solitaty Habit infused
alone by it self, but together with the Actus primi, or Habits of all
supernatural graces whatsoever. It Is true in some sense that before faith,
there is no life nor sanctity in the soul: because faith is a part of our life
of grace, and of sanctity. But there are other parts too, Hope, Charity, etc.
and of these it may be said as well as of faith, there is no grace in the soul
till hope and charity be wrought in it. All are parts of our spiritual life
wrought together. For as the corporal, so the spiritual life is not one
distinct, but omnes actus primi, of every faculty whereby it can work
regularly. And though in the body some part may live alone, and others be
dead, yet in our spiritual life it is far otherwise, all powers are quickened
and live together: where the habit of one grace is, there are all, and as soon
all, as one, every Faculty being rectified as well as any: and all the As the
Will renewed is at once disposed to love our neighbor, as well as to love God,
etc.
operations of each faculty tending to all its objects, renewed as well as any
one operation directed to some one object. Wherefore I see not, under
correction of quick eyes, how Faith can be accounted the root whence spring
all other fruits of righteousness, the efficient So Tilenus, with others
generally, makes Faith to be the instrument of Instification and
Sanctification, with this difference: Fides Iustificationem percipit,
Sanctificationem etiam efficit. In the one faith is an instrument only, in the
other an efficient cause also. Tylen. Syntag. part. 2. disp. 45. these. 41.
cause of our sanctification, the only pipe through which the waters of life
flow into the soul, that firstborne grace in our spiritual regeneration, so
much that before its actual operation there is no jot of spiritual life and
sanctity in our hearts. Many divine Elogies are given to faith in the
Scriptures, but none such as to cause us to make it the fountain of all
graces. That the heart is regenerate before the act of believing and other
graces wrought therein, together with the habit of faith, may appear by these
reasons:

1. It is the true and general doctrine of all Divines, that actual faith is
never wrought in the soul, till besides the supernatural illumination of the
understanding, the will be also changed and freed in part from its natural
perverseness: For till this be done, it is utterly impossible it should ever
embrace the promise. Now the doing away of this ignorance and rebellion, what
is it but an effect of the grace of sanctification implanted in the soul, by
which it is sweetly and freely inclined to all heavenly things?

2. To believe is an action of a man living by grace, not dead in sin. The
soul therefore is first endued with the life of grace before it can perform
this living action.

3. There can be no reason given why in our regeneration it should be
necessary first to have faith before we can have any other grace of
sanctification, no more than that it should be needful to have some other
grace, before we can have faith; or, why we are more fit being unconverted to
receive the grace of faith rather than any other grace, as of repentance, etc.
A man unregenerate having no preparations at all to any grace, is alike
disposed to receive every one: and so there is no difference on man's part. If
any say, that the Spirit which must work other graces is not received till we
do actually believe: in so saying he confutes himself; it being most
apparent, that the Spirit is given to men incredulous, to the end to make them
believers: and no man should ever be converted were not the holy Ghost given
to him, whilst he is unconverted, to work his conversion. Now God that for
Christ's sake gives faith unto us when we had none, without any predisposition
in us to receive it, can and does for the same Christ's sake give us all other
graces as well at the same time.

4. It cannot well be shown how faith produces all other virtues in us,
seeing that all habites of grace are infused, not acquired; and one habit
cannot produce another, nor does one habit bring forth the operations of
another. It Is true that faith lends a hand to help forward all gracious
actions, and does much in their guidance and direction; but it is like as the
understanding guides the actions of the will and inferior faculties, or as
prudence moderates the actions of all other moral virtues; which actions
notwithstanding come from their proper faculties and habites, as their
immediate principia and fountains. But of this point more at large when we
come to show the dependence that obedience has upon faith.

Against this may be objected: That we live by faith, Gal. 2. 20. that by faith
Christ dwells in our hearts, Ephesians. Ob.
3. 17. that through faith we are risen with Christ, Col. 2. 12. that by faith
we receive the holy Ghost, Ioh. 7. 38, 39. Ephesians. 1. 13.

So that we have no life till we be in Christ, no being in him til we have
faith to believe on him, no sap from the vine, no virtue from the body till we
be united as branches, as members, which union is by faith only; no Spirit of
grace to give us life till we have faith to receive it. In brief thus: Christ
by his Spirit is the author of all our spiritual life and sanctification. But
till we believe we have no participation nor fellowship with Christ and his
Spirit. Therefore till we As who should say, a dead man must first see, speak,
and go, before he have life in him.
believe we have in us no life at all, and consequently by faith we are made
partakers of all life and grace. To which I answer.

We must carefully distinguish between a twofold Sol.
Union and Communion we have with Christ.

1. By the Spirit on his part: for Christ as by his Death he is the meritorious
cause of life and grace unto Ephesians. 1. 22. and 4. 15. Gal. 2. 20. 1. Cor. 6. 17.
the elect, so by his Spirit he is the only efficient of life and grace in the
regenerate. To whom whilst they are yet dead in sin and destitute of all grace,
so as they neither do nor possibly can believe, Christ sends his Spirit which
breathes life into them, changes and purifies their nature, by working all holy
and rectified abilities in every part. Now this first work of the Spirit
creating of grace in the soul, does most apparently precede not only the act
of believing, but the habit also: for the habit it self is infused by this
work. And therefore None can call Christ Lord but by the holy Ghost.
it is also manifest that before all faith, we have and must have some
participation with Christ, even to this end that we may have faith. But this
union with him is wrought merely by the holy Spirit, which is that band
whereby Christ knits himself to us, communicating all gracious and quickening
virtue from himself to us, and thereby making us living members of his body.

2. By our faith on our parts: when being quickened by infused grace, we
actually apply our selves to embrace the promise, and to rely upon Christ
only. And here we knit our selves to Christ, resting upon him alone for all
comfort. By which uniting of our selves to Christ, we receive a greater
increase and larger measure of grace from him. In the first union we were
insensible of it, and grace is given to us non petentibus, that Romans 10. 20.
asked not after it: in this second union we are most sensible of its comfort
and benefit; and here an augmentation of grace is bestowed on us petentes,
earnestly suing for it, and by faith expecting the receiving of it. Wherefore I
conclude, All grace and virtue whatsoever Christ is made unto us life,
righteousness, etc.
in us, is given us from the fullness of Christ, the fountain of all
supernatural life; but yet all is not wrought by Christ embraced by our faith,
but by Christ convaying his grace unto us by his Spirit. This first quickens
us: we then with Lazarus after life put into us, can awake, stand up, come
forth, and by faith look on him that raised us, fall down, worship, and
believe in him as our Lord and God. The places alleged either touch not our
sanctification at all, or speak only of the increase of grace, not of its
first infusion, faith being a means of that, but no efficient or instrument of
this.

Having thus showed the nature of our conversion or sanctification, it
remains that for the further clearing of many doubts and our more easy
passage unto other points, we speak somewhat touching three material
circumstances necessary to be considered in this point of our conversion and
vocation, and they are these:

1. The cause whereby, 2. The manner how, 3. The subject wherein conversion is
wrought.
Of the cause first: which is double,

1. The impulsive or moving cause, 2. The efficient or working cause.
That which moves God to bestow the grace of sanctification upon man is nothing
in man, but all in God himself: namely, his free-love to his elect in Christ:
Which love of God is from eternity before the foundations of the world were
laid: and though it be revealed unto the elect in time or at their conversion,
yet does it not then begin, when it begins to be manifested. When we yet lay
in the shadow of death, strangers from the life of God through ignorance that
was in us, when we were cast out polluted in our blood, not yet washed and
seasoned with salt, even then God looked on us with tender compassions, he
pitted us, he loved us as chosen vessels prepared for glory, as heirs of
grace and life; and because he thus loved us, he said to us, Live, he covered
our nakedness, and clothed us with righteousness. Now that God does thus
actually love the elect before they are regenerate, or can actually believe,
may further appear by these reasons:

1. Where God is actually reconciled, there he actually loves: for love and
reconciliation are inseparable;

But with the elect before they convert and believe, God is actually
reconciled. Ergo,

He loves them before their faith and conversion.

The minor is evident, because before they are borne, much more before they are
regenerate, a full Atonement and satisfaction for all offenses is made by
Christ and accepted on Gods part. Whereupon actual reconciliation must needs
follow. And this the Scriptures make manifest, Christ being [the Lamb slain
from the beginning of the world] and God testifying of him at his Baptism long
before his death, in that speech of admirable consolation [This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am pleased] well pleased with him for the unspotted holiness
of his own person, well pleased with us in him for his unvaluable merits. And
hence a second reason a pari,

2. If God did actually love the elect before Christ's time, when an actual
reconciliation was not yet made, then much more may he actually love the elect
after the atonement is really made by Christ's death, even before they do
believe it.

But the former is true, as appears by the salvation of the Patriarchs: and
therefore the latter may not well Unless we will maintain the Popish Limbus.
be denied. The reason of the consequence is this, Because it is far more
probable, that God should love us upon satisfaction made, before our faith,
than love them upon their faith before satisfaction was given. Specially seeing
neither their faith nor ours is any efficient cause why God loves either them
or us.

3. Election, effectual Vocation, and Faith, all are fruits and consequents
of Gods actual love unto the He has loved us and chosen us, etc. Deuteronomy. 7. 7.
8. and 10. 15. 1. Ioh. 4. 19. 1. Pet. 1. 3. Tit. 3. 5. 7. Ephesians. 1. 4. 9. 2. Tim.
1. 9. Romans 11. 5. and 9. 11.
Elect: which graces and favors he therefore bestows upon them because he
loves them. And therefore it is vain to say, Deus elegit homines diligendos, non
dilectos, or that faith and sanctity are bestowed on us only to make us
capable of Gods love. Is not the bestowing of them a fruit of his great mercy
and love unto us? Yea, the whole series and chain of all Gods gracious works
for man's salvation, have Gods love for their first link: as is apparent, Ioh.
1. 13.

4. These affections of love and hatred in God are perpetual; being eternal
and unchangeable acts of his will. Whom he loves he loves always, whom he
hates he hates for ever. Nor does he as man at any time begin to love that
person, whom before he hated: or hate that person whom before he loved. These
things agree not with Gods immutability, or omnisciency. For it cannot be that
like a man he should be deceived in the placing of his affection, or that he
should change his mind where the things themselves change not: forasmuch as he
that is once hated of God will be for ever hateful (for who should make him
otherwise?) and he that is once beloved shall be for ever lovely (for God that
loves him will make him so). Wherefore Gods love to the regenerate is not a
thing of yesterday as themselves are: but one of those ancient favors, which
have been laid up for us in the treasury of his old and everlasting counsels.

5. God loves and saves those of his elect who dye infants, and cannot have
actual faith: Of which more anon. Wherefore I conclude that before conversion,
much more before actual faith, God actually loves the elect, and out of that
his great love, bestows upon them the grace of conversion. But here I would
have you observe a twofold distinction: 1. Between Gods love in itself, The
manifestation of it to us.

That is perpetual and One, from all to all eternity, without change, increase
or lessening toward every one of the Elect: But the manifestation of this love
to our hearts and consciences begins in time, at our conversion, and is
variable according to the several degrees of grace given, and our more or
less careful exercise of Piety, whereby the light of Gods countenance at one
time shines bright upon our souls, at another time is in the eclipse. Which
diverse degrees of revelation, argue no difference in Gods affection (nay in
earthly Parents it does not always, for a strong affection may be concealed):
but we may truly say, That Gods love to us when he decreed to save us, is one
and the same without addition with that which he manifests unto us, when he
glorifieth us. That holy flame of divine love toward us does burn as hot now
as then; though till then we shall not be so thoroughly heated with it.

2. Between Gods love to our persons, Gods love to our qualities and actions.

A distinction which God well knows how to make; and we should sometimes
learn to use it, not hating men's persons, because of some infirmities. Parents
I am sure are well skilled in putting this difference between the vices and
persons of their children, those they hate, these they love, and when for their
vices they chastise their persons, they remember with much compassion, that it is
a child whom they have under the rod. To the point; the cause is alike
between God and the Elect, his love to their persons is from everlasting the
same, nor does their sinnefulnesse lessen it, nor their sanctity increase it.
Because God in loving their persons never considered them otherwise than as
most perfectly holy and unblameable in Christ. But Gods love to their qualites
and works then begins, when both the one and other become holy by the grace of
conversion: before which time and after too, God is angry even with his Elect,
and testifies his hatred of their sins as much as of any others, by manifold
chastisements upon their persons for their offenses. Wherefore though Paul were
a chosen vessel dearly beloved of God for his person, even then when in
ignorant zeal he furiously persecuted the Church, yet for his conditions they
were hateful and highly displeasing to God till after his conversion. Most
true it is, that sin does justly make that person hateful in whom it is, and
it does so in the reprobate, whose sins God hates, and for their sins their
persons, which he always beholds polluted in their uncleanness: yet in the
Elect whom he has loved for ever, this difference of affection is manifest,
God approves of their persons, whilst he disallowes their corruptions, and
when his fiercest wrath was showed against the sins of the Elect in the
person of God so loved the world, etc.
Christ, then did God most compassionately love the persons both of Christ and
of all the Elect. Wherefore God might easily take away his Image from Adams
nature, yet not his favor from his person, which he loved as elect in Christ,
whilst yet he punished his transgression sharply: and we see nothing more
common in Christian observation, than for men, after such time as they are
converted and assured of Gods tender love unto them, yet then to feel the
bitterest storms of his displeasure raised up against them for their sins.

Hence then it appears, that our effectual Vocation and Conversion is justly
to be accounted a fruit or effect of Gods singular favor toward the persons
of his Elected, with whom being actually reconciled in Christ, having justified
them from all their sins by his merits, he afterward sends forth his holy
Spirit into their hearts, calling them from darkness to light, from under the
power of Satan and their corruption, to the liberty of Gods sons, that being
thus sanctified they may be made meet to be partakers of the inheritance with
the Saints in light. And whereas that place of the Apostle, Heb. 11. 6. Without
faith it is impossible to please God, may breed a doubt against this which has
beespoken, as seeming to imply, that before our actual Conversion and
Believing we are no way at all pleasing unto God, nor beloved of him: For the
removing of this scruple, we are according to the second distinction
understand this place of the Actions, not to the Persons of the Elect. Toward
their Persons he bears perpetual good will: but this is secret, they feel
it not, nor does so much appear unto them or others till their conversion,
when only God declares himself to be pleased both with their persons and
actions. But for their actions, it is certain no work whatsoever any of the
Elect does before the infusion of saving faith, can be done according to Gods
will, and so be pleasing unto him. Of which ordinary course of pleasing of God
in our Works, according to his revealed will, this place is to be interpreted,
and that out of the place it self; for it is apparent the Apostle gives a
reason why Abels Sacrifice pleased God not Cains, why Enochs life and religious
walking with God was pleasing to him, namely because they had faith, in and by
which they performed those services acceptably. Without which faith it is
impossible, says the Apostle, to please God, namely in any Work that we go
about; and he adds the reason, [For he that comes to God,] whether in
sacrifices, prayers, or any other religious duties to be performed to God, [he
must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him.] Here therefore is nothing against that Love of God which he always
bears toward his Elect in Christ, through whom they are pleasing unto him,
when yet their works please him not.

And thus much of the Moving cause of our Effectual Vocation, viz. Gods Love
and Actual Reconciliation with the Elect. From hence I deduce two corollaries,

1. That Sanctification and Inberent righteousness goes before our
Justification and imputed righteousness: but with a distinction of a double
justification.

1. In Foro Diuino, in Gods fight; and this goes before all our
sanctification: for even whilst the elect are unconverted, they are then
actually justified and freed from all sin by the Death of Christ: and God so
esteems of them as free, and having accepted of that Satisfaction, is actually
reconciled to them. By this Justification we are freed from the guilt of our
Sins, and because that is done away, God in due time proceeds to give us the
grace of Sanctification, Col. 1. 13.
to free us from sins corruption still inherent in our Persons.

2. In Foro Conscientiae, in our own sense, which is but the revelation and
certain declaration of Gods former secret act of accepting Christ's
righteousness to our justification. The manifestation of which to our hearts
and consciences, is the only ground of all our peace and comfort: and it
follows our Sanctification, upon and after the Infusion of Saving Faith, the
only instrument of this our Justification. This distinction is needful to be
observed, as giving light to many things: and without it I know not what
reasonable construction can be made of these words of Tilenus, Synt. part. 2.
cap. 45. These. 38. Perperam and absurd prorsus inter effecta Sanctificationis
numer atur justificatio, quae illam natura praecedit; neque enim sanctificatur
quisquam nisi jam justificatus: omninoque necesse est, ut arbor bona sit,
priusquam bonos ferat fructus. If he mean that no man is sanctified, but he
that is first justified in Gods sight by Christ's righteousness accepted for
him, it is true: but if, that none is sanctified but he that is first justified
in his own sense through the apprehension of Christ's righteousness by faith,
it is apparently false, seeing a man cannot have Faith, nor use faith till he be
first sanctified. And the reason he gives is exceeding weak, The tree must be
good before it bring forth good fruits. True, but what makes us good trees? our
Justification or our Sanctification? Surely our Sanctification. For though by
Justification we are accounted good and Holy before God, yet we are not so in
our Selves, but most evil and Corrupt till we be indewed with the grace of
sanctification. And then only we become Good trees, fit to bear the fruit of
good works: so that the reason is in effect, as if he had said we must first
be Sanctified before our works be Holy: and that's true; for even to Believe is
a good and Holy work, and therefore Ioh. 6. 29.
though it go before Justification, yet of necessity presupposes
Sanctification.

2. That faith is su^b an instrument of making us partakers of the Benefits of
Christ's Mediation, as is neither absolutely necessary in all. the Elect, nor yet
simply anteceding all manner of participation in those benefits.

That it is not absolutely necessary in all, appears in the Elect dying
infants, who enjoy all the benefits of Christ's merits in their Justification,
Sanctification and Glorification, without this isntrumental means of their
actual Faith: as we shall see more at large anon.

That Faith does not simply precede all manner of Participation with Christ,
appears by a double benefit we enjoy by and from Christ, before such time as
we do believe.

1. Our Sanctification wrought by the Spirit, which from Christ convaies Life
and Grace into our Souls, when we were utterly devoid of all both Faith and
other graces, as has been showed before at large. And this is the first
benefit of Christ's death bestowed on us before we so much as ask it.

2. Our Justification in Gods sight; which even long before we were borne is
purchased for us by Christ. For it is vain to think with the Arminians, that
Christ's merits have made God only Placabilem, not Placatum, procured a freedom
that God may be reconciled if he will, and other things concur, but not an
actual reconciliation. A silly shift devised to uphold the liberty of man's
will, and universality of Grace. No, it is otherwise, the Ransom demanded is
paid and accepted, full Satisfaction to the Divine justice is given and taken,
all the sins of the Elect are actually pardoned, Gods wrath for them is
suffered and overcome, he rests contented and appeased, the debt book is
crossed, and the handwriting cancelled. This grand transaction between God
and the Mediator Christ Jesus, was concluded upon and dispatched in heaven long
before we had any being, either in Nature or Grace: Yet the benefit of it was
ours, and belonged to us at that time, though we never knew so much till after
that by faith we did apprehend it. As in the like case, Lands may be
purchased, the Writings confirmed, the estate convayed and settled upon an
Infant, though it know nothing of all, till it come to age, and find by
experience the present commodity of that which was provided for him long ago.
And the reason of all this is, because it is not our Faith that works Gods
reconciliation with us, but Christ believed on by our faith: Now his Merits are
not therefore accepted of God, because we do believe, but because they of
themselves are of such Worth and sufficiency as do deserve his most favorable
acceptance of them for us. And what reason have we then to think why they have
not always procured as well as deserved Gods love and actual reconciliation
for the Elect, not only before their faith as in all, but also without their
faith as in Infants?

I proceed to the second cause of our Conversion, viz. the Efficient cause
which really produces it, and that is the Holy Ghost, in whose person, not
excluding the Father and the Son, this work of Sanctification is peculiarly
terminated. This blessed Spirit are those two golden pipes through which the
two Olive branches empty out of themselves the golden oils of all precious
graces, into the Candlestick, the Church, as it is Zach. 4. For which cause
all the Graces of God are called the Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. and
Ephesians. 5 9 [For the Fruit of the Spirit is and 1 Cor. 12. (...).
in all goodness and righteousness and truth.] yea, the whole work of
sanctification and renewed Grace is styled by the name of the Spirit, Gal. 5.
17. [The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh,]
id est, Grace fights against corruption, and this opposes against Grace. In
respect of this opperation which the Holy Ghost has in Sanctifying the Elect,
he is in Scripture set forth under a double Similitude of Water and Fire: which
are Elements most apt to cleanse. The similitude is from the custom of the
Leuiticall Purifications, which were done Heb. 102. 2, 23
by the use of both Elements. For all vessels and utensills polluted by any
legal uncleanenesse, were to be purged by Water if they were of wood, but by
Fire, if made of metal or other materials that might endure it, as you may
read, Number. 31. 23. So what ever filthiness cleaves unto us, or how deeply
soever incorporated into our natures, the Holy Ghost by his most blessed
virtue, as by water washes away, as by fire consumes. [Then I will pour
clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean, from all your filthiness and
from your Idols will I cleanse you:] says God unto the Church, Ezech. 36. 25.
And what is this water? in Verse 27. he interprets himself in these words,
[And I will put my Spirit within you]. Hence we are said to be baptized with
the Holy Ghost, Ioh. 1. 33. to be baptized by one Spirit into one body, 1 Cor.
12. 13. to be borne of water and of the Spirit, Ioh. 3. 5. Which baptizing of
washing by the Holy Ghost is in plainer terms our Sanctification wrought by
his power, cleansing us from inherent corruption, and creating in us Purite and
Holiness, as is clear out of that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6 11. [And such 1
Pet 1. 28.
were some of you: but ye are washed]: what is that? the next words tell us,
[But ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus,
and by the Spirit of our God]. Hence the bestowing of the abundant gifts of the
Holy Ghost, is metaphorically described by Effusion or pouring out, as Esa. 44.
3. [I will pour water upon the thirsty and floods upon the dry ground; I will
pour my Spirit upon thy seed, The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by
the Holy Ghost.
and my blessing upon thy buds.] Joel 2. 18, [I will pour out my Spirit upon
a^l fl^sh] fulfilled Act. 2. For that other appellation of Fire, we have it
expressly, Mat. 3. 11. [Hee will baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire,]
and implied, Marc. 9 49. Every man shall be salted with fire: and every
sacrifice shall be salted with salt. Grace therefore is of a divine offspring,
the immediate effect of the allpowerfull virtue of Gods Spirit, whereby he
replants inherent Holiness in our Souls, having purified them from all
Uncleanness, to make us holy vessels of pleasure fit for the service of Gods
Sanctuary. Now whereas this work of the Holy Spirit, is by divines called
Donatio Spiritus Sancti, the Giving of the Holy Ghost, that we be not mistaken,
you are to note briefly, that the Holy Ghost is said to be given two ways:

1. In his Essence and Graces, both together; and so was he given to Christ the
Head of the Church, in whom Col. 2. 9.
dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, or substantially, whom God has
anointed with the Holy Ghost and with Power, and that above all his brethren,
having given Act. 10. 38.
him the Spirit without measure.

2. In his Graces and Virtues only; and so is he given unto the Church, the
body of Christ. Touching this Sending forth of the Spirit into the hearts of
the Elect, the inhabitation thereof in their hearts, how they are said to be
the Temples of the holy Ghost, and Partakers of the Divine nature: albeit it be
most true, that the Holy Ghost 1 Cor. 3.
being God must needs be present every where by his Essence, yet I take it to
agree best with Christian modesty to let pass curious speculations about such
sacred mysteries, and to rest our selves contented with this, that it suffices
abundantly for our comfort, if we enjoy his Gracious presence, replenishing us
with all heavenly virtues and Consolations. Now this donation of the Spirit, in
his graces and virtues, is double;

1. One respecting the public, when an extraordinary measure either of
Inferior gifts, or of Sanctifying graces is bestowed upon some men for the
greater benefit of the Church in common. And this was more peculiar to the
times of the Primitive Church. Of which donation of the Spirit you may read,
Ioh. 7. 39. Act. 2. and Act. 19. 2. 6. Ephesians. 4. 8. 11.

2. Another in regard of the Private good of every Elect person, when the Holy
Spirit is given to him, effectually to call, convert, and sanctify him. And
this only is that giving of the Holy Ghost which we now seek after: when the
power of that Holy one overshadowes our souls, and by the immortal Seed of
his own most gracious virtue, frames in us the New man created according to
God in Righteousness and Holiness.

Let this suffice concerning the Causes of our Conversion, which are briefly
wrapped up in that of the Apostle, Romans 5. 5. The love of God shed abroad in
our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. I go on to the next
circumstance, viz.

The manner how it is wrought in us. To inquire in what manner the Holy Ghost
breathes into our Souls the Supernatural life of Grace, is a scruteny as
difficult, as to search whence and whither the wind blows, or for a dead man
raised up, to tell how life and sense came into him, or for a man borne into
the world, to describe in what manner each of his members was fashioned in the
womb. There is not, I suppose, any mortal man not inspired with special
revelation, that can declare unto us this Way of the heavenly spirit, any more
than the skilfullest Anatomist, the Way of the earthly spirit, nor how the
bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child, as Saloman speaks,
Eccle. 11. 5. To tell the month, day or hour wherein they were converted, is
in most converts impossible, in all of exceeding difficult observation; though
I deny not but the time may be in Some of sensible mark. But even in them or
others, to show us by which way the Spirit went out from God to speak unto
their hearts, by what secret motions it moved upon their souls, how and in
which parts its quickening and sanctifying virtue gave life and heat unto them,
we cannot expect from them any declaration of that which they had no power to
observe. Do not look then I should make known unto you the manner of that in
you, whereof I am ignorant in my self. This I trust, that thorough the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, both you and I may say with the blind man in the
Gospel, One thing we know that we were blind, but Ioh, 9. 25.
now we see; we were dead, but now we are alive; we were lost, but are now
found; we were darkness, but are now light in the Lord: albeit how our eyes
are opened and illightned, how we were recovered from our wandering in the vale
of death, we cannot in every particular exactly recount. Blessed is he that
finds this change in himself: and far more blessed than they, who betray
themselves to have no part in the work by their pride and bitterness in
quarrelling the manner of it, who (as the learned Moulin Anat. Armin.
censures, not too sharply) are themselves led by a reprobate Spirit, whilst
captiously and carnally they inquire after the working of Gods Spirit.

There are nevertheless two things in the manner of Graces plantation in us,
which we may descry, because the Scriptures have discovered them unto us:
namely,

1. That this Plantation of Grace in us, is merely Supernatural.

2. That this Plantation of Grace is Constant and Durable, not to be rooted up
again: two circumstances about the infusion of Grace into man's heart, so
necessary to be well observed, as nothing more. Because in the one lies the
foundation of all Christian humility, we having nothing but what we have
received: on the other depends all our unconquerable comforts in this our
pilgrimage, that we have so received grace, as we shall never lose it again.
In both these Satan has not been wanting by his instruments, men of corrupt
minds, to pervert sound doctrine, and poison religion even in the root:
advancing the wisdom of the flesh, against the power of Gods Spirit, filling
the heart with proud imaginations, by ascribing so much unto the Sufficiency of
its own natural Abilities in point of Convesion, as it need not be much
beholding to God for his grace: and again breeding in the soul terrors
unsufferable, and fearful doubtings of its perseverance in grace received,
upon the apprehension of no stronger support in grace, than the reed of man's
Free Will, which having received, may as easily reject grace, and having made
them, may by the same power eternally undo them again. So look how men are
exalted in pride on the one side, as low are they thrown down, in discomfort
on the other side; and scarce is there any point of religion wherein we may
err more easily and dangerously. Well then let this be our first conclusion
touching the manner of our conversion, that

The Grace of Sanctification is wrought in the Elect in such a manner as is
merely Supernatural, id est, above the strength, without the concurrence of
any abilities of our corrupted nature.

God though a supernatural agent, yet works many things by natural means,
and in a natural manner, whilst he does but only give his assistance and
co-working power to and with the natural abilities originally planted in every
creature. And then though we deny not Gods actual For in him we live and
move, etc.
Concurrence, yet we truly and properly ascribe such effects to their Visible,
apparent, immediate causes. But in this point, concerning the replantation of
Holiness in a Sinful man, we affirm against Pelagians, Semi-pelagians,
Papists, Arminians, or other sectaries however branded, that as the Agent or
Efficient of man's Sanctification is simply supernatural, viz. the Holy Hhost,
so is his manner of working altogether Divine beyond the power, and without the
help of any thing in man. An assertion that lays nature flat on her back:
and yet gives unto her as much as Sin has left her, and that's just Nothing
in matter of Grace. And the truth hereof will easily appear to any that will
without pride and prejudice consult the Scriptures, or common experience. Me
thinks when we read in the book of God these and such like sayings, that
every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart is only evil continually; that
of the children of men, there is none that understands and seeks after God;
that they are become altogether filthy, none that does good no not one; that
[the natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit, nor can he know them
being spiritually discerned] that we are [blinde] till God [Open our eyes]
that we are [deafe] till God [bore our Eares] that we are [Darknesse] utterly
destitute of Spiritual light, that, [the Wissdome (...) of the flesh is enmity
or hatred against God, is not, nor can be subject to him] that [the flesh
lusts against the Spirit] rebelling against the work thereof even in the
regenerate; much more before regeneration, that [of our selves we are not
sufficient to think a good thought as of our selves, but that our sufficiency
is of God] that [it is God which works in us both 2 Cor. 3. 5.
the will and the deed of his good pleasure] that in our conversion, we are
[New begotten] [New borne] [New creatures, created in Christ Jesus to good
workes] in fine to put all out of doubt, [That we are Dead in trespasses and
Sinnes] and that our Sanctification is the [first resurrection] from death,
effected in us by the same Almighty [power which God declared in raising
Christ] from the grave: When, I say, we consider of these and the like places,
were we not too much in love with our selves, and held some scorn to con God
all the thanks for our salvation, our hearts and tongues would presently be
filled with a sincere acknowledgement, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy Name we give the glory, for thy loving mercy, and for thy Psalm. 115.
8.
truths sake. Besides, I wish we would descend unto an unpartiall examination
of our own hearts, to make discovery by the light of the Spirit, of that body
of Death we be are about with us, what strong rebellion there is of the Law in
our members, against the law of our minds, what secret and powerful
attractives the affections of Sin have to pull us unto disobedience, what
violent and bitter opposition they make against Grace checking their disorderly
motions, how seldom any blessed resolution tending to sanctity rises up in our
thoughts, how unwieldy we are in the managing of any gracious motion from the
Holy Ghost, with what slacknesse and cumber we prosecute such holy
inspirations to action and full accomplishment, in a word, how passing slow our
course toward heaven is, when we have all helps of nature and Grace to carry
us forward, I am fully persuaded, that whatsoever any man may conceive in
abstract speculation, there is no converted person if he make application to
his own particular, but will confess freely, if he deal truly with his own
heart, that, not only if God had not done More for him than he could for
himself, but if God had not done All for him he had utterly perished in his
sins. And he will acknowledge that it is impossible there should be in and of
himself such Preparations and forward dispositions to work his own
Conversion; who being Converted is hindered by none so much in the finishing of
his salvation, as by his own perpetual indisposition to goodness. This our
disabilitie whereof we are convinced in our own sense and by testimony of the
Scripture, will enforce us, if our pride be not as great as our poverty, to
confess whence we have our riches without stammering, shifting and mineing of
the matter, as the fashion of too many is, who by many pretty scholasticall
devices distinguish God out of all or the greatest part, or at least some part
of his Glory due unto him for our Conversion, and thrust in the Abilities of
their own Free Will as co-workers with Gods Spirit, and joynt-purchasers of
this inheritance of Grace. But let God have glory and every man shame: and let
all whom grace has taught to judge of their Corruption, say with the Church
Es. 26. 12. Thou (O Lord) have wrought all our works in us.

I will not prevent my self by larger explication of this point at this time:
but wrapp up all touching this first conclusion, in a needful distinction or
two, and so pass on. Man's Concurrence in the work of his sanctifications is
double,

1 Passive, which is the Capacity or Aptness that is in man's nature for the
Receiving of Grace, for being a Reasonable creature he is naturally prepared
and disposed with such a substance and faculties as are meet subjects to
receive the Habit, and instruments to perform the actions of Grace. This
Concurrence of man to his regeneration, is most necessary: nor does God
sanctify senseless or irrational creatures, nor is man in his conversion in
such sort passive, as is a stone, block, or brute beast, as our adversaries
absurdly cavil.

2 Active, which is some Strength or Power that man has in the Use of his
faculties, especially of his will, for the Production of Grace. This strength
of man in doing good is to be distinguished in regard

1 Of the Beginning and first Act of our Conversion, when Holiness is at the
first reimplanted in the Soul.

2 Of the Progress of our Conversion in the practice of Sanctification: In
this second respect none denies Man's actual concurrence with the Spirit of
God: for being sanctified and inwardly enabled in his faculties by Spiritual
life put into them, he can Move himself in and toward the performance of all
living actions of grace, even as Lazarus of Nature. Whereas yet you are to
remember, that even in these actions we cannot work alone, we are but
Fellow-workers with the Spirit of God, and this not in an Equality, but
Subordination to him: we indeed move our hands to write, but like raw scholars
we shall draw misshapen charecters, unless our heavenly Master guide our
hands. Nevertheless these actions take their denominations from the next
Agent, and though performed by special assistance of the Spirit, yet are
rightly said to be man's actions: so that when a regenerate person, Believes,
Prays, gives alms, rejoices in God, etc. we do not say that the Holy Ghost
in us Believes or Prays, or gives alms, or rejoices in the hope of
happiness, (as some would fasten upon us such a senseless assertion) it is
man that does all these, but man assisted by Grace.

But now concerning the former respect, for the first Infusion of the Habit of
grace into the soul, we utterly deny all Active concurrence of man's natural
abilities to the acquiring and generating of grace in his heart, and grant him
only a Passive capacity to receive it bestowed on him. And we maintain that
in this Case neither the Holy Ghost works like a Natural, nor man like a
Moral agent. The work of the Holy Ghost is not like that of Natural agents
in the production of Material Forms, brought out of the Power of the Matter,
that is, if I understand Naturalists in that Phrase, resulting out of the
Inherent qualities of the Subject diversely compounded and ^ipened by the
external agent, or as those agents work in the generation of Second qualities
arising out of the different mixture of the First: in both which the qualities
of the Subject concur with the outward agent in producing the effect. This
work is of a higher nature, like the infusion of the Reasonable Soul into the
Conception, to whose creation the body conferres nothing at all, and to its
introduction nothing but a passive capacity. It is a change of our nature, a
creation of new qualities, not a perfection of the old, an habitual quality
merely infused by Divine virtue, not issuing out of any inward force of humane
abilities, howsoever strained up to the highest pitch of their natural
perfection. And therefore again, man in this work of sanctification is not any
moral agent, as when by many commendable actions he gets to himself the habit
of moral virtue. No: Civilitie is a hopeful preparation, but no working cause
of sanctity. Take that and all other the most likely dispositions you will,
let there be sweetness of natural temper, ingenuitie of education, learning,
good company, abstinence and hatred of grosser vices, respect of laws,
restraint of discipline, an industrious forwardness to all laudable courses, a
natural desire of the unknown happiness of the Saints, a part in the
external communion of the Church, in brief, the whole pack of moral virtues
Christianis'd (that I may so speak) by the general knowledge of religion; yet
all these with their joint force cannot kindle in us one spark of Celestial
fire, nor quicken our dead souls with the least true motion of spiritual
life. Of a man qualified with those preparations we may say as Christ of the
yongue man in the Gospel, He is not far from the kingdom of God; but that
he is in common estimation, and according to the usual course of Gods
working, more fit than another man is for the receiving of Grace: and for the
performance of all gracious works, without question he is more aptly disposed
than others are, because by those preparations the violence of corruption is
somewhat broken in him, which in others remaining entire till their conversion,
makes the stronger resistance afterward in all their religious practices.
Wherefore it is not to be denied, but that in such a man so prepared, there is
a passive capacity more large and fit for the entertainment of Grace, than in
others: but for any active qualification to produce it, it is found neither in
the one nor other. And you are to observe, that in respect of God it is all one,
prepared or not prepared: he can of stones raise up children to Abraham: it is
easy for him to do so, and it is not unusual, if you mark it, that the
fairest, best tempered, and best governed natures are manietimes left utterly
destitute of all true sense of Piety, when men of sour and crabbed
dispositions, or of more disorderly conversations, are made partakers of
sanctifying grace. To end this matter, Original righteousness to Adam was
natural, being the natural quality wherewith he was created, and corruption
was accidental, being an unnatural vitiousnesse acquired by his fall: with us
it is quite contrary, Corruption is natural following our generation and birth,
and Grace, accidental: recoverable neither in whole nor in part by virtue of
the poor remainders of Gods Image in us, but by supernatural restitution made
by the holy Ghost. So I come to my second conclusion touching the manner how
grace is planted in us, which is this;

That in our Conversion the Habit of grace is so firmly wrought in us, as it
shall never be abolished again.

Grace in the regenerate is not any slight tincture or stain, but a through
and durable dye. The Image of God is so deeply imprinted in our souls, as it
shall never be defaced again. Where the Spirit of God comes, he makes sure
work: what he has built none shall pull down: where he has taken
possession, none can thrust him out of doors: where he has opened none can
shut: where he bestows his gifts and graces he repents not of his
liberality: where he has begun the good work of grace, there he will also
finish it. A matter as plain as comfortable, if we will but distinguish of the
works of Gods Spirit about our Sanctification, as they are differenced in
their times: they are two,

1. The first is the Creating of the Quality of renewed Holiness in the
Soul, whereby we are converted. This work is called Preventing grace, by
which the Spirit without our help works in us Habitual grace.

2. The second is the Aid and Assistance of the Spirit in all actions slowing
from the Habit of grace, by effectual concurrence of his virtue, together
with the strength of our regenerate faculties. This work is called Gratia
Subsequens, Cooperans, or Assistens, and the issue of it, are all those
sanctified actions which we perform by its help. And this second work of
the Spirit must needs be granted: for albeit he could work without us in
making us good trees, yet we must work together with him in bearing good
fruit: and it is very absurd to deny the assistance of Gods special grace in
every spiritual action, when we cannot but grant an immediate concourse of his
ordinary power, in all actions natural, even to the moving of one of our
fingers. But further this subsequent virtue of the Holy Ghost about all good
works which we do, is twofold:

1. One, that stirs us up to good actions, by inspiring into our souls,
after a secret and unperceiveable manner, holy thoughts, heavenly motions,
desires, purposes, and resolutions tending to godliness: and this work is
called Gratia excitans.

2. Another, that guides and helps forward the strength of each faculty, when
it applies it self to the real performance of any action: and this is
properly called Gratia adjuvans or Cooperans.

These things thus differenced, let us see wherein the Constancy of Grace
consists, and wherein it seems changeable. First for the Habit of Grace, in the
regenerate we affirm that it is Constant, abiding for ever in them in whom it
is once implanted. So that he who is once converted, cannot so shake off the
grace of his first, that he should need a second conversion: and a sinner once
raised from death through the infusion of spirituallife, like unto Christ, he
dies no more, but lives for ever to the glory of God. The reason is strong
from that of the Apostle Peter, 1. Pet. 1. 23. (...). What is this Seed by
which we are borne again? It is not the Word either alone or principally
considered, because that is but an instrument, and arbitrary too, the force
whereof so depends on the chief agent the power of the Spirit, that without it
is but a dead sound. And the reason why the word Lives and endures for ever, is
only because the power of the H. Spirit, which gives it its effect, is
everlasting. Well then, this Seed is the power or virtue of the H. Ghost: so
called by similitude, because that as of Seed the Conception is formed; so by
the power of Gods Spirit immediately, the New man, or graces of Sanctification
are begotten in us. But why is this Divine virtue the seed of our regeneration
called Incorruptible seed? is it in regard of it self, or in respect of the
fruit? For it self it is most true, that as the Person, so the Power of the
Holy Ghost, is eternal and incorruptible. But he is wilfully blind, who sees
not that in this place, it is so styled in relation to the effect it works in
us, quatenus Semen, as it is seed incorruptible, producing fruit like to it
self incorruptible and immortal. And the opposition here made, is manifest,
We are not borne of corruptible Seed, for that perishes, and so what is borne
of that must needs be corruptible: but we are borne of incorruptible seed
which lives and endures for ever, and therefore what is born of that, must
needs be incorruptible. This is plain then, that this Quickening Power of Gods
Spirit, whereby we be regenerate, lives for ever, not only in it self but in us
also: supporting and sustaining our souls for ever in their spiritual life of
grace once infused into them. And if any will cavil, St. John puts all out of
doubt, when speaking of every regenerate person, he says, that this [Seed
remains in him] and so that cannot sin. 1 John 3. 9. [Whosoever is borne of
God does not commit sin: for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin
because he is (...) of God.] And this for the Habit of grace, the Constancy
whereof no desperate defender of the Saints Apostasy, be he Papist or
Arminian shall be ever able to shake.

In the next place touching the Operations of Grace which we perform by the
aid of the Spirit, there is not such Constancy to be found in them, as in the
former. For the Holy Ghost does not at all times alike, either stir up the
faculties of the Soul by holy motions, or assist their endeavors in
performance of Good desires. Some presumptuous Sin against Conscience, some
Pride in our own strength, some neglect of pious duties, especially Prayer and
spiritual Meditation, some Careless entertainment of the blessed motions of
Grace, some Security through long enjoying of heavenly comforts, some such or
other offense, may Quench the Spirit, and cause him to withdraw from our Souls
all Sense of his comfortable presence and assistance for a time. And then the
Soul being destitute of this actual concurrence of the good Spirit, falls a
Languishing, bewrayes presently its natural impotency, like hot water taken
off the fire begins to return to its first coldness; and for a time
corruption prevails against Grace, that which is natural against that which
was but Accidental. Such Cessations or Interruptions of grace as these are,
all men grant, and all good men feel: but yet though the act fail the Habit
cease not, nor is the ground straitway barren because it misseth a Season or
two: They are but chastisements for negligence past, and admonitions to ensuing
industry, both ending in a large augmentation of all comforts, when upon
submission God is entreated again to cause the light of his Favor to shine
upon us.

^s much touching the second Circumstance about our Conversion, viz. the manner
how it is wrought: I should proceed to the third, viz. the Subject of it: but I
should utterly weary you, who by this time cannot but desire to be rid of me.
Pardon me yet a small trespass upon the time and your patience, that I may
conclude all in a word or two of application to our practice. Ye have heard
touching our conversion, that the cause of it is Gods free love, without our
worth, before we were: that the manner of it is by the grace of the Holy Ghost,
without our help, when we were weak and of no strength. Let the serious
thought of these things breed in our hearts a double grace. 1. Of
Thankfulness. 2. Of Humility. Lets join both together, for they are twins of
one birth: and as you shall never see a proud man thankful either to God or
man: so you shall never behold an humble mind, but it will always appear in
the most grateful acknowledgement and confession of the least good turn. We
shall see how great cause there is in this business of our conversion, that we
should empty our selves, of all proud imaginations, and fill our hearts and
tongues with the Praises of Gods rich grace and free Mercy: if we will enforce
upon our dull hearts the powerful meditation of these four points;

1. The Desperate and forlorn estate of an unconverted person. 2. The
Impossibility of our recovery out of this damnable condition, by any strength
of our own or other creature whatsoever. 3. The admirable Graciousnesse of
Almighty God in providing the means, and by them effectually working our full
deliverance from the power of Sin and Damnation. 4. Lastly, the blessed
estate of Grace whereto he has now brought us, and wherein he preserves us
under the hope and expectation of eternal glory.
I beseech you that among the multitude of your thoughts and studies, you would
be pleased to make these things the subject of your best advised meditation.
Hold me for ever guilty of a damnable lie, if you find not by experience how
forcible this course will be to take down our foolish haughtiness and
swelling conceits of our own sufficiency: and to enlarge the heart in sweetest
songs of thanksgiving to him that has done so great things for our souls. My
brethren slight it not, it is a matter of greatest consequence, and touches us
nearly. Do but conceive with me, How horrible that thought is, and full of
unspeakeable terror, when the conscience, freed from the clamours of ill
company, cooled after the heat of wine and fullness of bread, retired from
the distracting business of our Callings, and stilled after the rage of some
furious passtons, or glut of pleasures, shall in silence turn in upon it
self, and falling upon the inquiry after its future estate, conclude after
diligent search, that as yet it has neither part nor portion in the
inheritance of grace or glory. Be assured, that conscience will not lie and
flatter at such a time, and that, where it finds no reformation of manners, no
change of the heart, no purity in the affections and desires, no sense of the
powerful work of the Spirit of Grace, conscience will not spare to tell such
a man to his face, That he is a man of death, prepared against the day of
slaughter, one hated of God, detested of Saints and Angels, living without
communion and fellowship with Christ, and so in a continual expectation of
Gods vengeance to fall on him in hell, as soon as death shall strike him to the
ground. This will put the heart into a cold sweat, and make the powers of the
soul to shake: specially when it shall look about to all those things whence
succor may seem to be had, and then shall find it self utterly forsaken by
them in its distress. Again consider with me that no stranger can partake or
perceive the unspeakeable joy of that heart, which upon the like examination
finds it self to be translated out of the bondage of Corruption, into the
liberty of Grace, washed from its uncleanenesse by the Holy Ghost, linked in
communion with the Saints and body of Christ, and sealed with the Spirit of
promise to the assured Hope of everlasting happiness. If any thing can, these
thoughts will melt the heart into most humble thanksgiving, and make us fall on
our knees, and with hands and eyes lifted up to him from whom our help comes,
to confess with the holy Prophet: I was brought low, but thou have helped me;
I was in thraldom, but thou have loosed my bonds: Psalm. 116.
the sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of Hell gat hold on me, I
found trouble and sorrow: but thou have delivered my soul from death, mine
eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. What is now my duty? I will offer
to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and call upon the Name of the Lord: My
soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy Name. And
again, My soul praise the Lord, and forget not all his benefits, says the
same holy David, Psalm. 103. 1. 2. But wherefore was all this contention of
Spirit, why this striving with utmost endeavor to be thankful? Oh there was
good cause: Grace was worth God-a-mercy, and it is for that this holy man thus
strives to be thankful to God, who forgave all his iniquities, and had
healed his diseases. Certainly, where so undeserved mercy in such desperate
misery, in that showed upon a wretch, as not only to free him from all evil,
but also put him into the possession of all blessedness; where this grace
works not the heart to Thankfulness and Humility, it is most apparent, that
such a heart knows not what such Grace means. For our selves, let us show
forth these virtues of the Spirit which has converted us and dwells in our
hearts: let us look to the rock out of which we were hewn, to the pit whence
we were dug, consider what we were and should have been, what we are and
shall be: and then take we up that most modest speech of that noble Athenian
Iphicrates Arist Rhet. l. 1. cap. 9.
Captain in the midst of all his glory, (...), from how great baseness and
misery, to what great glory and blessedness are we advanced? Make we our
confession with Jacob, With my staff I came, etc. and the Israelites, Deuteronomy.
26. 5. A Syrian was my father ready to perish, etc. And now let us in like
manner make unto God our thankful acknowledgement, and say in the words of
the Prophet: O Lord, we confess unto thee, that our father was an Amo^ite,
our mother an Hittite; that our birth is of the land of Canaan, we were borne
bondslaves and children of the curse. In the day of our nativity our navell
was not cut, we were not washed with water, not salted with salt, nor swadled
in clouts: none eye pitied us to do any of these things unto us, and to have
compassion upon us, but we were cast out into the open field, to the contempt
of our persons in the day that we were borne. Only thou, O Lord, when thou
passest by and saw us polluted in our blood, have had mercy on us, and
said unto us, Live, even when we were in our blood thou said unto us, Live.
Of vile, thou have made us Honorable, of sinful, Holy, of miserable, Happy.
We praise thee, we bless thee; and we beseech thee to finish the good work
thou have begun, and as by thy mercy thou have brought us into the kingdom
of Grace, so by thy power preserve us through faith unto thy Kingdom of Glory.
Amen.

I proceed to the third Circumstance considerable in this point of our
Conversion, namely, the Subject wherein it is wrought. Now this in general is
the Elect, and they only: whom only God has called to glory and virtue,
appointing them to that as the end, preparing them unto it by this as the
means. I shall need to name unto you but one place for proof hereof, and
that's Romans 8. 30. Moreover whom he has predestinate, them also has he called,
whom he has called, etc. The linkes of this chain are so surely fastened
together, that no power of hell, no wit of man may break and sunder them. Whom
God fore knew, he predestined to be made like to the image of his Son, in
grace and glory: whom he has thus elected before all time, those in due time
he calls or converts, those he justifies, those he glorifies. Wherefore
Sanctification, Justification and Glory are bounded within those limits which
Gods predestination or election has prescribed unto them: extending to no
other persons but such only as have their names written in the book of life,
and are enrolled in the List of Gods eternal election. But this generality of
the Subject is yet more particularly to be differenced: The Elect in this life
are of two sorts;

1. Infantes, Infants whose age permits them not the knowledge of good, or
actual practice of evil. 2. Adulti, Such as are of age, who may both know and
do either good or evil.
Both these are the Subjects of Conversion or Sanctification, but with some
difference in the circumstances or manner of working it in them. Which will thus
appear: our Vocation unto the state of grace is double,

1. Inward, in the work of the Spirit of grace upon our hearts, regenerating
and sanctifying them by the infusion of Holiness. Now though this be properly
a Work, yet it is metaphorically termed a Voice or Calling, whereby the Spirit
speaks unto our hearts, and persuades us to Obedience. But you must know, that
this inward voice or speaking of the Spirit to the heart of a man unregenerate,
is much more than a bare suggestion of some thing to be done by him: it is a
word of Spirit and Life, as Christ speaks of his own, John 6. 63. a working
Word, renewing in soul, and creating in it all the graces of Sanctification.

2. Outward, in the Preaching of the Word calling us to Faith and Repentance:
whereto the Spirit joins his secret virtue to make it effectual in whom he
pleases. I will not now stand to justify this distinction of our Outward and
Inward Vocation, so ancient, so necessary: but yet in these quarrelsome times
derided and scornfully rejected. Let us for the present take it, as it is for a
truth, and so apply it to our present purpose, thus: Those of the Elect that
die infants are internally called and converted; that is, Sanctified, before
they are capable of external Vocation: Those of the Elect that live to ripe
age, are converted and called both inwardly by the work of the Spirit, and
outwardly by the voice of the Word. In both sorts the work of Conversion is
the same, and Infants have it the same in substance as others, being Sanctified
by the Spirit without the Word; but those of years have it also in the
circumstance of external Vocation, being Sanctified by the Spirit working in
and together with the Ministry of the Word, which is the voice of God calling
men unto himself: Now a voice presupposing ears to hear, and an understanding
to perceive, infants cannot properly be said to be called by any such voice,
though they may properly be said to be converted and sanctified. And this
work of our Sanctification, is also not unusually in Scripture styled by the
name of our Romans 8. 28 30 Gal. 1. 15.
Calling. Wherefore that we may a little further insist upon this point
touching the state of the Elect in their infancy, let this be laid down as a
sure conclusion: That the graces of Sanctification may be, and are infused
into many of the Elect in their very infancy. The truth whereof there is not
any does or can justly deny, considering; 1. That infants are as capable of
the Habites of Sanctity as men are: 2. That their souls may as well be now
sanctified by infused Grace, as if Adam had not fell, they should have been
Holy even from the womb, by Original justice propagated unto them and
inherent in them. 3. That the Humanity of Christ was in this manner Holy even
from the conception, which was therein by special privilege, like unto that
course which should have been ordinary in our conceptions and births, if we had
not sinned. 4. That it cannot honestly be denied to be so in John Baptist, but
that so great a Prophet was sanctified by the Holy Ghost even from the womb;
which may be confirmed by that his extraordinary motion upon the Salutation of
Marie the mother of our blessed Savior, Luke 1. 41. 44. And of Jeremy it is not
unprobable, by that which God says of him, Ier. 1. 5. Before I formed thee in
the womb I knew thee, and before thou came out of the womb I sanctified
thee, and ordained thee to be a Prophet unto the Nations. Albeit here I will
not deny, but that Sanctifying here may well be taken not for the graces of
Regeneration, but for a designation unto such a function, and a preparation of
the Prophet thereto by the infusion of such qualities as might make him meet
for the discharge thereof; as extraordinary wisdom, courage, patience, and
the like. In which sense the word Sanctify is not unusually taken: as, Esa.
13. 3. Where God called the Medes and Persians, prepared and designed for the
destruction of the Babylonians, his Sanctified ones: i. e. set apart for his
own service in that business. So also Paul of himself, Gal. 1. 15. (...),
that Separated me [(...)] to the Apostleship.

From this Conclusion, that Elect infants may be partakers of the grace of
Conversion and Sanctification; namely, in the Habit implanted in their souls:
I desire you to observe four Corollaries thereon depending, each whereof have
their necessary use.

1. A Resolution of that doubt which troubles many tender consciences, who
having the care of their salvation in highest regard, are suspiciously jealous
over their deceitful hearts, and apt to think the worst of themselves, where
they see no manifest evidence to the contrary. These men will often doubt of
the truth of their Conversion, because they know not the time when of stark
naught they become Good and Holy.) They will tell you, that their birth has
been of religious parents, their education under godly governors, that from
their youth they have been accustomed to frequent the exercises of religion in
public, and to use themselves to all duties of devotion in private: some
goodness and love of godliness they find in themselves, but they know not how
it has crept upon them by degrees, and they question whether all be right or
no with them, because they never remember in all their lives, that ever there
was such an alteration wrought in them as they hear and see to be in other
men. To these I say, there is no reason they should be sorry that they have not
been so bad as other men. They ought to rejoice and be thankful, that God
did so soon stop up in them that bloody issue, which in others has so many
years run incurably, that he healed their wounds when they were green, and
cured their impoisened nature before the venom thereof grow more rank and
raging; that he bowed their hearts when they were yongue and tender, before
they grew stiff and old in sin, that he has preserved their youth from
those corruptions which others in their age have decrely repented of. Let such
who from their infancy have with Isaac, Samuel, Timothy and other Saints been
bred up in all pictie, and grown as in stature so in favor and grace with God
and good men, let such not doubt to say, it was at my baptism, or at my birth,
or in my mothers womb that God has dealt so graciously with me, sanctifying
me with the Spirit of grace, which then was given me, and has ever since
showed itself in all blessed inclinations to religious courses.

2. A justification of that Prayer in our public Leiturgie, where the
congregation gives thanks to God for the child baptized, in that it [hath
pleased him to regenerate the Infant by his Holy Spirit and to receive him for
his own child by adoption, and to incorporate him into his holy
Congregation]. For it cannot be denied but that this Holy Ordinance of Baptism
the scale of our Sanctification, does take effect many times immediately in the
Infusion of the present grace into the Infants soul: though many times also it
have not its effect till many years after. But seeing it is questionless true
in many, we may and must charitably suppose it in every one (for when we come
to particular whom dare we exclude?) And this we may do without tying the
grace of regeneration necessarily to Baptism, as some complain that we do
by that prayer. To give a reason of this different working why grace is
bestowed on some presently at baptism, in others it is deferred till a long time
after, is to unlocke the treasury of Gods secret counsels: only this we may
say, that God will show that no age is incapable of grace, and that he will be
glorified as well in saving some from falling into the fire, as by pulling
others out of it: by the gentle and easy deliverance of one and by the more
violent torments and panges of the New Birth in another: that both ways he may
have the Thanks and we the Benefit of this his grace and power.

3. A Defense of the salvation of Infants dying before Baptism against the
Popish assertion to the contrary. For this ground being certain, No unclean
thing shall enter in the kingdom of Heaven, it follows by the law of
contraries, that, whatsoever is clean may enter thereinto. But Infants such as
are elect may be clean and holy before their Baptism: as is manifest, whether
we respect the guilt of Sin or the corruption of it. They are clean from the
guilt of original sin by the death of Christ which God has accepted to
their perfect justification, long before they were borne. They are likewise
made clean in part from the Corruption of original sin, by the infusion of
Habitual sanctity into their souls. For being justified by Christ from the
guilt and punishment of sin, what should hinder why they may not be
sanctified by the Holy Ghost, in part whilst they live, and perfectly upon the
severing of the Soul and Body, when original corruption is in a moment done
away, and the soul invested in the robes of righteousness fit for its
entrance into happiness? Cannot this work of Sanctification be wrought in
them before Baptism? it may as well as after; seeing it is not baptism but
the Spirit is the cause thereof, whose work is free, and not so to be tied
unto that ordinance as they of the Romish Synagogue would make us believe, but
that he may sanctify the Elect sometime before, sometime after, and not
always at the present celebration of it. Now if Infants thus justified and
sanctified depart this life, what should stop their passage to heaven? It
will be vain to object that they have not actual Faith, and therefore must
be excluded. We may as well say they want repentance and therefore cannot be
saved, seeing the Scriptures make alike necessity of both graces to our
salvation. And the objection holds as well after Baptism as before, when yet
all grant the salvation of Infants. For it is a thing inconceivable and
inexplicable how Infants should have Actual Faith, whilst they are not yet
able to exercise any one faculty of their reasonable soul. The truth is, that
the Habits of Faith and Repentance they have, as of all other Spiritual graces
infused into them, which if they lived would also appear by their actual
opperations: but for that time they have not the Acts of those graces, nor are
they capable of them, nor is it simply needful they should have them. The case
is extraordinary, and God as before they were has pardoned them of their
original righteousness by the blood of Christ, so can he as well bestow
Holiness and Happiness on them without any actual faith of theirs coming
between as an instrument to receive both. If this may not be said touching
such elect Infants, I must confess that unto me the knowledge of the salvation
of their souls is as inscrutable, as the fashioning of their tender bodies in
their mothers womb. And this which has been said of Infants may be also
applied to such as are Deaf or ^ooles, having such natural defects as make
them incapable of Discipline.

4. A just apology for the lawfulness of Childrens Baptism, against
Heretical impugners of the same. For how can the Sign be denied unto them
which have and enjoy the thing signified? That which is signified in Baptism
is our Justification by the blood of Christ, our Sanctification by the Spirit
of Christ. Baptism is the Scale of both unto us: and Infants may be partakers
of both, being washed from the guilt of sin by the blood of Christ, in whom
they are reconciled to God, and actually justified before him: and also
purified in partfrom the uncleanness of sin by the infusion of Grace from
the Holy Ghost. What then should hinder why these Infants should not also be
washed with the water of the Sacrament thereof? If it be demanded how we can
presume that Christian Infants have a part in the graces of Justification and
Sanctification: I answer, we have good warrant so to think, from the Covenant
and Promise of God, that he will be the God of the faithful and of their
seed. But for Heathens and Infidells we have no such promise whereon to ground
our judgment of Charity, and therefore albeit some of them who are out of the
Church may be within the compass of God selection, yet seeing God has
excluded them by an apparent bar, we may not venture to give them the
Sacrament of Baptism, till such time as they shall make profession of their
faith, and that by their appearing conversion we may charitably judge they
belong to the Covenant of Grace. Now although of such as live within the Church
we know for a certainty in the general that many both of Christian parents are
not faithful, and of Christian children that they have no part in Christ, yet
we may not exclude them from Baptism, because no man dares be so hardy as to
pass his peremptory censure of this or that persons rejection in particular.
This is one thing, if we did know infallibly now that any one were certainly
excluded out of Gods election, Whether may the child of such a one be
baptized? yes because the Wife may be a true Christian, and one party makes the
children holy. But what if both should so sin? Then the child borne of them
is to be baptized as other Insidells at years of discretion, and to be held in
the same rank as the children of Christians that turn Turks.
and should never have benefit by Christ's death; such a one be he Infidel, or
borne of the most Christian parents in the world, we ought by no means to
baptize: no more than we may admit of that person to come to the Lords Supper,
that has apparently sinned against the Holy Ghost, or as the Church does with
such as are justly Excommunicated, who for the time of their open inpenitencie
declare themselves publicly to have no Faith nor part in Christ. For it were a
manifest mockery and abuse of this sacred institution to apply this Seal to a
Blanke, and to dip them in the water of Baptism, whom we know shall never be
washed with the Holy Ghost. Further, it helps not the Ca^abaptists a jot, that
when Christian Infants come to age and ability to make profession then we may
discern and judge of their estate. For that's impossible: no man can infallibly
perceive by any words or actions what the Heart is, whether there be in it true
faith or not. And so in this case if Baptism should never be administered till
other men may judge of their Faith, it shall be afforded to none at all, or if
it be given to every one that professes and says he has faith, it must be
administered to all, and among them to some that have no faith indeed. Wherefore
it is as good and safe to baptize them in their infancy as to defer it:
seeing at that time as well as afterward the judgment of Charity holds good,
and tarry we never so long we can go no further than this charitable belief
of them. Wherefore to conclude the absurdity of Paedobaptisme, because Infants
have no knowledge nor actual Faith whereby to embrace the promise; is at the
least, an absurd conclusion, as well for that the like inconvenience holds in
Circumcision, as also because where Justification and Sanctification is given,
it is injurious to deny the benefit of Baptism. And we are to know that in
this case of Infants faith is not required as a Condition absolutely necessary
to partake the benefit of Justification: howsoever in adult is such as are of
age it be an instrument simply needful to give them an Evidence and Assurance
of it: which assurance seeing it cannot be in children, the actual operation
of Faith is not needful in them. But in such as are of age the case is far
otherwise, whether they be Infidells, or Christians children that have been so
long neglected, they must have knowledge and Faith too, so far as the Church
can judge of the tree by the fruit, because if they have neither, or knowledge
only but no Grace nor sanctity of life, the Church cannot but presume the worst
of them, as of those that yet are out of Christ, rectified by their ignorance
and profaneness of Conversation, which witnesses to all the unbelief and
impenitency of their hearts.

If it be now objected, (not to leave that scruple untouched) that the Lords
Supper may as well be given to Infants as Baptism, seeing the same
presumptions may be used here as there, and that infants may make as much use
of one as of the other, being alike insensible of both: to this I answer,
besides the dangerous inconveniency to their tender age which cannot endure the
taking in of the very Elements of Bread and Wine that God himself the author
of these two Sacraments, has in the manner of their Institution, made a plain
difference of the persons that are to partake of them. Thus briefly of the
Substance of both Sacraments is one and the same, viz. to set forth unto us the
benefits of Christ's death in our Justification, And therefore some of the
Ancients did erroneously give the Supper to Infants.
Sanctification and Glorification. The Ceremonies of Administration are diverse,
and in that sort differenced as in Baptism they require nothing but Passion in
the baptized, and so may be administered to Children; but in the Lords Supper
they require such Actions as cannot be performed but by those only that are of
years of discretion: such actions are those of Discerning the Lords body,
thankful remembrance of the death of Christ, Examination of our spiritual
estate, which, together with that circumstance of often repetition, apparently
show that God in this Sacrament intended such an exercise of our Faith and
Piety as cannot be performed by Children.

I will not stand longer upon this point, the full descussing whereof belongs
more properly to the doctrine of the Sacraments: and therefore I conclude this
Discourse touching the Conversion of Elect Infants, with this general rule;
That the Scriptures are very sparing and silent touching the case of Infants,
so that when they speak of Vocation, Conversion, Faith, Repentance, and such
other works of Grace done by us or in us by the Spirit of God, they are
generally to be understood of those that are of age, and by proportion only to
be applied unto Infants. Which would be observed for taking away of some
doubts that may arise in reading of the Scriptures.

The next sort of Elect persons are those that are of Age, who having some
while g^ne astray, are at length brought home to the Sheepfold of Christ under
the obedience of that great Shepherd of their souls. Of these some are let
run longer, others recovered sooner: some have a more gentle and sweet
passage from Mortality to Grace, whose lives have been ordered by the rule of
stricter discipline: others whose conversation has been notoriously
disordered, are converted with more bitter plunges, terrors, and anguish of
Conscience: some are strangely changed on a sudden upon the reading of a
sentence in Scripture, or hearing of a gracious word uttered in due season, and
deeply apprehended: others wrought upon with much pains and long time: in a
word, so various is the dispensation of Gods grace in our conversion, that as
Christ speaks of his coming in the flesh, so may we of Luc. 17.
this in the Spirit; The kingdom of God comes not with observation: and
impossible it is to set down a general rule that will hold in all Converts.
But though the manner be diverse, yet the means are Uniform and Constant:
namely the Spirit of God the chief worker, and the Word of God the subordinate
instrument by which it works our Conversion. The word discovers what is to be
done, the Spirit inables us to the performance: In Infants the Spirit without
the Word, in those of years the Spirit and the Word join together to work our
Sanctification. In which respect their conversion is properly termed a
Vocation or Calling, because it is effected by the preaching of the Gospel,
which is Si^ilus Pastor is, Zach. 10. 8. Ioh. 10. 3. 4.
the whistle or voice of the good Shepherd, which the sheep hear and follow.
And from hence the whole Company of Saints is properly styled (...) or
Evocatorum coetus, Saints by calling, and ((...)) as it is 1 Cor. 1. (...) in
Holiness.
1. that is, such whom God has called (...), with an holy calling (2 Ton. 1
9.) or unto Holiness (1 These. 4. 7.) by the voice of the Word, from out of the
corruptions of this present evil world, to the communion of grace and glory.
All this is most excellently set down by the Apostle Paul in those few but
most pithy words, containing in brief the whole administration of the works
of our Redemption, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. 14. But we ought to give thanks always to
God for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, because that God has from the
beginning chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and
the Faith of truth: whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to obtain the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now we might justly in this place enter upon an
inquiry, how and in what sort the Word and Spirit do work together in causing
a sinners conversion: a search needful in these times, wherein it is
peremptorily denied by those of the Arminian faction, that there is or need to
be any inward power of the Spirit working on the soul, besides the outward
ordinary preaching of the Word. Which opinion is but the issue of their maine
error touching the liberty of Man's will in his conversion, which cannot stand
if withal they grant that inward Force of the Spirit giving life and effect to
the Word preached, which we maintain and plead for. This point will fall in
more fitly to be discussed afterward in the handling of a few Questions
touching the manner of the Working of grace in man's conversion. Whereinto
though I am somewhat unwilling to enter, because that Positive rather than
Polemicall Divinity befits this place, yet considering the danger whereinto
minds not rightly informed in these points may unhappily fall, and that herein
it is easy to slip from the truth to Arminianisme, and thence to Popery,
(there is but a thread between them) I have thought it would not be
unprofitable, briefly and plainly to touch upon such material controversies as
are moved in this matter, that even the younger sort might have something to
oppose against cauilling gainsayers of the truth and crafty seducers of the
uninstructed.

You are therefore to understand that in point touching Man's conversion there
is scarce any circumstance that we have formerly spoken of, but it is
quarrelled at and corrupted with false opinions: Not the nature and substance
of our conversion, which, say they, is not by the infusion of Habitual
sanctity into the Soul, but through Grace acquired by much pains and
industrious actions of our own excited and assisted by some help of the
Spirit: Not the moving Cause, which is affirmed by them to be not Gods
special and actual Love to his Elect, but his common and equal love to all
mankind alike: Not the Efficient cause which we affirm to be the work of
Gods Spirit, they say is the Freedom of our wills: Not the manner of it,
without and above the strength of our natural abilities, as we hold, but so
far is the compass of our own power that we may help or hinder it at our
pleasure; Not the instrument of it, the Word by the work of the Spirit, but as
they would have it, the Word working by it self without any inward virtue of
the Spirit besides: Lastly, not the Subject, the Elect only as we maintain,
but all in Common upon whom sufficient grace to Conversion is bestowed if we
will believe them. All these Erroneous opinions, are founded upon other rotten
and unsound principles, which are chiefly these:

1. That God has not precisely determined of any man's salvation or damnation
in particular, but has left it to be decided by the liberty of their own
wills.

2. That God does not bear any special favor to one more than another, but
that his love is equal to all in general, and his desire of the salvation of
all mankind alike.

3. That Christ has dyed for all men alike, procuring so much by his death
that God is Placabilis toward all, and all men indifferently are Salvabiles if
they list to make use of the benefit purchased for them.

4. That God requires Faith in Christ of all men whatsoever, even of such
Infidells as to whom Christ was never preached.

5. That God cannot in justice demand of Man the performance of those things,
which, since his fall, he has no strength to perform: and that if God
require any such service, he is bound in equity to give unto man new strength
for to perform it.

I do but only name these articles of the Arminian Faith, though even that is
enough to show their weakness and untruth to any that can judge of sound
doctrine; but I say I mention them only, that you may the better perceive what
is that maine issue whereinto they are finally resolved: and that in plain
terms is this, [That all men whether Christians or Infidells within or without
the Church may be converted and saved if they will.] You will say this is
broadly spoken: but I do them no wrong, read their books, compare their
tenants, and you shall see that this is the upshot of all their discourses: God
has excluded none, he loves all alike, Christ has dyed for all, Faith is
required of all, sufficient ability to believe and repent is given to all; who
then or what should hinder the Conversion or Salvation of any one but himself
his own mere free will? Surely an opinion that should not be gainsaid by
any, but readily embraced by all if it had as much truth in it as it carries
show of Pity and Commiseration to mankind. We would be loath to be judged
cruel: but it is folly, not pity, to take upon us to be more merciful than
God has declared himself to be: and it is impiety to tell a lie for God, by
magnifying the glorious largeness of his mercy beyond the bounds which
himself has prescribed unto it. Wherefore against this wide and vast
Conclusion of Arminianisme, that [God has given sufficient grace to all the
world to convert and believe if they will,] I oppose this directly
contradictory, [God has not given sufficient grace to all, and in those to
whom he has given such grace, it depends not on their Free Will, whether they
will be converted or no.] These two propositions destroy one another, and one
is confuted by that which confirms the other. I will proceed in the handling
of them in this order; Men that are capable of Vocation, are of two sorts,

1. Out of the Visible Church: and of these the Question will be, Whether God
have given to all Pagans and Heathens grace sufficient for their conversion? 2.
Within the precincts of the Visible Church: and of these the question will be
double;
1. Whether God do give unto all Christians grace sufficient to work their
conversion? 2. Whether those upon whom such sufficient grace is bestowed, may
if they list hinder their conversion by the power of their free will?
Within the compass of these three Questions will be included all that is
material touching this business. I will use as much brevity in each as the
matter will give leave: of the first at this time, viz.

Whether the Gentiles out of the Church have grace given Quest- 1.
unto them sufficient for their conversion?

We maintain the Negative part, the Arminians affirm that all Pagans and
Infidells have so much grace given unto them that by it they may be converted,
believe and worship God rightly in some sort, even without the knowledge of the
Gospel. A monstrous assertion, every way repugnant to Reason and Scriptures:
For

1. Let it be demanded, what this sufficient Grace is that is given to the
Gentiles. Is it that knowledge of God and goodness whereto the Gentiles might
come by the light of nature? or it is some other supernatural Revelation? If
the former, there is a double error in it; 1. That they call that Grace which
is but Nature: for if Universal Grace given to Heathens be but that knowledge
of God and his worship, which is attainable by the right use of the light of
Nature through the contemplation of the creatures and remainders of the Moral
Law in man's heart, what is this grace but Nature, and what this opinion but
Pelagianisme? 2. In that they suppose this light of Nature well used is a
sufficient direction for the right and acceptable worship of God in some sort:
which is nothing but a fancy, overvaluing natures abilities against all reason
and common experience, and by consequence taking away the necessity of
Scriptures and divine Revelations to teach the right way of worshipping God in
Christ. If they say it is some Supernatural Revelation, it must be known
whereof, when and by what means it is bestowed on the Heathen. Is it of the
Law, or of the Gospel? is it made known unto them by some inward suggestion,
vision or dream, or by outward instruction from a Preacher or Prophet
invisibly convayed unto them by miracle, or extraordinarily raised up among
them? again when is this supernatural knowledge bestowed on Pagans? have they
it as soon as they come into the world? if so, it is Natural: or is it given
afterward at years of discretion? if so, then it is not in Infants, and so not
in all the Heathen, and at what years is it bestowed? and what if they die
before that age? All which quaeres are inexplicable, and draw into most vexing
and torturing absurdities: a sufficient proof that there is no such thing as
Sufficient grace to conversion given to Indians, Americans, Tartarians, and
other Pagans, when they that defend it cannot tell what it should be. For
seeing it is neither any Natural or Supernatural knowledge, I think none will
be so senseless to say that it is some Natural or Supernatupower or ability.
For if it be Natural it is not Grace, if Supernatural, twould be known to what
purpose a Supernatural ability should be given to ignorant Infidells, to do
they know not what.

2. Let Us come to experience, and judge we by what means it may possibly
appear unto us, that the Virginians, and other Americans, or the Inhabitants
of Southern unknown parts of the world, have at this day, or ever have had
before or since Christ, sufficient grace for their Conversion and Salvation.
What instance and example can be given in so many ages of any one among these
or other Gentiles, that has been converted by this Sufficient grace? Strange,
that what is ordinarily bestowed on all, should never take effect in any. If it
do take effect extraordinarily in some, how know they that? If ordinarily in
many, then farewell the prerogative of the Jew above the Gentile, of the
Christian Church above Pagans: if God ordinarily have his Church, his Converts,
his right Worshippers even amidst the darkness of Gentilisme, without the
knowledge of Christ, and all divine revelation of Gods will in his Word. These
opinions are, as Moulin speaks, like sick men's dreams, or rather mad men's
ravings.

3. Let us inquire of the Scriptures, and see whether they speak as favorably
of the Gentiles as these pitiful Remonstrants do: In them we shall find
another manner of censure, both touching their forlorn estate in Ignorance and
Infidelity, as also the impossibility of their recovery into Grace, except by
greater help than the Arminians afford them. Of the Ephesians Paul testifies,
that before they were converted by the Preaching of the Gospel, They were at
that time without Christ, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, strangers
from the covenant of Promise, having no hope, and being without God in the
world, Ephesians. 2. 12. And Matthew out of the Prophet Esaias witnesses of all the
Gentiles, that before the light of the Gospel was risen to them, they sat in
darkness, and in the region of the shadow of Death, Mat. 4. 15, 16. This was
the condition of the Nations in their pure Naturalls, so fully expressed by
those places, as nothing can be more significantly declared. Now for the
means they had to come out of it and be converted, the Scriptures deny them
all unto them: God favored them not, nor had any regard to bestow grace on
them; for [In times past he suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own
waies] says Paul, Acts 14. 16. The Word and Ordinances of his worship they had
not: for [He shows his Word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto
Israel: He has not dealt so with every nation, neither have they known his
judgements] as the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. A Preacher they have
not; and [How should they believe in him of whom they have not heard, and how
should they hear without a Preacher?] Romans 10. 14. Natural ability to know
the mysteries of the Kingdom of God they have not; for [The Natural man
perceives not the things of the Spirit] 1. Cor. 3. Nor is there any such power
given them from God; for [Vnto you it is given to know the secrets of the
Kingdom of Heaven, but unto them it is not given] Mat. 13. 11. and [Without
me ye can do nothing] Ioh. 15. 5. What shall we think then the poor
Americans can either know or do in point of godliness by the pretended power
of Sufficient grace, when the Pharisees and other Jews, yea the Apostles
themselves could do nothing without a special gift and assistance from Christ:
whereof they will not say those Pagans are made partakers?

Wherefore there is good cause we should reject this monstrous opinion of
Sufficient grace for Conversion bestowed upon Savages and Infidells, as being
contrary to Scripture, common sense and reason: Nor can it be thought but that
the authors of it are ashamed of the absurdity thereof, although the Sequel of
their other tenants (one error drawing on another) have enforced upon them a
necessity of defending this also. And that it may not go abroad without the
Patronage of some color of reason: they proceed in the justification of it
upon two grounds;

1. That the light of Nature if it be well used, is of it self sufficient to
convert a Heathen from his idolatrous and evil ways, and bring him to a right
knowledge and worship of God, in some sort.

2. That if the Gentiles use the light and help of Nature well and with their
best endeavor, God is ready; nay he is bound in justice to bestow on them one
further grace, viz. the knowledge of themystery of Redemption.

These two are the rotten pillars of Universal grace, given unto the Gentiles;
which how shaken and riven they are, you may soon perceive, if we pill off
that plaster of doubtful words, wavering and dark sentences wherewith they
are daubed over: for the matter is so shameful that they dare scarce speak
out their mind plainly. But their opinion in plain terms is this: God, say
they has given sufficient strength to all the Gentiles to use their Natural
gifts well: Be it so. But what is this Well Using of Natural gifts? It is
that, say they, whereby they may in some sort and according to their measure
forsake their idolatrous and wicked practices, and attain to the right
knowledge and worship of God, and reformation of Life. But may all this be done
without the help of Supernatural revelation? Yes: for, say they, if a man go
so far as with utmost endeavor he may by natural helps: then God is ready
and bound in equity to give him Greater grace. Well, what is this further or
Greater grace? It Is the Supernatural light of the Gospel, and knowledge of
Gods will in Christ. So then, here is the conclusion, Before all knowledge of God
in Christ a Heathen man may so bestirre himself in the use of Natural helps,
that he may convert truly unto God, knowing and serving him rightly in part:
and upon his so doing, God will give a new supply of grace to perfect what is
begun.

I cannot well say whether these things deserve a serious refutation, which had
they been defended in former ages would sure have been rejected with scorn
and laughter: but seeing in these times wherein men grow wanton, and use
neither Grace nor Nature as they ought to do; seeing, I say, the Bondwoman is
advanced equal to the Freewoman, the servant set up in honor to the disgrace
and contumely of the Mistress, it shall not be (I hope) amiss to take a
little pains in examining the Dignities and Abilities of Nature, that she
being compelled to keep her old rank, Grace in all things may have the sole
preeminency. And after we will in a word or two examine the force of that
Obligation wherein the Arminians say God stands bound to Nature to give her a
larger portion of Grace, upon trial had of her good behavior.

To come therefore to the first, viz. The Sufficiency of mere nature in the
Heathen to work in them true Conversion in part: for the confirmation hereof
three special passages of Scriptures are alleged; First, that of Romans 1. 19,
20, 21. [That which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God has
shown it unto them. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the
world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things which are made, even
his eternal Power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse: Because when
they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankefull] etc. The
second is that in Romans 2. 14. [For when the Gentiles having not the Law, do by
Nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the Law are a Law unto
themselves. Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing
or else excusing one another.] The third is that place, Act. 14. 16, 17. [Who
in time past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless
he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain
from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and
gladness.] From hence this argument may be framed, The book of Nature and
Providence clearly showing what God is in himself, in his Nature and
Attributes, his eternal Power and Godhead, and what he is to us in his
Goodness and Gracious bounty: together with the book of Conscience, dictating
unto us what duty it is we owe to God or Man in doing of good or forbearing of
evil: these two books are a sufficient direction for man to glorify God and
become thankful. But all the Gentiles had the direction of these books of
Nature, Providence, and Conscience, as appears by the places alleged.
Therefore the Gentiles had a sufficient direction for the worshipping of God,
and for to make them thankefully obedient. Which help, because they followed
not when they might, but detained the truth in unrighteousness, they are
therefore justly left without excuse in their idolatries and ungodliness of
living. The answer to this argument depends upon the denial of the major
proposition, and the right explication of its contradictory, which is this,
[The knowledge of God and goodness whereto a mere Heathen devoid of all
Supernatural helps may possibly attain by contemplation of the works of
Creation and Providence, and by the light of his Natural conscience, is not
sufficient to convert him to the right worship and obedience of God.]

That this may appear, be pleased to afford me your patience, whilst once for
all, we take a general survey of the State of a mere natural man living out
of the Church, utterly destitute of all Supernatural helps: and whilst of
such a one we do inquire how far he may go in Religion, in the knowledge and
practice of Piety. In which search, we are, for our more distinct proceeding,
to examine

1. The Knowledge of the Heathen, how far they might proceed by the help of
a merely natural understanding in the knowledge of Divine things. 2. The
Effect which this knowledge may work in them, in regard of practice and
obedience to what they know.
Touching the former, there may be a twofold consideration of it. 1. How far
the Heathen have gone. 2. How far they might have gone in the knowledge of
God and Godliness, if they had carefully used all Natures helps. For this
question is defined in too narrow a compass, if we go no farther than the
Hypothesis, taking an Historical view of the Heathens knowledge by those
records of it that are remaining upon their writings. We must ascend higher to
the Thesis, to see what they might have done more than they have, or at least
whether they have done that they could. It is not to be doubted, there were
and are among the Heathen, many, who besides the common and ordinary gifts of
Nature, had extraordinary abilities and endowments by a special though not
sanctifying grace of God, whereby they were fitted in a singular manner for the
finding out of the most secret hidden principles and Exodus 31. 3. and 35. 31.
conclusions in all learned arts, and for the wisest application of them to all
manner of practice. A point easily demonstrable, if we consider the singular
excellency of some few in all times above the common pitch of man's ordinary
condition, though not above that whereto mere Nature is advanceable. Which
whether it depended partly on some peculiar temper of the body and spirits not
usual, partly on the special gift of God, or both, it alters not the matter,
this being certain, that these rare privileges exempted not the possessors of
them from being Natural men and no more. Now whether such as were thus in the
best manner qualified, did employ themselves in the search of the best, that
is, Divine things, it may justly be doubted, if we guess at former times
either by the monuments of them, or by the temper of this present age. We may
now see, and (if such did not scorn to be pitied) we would lament the
unhappiness of our finest, rarest, and most Heroical wits, who do generally
spend themselves in matters of meaner and inferior excellency, and most
commonly in curious and fruitless imploiments, scarcely ever aspiring to any
achievement worthy of a man, and men of their parts, and if they do, it is any
thing rather than divine and sacred inquisitions, the humble and painful
study whereof is most opposite to their negligence and presumption. For former
times it will also evidently appear to him that shall but a little survey the
writings of Philosophers, both those that are extant in whole or in part, and
such whose titles only we have remaining recorded by those that have written
their lives. For among so many hundred volumes written by the Ancients, how few
or none almost shall we find touching the matter of Religion? Those great
scriblers, (...), as Chrysippus was called, who left no part of Logic,
Oratory Mathematickes, Morality, Policy, and Nature it self unattempted, but
with a curious and inquisitive eye pried into the smallest matters, yet in
those higher speculations concerning the Nature of Divine things, were either
miserably blind, or wilfully negligent. Aristotle a man of the deepest reach
that Antiquity ever bred, among so many books that he wrote, and are in part
yet extant, has not left us any one discourse by which it might appear that
he bestowed any pains in searching after the knowledge of God, except a
little As de Coelo. l 1. c. 10. De Mundo, cap. 11. 12. Physic. l. 8.
here and there in some poor pitiful disputes. Theophrastus his scholar, who
exceeded the master in numbersome writings, composed six books (...), and
(...) three, which we wish had remained to posterity, albeit by the very titles
we may suspect what stuff they were, not unlike to Hes^ods Theogonia and such
other fooleries: and that both his books and others written of the same
subject by Crito, Simon, Xenocrates, Strato, Cleanthes, Epicurus, and many more
(as may be seen in Laertius) were they now extant, would give us but small
satisfaction in this point, unless it were to discover the gross stupidity
and dullness of those otherwise refined and sublimated wits. Tullie, who had
read them, and sets De not. Deor. lib. 1.
down the sum of their opinions, gives us cause to believe that the wisest
of them all, and himself too, (...) were here stark fools, and forsaking the
right way of searching out the Deity in the footsteps of Nature by a due
proceeding from the lower to the higher, they gave heed to old and fond
fables, or vanished away in their idle imaginations and new opinions. Nor could
it be otherwise, if we respect either the corruption of Nature, which how quick
and forward soever it be in other matters, is dull enough in sacred
imploiments, as the experience of many dispositions proves, who are excellent
in many sorts of Learning, yet dunces in Divinity: or if we regard the policy
of Satan, who blinding the eyes of so learned and wise men, made use of their
wits and pens in darkning the cleerer light of divine knowledge by senseless
fables and foolish fancies, which passed unto the ignorant vulgar with
approbation under the authority of their deep learning. Wherefore seeing
neither the most wise and learned in former times have always applied their
industry in this part of knowledge, nor yet the labors of such as have been
busied therein are preserved to our times, nor those few monuments that are
left do give sufficient proof that men have done their best in going so far
as they might, we must without consideration of particulars, first dispute in
general, how deep the eye of Natural reason can pierce into divine
mysteries, and then see in brief how far men, whose inventions are come to our
knowledge, have proceeded therein.

Concerning the first, you are to call to mind, that Religion contains in it
two chief branches.

1. All Divine truths to be known and believed in way of Spiritual
contemplation and assent, and the Summary of these are the Articles of our
Creed, which in general declare unto us what is to be believed touching God,

as Creator in the first Article, Redeemer in the rest.

2. All Divine and Moral duties to be done and practiced by us, the brief
whereof is in the Decalogue, describing unto us, the rules of 1. Piety in Gods
worship. 2. Of Charity in righteousness toward man. Within these bounds we
must seek for the utmost extent of the mere natural man's knowledge: which
we will do, beginning with the knowledge of God the Redeemer: touching which
I lay down this position as infallible and undeniable, that

The mere natural man cannot by the most industrious use of 1.
all Natures helps, attain unto any the least knowledge of God, as he is
man's Redeemer in Christ. This is most apparent by the Scriptures wholly
ascribing the knowledge of this mystery to the Son of God revealing it from
the bosom of Mat. 16. 17. 1 Cor. 2. 21. and 2. 6. and seq. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
the Father, and to the Spirit of God: but utterly denying so much as a thought
of it to any of the greatest or wisest of this world, yea, unto the blessed
Angels themselves. And it is no less agreeable to good reason, which forbids to
imagine that a man fallen and corrupted by sin, should ever attain to the
understanding of those things, which Adam in his perfection never had knowledge
of. Now the knowledge of God as Redeemer, with all the dependances thereupon,
as Adam had no need of it, so was he before his fall utterly ignorant of it,
and had so remained forever, if God had not vouchsafed to reveal it to him.
Which revelation though made to Adam when we were in his loins, yet was not
(as I may speak) General and deriveable to all his posterity, as the first
connaturall and inprinted knowledge was, but particular for the benefit of Adam
and so many of his seed as were elect. And though no doubt but Adam did
instruct his children, and they theirs for some descents in this mystery, yet
wickedness increasing in men as fast as men multiplied in the earth, and by
reason of the darksome obscurity of this mystery in those first times of the
world, it came to pass that this knowledge quickly decreased, being almost
decayed even among the sons of God the Few of Gods Church, whom therefore God
was feign by new revelations continually to instruct; but for the Sons of men
the rest of the wicked world it was utterly extinct, and no spark of it left
alive. They soon forgot what they cared not to believe. Wherefore we must
confine the mere natural man's knowledge within these two limits, 1. The
knowledge of God as Creator, 2. The knowledge of the moral Law: and beyond
these it is not possible for him to go. The knowledge of which, though very
much eclipsed in Adam himself, but more and more darkened in his posterity as
they further degenerated from his original purity: yet is it not so far
obscured, (except in such whose brutish and savage education have made them
equal to the beasts that perish) but that by careful education and vigilant
industry in the use of all helps, it may be somewhat repaired, though this
some what is but a very little part, almost nothing of its first clearenesse.
Wherefore in the second 2.
place touching the knowledge God as Creator; I suppose a mere natural man
may know these things touching God in his nature and attributes:

1. That there is a God. 2. That he is a living Substance. 3. That he is one.
4. That he is Eternal. 5. That he is Immutable. 6. That he is Omnipresent at
once in all places. 7. That his Substance is Incorporeall and Invisible. 8.
That he is most Simple without all mixture and composition. 9. That he is most
Perfect, most Happy, most Good and Omnisufficient in and of himself. 10. That
he is Omnipotent and most free, Omniscient and most wise. 11. That he is most
just and merciful in rewarding and punishing.

Besides these invisible things of the Godhead, a mere natural man may know
these two:

1. That this God is the Creator of the world, giving all things their being of
nothing.

2. That this God by his Providence does Preserve and Rule all things. Thus
far at least a natural man may proceed in the knowledge of God, as Adam kn^w
him, and the Gentiles might grope after even in their natural darkness.

But this is not all: in the third place touching the 3.
knowledge of the moral Law as it contains all such duties as were to be
known and put in practice in regard of God and our neighbor, by the very
laws of Creation, we may safely affirm these things fallwithin the reach of
the natural understanding and conscience:

1. That this God is to be worshipped and adored of all creatures, men
especially.

2. That he is not to be worshipped in bodily shapes and figures.

3. That there are outward religious services to be done in his honor, as
Invocation with its solemn Times, Gestures, and Ceremonies; and also Oaths.

4. That God is to be inwardly reverenced as well as outwardly adored, namely
with the pure affections of Love, Fear, Trust and Confidence.

5. That in all the duties of the second Table Justice and Civil honesty in a
state between man and man, as also sanctity and sobriety in each man, is a
thing commanded by God and pleasing to him.

And thus far if not further a natural man might go, proceeding still upon
sure undeniable grounds and experiments in nature and reason, and from thence
deducting necessary conclusions. So that I doubt not but a learned Philosopher,
having his judgment rectified by the help of Logic, not forstalled and
infatuated by some superstitious and senseless conceits, (as was that of the
ancient Philosophers) might have attained thus far, if he had diligently and
mainely intended the search of these things. But as their search so their
finding was by halfes. Christian Philosophers have taken more pains in this
point; and it alters not the case that they were Christian, and so had other
light besides that of their own, seeing in this matter they used it not, but
have taken pleasure in this natural search, both to see Religion confirmed by
reason, as also to behold how short the Ancients came of those conclusions,
which posterity has with much ease collected even out of their own
principles. To make a summary collection of all those reasons which are
produced by sundry authors who have purposely, or by occasion dealt in these
points, were a matter of no great difficulty. Such as have written of
Metaphysickes, as also some Divines afford us no small number of Arguments. But
out of them, or where they fail out of Reason it self to make a certain and
unerring discourse for confirmation of all the forenamed points, so as a
wrangling, cavelling and gainsaying natural wit might be convinced and set
down, were a labor worth the pains of some active and searching wit, but
requiring time and industry. In the issue of which discourse, these two
conclusions would appear evidently true:

1. That our natural man may go much further in the disquisition of Gods
attributes, and those things that concern his worship, than in the
understanding of the Nature of the Divine Essence: wherein following reason he
would be as some Christians are, strangely befogg'd, especially in the mystery
of the Trinity.

2. That nothing concerning God himself immediately in the first Table of the
Law, would be so discernable to the Natural man, as those other points of
morality contained in the second: a more particular and exact knowledge whereof
he would with ease attain unto.

The ground of this whole discourse, besides that in Nature, we have in the
Scriptures in the like practice of the Apostle with the Gentiles; as with the
Lystrians, Act. 14, 17. the Athenians in that long and excellent Sermon wholly
almost of this subject, Act. 17. 24, 25, etc. and the Romans, Chap. 1. verse.
18, 19, 20, 21. An exact consideration and resolution of which places would
singularly declare the point in question.

But go we on from what may be known to enquire in brief what has been
found out by natural men in former times. Which being a matter of fact
depending upon Records and Histories of ancient times, cannot possibly be
perfectly handled: seeing time has defaced the memory and monuments of our
Ancestors. Many learned men have made collections of those sayings and opinions
which the Ancients have left unto us concerning the matter of Religion: the
like whereof were not hard to be performed with much addition by such as have
time to read, and would use diligence to collect the passages of several
authors. For the present I desire you only to observe in general these two
cautions, which particular search will approve for good:

1. That the wisest of the Gentiles have taken more pains, and with far
better success in points of Morality touching the second, than Divinity in the
first Table; as appears by those Treatises of Oeconomickes, Ethickes, and
Politics, where the orders of household Government, the course of a virtuous
conversation, the laws of State and Policy are disputed largely, and in most
points consonantly to the Scripture, and the fundamental grounds of equity and
justice. So that in many of these virtues commended unto us in Scripture, we
may with much profit have recourse unto their writings for the explication of
their nature and quality.

2. That we cannot be certain when these Ancients were only guided by the
mere light of nature, and when by some supernatural illumination: not that
God did afford divine Revelations concerning heavenly mysteries unto the
Heathen (excepting happily the Sybills) but that what God had revealed from
heaven to his Church, was from them brought by some means or other to the
knowledge of these Philosophers: A point not much to be doubted, if we
consider, that all knowledge whatsoever in any kind has principally
flourished in those parts of the world, that have been nighest unto the
borders of the Church. Such is the nature of Religion, that it breeds
Civilitie and Knowledge of all Arts in the Countries wherein it is professed,
and also spreads some part of its light and virtue into the Countries next
adjoining. Witness hereof are the Countries of Chaldea, Syria, Egypt, Arabia,
Greece and Asia, with the nearer coasts thereof: wherein the Church had its
original and first breeding, or nigh whereunto it had its abode and settled
plantation for many ages. In which time learning Arts, and all Civilitie seemed
to have been confined to those middle parts of the world, the rest further
remote being left in gross ignorance and barbarism. And the same course is
held to this day, wherein Learning and Civility has abandoned the Eastern
countries which have forsaken true Religion; and has not yet approached to the
Western Americans, who have not heard the sound of the Gospel. Now then in
the course of times it could not be but sundry accidents would fall out for
the dispearcing of sacred knowledge: as trading and commerce of Merchants, both
strangers into Iudaea, and Jews into foreign parts: Entertaining of Slaves
and Captives, who if barbarous learned of their Jewish, if Jews taught their
barbarous Masters many mysteries of Religion, received and believed among the
people of God: The perigrination and sojourning of many Jews abroad in
foreign parts (as no country soever but has some of its people in all
countries) which Jews as they learned the superstitions of the Heathen, so
they brought in amongst them some pieces and relickes of true Religion: Lastly,
the Curiosity of the Philosophers of those times (shaming the negligence of the
learned now) who would with any cost purchase books of any Art in any
Language, which they thought contained some secret knowledge and rare mystery:
as also spared no labor in traveling into foreign parts wherein they heard
were any men or means whereby their knowledge might be increased. Wherefore it
is more than probable that those Ancients, Zoroastres, Hermes, Orpheus, Plato
and others, drew their knowledge, which in part they had of many high
mysteries, out of a deeper and cleerer fountain than the muddy shallow springs
of their own natural reason, though in the passage this water was much soyled
by them with the mudde of many idle fables and silly conceits. A reason
whereof, we may conceive to be either the darkness of their apprehension, not
clearly discerning what was perhaps plainly enough delivered, or the
corruption of those Idolatrous times, which permitted not the least innovation
in opinion or practice touching the matter of Religion (as appears in the case
of Socrates) which constrained the learned in those days, to conceal much of
what they knew, or to declare it darkly in many mistie and foggy fables, whose
interpretation aftertimes forgot, and so believed a lie for a true tale.

Hitherto of the knowledge of a mere natural man, let us next descend to the
Effects thereof in regard of Practice: which admitting of a double
consideration as theformer, What may be, what has been done: shall yet here
be handled jointly together. By the former discourse it appears how imperfect
the knowledge of the wisest natural man is: whence it follows that his
practice will come as far short of his knowledge, as his knowledge does of
perfection. For so it is even with the best Christians who practice far less
than they know: much more with the natural man whose knowledge is too dark
and uncertain to cause any powerful and vigorous impression upon his will and
sensual affections, which will be too too violent and untamed to give way to
the commands of his understanding. Yea, should we suppose in a natural man the
cleerest apprehension of all duties in the moral Law, yet could it not much
better his practice: so easily would the Natural Conscience be choked and
borne down by the power of Corruption, unless it be supported by Faith which
only puts life into our knowledge, and strength unto our practice. And in this
case there is no difference between a Natural Heathen and an Unregenerate
Christian, who in knowledge may and does exceed the other, and yet come short
of him in practice. For seeing they both alike want Faith and Sanctification,
it is possible that goodness of natural temper, civility of education,
strictness of government, due hope of reward and praise, or fear of the
contrary, with the like motives, may carry a Heathen as far in virtuous
courses as bare illumination can a Christian. The same corruption in both
(perhaps greater in the Christian than Heathen, as sin abounds more, where
unsanctified knowledge abounds) I say the like corruption in both would
imprison this knowledge in unrighteousness, that it break not forth into
Religious practice. Whence we find that Christians, much more Philosophers,
have not been the same men in the Chair and in their Conversations: but that
their opinions and discourses have been full of Sanctity and Temperance, when
their lives have been defiled with all Impiety and Sensuality. Wherefore for
the general, let us set down this Conclusion as most true, that

The mere natural man never goes so far in the application of his knowledge
unto practice, as he might do, and as he knows he should do.

And therefore the Gentiles are condemned for detaining the truth in injustice,
for sinning against their consciences accusing them, for knowing God and yet
not glorifying him as God. So that it is clear, although the Natural man cannot
do or know so much as he ought, yet he knows more than he is ever willing
to practice: and for that cause his knowledge is sufficient to condemn him of
his unrighteousness toward man, and false worship of God himself; though it
be not sufficient to direct him in the true means and manner of Gods right
worship, or the practice of a holy life. And thus in Gods wonderful judgment,
he is left as without sufficient direction for well doing, so without all
lawful excuse for his ill doing. But come we to particulars; the Natural man's
practice respects

either God in his Inward worship. Outward Man.

1. In things concerning God and his worship the Natural man utterly, perverts
himself in his practice, there being in this case the greatest deformity and
disagreement that may be, between his knowledge in the speculation, and his
application thereof to practice. Consider him in the Inward worship of the
heart, how he stands affected toward the Deity in those inward affections, of
Love, Fear, Credence, and Confidence, which are required as part of our
Spiritual worship of God. It would be strange to see the disposition of a
mere Natural man's heart in this part of Gods worship: how feeble, cold, and
forced these affections would be; how full of hypocrisy and falsehood, being
secretly fastened to the creature, when they pretend to be directed to the
Creator, just like unregenerate Christians, that will make show of Love, Fear,
Faith, and Trust in God, when it is apparent they intend nothing less in their
affections.

Consider him in the Outward worship of God, and the Natural man is far more
defective, as appears by the manifest experience of all ages, who corrupted
their ways in nothing so much as the service of God: mistaking the object, and
seeking for that Deity which they apprehended in a general Notion, not only
in the Similitude but in Nature of the Creatures, and those many times of the
weakest and basest rank, mistaking the manner of this Service, falling from
that Spiritual service which by the laws of Creation was only required, to a
thousand carnal outward Ceremonies, and observations of their foolish
devising; some ridiculous and senseless, some strange, cruel, and horrible
against all good nature and humanity, some furious, mad and drunken, some
obscene and beastly, all superstitious and divellish: mistaking lastly the time
of this service, in appointing a number of Festivalls, but neglecting utterly
the Sabbath, the knowledge whereof was quite worn out among the Gentiles.
Which particulars are all manifest by records of old, and experience of latter
times, in those places where the Gospel has not been yet preached. A reason
of this general corruption in the whole frame of Gods worship, we may conceive
to be this. The worship of God that man was to perform in his innocence was
wholly Spiritual, not consisting in outward Ceremonies, Ordinances, and
Observations; according as the same shall again be performed by us in Heaven
hereafter. Such was the perfection of Adams nature, that he being fully
replenished with the love of his Creator, did always more cheerfully delight
himself in the contemplation of his excellency, and obedience to his commands,
without such external helps. True it is that to Adam in his innocence was
prescribed the observation of the Sabbath, and two Sacraments of the Tree of
Life, and Knowledge of good and evil. But for these Sacraments, the latter was
rather of Abstinence than Action, a trial rather than a help of his
obedience: the former was a pledge of his happiness if he stood, but no
means of his upholding, and so both of them mainely differing from all
Sacraments, afterward given unto the Church for the support of our
infirmities. Likewise the Sabbath was then to be spent in exercises merely
Spiritual, not in any such outward bodily observations, as since the Fall have
been instituted by God in regard of our weakness. And though God always
required to be worshipped in spirit and truth, yet since the Fall there have
been certain external rites added thereunto, which were not needful in
time of innocence. Now then this whole frame of the outward and instituted
worship of God, man once corrupted could not so much as guess at: God
therefore revealed it from time to time in the Old and New Testament, and that
with many straight prohibitions of adding or altering any things out of our
own invention: for who can or could tell with what outward things God would be
pleased but he himself? So that the Heathen being destitute of this light, it
was no marvel if they became vain in their imaginations, and in this point
sought out unto themselves many strange inventions. They found by experience
how needful it was by some outward services, to give testimony that they
believed and worship ped a God, whom else they might seem to deny in regard of
their monstrous impieties: but in what manner to do this they knew not. Only
this you are to observe, that the whole world almost retained the custom of
sacrificing unto their gods, which you must not think was a thing learned from
the light of Nature As Bellar. absurdly holds Lib. 1. de missa. cap. 20.
; for what ground in reason had they to imagine that the wrath of God against a
man for sin, should be appeased with the slaying of a beast? but it was a
practice received by tradition from the beginning of the world: this custom of
Sacrificing being the most eminent and principal outward service of God,
commanded first to Adam, and by his precept and practice delivered to
posterity. Who retaining the outward work and ceremony (as man's corrupt nature
is ceremonious enough) but forgetting the mystery and signification, did
quickly pervert that sacred institution in all abominable Idolatry, and
esteemed the Numen or Deity offended to be directly pacified by that, which in
its Original was only a figure of that propitiatory sacrifice of Jesus Christ.

2. Let us in the next place enquire of the mere Natural man's practice, as it
concerns man in all Moral duties of the second Table: wherein he will go
much further than in the former. So that there is scarce any sin therein
forbidden which the Heathen have not condemned, or duty commanded, which some
of them have not praised and practiced. Instances might be showed in those many
excellent patterns of virtue, whose lives have been left registered unto us by
the Ancients: and hardly is there any man so bad in whom we shall not find
some one or other eminent part of goodness. But in this point touching the
Vicious or Virtuous practices of the Heathen, you are to observe two things
wherein the Natural man will always discover his ignorance and error:

1. In determining the right cause and Original of sin, whence all this
disorder which is evidently perceived in man's nature, had its beginning, and
how it came into the world. Here the Natural man is at a stand, and cannot
possibly ascend so high as to find out the fall of Adam, and in his Sin and
Gods Curse thereupon to discover the fountain of all our uncleanness and
wretchedness. So that every Natural man would upon examination of this matter
easily fall into that opinion of some, that there were Duo principia, the one
summum Malum the cause of all Evil, the other summum Bonum the cause of all
Good. We not much wonder that the remembrance of so memorable an accident as
Adams fall should quite be lost in his posterity, seeing that Adam himself
having that Fact of his in horror and detestation, whereby he made himself and
all the world miserable, was not willing to publish his own shame, but rather
conceal it from his children as he would have done from God: and as for the
most part of his posterity, they little heeded to know that whereof they cared
not to repent.

2. In judging aright of the Nature of sin, either in regard of the Punishment
of it, or in regard of the Evil of it. For the Punishment of it, though the
Heathen had a gross apprehension of Gods wrath against wicked persons in this
life, and some kind of punishments they should feel afterward in Hell, yet
they never could come so far as to see that all men were in one condition,
under the Curse of God subject to everlasting damnation in body and soul,
without special grace showed from God. And for this cause that knowledge of
the Law which the Gentiles had, could not work in them that effect as in the
Jews and Christians it does. These it drives unto Christ, to seek after a
Savior from the curse and punishment which the Law threatens them withal: but
in the Gentiles who apprehend not this Curse, it cannot take any such effect.

Again, for the Evil and Vitiousnesse of sin they never conceived of it
according to the full extent of it. They knewit to be bad, but not so bad as to
deserve such horrible punishment, as the Scriptures tell us to be due unto it.
They knew man's nature to be corrupt, but never dreamt of any such Original
universal depravation of our nature, as that we are dead in sinful
infirmity, utterly deprived of that Spiritual life and ability which sometime
we enjoyed. They knew the Outward act of sin, and the grosser sort of.
Inward thoughts to be evil, but they could not imagine that so high perfection
of Spiritual obedience was required of man by any Law, as to condemn him for
every disorderly thought not consented unto. To wish for our Neighbors House
or Wife, is a thought, which, allowed of with consent, may by a Heathen upon
the fundamental notions of right and wrong be condemned as repugnant to
charity and equity. But for the same thought to arise in the heart, and pass
away without all approbation and intention of practice; yea happily with some
dislike, and yet to be esteemed as an offense, was never thought of by the
natural man. The discovery of the sinfulness of this first brood of Lust,
when by secret entisings it draws away the heart, and shootes forth only in
sudden motions, arising and vanishing without notice and allowance: this is a
point of Divinity of a higher strain than ever any natural man could reach
unto. Yea Paul himself though a Jew and a learned Pharisee, yet before his
conversion understood it not, Romans 7. 7. and the Papist to this day will not
be persuaded it is so, though Paul affirm it.

Now from hence we shall learn in part to judge aright of the natural man's
virtue and goodness, How far ordinarily it goes, and what worth is in it in
regard of Gods approbation of it. I will briefly set this down in five
Propositions.

1. The Virtuous practice of the natural man is more busied about the Outward
act than the Inward affection: in reforming the manners, not amending the heart,
in restraining the external action, not resisting the inward desires and
inclinations, as the true Christian does. It is indeed not to be denied but the
Heathen came so far as to condemn the root of sin as well as the fruit,
and to judge them punishable as vicious persons, not only whose lewd practices
testified them so to be, but those also who in their affections and thoughts
approved the like wickedness. And Philosophers have not a little labored to
find out the true means of composing and settling that more distempered part
of our minds in our unruly passions and perturbations; whence they easily
perceived did issue originally the chief provocations to all evil. And in
this point they did rightly judge, that it was of much greater difficulty to
order the unruly motions of the mind, than to restrain the outward actions of
the body, or to atchieve any hard adventure. They well knew that the
Sovereignty of the Will over the Appetite and Affections was but a civil
persuasive authority, which might be easily withstood by the stubbornness of
the inferior faculties: only over the outward parts the Will had a masterly
and absolute command to move them as it pleased without gainsaying. Now then
although we may find many among the Heathen of an excellent temper, who either
by a Natural disposition, or studious education, and wise observation of
themselves, carried a singular command over some of their passions of Anger, I
ove, and the rest: yet in the general we may assuredly believe that all those
precepts delivered by the wisest Philosophers touching the calmness of mind,
were far too weak and heartlesse in their practice to bring the observers of
them to true Tranquillity. No, it is only the Spirit of Sanctification that
commands our disordered souls: and if we consider it, even in the sanctified
Christian having that Supernatural help, the longest combat and most
doubtful conflict is with these carnal affections and lusts. This exceeding
difficulty of mastering the affections, did as it seems, turn the Stoickes
quite on the other side, who truly perceiving how great enemies these Desires
and Passions were unto Wisdom, Tranquillity, and Virtuous Endeavors, judged
them all utterly evil, and not to need reformation so much as abolishment:
whereby they did rather astonish than conquer them: and such their peace might
be termed the dull stupidity and unmoveablenesse of a block, rather than the
quiet calmness of a man. Which thing did in many passages of their lives upon
occasion of unexpected dangerous accidents, discover it self, to others
laughter and their own shame: when their passions which were formerly
stupefied and charmed by Philosophical discourses, but not mortified, did
easily recover their strength, and brake forth with unresistable violence. So
then the natural man will utterly come short of that endeavor which
Christians make their chief, viz. the inward Reformation and Sanctity of the
Soul; if he strive about it, it is but faintly, and he soon gives it over,
finding the contention laborious, and the victory impossible: Outward evil
practices he may in part forbear, the grossness whereof make a deeper
impression of dislike in the natural conscience, and also bring him in
compass of many Civil inconveniences; but for the inward loathsome
corruptions of the Soul he takes as little notice of them to amend them, as
the world does to punish them.

As in Vice so it is in Virtue, the natural man will love and practice so much
of it, as may by its outward splendour win praise, honor and reward: but to
entertain an entire and unchangeable love to virtue, severed from all these
by-respects, has been seldom found in any but those alone in whom Grace has
prevailed more than Nature. There have been some among the Heathen that have
held on in a virtuous course even when they have got disgrace and smart by so
doing: but this has been rather out of a kind of surly Obstinacy and
Stiffenesse of mind, than any zealous affection to goodness it self. It Is one
thing to Scorn an ill practice, another thing to Hate it; and so it is one thing
to Love virtue, and another to Practice it out of Greatness of mind and High
Spirit, when men having fallen upon some good course, and continued long in it
with commendations, they now scorn so to submit themselves to other men's
wills, and wisdom, as for their pleasure to alter their own resolutions; out
of mere stomach they will endure any thing rather than be so base. And in
these high Conceits they pleased themselves much more than in the goodness of
that virtue whereof they made profession. For we cannot believe that those
cold discourses of Philosophers, That virtue is to be loved for it own sake,
could ever set so fair a gloss on Virtues face, and so to represent her
excellency to the dull apprehension of natural men, as to make any of them so
far enamoured with her beauty, that they would still follow her when praise
or profit forsook them. Nay, this is a point most hard for the best Christians
to attain unto, few of whom, those excepted whose more strong and lively faith
causes a clear apprehension of eternal blessedness, few I say will be
found, whose love to virtue grows not hotter or colder according as hope of
temporal reward, or fear of loss increases or slackeneth the flame: as for
Hypocrites, the case is most apparent in them, as is clear in the practice of
the Pharisees; between Mat. 6.
whom and the Heathen there is little difference in these points, unless that
these Hypocries are the worse.

2. The Righteousness of the natural man is rather Negative than Positive, in
forbearing more than in doing. He is magis extra Vitia quam cum Virtutibus: a
harmless Conversation is reputed for a Virtuous innocence, and he is
esteemed very good that is not so bad as others are. Experience shows it in
all natural men, who content themselves in a freedom from such vices as they
see and dislike in other men though themselves have in the mean time but
little goodness. And it must needs be so, seeing they want the sanctifying
Spirit of God that should incline them to good practices, and have only his
restraining Grace which keeps them from breaking out into those enormities,
whereby they would shortly disturb and overthrow all humane society.

3. The goodness of the natural man generally respects others more than
himself; his righteousness toward his neighbor in things that are done
Test Populo, is greater than his Sobriety in regard of himself in those
things that are done Test Deo and Conscientia. For in those common affairs
between man and man which lie open to the eye and censure of many, men will
for the most part be careful to maintain their credit and esteem: as knowing
that commonly men judge of others by their common Practice and Intercourse in
public business more than by their Private and Personal qualities. Hence
many have been good Governors and Commanders both in peace and war, that
for their particulars have been vicious persons: many good for the Common, bad
for their private Wealth, good Subjects, good Neighbors, etc. yet bad men:
dealing in this case as Covetous men do in feasting, who however sparing they
be in their private and daily spendings, yet in public entertainments exceed
all for costly provision: few take notice of the one, and the Many will judge
of all the rest by that which they once see and approve of. So that the maxim
of Politicians, That the Opinion of Virtue is a Commodity, the real Practice
of it a burden, seems to be drawn out of the very dregs of corrupted nature:
it being generally the utmost aim of a sinful man, to cover his shameful but
beloved vices with the mantle of otherwise-disdained honesty.

4. The natural man's goodness is not General but confined within the
compass of some one or few virtues, those whereto his natural inclination and
Civil Institution did best lead him. This may be found true even in the most
excellent of the Heathen, who excelled, some in fortitude, some in justice,
some in liberality, some in temperance, etc. but all almost had their great
vices mingled with their great virtues, that the case was doubtful, whether
they were more to be loved for the one or hated for the other. Wherein yet they
dealt politickly Pravitatem unius, Probitate alterius compensantes, as Salvian
speaks, so counterpoysing Vice with Virtue, that by the favor of some virtues
pleasing and profitable to others, they with less apprehension did freely
practice many vices, no less pleasing and commodious to themselves.

5, The righteousness of the natural man is not entirely good, nor acceptable
unto God. Which that it may appear, we are to see how far the actions of the
Heathen may be said to be good and pleasing unto God. In moral actions two
things are to be respected, 1. The Matter and Substance, 2. The Manner and
Circumstances of it. The Substance of every Moral Action is its Conformity
with the Rule of Goodness, id est, the Law, when that thing is done which is
commanded by the justice and equity of the Law. The Circumstances or manner of
the action consists 1. In the efficient cause or Person that does the work, 2.
In the end or scope he proposes to himself in working: Both these I call
circumstances of a moral Action, Because by them the Quality of the action is
not varied in it self, but only in regard of Acceptance or Reward. For, that
he be a liberal man that gives an alms, or a true friend that does a
friendly office, it is nothing to the work it self, for a covetous man or an
enemy may do the like, but with this difference only, that it cannot be
accepted or counted thanks-worthy at their hands. In like manner, to make a
good work pleasing to God, its necessary the person himself be first
sanctified and regenerate: but to do a work, good for the substance of it,
this is not absolutely necessary. Further for a servant or any other to
perform his duty upon Constraint, upon Fear, at Unawares, etc. alters the
case much in respect of favorable acceptance and merit of reward, but not in
respect of the goodness of such Services, which may be the same, as in one
that performs them willingly and out of regard of his duty. So, that work
that is performed out of Hypocrisy, Custom, Formality, Compulsion, or by
Chance, may be a work good in it self, but never find favor and reward with
God, unless it proceed out of a pure Conscience. Again, for the End proposed
in all actions it is manifest, that neither a good end mends the Nature of a
bad action, nor yet a bad end marres the goodness of any virtuous work: Both
are merely Accidental not Essential to the Action it self. True it is in
respect of our selves we do corrupt a good action by a bad meaning, though
(as we are more apt to mar then than to make) we cannot infuse any
goodness into a vicious action by a virtuous intention. But it is only in
respect of our selves, who get no benefit by such a work; Otherwise the action
of a liberal man, of a valiant man, of a good commonwealths man, though done
for private respects of commodity or commendation, may be in themselves as
good, and by such as are ignorant of their intention will be judged to be as
good, as those that come out of a pure affection to virtue and sincere aim at
public benefit. So likewise all the virtuous actions of the Heathen, though
done for private and carnal ends, may be the same for goodness with those
which are performed by Christians with those Spiritual intentions of Gods
glory and their own Salvation. Only God accepts not alike of those things that
we do to serve our selves, as of those things which are done with a desire of
his honor; as man also in the like case would do the same. Now then seeing
the Law commands the Circumstance as well as the Substance of every good and
acceptable action, that as we do Deuteronomy. 6. 25. 1 Timothy 1. 5.
all, so we do it As God commands: and seeing the Circumstances of every
good work are a pure Conscience and Faith unfeigned (the Cause) and the Glory
of God (the End) which give such beauty and so sweet a relish to all actions,
as that without them they are deformed and unsavory in the eye and taste of
the Almighty: it is manifest that all the moral actions of the Heathen fell
short of their Complete perfection, forasmuch as their Persons were unholy,
their Consciences defiled, their Purposes perverse and crooked, and their best
Intentions finally resolving themselves into temporal, worldly and
selfe-considerations. But if we look unto the substance of the work it
self, we shall find little difference between many actions of the Heathen
and of Christians: there being as exact proportion and correspondence to the
rules of Justice observed by the one as by the other: yea many times more by
the Heathen than the other. It were a consideration worth ones labor to
parallel the laws, customs, and famous actions of the people of God, with
those which we find like unto them recorded in humane history: we should see
that many particulars would carry a fair resemblance between themselves, and
have the same stamp of virtue imprinted on both. This moral goodness in
Heathen men was no doubt pleasing and acceptable to God, so far forth that he
liked the work, and approved of it, with that common allowance which he
affords to all things that bear any stamp of his own goodness, but not so
that he liked the person, and accepted of it into any special favor of grace.
For it were most absurd to imagine that the Justice, Temperance, Valor,
Chastity of an Aristides, Cato, Scipio, Lucretia, etc. shall stand condemned
before God with the same censure of dislike, as the rapine, luxury, cowardice,
lust, etc. of a Sardanapalus, Caligula, Messalina, or such other miscreants.
Nay, he approved of their virtue and civility, as the effects of his own grace
in common bestowed on the Gentiles for a common good: and in testimony of this
his approbation he prospered those persons and commonwealths, among whom
sobriety of life, strictness of discipline, and severity of good laws was
best maintained: And Heathenism it self could discern the ruin of
Commonwealths to spring originally from the neglect of Piety and Virtue.

To conclude then and sum up all touching this point: Gods Nature and
Attributes, his Godhead and eternal Power and Providence are indeed clearly
to be seen in the Creatures, if the Heathen had eyes to see them as Adam had
at first. But though they be still as visible as they were, yet man is blind
and cannot behold them. It is very little the Naturallman has seen, not much
that he can see. What he knows, might teach him that God is to be worshipped
otherwise than he does, but cannot show him how to worship him as he ought.
Whatever he does or can do in the worship of God, nothing is done aright, for
matter or manner: His Inward worship is unholy, because his heart is so: His
Outward worship is superstitious and idolatrous, because he is utterly
ignorant of Gods appointments: both are false and displeasing, being presented
to God without a Mediator, of whom the Heathen have no knowledge.

Again, the Nature of their sin and misery is above the reach of the
Heathens knowledge; and therefore Grace and Mercy are beyond the possibility of
their desire: both which yet are the first step to true Conversion. Finally,
for their virtues they are corrupted in the root, perverted in their buddes,
defective in their whole practice. So that unless we will think, that a
civil Conversation, without all Sanctity of heart, to be true Conversion: a
kind of bare Natural reverence of the Creator in some cold affections of
Love, Fear, etc. or an external superstitious invented worship without all
warrant from God, To be Gods true and right worship in part: (which are the
things the Heathen can attain unto) it appears to be a vain assertion, to
affirm, That God has afforded sufficiency of ability to the Gentiles, by the
good use of Nature to convert truly to the right worship and obedience of God.

This of the first; the second ground is, That if the Heathen use the light of
Nature well, God is ready, yea bound in justice to bestow on them Supernatural
light of grace.

In the examination of this we need not be long: it being supported by the
former, together with it it falls to the dust. A mere imagination it is
withour all warrant from Scripture: though for it they bring that place, Matthew.
25. 29. [For unto every man that has it shall be given, and he shall have
abundance] i. e. say the Arminians, He that has the light of Nature and uses
it well, to him shall be given the Supernatural light of grace. An Arminian
gloss, that corrupts the Text, which is to be understood of painfulness in the
Ministers of the Gospel, in the emploiment of such gifts as God has endewed
them withal for the benefit of the Church. Which gifts and abilities being
well used, increase through Gods blessing, but if neglected, decay utterly
through his secret curse; as experience shows in painful or idle Ministers.
If the argument be framed only by analogy from this Text, and the general
equity of it, That whosoever uses any thing well, shall have more given unto
him: besides that this is a very large interpretation, which will admit of many
exceptions, it is to be noted that in their deduction they mistake the
proportion observed in the Text and Parable, which speaks of an increase in
the Same, not in a Diverse kind. He that has mean gifts for the Ministry and
uses them well, he shall have greater gifts in the same kind. But thence to
collect, He that uses Nature well shall have Grace given him, is as if we
should say, He that uses his health well, shall have riches or honors given
him: things of another nature. It had been true, if they had said, He that
uses Natural light well, i. e. studiously in the search of all good
knowledge, in him that light shall be increased, as it was in Philosophers: but
this made not to their purpose; and therefore they take a wide step from Nature
to Grace. In Scripture therefore there is no ground for this conceit: besides,
there are these three errors in it:

1. Against Experience, which shows that grace has not been bestowed where
they have had the best Natuturall dispositions, as is plain by rejection of
the Tyrians and Sidonians, and Vocation of the Capernaites, though they were
naturally better fitted to entertain the Gospel than these: as also by the
long rejection of all the civil and learned men of the Nations of the world,
who though they used their Natural reason far better than other barbarous
people, yet were left destitute so many ages of all Supernatural helps as
well as they.

2. It is founded upon two false Suppositions;

1. One, That the well using of Natural light is such an excellent preparation
for the receiving This opinion of Arminians of the bestowing of grace upon the
well using of Nature, is in effect but the doctrine of Popish preparatory
merits of Congruity, preceding the gift of grace. Both contrary to that of the
Apostle, (...). Tim. 1. 9.
of the Gospel. Which is not so: for although God showed that favor toward
learning and civility of manners, that in the propagation of the Gospel
through the world, he respected those Nations that excelled therein, before
others; as appears by the plantation of the Church among the Gentiles: yet
come we to particulars, and it is evident the Gospel found most resistance and
neglect at their hands who seemed to have used their Natural abilities best,
as the learned Philosophers, the wise, temperate, just, politic men of the
world, who were so far from being the fitter to receive the Gospel, that
they cut of pride and fleshly wisdom were its greatest enemies. Number ut
quisque (says Moulin) virtutis civilis laudem affectat, and ingenium habet
multa eruditione subactum, ita eimaxime sordet simplicitas Evangelij, and
crucis Christi scandalo magis offenditur.

2. Another, That a man may use his Natural abilities well, i. e. to the right
worshipping and obedience of God, without the grace of regeneration, without
faith, without all knowledge of the Gospel and the will of God revealed unto
man: which being a gross supposition of an utter impossibility; and such a one
as by consequence overturnes all Christian Religion, as has been showed: it
is manifest that this obligation, wherewith the Arminians have tied God to give
Supernatural grace to the Gentiles upon their good usage of Natural helps, is
void and of no validity, God will easily be discharged of it without forfeiture
of his Justice, where the condition on man's part is so impossible to be
performed.

And hitherto of this first question touching sufficiency of grace given to
them that are out of the Church: I will make an end of all with a word or two
of admonition for our practice. We (beloved) are (as the Apostle speaks) (...)
sinners of the Gentiles, but Jews of that circumcision which ^o not made with
hands. Let us then now bethink our selves what grace we have received, and
others want. Compare we advisedly our condition at this present with that of
Turks or other Pagans: and let us magnify his mercy, that has by Grace made
so great a difference between us and them, who by Nature were all alike. We
were strangers and forreiners as they now are, but we are now fellow Citizens
with the Saints and of the household of God, which they are not. A glorious
privilege, and if we have grace to judge aright of it, deserving to have the
first place in our esteem, above all prerogatives in the world. It Was but a
poor contentment to a dying Philosopher, when he thankt his Gods for being a
Crecian, not a Barbarian, an Athenian among Grecians, a philosophen among
Athenians. We my Brethren, have to joy in greater dignities, who are
Christians, not Insidells, true Believers among a world of Heretics, and
Scholars among the company of true Believers. Let me then tell you what you
know already, but few of us think of it as we should: where greater grace and
favor is hestowed, there more Thanks are deserved, more Service is required,
a stricter account will be taken of both. And be now intrcated by the mercies
of our Lord Jesus Christ to hearken to the Apostolical exhortation, Walk
worthy of that Vocation wherewith we are called. Be we ashamed that the
Morality of a Pagan should outstrip our Religion, that the Conversation of a
Papist should disgrace the Belief of a Protestant, that the Piety and Modesty
of the Unlearned should condemn the Vncivility and Lewdness of a Scholar. Be
not ignorant of the dignity of your Calling, but if in any thing, here stand
upon your credit and reputation: Why should not the name of Christian, of
Protestant, of Scholar, be held forth as a shield of defense against all
provocations to base and unworthy courses, as well as meaner titles of
Gentility, Honors and Offices are readily alleged against viler imploiments
not besitting persons of that quality? If there be any so respectlesse of his
own, and regardlesse of Gods honor, as by ungodly and base practices, to
cause those holy and precious names wherewith we are called, to be ill spoken
of, and Gods Name therein to be blasphemed, to such a one I say only this, and
I wish him to heed it, that God will shame that Servant that disgraces his
Master, and will in his time vindicate his own glory, by pouring contempt and
everlasting shame upon the head of such a Caitiffe wretch. Wherefore let us
pray that the Lord would make us truly jealous of his and our own honor, by
demeaning our selves answerably to our Holy Calling; in all things to please
him and glorify his name. Amen.

Having thus showed the state of a mere Heathen living out of the Church, and
the Insufficiency of all means whatsoever, that are given him in that state,
to work his Conversion and Salvation, we are in the second place to descend
unto the discussing of our next Question touching the Condition of those that
live within the pale of the visible Church, enjoying the benefit of the Word
and other ordinances of Salvation, Whether or no Sufficient grace be given to
all and singular Christians for their Conversion (...)* Quest.
unto God. This Question is something perplexed and intricate by reason of
diverse particular queres whereinto it resolves it self. I will by Gods help
proceed therein as distinctly and plainly as I can: First beginning with a
brief explication of the Terms of the Question; where it must be in short
explained, 1. What is meant by Sufficient, 2. What by Grace, 3. What by
Christians, 4. What by Conversion.

1. For the term, Sufficient, we are to know that Sufficiency as it is taken
in Relation to the producing of some effect, is nothing but such a degree of
Power or Strength, And so Adam had Sufficient strength to stand, because it
would have upheld him being assaulled, if he had then made use of it as he
should. But that he did not.
in any thing, as that if it be applied unto the Execution, it is able to
perform that whereto it was intended. As we use to say of any man, He is a
man sufficient for such an employment, because if he be set about it, he can
by the good parts he has, actually discharge it. Where you are to observe that
it is a mere abuse of this word, Sufficient, to oppose it to Effectual, and
so to distinguish between the Power and the Act, as if any thing could be
called Sufficient in Potentia, which when it is purposely applied to the Act,
is utterly insufficient to produce it. It Is an error in Speech to say. [This
Medicine considered in it self is sufficient to cure such a man] for it is a
vain consideration to consider the Medicine in it self, when we should
consider it in relation to the disease. And if such a medicine being
administered suffice not to cure the disease, it is certain that it was an
unsufficient medicine. Wherefore that distinction of the grace of Conversion
into Sufficientem and Essicacem is at least a frivolous imagination,
distinguishing those things as opposite, which at most are but subordinate, and
differ only as the cause and effect. For is it not the fancy of some cracked
brain, to affirm, that there is a Grace every way sufficient, and powerful
enough in it self to work the conversion of a Sinner, and yet when this grace
is given to such a sinner with a purpose and intent to convert him by it, it
shall be found to be utterly unsufficient to Effect it? It Is strange whence or
how men should conceit a sufficiency in the power of such grace, when they
find insufficiency in the performance of the work.

2. By the word Grace we understand some Supernatural gift freely given unto
man from God himself.

3. By the word Christians, we mean, all those that live in external
communion with the militant Church, enjoying the ministry of the Word, and
being of years to make use of it: for this Question touches not Infants.

4. Lastly, by Conversion (as heretofore has been showed) we are to
understand two things, either

1. The Root and Cause of that act, namely the Sanctification of all the
Faculties by the Infusion of Habitual Holiness.

2. The Fruit or Act of Conversion properly so called; when a man regenerate
and renewed in all parts, does actually employ them in loving and obeying God.
The first is Gods work upon us: the next our work performed toward him, when
by the strength of inward Grace given, we after convert our selves in Thought
and Work toward God. This latter is not here to be understood in this
Question, but the former, namely that Conversion of a man, which God works in
him by infusion of the grace of Regeneration into all parts. This infusion of
Grace into the Soul by an immediate act of Gods Spirit, the Arminians can by
no means endure to hear of in this business of our Conversion: and therefore
they burden this assertion with odious but untrue imputations of
Anabaptisticall Enthusiasmes, and of a Lazy expectation of all Grace to be
poured into us sleeping, without any endeavor of our own to get it. Which
slanders are only devised for the countenance of that impious opinion of their
own; namely, That man's Conversion to God begins in some act which man himself
performs, and not in a work first wrought in us by God. Now that act of man
is his assent and actual Faith given to the promise. A lewd imagination,
sufficiently confuted and cried down in the venerable assembly of the last
Synod, as most derogatory to the whole work of Grace in our Vocation, most
repugnant to reason and Scriptures, which tell us, That the tree must be good
before the fruit can be so: it being impossible, that an action so Holy and
good as is the yielding of Assent and Belief to the promises of the Gospel,
should be done by a man unless he be first regenerate and sanctified in all
his faculties.

The terms thus explaned, the state of the Question is more fully thus,
Whether God do bestow upon all such as Hear the Word preached, any such
Supernatural gift as is sufficiently powerful to work in them true
Sanctification, though it do not always effectually produce it?

Our Adversaries affirm it: but we truly maintain the Negative part, opposing
against their assertion these two Conclusions.

1. That there is no supernatural gift given unto the unregenerate, which is
Sufficient to work his Sanctification, but that only which is Effectual to
work it.

This has appeared manifestly enough in the explication of the terms of this
Question, and will be more and more evident to us, if we consider that maine
mistake of our Adversaries in this business of our Conversion, which is, that
they imagine our Conversion to begin in some act of ours, namely our Assenting
and Believing, not in some act of God, sanctifying the Soul before it can
Assent and Believe. Now because this act is good, and therefore must be done by
Gods help, for to salve this they have found a dainty new devise of
Spiritual strength infused into the Soul by the Holy Ghost: which strength
when it is inherent in the soul, a man may use it if he will to the producing
of the act of Faith. If he do use it, then by that act he is converted: if
not, yet that was sufficient to bring forth the Act, if it had been thereto
applied. As in a like Case, when Christ said to the sick man, Arise take up
thy bed and walk, He gave him bodily strength sufficient to do what he bad
him, but yet the man might have let his bed lie and stood still if he list. So
when God commands us to believe, he gives us strength sufficient so to do it,
albeit we may if we will neglect to make use of it. This foul error has bred
all that confusion and darkness wherein this controversy is wrapped up; and
it contains two gross absurdities in it.

1. That they suppose a supernatural ability of believing infused into the
soul by the Holy Ghost, which yet shall be no sanctifying grace of the Spirit;
an opinion altogether new and against reason. For ask them, is not the inward
disability of our souls to believe and convert a part of our corruption? It
cannot be denied. Well, is not then the infusion of an Ability to Believe and
Convert, the doing away of that corruption? It is. And then shall not that gift
which abolishes our sinful infirmities, be justly called a Sanctifying grace?
It is most evident, and none but such as are possessed with the Spirit of wilful
contradiction to all manifest truth, will affirm, That the Rectifying of our
weak and corrupt faculties by a supernatural ability put into them, and
disposing them to the most excellent work of Faith, can be any thing else than
the grace of Regeneration. An Act so Holy, must come from an Habit as Holy.

2. That they suppose the Act in Divine graces goes before the Habit: an
assertion in Divinity not tolerable, which tells us that the Tree must be good
before the fruit can be good. And that Question which Christ put to the
Pharisees, Mat. 12. 34. How can ye that are evil speak good things? is more
than any Arminian cau tell how to answer. This pincheth them, and puts them to
this choice, either that an unregenerate man who certainly is utterly Evil,
may by the help of such a gift as has not sanctified nor made him Good, not
only speak, but do that which is eminently Good, namely, Believe and Convert,
or that the Act of Faith performed by such a one, is not good and sound, and so
no beginning of true Conversion, or that they do confess the Habit of Faith,
as of other graces to be first implanted in our souls in the universal
renovation of all the Faculties thereof, whence the operation of faith does
afterward issue. And this is the truth which under those obscure and
unexplicated terms of [Supernaturall strength to Beleeve] they grant in
effect: for the strength is either Nothing at all, or Nothing else but that
Habitual Faith, which we maintain to be given us as a principal part of our
regeneration.

These mistakings of the Nature of our Conversion, has utterly confounded our
Adversaries in their opinions and writings about this point. They speak of
Sufficiency of Grace to produce the acts and operations of Faith and other
virtues: when the Question is meant of the Sufficiency of Grace in producing
the Habit of all Inherent Holiness. Now as in the former example of the sick
man, it is one thing to enquire whether the Health and strength Christ gave him
was sufficient to cause him to walk, another thing to demand what virtue of
Christ was sufficient to give him that health and strength: so in this case it is
one thing to ask whether the grace of Spiritual health or Sanctification be
sufficient for the producing of the actions of a Sanctified man: another thing
to ask what grace is sufficient to work in the soul the grace of
Sanctification it self. Wherefore in this matter we affirm, that as Health
when it is in a man is sufficient to every Natural action, though always it
be not effectual, because we make not use of our strength at all times: but
to work Health in a sick man no virtue is sufficient, but that only which
being applied proves effectual to restore it: So, where Sanctification is, it
is always sufficient to every gracious action if it be duly exercised
thereabouts, but may sometime be ineffectuall through our default in not
applying it aright: but now, to work Sanctification in the heart that has it
not, there is no other gift whatsoever sufficient but the only virtue and
power of the Holy Ghost, the immortal seed of our Regeneration; and
wheresoever this only and all-sufficient virtue works in the heart of any
man, there it is always infallibly effectual. To dream of any other inherent
quality in the soul given to man as sufficient to Sanctify the soul, and yet
after it is given, ineffectuall to perform it, is a fancy never thought of till
of late times, wherein men's hearts are strangely embittered in fierce
opposition against the glory of Gods free Grace.

This of the first Conclusion: the second follows, and it is this; That
sufficient grace for Sanctification is not given unto all.

This is a necessary consectary of the former: for seeing Sufficient and
Effectual are all one in this case, and seeing it is apparent that this grace is
not Effectual in some who are never Sanctified, it follows necessarily, that
such Sufficient grace is not given unto all. This were enough to have been
said against this opinion of Sufficiency of Grace given to all within the
Church: But yet ex abundanti; for our better satisfaction I desire your
patience and attention in the further examination of this second Conclusion.
The truth of it will be cleared by considering what the grace is which is given
to those that are within the Church. Now this grace is twofold:

1. The External Declaration of Gods will, made unto all men in common by the
Preaching of the Word; the ordinary consequent whereof is Knowledge or
Illumination. And this is termed our External Vocation by the Word.

2. The Inward gracious work and virtue of the Holy Ghost immediately
exercised upon the Understanding, Will, Affections, and whole Man. The constant
effect whereof is Regeneration. And this is called our Internal Vocation by
the Spirit.

In the explication of the Nature, Distinction, and Sufficiency of these two
unto the work of Sanctification, consists the further clearing of this
troublesome controversy. The Orthodoxe sentence which has been held touching
this matter agreeably to the Scriptures, is this;

There are two things which are ordinarily wrought in men living under the
Ministry of the Word:

1. Illumination of the Understanding, 2. A touch or motion of the Will and
Affections.
These two, because they are the fountain of all Outward actions, we only
consider in this business, letting pass such effects as are visible in men's
conversations. Now both these are each of them of two different sorts:

Illumination is either,

1. Common and Natural, when a man in hearing or (...).
reading conceives the litterall sense and meaning of the Scriptures in most
points of Christian Religion, so that he is able to discourse, dispute, and
write of them. I call this knowledge Common, because it is bestowed on reprobates
as well as others. I call it also Natural, because although the object thereof
be Supernatural and Divine, nor could be known but by revelation, yet being
revealed, the manner of apprehending it in such a one is merely Natural and
Carnal, and that light which the Spirit affords to such a one, is but some
more eminent degree of that common assistance which he gives to all that seek
after knowledge in any learning for a public benefit. For the case is plain
enough, a learned Scholar unregenerate knows and studies Divinity in the same
manner as he does any other Art: and as in them, so in this he may attain
excellent knowledge, by a special but no sanctifying gift of the Spirit;
perfecting his Natural reason but not making it Spiritual.

2. Proper and Spiritual, when a man by a singular gift of the Spirit of grace
is enabled to judge of Heavenly things in a Spiritual manner, according to
their truth and goodness represented to the understanding in their native
beauty and excellency. I call this Proper, because it belongs only to the
Elect; and Spiritual, because the Sanctified understanding judges of them
Spiritually. Thus for knowledge: next touching the

Motions which are wrought in the Will, they are likewise double: 2.


1. Natural, when upon the understanding of threatenings or promises the Will
is touched with some kind of affections toward those things, as they which
are naturally hurtful or beneficial to it: as to love, hope, desire, fear,
or hate such or such a good or evil thing spoken of in the Word. I term these
affections Natural, being proportionable to that first sort of knowledge that
bred them. For when an unregenerate man shall hear it plainly and amply
declared, what happiness belongs to the Saints, what comfort is in Gods
favor, what glory in heaven, what horror in Hell and a bad conscience, he
will be easily stirred up with many desires of enjoying the one and escaping
the other. But this he does in no other manner than as every man by instinct of
Nature will wish and seek for that good which he knows to be proportionable
to his nature, and also shun the Contrary.

2. Spiritual, when upon the thorough apprehension of all Spiritual Good and
Evil, known and believed by Faith, the Will is strongly inclined with all
Constant and Vehement affections of Love and Hatred earnestly to embrace the
one and detest the other above all things else whatsoever. How great difference
there is between these Illuminations and Motions in the regenerate and
unregenerate, I shall by Gods grace shortly have occasion to handle at large.
Having now thus distinguished them, let us see how these effects are appliable
to their Causes, the Word and the Spirit: the dependence is thus;

1. Common illumination and the natural movings of the Will that follow
thereupon, are the effects of the ordinary grace of the Spirit in the
ministry of the Word preached.

2. Proper illumination with the Spiritual affections thence arising, are the
Effects of the Special Virtue of the Holy Ghost in the ministry of the Word,
regenerating the Soul.

But we must go further yet, and whereas the Word and Spirit are both joined
together in this work of regeneration, we must carefully see what belongs to
one, what to the other. Wherefore we are to distinguish between the

1. Instrument: For whatsoever can be ascribed to the Word, agrees to it but
only as it is an instrument of the power of Gods Spirit. Now instruments are
either Cooperative or Passive, and the word must be one of the two. Cooperative
it is not, moving and working on the soul by any inward force of it self. For
it cannot be declared what operative force there should be in the bare
Declaration of Gods Will, to produce the real effect of Sanctification in the
unregenerate heart. It is therefore in it self a Passive instrument working
only And so in Adam who was endued with all inward abilities to do whatsoever
God should command, there needed nothing else but the declaration of his Will,
and Adam could presently obey. But in us that want such strength there is
required by such a proposal of Gods will, another work of the Spirit giving
us power to do it.
Per modum Objects, as it contains a Declaration of the Divine will, and as it
proposes to the understanding and will the things to be known, believed and
practiced. Now it is well known that no Object whatsoever has any Active power
per se to work any thing upon the Organ, but is only an occasion of working,
which some Force in or about the Organ makes use of. But whence then has the
word its effect? from the

2. Principal Agent, the Spirit of God; who by his immediate and proper virtue
works upon the Understanding and Will, causing in that a thorough apprehension
of the things proposed, and in this a cheerful obedience to the things so
understood. The Object of this work of the Holy Ghost is not the Word, as if
the Holy Ghost did infuse into it any special Virtue whereby it should work,
together with himself, as a partial Coordinate efficient cause in our
Coaversion, the Word working one part, the Holy Ghost another, as the Arminians
vainly dispute, (Act. Synod, Defens. Act. 4. p. 136.) But the object of this
Work is the Soul of man, whereinto this virtue of the Spirit is Infusa or
Affusa, or rather, whereabout this Virtue is employed, quickening, changing,
renewing the Faculties of the Soul with such spiritual strength and holiness,
that so it may perform what the Word declares is to be done. Which effect of
Regeneration though properly it comes only from the Sanctifying power of the
Holy Ghost, yet by a common Metonymie it is ascribed also to the Word, and for
that cause we are said [to be borne again Iam. 1. 18.
by the Word] 1 Pet. 1. 23. [to get Faith by Hearing] Rom 8. [to be begotten
by the Holy Ghost] 1 Cor. 4. 15. [to be sanctified by the truth, id est, the
Word] Ioh. 17. 17. and hence such proporties as these are ascribed to the Word,
that [it is the Power of God to Salvation] Romans 1. that [it is mighty in
operation, sharp as a two edged Sword] Heb. 4. 12. that [it is a Sword] Ephesians.
6. 17. Revel. 19. 15. that [it is Fire and a Hammer to break the Rocke] Ier.
23. 29. that it is [Powerfull to cast down all strong bolds of Man's proud
imagination] 2 Cor. 10. 4. with many the like, which though they properly
belong to the invisible power of the Holy Ghost, giving effect unto his own
Word, yet are figuratively attributed unto the Word it self, which he uses as
his visible Instrument. I cannot better express the manner how the Holy Ghost
uses the Word in the work of Sanctification, than by a Similitude or two.
Christ meeting a dead Coarse in the City of Nain, touches the Bear and Luke 7.
utters these words, [Yongue man I say unto thee arise.] Hear the Command, and
that given to a dead man: But could these words do any thing to raise him? No,
it was Christ's invisible power that quickened the dead, not his words, which only
declared what he meant to do by his power. Again, to the sick of the
Palsy, He says [Arise, take up thy bed and walke] Here Is the Command given to
a sick man. But was it the virtue of these words that heald him? No, 'twas
that secret virtue which went from Christ's Deity, which did the Cure. His words
declared what that should bring to pass. So in this matter of our Conversion,
Christ bids us, Awake we that sleep, and stand up on our feet; he bids us
Believe, repent, obey, turn unto him, etc. But all these commands work
nothing of themselves, but take effect by the only Power of God working upon
the Heart. In which case the Word is truly the Voice of God, not of man. Now
Gods Voice is not a bare sound or word carrying such or such a meaning with it
and no more, as man's does, but it is Verbum factivum, as well as
significativum, it deeth and really brings to effect that which it commands to
be done: it makes a world, when it bids a world to be made, it raises us, when
it bids us arise, it awakens us, when it bids us awake, it works faith in us,
when it commands us to believe, it gives repentance when it bids us repent, it
makes us holy when it commands us to be so. According to that of the Apostle, 2
Cor. 10. The weapons of our warfare are mighty, but it is Ephesians. 3. 7. Coll. 1.
29.
through God: and that in Esa. 59. 21. My word, says God, shall abide in you,
but this cannot be till he have first put his Spirit within our hearts.
Wherefore where this virtue of the Spirit is wanting, as it is in most, there
the Word has no other virtue, than to be as a fair Map presented to the
eye, wherein are described many matters of excellent knowledge, which the
unregenerate may gaze upon, in a kind of shallow heartlesse speculation, which
will differ as much from good knowledge, as the knowledge of a Country by the
Map and by the eye in traveling it.

And this is the Sentence of the Orthodox Church touching the Nature and
distinction of these two Callings, Inward by the work of the Spirit, Outward
by the voice of the Word. The Arminians are of another opinion, whose judgment
about this matter is thas:

The Word, say they, and the Spirit always go together, and wheresoever
either the Law or Gospel is preached, there and then the Quickening power and
effectual virtue of the Holy Ghost is present in all, even those that are
unregenerate, until such time as by Contumacy and Rebellion against the
Spirit, they have made themselves unworthy of further help. But now what is
this effectual power, according to the Arminians, and what does it in all men?
It does, say they, inlighten the understanding, it stirs up the Sensual
affections (for as touching the Will, it meddles not with that) and so gives
unto the heart Sensum verbi, and by an inward power infused does move and
dispose the heart to Believe and Convert. Yea, but how is all this done? Is it
by any proper work of the Spirit distinct from the power of the Word? By no
means, say they: It is done by a moral persuasion, per Representationem
objectivam, by a proposal of what is to be done, with commands, exhortations,
entreaties, promises thereto annexed. And is this sufficient to our
regeneration? Yea, there is not, there needs not any other immediate inward
invincibilis actio (as they style it) of the Holy Ghost upon the Soul. The
Word, only the Word begins, continues and consummates our Conversion. Nay, if
an inward work of the Spirit be granted, they affirm that the preaching of
the Word can by no means possible be accounted any means at all of our
Conversion. What then, Inward Calling there is none? No, say they, there is no
other inward regenerating grace but only the forenamed Moral Persuasion to
goodness, by the outward Ministry of the Word. This is the sum of their
opinion, and that Chaos of confused errors, which it is hard to distinguish into
any good order: I will touch upon them in these three propositions, manifestly
opposing their fundamental suppositions in those their Assertions: The first
shall be this,

1. That not so much as common Illumination and stirring up of the affections
is given to all in hearing of the Word preached. Shall we go any further than
experience to prove this in thousands that hear the Word, yet understand no
more of it, and are no more affected with it, than the seats they sit on? The
Arminians, as they will deny any thing, reject this argument from experience, and
except, that though they do not understand, yet they might understand if they
would. To which I answer, that it is true; Such men shall be condemned of
wilful ignorance, because the means God afforded were sufficient to have
brought them to more knowledge, if they had done but as much as they might: but
yet the exception is here altogether vain, because here we inquire of the Act,
whether all men be enlightened, not de Potentia, whether they may be or no.
For the Arminians hold that the Understanding is enlightened, and the affections
moved in all, and that Irresistably; men cannot choose but know and be affected
with the Word preached. And this they stiffely maintain, because that God has
infallibly given unto all Potentiam and Vires Credendi, and this strength is
nothing but Illumination of the Understanding, and Exciting of the Affections;
and therefore all must infallibly be illuminated and excited. Wherefore when
they affirm that a man may choose whether he will understand and be affected
or no, though it be true in part, yet they contradict their own maine
position, and confirm ours, That God though he have given the outward means,
yet has not given so much grace unto all, as to make use of them for the
gaining of ordinary knowledge in the Word.

The second proposition shall be this,

2. That bare Illumination, in the understanding of the sense of the Word
preached is not sufficient for Sanctification of the heart: i. e. to move, to
renew, to quicken those affections with true love of goodness and desire of
grace, which before were disordered, by reason of the darkness of the
understanding.

This they affirm: we deny it as a new and uncouth opinion, and that upon
these grounds:

1. Because it presupposes that in the affections there is no other
vitiousnesse, but that only which is bred in them by the error of the
understanding; which being deceived, misguides the affections, but being once
rightly informed, the affections are presently brought in order to follow the
directions thereof. Than which nothing can be more absurd, and contrary to all
experience.

2. If bare Illumination or Moral Persuasion be sufficient to Sanctify, it
shall work that effect either by it own simple Nil obstat quominus dicitur vel
sola Dei meralis suasio bomines animales reddere spiritueles, says Grevine.
cont. A^^es. page 297.
virtue, or by the help of something else besides. If by it self, then why are
not the Devils sanctified, who know more of Divinity than happily the learned
man? And why are not all learned Divines sanctified also? what should hinder?
Or if there must be some special grace beside, how can they affirm that to be
of it self sufficient, which helps not without the help of another thing? And
yet this is that whereto they are driven, namely, to confess there must be a
Special grace to make the General effectual; and so in one word they dash all
their dispute about the sufficiency of Universal grace. Or if they like not
that, will fall to that shift to say, that Bare illumination is sufficient,
though not to Sanctify, yet to work true Faith and Conversion: which is
nothing else but to affirm that there is Faith and Conversion before and
without Sanctification. Which opinion is a kind of frenzy.

The third proposition shall be this.

3. That besides the Common illightning of the Understanding and Motion of the
affections in ordinary preaching of the Word, there is necessarily required
another immediate work of the Holy Ghost upon the soul for its Sanctification
throughout: without which the preaching of the Word will be utterly unable to
work true grace in the hearers.

This I prove by Scriptures and Reason: The Scriptures are many, I will name
but one or two of the plainest places.

1. John 6. 36. Where Christ speaks to the Unconverted Capernaites thus, [But
I say unto you, that ye have also seen me] there is their knowledge of the
Gospel by Christ's preaching and miracles, but yet [yee believe not.] What was
the reason of that? it was this: God had not given the Capernaites to Christ; and
therefore he gave them not grace to come unto Christ: for, [All that the Father
gives me comes unto me: and he that comes unto me I cast not away] verse
37. Yea, will an Arminian say, They came not, because they were not willing to
come, there wanted nothing on Gods part but they might have come. Yes but there
did, if we believe Christ; God did not draw them, therefore they came not. For
[No man can come unto me except the Father which has sent me draw him, and I
will raise him up at the last day] verse. 44. But what is this Drawing? it is
the same which in the next verse he call Gods Teaching of us. [It is written in
the Prophets, They shall all be taught of God. Every man therefore that has
heard and learned of the Father comes unto me.] Nothing can be more manifest
than in this place the plain distinction of an inward Drawing from an outward
Moral Persuasion, an inward Teaching of God, from the outward Preaching of
man. Which is effectual to true Conversion in all, and only those that are
inwardly so drawn and taught of God, which the Capernaites were not.

2. Deuteronomy. 29. 3. 4. The Israelites in the wilderness had all instruction and
persuasion that might be by the Word, and by Miracles from God and his servant
Moses: they had heard Moses and God speak, and seen the great tentations,
miracles, and wonders with their eyes. But was this sufficient to convert them?
No, there wanted that within which God denied them; for, says Moses, [Yet tho
Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to
hear unto this day] verse. 4. Parallel to which is that touching the Jews,
among whom Christ had preached so much and so plainly, done so many, so
singular miracles, [Yet they believed not in him] Ioha 1^. 37. But what was the
cause of that, was not the means sufficient? No, God had denied to reveal
unto them his arm or power in giving them the knowledge of the Gospel. That
he proves out of the Prophet Esaias, who of all the Prophets preached the Gospel
plainest, and yet found small credit to his doctrine, [That the saying of
Esaias the Prophet might be fulfilled, that he says, Lord, who has believed
our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?] verse. 38. A very
unreasonable complaint says the Arminian, if we construe it so; for it is as if
Esaias had said, Lord, only the Elect to whom thine arm was revealed they have
believed it, but none of the Reprobates have believed it, because thine arm
was never revealed to them, and so they could not believe. And what reason had
Esaias then to complain of them for not doing that which they could not do? I
think the wisdom of God has of purpose to check these pestilent gainsaying
Spirits, added in the next words, verse. 39. [Therefore they could not believe,
because thus Esaias says again, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their
hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, and understand with their
hearts, and should be Converted, and I should heal them.] So Gods Spirit
brings that for a good reason which these men count an absurdity: They did not
believe, and the Prophet complains of it; yet it was because they could not
believe. And why could they not? ^was the want of that Inward work of grace
we stand for: God had not enlightened their minds, nor softened and sanctisied
their hearts, and therefore they could not believe.

3. 2. Tim. 2, 24, 25, 26. [And the servant of the Lord must not strive but be
gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient: In meekness instructing those
that oppose themselves.] Here Is the Ministers duty to preach uncessantly, using
all gentle and good means to bring men to repentance; but will this diligence
in persuasion, and patient industry be effectual at last? It may prove so,
but when it does, it is not by it self, but by Gods special grace, [If ^od
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the Namely that
acknowledging of the truth which is according unto godliness. Tit. 1. 1. So
Eliah to Elisha, What have I done unto thee? viz. that thou should be so
eager to follow me. He cast on his Mantle, said nothing and went his way.
truth.] After all outward means used, an inward gift is still to be expected.

Let us in the next place come unto reason and experience, where we have these
persuasive arguments to confirm us in this truth:

1. From the like experience in Christ's calling of his Disciples, to whom he
uses no other words but, Follow me, or, Follow me I will make you fishers of
men; it is wonderful that so shortan Invitation should work so strange, so
speedy an alteration: [Sraightway they leave all and follow him] what? forsake
all to follow after a stranger they never knew before, with such constancy, and
yet through so much peril and disgrace, and all for a word spoken, Follow me?
Nay, in that word there was more then a word; there went with it that Power,
which could have commanded the attendance of the Armies of Heaven and Earth.
And those few words accompanied with this secret virtue did more upon the
hearts of the Disciples, than many a long Sermon upon the Pharisees and
obdurate Jews, where Christ was not pleased to show the like effect of his
power. So Christ appearing to Saul, accosts him with this expostulatorie
salutation, [Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?] he says no more, but only
tells him being asked [That he was Jesus of Nazareth whom he persecuted, and
that it was hard for him to kick against the pricks.] But see what a change
these few words have made in a fierce raging persecutor, he is on the sudden
as meek as a Lamb, and now all for obedience to that name which before he
furiously persecuted. [Lord what will thou have me to do?] command what thou will, I am ready to obey. Was it external moral persuasion trow ye that has
made this wonderful alteration? Nor are these examples to be accounted so
extraordinary, as if for the substance the same course were not ordinarily
observed. Were not men wilfully perverse, they would confess, that when of
many thousands that hear one and the same Sermon, some one or two, it may be
the worst in the company, are in a moment so changed that they are not the same
men they were, new hearts, new desires, new affections, all new in them; they
would I say confess, that this is the very ^inger of God touching the Heart,
and not the force of any outward persuasion whatsoever.

2. If only a bare proposing of Divine things to the understanding, joined with
persuasions of command, threatening and the like toward the Will, be all that
is needful to man's conversion, it would be known what difference we shall
make between the working of Gods word and of Man's, of a Divinity Sermon, and
a good moral The Counsel of a Friend, and the persuasion of God.
speech. Nay more, what difference can be made between Satan's temptations and
all the sacred suggestions of Gods word? yea, whether Satan's seducements to
evil are not likely to prove always more powerful than Gods persuasions to
goodness, because in both cases the work it self is left wholly to our
arbitrament, and then Satan has the advantage of our natural Corruption
clearly on his side. So that by this Arminian doctrine, man's conversion is
even desperate, seeing Satan is as powerful, and certainly he is as willing
to Pervert as God is to Convert. This blasphemous absurdity the Arminians
cannot shift their hands of, though they strive in vain about it.

3. The old rule must here be remembered, Passio r^cipitur non tam per
conditionem agent is: quam dispositionem patient is: Qualis unusquisque est,
(...) is ^^^is ^idetur.
all exhortations, promises, commands, take effect not according to their own,
but according to the quality of him toward whom they are used. And so we see
a word does more with some, than a frown, or sharp menace toward another. All
Speech works as the Heart of the Hearer is affected, not as he intends that
utters it. Wherefore if there be nothing more to be done on Gods part toward
our Conversion but the only proposal and persuasion of the acceptance of
Grace, it is manifest to all, that can judge of the state of Corrupted nature,
that we shall never accept of Gods offer; but out of that Enmity and Hatred of
all goodness which is deeply rooted in our Romans 8 7.
nature, we should all universally and finally reject it, if it be left to our
discretion whether or no we will receive it. Except our tongues be first
brought unto a right temper, purged from the bitterness of our corrupt humors
that have overflowed and infected them, we shall distaste the sweetness of
all heavenly doctrine, and nothing will seem so unsavory to our relish, as
the things of the Spirit. And therefore of necessity our distempered,
disordered, and crooked dispositions must be first Rectified by an inward work
of Gods Spirit, before we can possibly take any true benefit by the Word
preached.

Thus then the truth of our second maine conclusion stands good, That
sufficient grace to Sanctification is not given to all that Hear the Word
preached: because none of those other gifts that are given them are sufficient,
but only the inward Virtue of the Holy Ghost, and this is not bestowed on all,
because wheresoever it works, it is always infallibly effectual, by no
means possibly to be hindered. Which shall be further showed in our third
Question touching the Controversy. But before we leave this, a scruple or two
cast into our way by the Adversary would be removed. They prove that the Word
and Spirit are never separated; and for it they bring Scriptures and reason.
Scriptures:

1. Esa. 55. 11. The word that goes out of my mouth shall not return unto me
void, but it shall accomplish that which I will, and it shall prosper in the
thing whereto I sent it. To which I answer, that this place intends no more
but that God will certainly perform all his promises that he makes unto the
Church. If it be extended to a larger sense, we grant that at every Sermon the
Prophet or Preacher makes, the power of Gods Spirit is always present with his
Word: but how? to make it powerful unto conversion in all to whom it is
proposed? Nothing less. It suffices, that that be done in some only, for
whose sakes God chiefly sent it: For others that are disobedient, God has his
work in them too, namely the accomplishment of his works of judgment though
not of Grace.

2. Like places are Io^. 2. 1. 13. Esa. 63. 10. 1 Timothy 3 8. Genesis 6. 3.
Act. 7. 51. Ye have always resisted the Holy Ghost, viz. whose virtue was
shown upon their hearts in and together with the preaching of the Prophet.

To this I answer, That they that either neglect the Hearing of the Word, or
when they hear and understand it, and are convinced of the truth of it, do
wilfully refuse to yield obedience to what they know: these are justly said to
resist the Holy Ghost, because they resist His Mat. 10. 24.
Ordinance, and His work enlightening their understanding with the knowledge
of Gods will. The Jews had both, and resisted As their fathers had done Esa.
6. 9. and 63. 10.
both; but it cannot appear by this place that there was any other Quickening
virtue of Gods Spirit working effectually upon the Hearts of the Jews For
these were uncercumcised in heart and ear: id est, unregenerate.
: only they had the External declaration of Gods will, and also Illumination
and Conviction of their Consciences; which effect the Spirit works ordinarily
in most, but not universally in all that hear the Word.

3. Heb. 6. 4. 5. and 10. 26. 29. But these places as they touch only some of
the Unregenerate, which are in that manner wrought upon; not all who hear the
Word preached: so that work of the Holy Ghost which appears upon their hearts
is not by that Saving and Quickening power which is the immediate and
infallible cause of true Sanctification: but only a more special degree of an
inferior grace, as shall be shown hereafter. Reasons which they allege, are
th^se;

1. If the inward work of the Spirit do not always go with the Word
preached, it will follow that God does not sincerely mean that which he makes
profession of. For outwardly by his Word he calls them unto him, whom yet
secretly he would not have come unto him. For if he would have them come, why
does he not give them that inward work of the Spirit, without which he knows
they cannot come? As for example, when by the Word he calls upon men and bids
them repent and convert, if he will this seriously, why does not God bestow
on men all such helps and means as are required on his part, inward as well
as outward, without which they cannot convert? If he will it not seriously,
why does he command them to do that which he knows they cannot, nay, we
know he would not have them do? Is not this dissembling to say one thing and
mean another, to will one thing in word, another in secret intent?

Answ. None more damnable hypocrites than they that will accuse God of
counterfeiting. He deals plainly, fairly, openly, speaks as he means,
and as it pleases him it should be. If he bid a wicked man do well, he
would truly have him do so; nor is it his secret desire he should continue in
his wickedness when he openly exhorts him to come unto repentance and
amendment. But here we must distinguish between a double Will in God:

1. Voluntas approbationis, of Allowance. God as he knows, so he likes of and
approves of many good things which he intends never to bring to pass.

2, Voluntas Effection^s and ^^tentionis, of Performance, when God intends,
that shall actually come to pass, which he approves as good in it self. Now
for the Conversion of all men by the Preaching of the Word, God wills it
seriously by way of Approbation and allowance; That the creature should convert
to God and obey his Creator in all things, is a thing truly good, and God
justly commands it, and if the creature can by its own strength perform it,
God does truly approve and like well of it. But God does not will the
conversion of all men Effectually by way of full intention to work it in them.
If man can do it, as it is his bounden duty he should, well and good, God
wills it as a thing in it self pleasing and acceptable to him. But God wills
not to bestow upon a man strength to do it, nor is he bound so to do. So that
here is no fraud, nor Sancta Simulatio, or duplex persona in God (as some
impiously at least imagine) as if his Word had a meaning contrary to his
secret intent. No, the meaning of his Word is sincere, what he commands he
wills to be done as a thing in it self very good, and on our parts, our pure
due obedience to do it: and his secret inient of not giving a man sufficient
abilities to do his duty, crosses not his Approbation of the goodness and
necessity of our duty to be performed by us. They are blind that will not
understand this, that it is one thing to approve of an end as good, another thing
to will it with a purpose of using all means to effect it. Gods Commandments
or exhortations show what he approves and wills to be done as good; but his
Such are 2 Cor. 5. 2. and 6. 1. Gal. 1. 6. Revel. 3. 20.
Promises or Threatenings show what he intends effectually to bring to pass.

But yet here they urge further, How can God in justice command unto a man by
his Word, the Performance of that, which cannot be done by him without the
inward help of the Spirit, and yet in the mean time God denies this inward
grace unto him?

I answer, Gods justice will herein be as free from accusation of tyranny, as
before his truth was from falsehood and collusion. God may without blemish to
his justice Command man to perform his duty although he have now no strength
to do it, because once he had strength and he has now lost it. Yea, will
they say, that were true did not two things hinder,

1. Man indeed had strength and has lost it, but how? himself did not
decoquere wastefully spend his Patrimony, and by the Act of his sinning
abolish the Image of God within him: but God for a punishment of his fault did
by an immediate act take away his original abilities. And it is then as great
injustice in God to command us Conversion, Faith, and Repentance, when himself
has taken away our abilities whereby we should perform it, as for a Judge
after he has put out an offenders eyes, yet to command him under pain of
further punishment to read such a book. If he had put out his own eyes the
case had been otherwise, the Judge being not bound to take notice of that his
fact. To which we answer, that it is true, God for our sin has deprived us of
his image, so that we cannot do his will without new strength restored unto
us: yet we must remember though this deprivation be an act of God, yet it
happens through our merit by reason of our sin; and in this case how harsh
soever it may seem to us, yet God the Judge of the world does not unjustly, To
command us the doing of that which we cannot perform without those abilities
restored, which himself for our transgression has taken from us, and will not
give us again. This is proved by that one instance beyond all exception, The
perfect obedience to the Moral Law is required of all, and yet it is madness to
affirm that God gives or is bound to give unto all that strength to do it,
which they had in Adam, without which it cannot be done. Further, that God may
justly command what man cannot perform, is manifest by Gods commanding Pharaoh
to let the Israelites go, which yet Pharaoh could not do; for God himself
hardened his heart that he should not be willing to let them depart.

2. When God commands man to believe the Gospel, here is a duty enjoined that
man never had strengh in Adam to perform. And therefore if God do require a
new duty he is bound to afford new strength, because by that which he had, and
lost, he was never enabled to do it. To which we answer, that it is an error
to affirm, that Faith which is the condition of the new Covenant, is not
commanded in the Moral Law. Legal and Evangelicall, or the Faith of Adam in
innocence, and of man since his Fall, is for the substance of the grace one and
the same, viz. Credence and Confidence of and in all things whatsoever that God
shall reveal unto man. The difference is only in the Use, and in the
particular object: as we shall see in the handling of that point of Faith. Now
Adam being commanded in all things to believe his Creator, whether revealed or
to be revealed, and having ability so to do, so that if God had told of him
the mystery of the Gospel he would have believed it; we also are bound by the
Law of our Creation, and so the Moral Law, to believe in Christ as soon as
God reveals unto us this thing to be believed: and God may require it of us,
because we had power once to do it; and what is lost, God is not bound to
restore.

2. Reason. If the Word at any time be destitute of the quickening Spirit, it
will follow, that the Word shall be of it self a dead letter, and the ^avour
of death, because it is destitute of the Spirit which only puts life unto it.
But this is not to be affirmed, for as much as it is only our fault that the
Word proves the ^avour of death, etc. To this we answer, That the Word is never
of it self the ^avour of death, no not then when it is without the virtue of
the Spirit: and we reject those assertions as utterly erroneous, That the Word
should be preached unto some to damn them, or with this intent to make them
inexcusable. The Gospel is not published with any such purpose at all: for the
judgment of our English Divines in the Synod is In Act. Synod. Dord. Sent^^.
Britan. Theol. de 3. and 4. Artic. He is excusable for rejecting that which is
offered him to that very end that he should reject it, not that he should
receive it.
^ound, that those who being called refuse to convert, should be made more
inexcusable: Neque enim ea singi potest homines reddere inexcusabiles per
Verbum and Spiritum vocatio, quae eo tantum Fine exhibetur, ut reddat
inexcusabiles. No, there is no such matter: The end of the Word preached is to
show unto man what is that good, and that acceptable will of God which he
requires man should perform: and the declaration of the will of God to man, is
always in it self most good and excellent: nor does it vary in its own
nature, whether the virtue of the Spirit go with it or no. For (as I touched
before) the power of the Spirit does not work upon the Word to put life into
it, but it works upon our souls to put life into them. So that whether our
hearts be sanctified or not sanctified it is all one to the Word, it makes no
alteration in the nature of that: All the difference lies in the Effect; where
the heart is sanctified, there the Word is heard with obedience, where it is not
sanctified, there it is heard and disobeyed. But the cause of this difference is
merely in the disposition of man's heart, not any jot from the Word: the Sea
Some. 7. 10, 11, 12, 13.
preaching whereof is good and to a good intent, but unto some it becomes
hurtful; not because the Word hurts them, but they hurt themselves by their
own sinnefulnesse, leaving themselves inexcusable in their fault, and
aggravating their damnation by wilful disobedience. The Word is neither dead,
nor deadly in it self, but we are dead, and by our sins against the Word
slay our selves.

3. Reason. If the preaching of the Word be sometimes destitute of the virtue
of the Spirit, it will follow that men should be condemned for not believing,
and being converted by that, which has no power to cause them to believe and
convert, as the Word without the Spirit has not. But that were injustice so
to do, etc. Ergo. To this slight argument we answer, that the default of men's
not believing and converting, is not through want of any thing in the Word,
which is only to tell them what God requires of them; and this the Word does
fully and sufficiently. If they obey not, it is through want of something in
themselves, namely, sanctified abilities in the heart, which as they come not
from the Word, so God is not bound to give them by his Spirit. It suffices
that God only command them, if they cannot obey, whose fault is that but their
own? Gods commands presuppose that strength to obey is or should be in the
creature: if that through sin be made weak, God is yet just in commanding
and punishing.

And thus much of this second question, by way of knowledge let us briefly see
what use we may make thereof to our practice: it learnes us a threefold lesson;

1. What our affections are to be in hearing of the Word, namely, the same
that in teachable Scholars toward a most wise Master, or in sick Patients
toward the skilfullest Physician. We must be content to be ^^ld, and every way
submit our selves to the discretion of that our Heavenly Doctor. We must
remember we have to do with more than man in this business: it is the Holy
Ghost that does all in all in this sacred ordinance. When therefore we go to
hear, let us put on all holy, humble, obedient, and tractable affections. A
proud, disdainful, selfeconceited, contentious mind is un^it for man's
instruction, most opposite to the wisdom of Gods teaching, who must needs
scorn to be their Master, that think themselves to be too good to be his
Scholars. Again, a malicious, unclean, worldly, voluptuous heart stands
contradictory to the holiness of this blessed Spirit. Those proud affections
hinder us in knowing, these impure lusts in doing our Masters will; both
together, or each alone make the Word utterly unprofitable unto us.

2. What the duty of Ministers is in preaching the Word. This is threefold:
one respecting the work, two the issue of it. For the work it self, the
nature and Spiritual quality thereof should teach them faithfulness to speak
Gods Word as it ought to be spoke: which is opposed as to negligence, and
accaused carelessenesse in the handling thereof contrary to the dignity and
majesty of it, so on the other side too overmuch diligence and humane curiosity
contrary to the simplicity and saving virtue thereof. Not that a man can be too
diligent in doing Gods work, or that it is easy to define precisely what and
how far humane helps are to be used in Divinity: but yet this is apparent,
a singular fault there is in men's preparations to this work, who either intend
not at all the saving of men's souls, or if they do, they think themselves
must do as much in it as Gods Spirit. Whence else, or to what end should so
much of man be mingled with that of God, why so much study to please men's
^ares, why so much care to win credit to their own persons? etc. Sure it
cannot but be a thing very admirable to any that will observe it, to hear a
man standing as Gods Ambassador, speaking as from his mouth in his Name, to
make a solemn prayer for assistance of Gods Spirit in his preaching, to bless
his Meditations that he has put into his heart, to make them effectual in the
hearers, etc. when in the mean time his conscience tells him that in his
studied preparations he sought for nothing less than the aid of the Spirit,
and his preaching tells us that he publishes the words not of Gods but of man's
wisdom.

In the Issue of this work, there is a double duty: 1. If it succeed well,
Thankful Humility opposed to Pride; that Luke (...). 16. 1 Cor. 3. 5. 6. and
5. 10.
when men are converted by his Ministry, he ascribe all to God, nothing to
himself, who was but the Saw in the workemans hand, etc. 2. If it succeed ill,
Contented Patience opposed to repining Thought; as, Why should not my Ministry
be as effectual as another is? Let a Minister remember he only sowes the
seed, God must give it a body of his good pleasure: nor is it himself, but
God whom the people here cast off. He may take comfort and shall have reward
for his godly pain^ in the conscionable discharge of his duty, albeit God saw
it not good that it should be so blessed in the effect as (...) could desire.

3. This teaches us how to judge of our ^onversion by the Word preached,
namely, by the inward Sanctification of the heart, not by having and
frequenting the public ordinance. Silly wretches they are that so far
mis^ake themselves and the nature of these things, as to think^ the going to
Church, the hearing of the Sermon, the remembering and discoursing ^f it, the
commending of the Preacher, outward reverence to his Person and Ministry, some
kind of Reformation of manners, wrought out of very shame not to follow such
plain directions as they must needs confess to be good, and others allow of
in opinion and practice, that think, I say, these things sufficient arguments
of a sound Conversion by the Word. Let us not beguile our selves in a matter of
this high consequence, these things are outward, but the effect of the Word is
inward also upon the conscience, in the change of the heart and sanctification
thereof, with all sacred affections to holinesses. Look then inwards, and try
how we are affected in and after the hearing of the Word. Do we find an Holy
fear to fall upon us when our sins are threatened? are we willing to abide
the Surgeons hand upon our tenderest sores, and though it be painful, yet do
heartily rejoice in the sharpest strokes, and deepest cuts of the sword of the
Spirit, when it pierces in to the dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit,
marrow and joints, parting us and our best beloved sin? Do our hearts
secretly rejoice with joy unspeakeable and glorious, in hearing those sure and
steadfast promises of Mercy and Grace published in the Gospel? Are our souls
brought under the powerful command of the majesty and authority of the Word
captivating all our thoughts to the obedience of Christ, so that no command of
a King armed with greatest terror can lay the like necessity of obedience upon
our outward man, as Gods injunctions do upon our consciences? Has the Word
wrought in us an unfeigned hatred of that evil which we outwardly forsake, a
sincere love of that good which outwardly we practice? Can we truly mourn
with much bitterness and anguish, when the Word discovers unto us the infinite
corruptions and loathsome uncleanness of our hearts, so that we wish for
nothing more in the world than to be freed from the sin that hangs so fast
on us, and to be clothed with perfect holiness. Finally, do we love the
Word that has begotten us, preferring that food of our souls before our
appointed bodily food? If these things be in us we have a witness to our
souls, that the Word preached has been unto us not only in word but also in
power, and that the same Spirit which gave it unto the Church, has made it his
most blessed instrument of our effectual Conversion to God. But if the case
stand so with us, that we know not what these things mean: if to our
apprehension there appear more terror in the angry words of a King, than the
most peremptory threatenings of God: if a reproof of a known fault will be
rejected by us with contempt and gall: if we slight the sweetest exhortations,
and the Consolations of God seem a small matter to us: if we can with a
Confident scorn of all Gods counsels hold a resolution to go on still in our
own courses, let God and his Ministers say what they list: if our Corruptions
trouble us not, and of all things in this life we take least notice of the
sinful estate of our souls, or of all pleasures and studies, we find least
content in hearing, reading, meditating on the Word: These things are
infallible Symptoms of Spiritual death that has seized on us, and that as
yet we have not so heard the Word, the Voice of the Son Ioh. 5. 25.
of God, as to be made alive by the hearing of it.

This trial is certain, and this Change that the Word and Spirit work in our
regeneration is very sensible; if we be not sensible of it, we may be bold to
Censure our selves that as yet we have it not. To conclude, they only hear
the Word as the word of God which find in it Gods 1 These. 2. 13. Ephesians. 4. 20.
seq.
power working Sanctification in their hearts, others hear it only as the word
of man, which goes no further than the natural care and understanding. Where
this change of the heart is not, all reformation in the life is but counterfeit
and hypocritical.

In the two former Questions we have examined the pretended sufficiency of
Grace universally bestowed on all, whether within or without the Church: and
showed you, that all those gifts which are ordinarily given either to
Christians or Heathens, are utterly insufficient for to work their true
Conversion, unless there be a further aid of the special grace of the Holy
Ghost working on the Soul to the sanctification thereof. We are at this time
to come unto our third and last Question, whether or no, supposing such grace
to be given as is truly sufficient to convert, it be notwithstanding in man's
power freely to choose whether he will be converted or not converted by it. The
Arminian affirms that it is so, and that when God directly intends to Convert
a man, and for that purpose affords him all gracious helps needful to be
given on his part, then Man by the liberty of his Will may resist Gods will and
work, so as they shall not work his Conversion. A desperate error, which
whosoever maintains, it is impossible that Christian Humility and
thankfulness can have any place in that man's heart. Wherefore it behooves us
much to be rightly informed in a point of such consequence, wherein it is so
easy to become an enemy against the grace of God. The Question then is this,

Whether it be in man's power so to resist the grace of 3. Question.
God, as finally to hinder his own Conversion?

In the explication of this Controversy, I shall with Gods help proceed in
this order,

1. To show unto you in brief the Opinion and Errors of our Adversaries in
this point. 2. To unfold and confirm that Truth which the orthodox Church
defends as touching this matter. 3. To answer such Arguments as are made
against it.
The Opinion of the Arminians touching the power of Man's free Will in the work
of Conversion, is most fully and freely expressed by that perverse Sectary
Johannes Arnoldi Corvinus, in these words of his so often mentioned in Contra
Bogerman. p. 363. Contra Tilen. P. 337.
the acts of the late Synod, and which are most worthy to be had in everlasting
detestation: [Positis, says he, omnibus operationibus gratiae, quibus ad
Conversionem in nobis e^^iciendam Deus utitur, manet tamen ipsa Conversio it a
in ^ostra Potestate libera, ut possimus non converti, id est, nosmetipsos vel
convertere vel non converters] id est, Suppose all the operations of Grace
which God uses to work conversion in us, be present, yet Conversion it self
remains in that sort free in our power, that we may be not converted, that is
we may convert or not convert our selves. This is plain dealing without
ambiguity and doubling, When God has done all that is to be done for his part,
it is still on our free choice whether we will convert or not. Their
explication of this conclusion is as strange as the conclusion it self is
heretical. It is thus: there are two operations of Grace precedent to a man's
Conversion:

1. Illumination of the Understanding in the clear knowledge of the Law and
Gospel, Sin and Grace. Which illumination is not, you must think, wrought
by any immediate work of the Holy Ghost opening the understanding to discern
of Spiritual things, but by the very plain evidence of the things themselves,
so clearly declared and represented to the Understanding, that every man
having the use of reason and judgment, and being attentive in the hearing or
reading of the Word, may by the help of his natural reason, without other
Supernatural Episcop disp de Perspic. Scripture.
light, understand the sense of all things delivered in Scripture needful to
be known, believed, hoped for, or practiced. This is the first work of Grace
upon the Understanding; the next is in the

2. Renovation of the Affections which are quickened and rectified with new
motions toward spiritual things. So that a man not yet converted may truly
Sorrow for his offending of God, Bewail his spiritual death in sin, be
inflamed with the love of the truth, Desire Grace and the Spirit of
regeneration, hunger and thirst after righteousness and eternal life, truly
wish for deliverance out of his sinful estate, in brief, offer up to God the
Sacrifice of a contrite and broken heart, in Humility, in Confession of Arnold
contra (...). 307.
sin, in Prayers for mercy, in a Purpose and an Assay of amendment of life.
And thus far the heart or affections may be changed and quickened, when yet a
man is not Converted. Now this alteration which is wrought in affections, is,
if you will believe them, not any immediate effect of the Holy Ghost working
this change in them, but the proper cause of it is the Illumination of the
understanding, whereupon follows necessarily the stirring up of the affections
in their right orderly motions, which formerly were dead and disordered by
reason of the darkness of the mind misguiding them.

These two works go before man's Conversion, and are wrought in all that hear
the Word Universally and Irresistably: the plainness of Divine truth is such,
that men though they would cannot avoid the knowledge of it, and the
dependence of the affections on the Understanding is such, that their motions
must needs be conformable to the knowledge and apprehensions thereof. When
these two effects are wrought in a man, he is then furnished with sufficient
strength to Believe and Convert if he will. This power and strength is given
him irresistably will he nill he; but for the Act of believing, that depends
wholly on his free will, which after the forenamed illumination of the mind,
and motions in the affections, remains Free to choose or not to choose, to
consent or not consent unto the promise of Grace. Which wondrous doctrine they
unfold unto us in this manner:

The will of man, say they, never had, has nor can have any other quality
inherent in it, but only that which is always Essential unto it, namely,
Liberty, Indifferenti^ and indeterminati^ ad actus oppositos. Wherefore as in
Adam it had no spiritual gifts of Holiness inherent in it, so it lost none in
the fall, nor has it now any inherent corruption as the other faculties have,
nor is it in our regeneration reindued with any sanctified qualities
whatsoever. Only a pure naked Liberty there is in it to choose or refuse any
good or evil whatsoever, Spiritual, Moral, or Natural, after it is once
known. This Freedom though it be so Natural to the will of Man, that Salva
essentia it cannot be taken away, yet in the exercise thereof the Will depends
on the Understanding and Affections. So long as the understanding is dark, and
the affections distempered, the Will though it have in it self a natural
ability to choose that which is good, yet it cannot exercise it by reason of
those impediments. Even as the eye has in it self a natural power to see
even in the dark, but yet cannot make use of it, till the object be
enlightened. So in the Unregenerate the Will has a natural freedom in it
self toward all Spiritual good or evil, but it wants the free exercise of
this power so long as the Understanding is without Knowledge and the affections
are disordered. But as soon as the Understanding is enlightened and the
affections reneued, then the Will is restored to the use of her Natural
liberty: So that whereas Life and Death, Good and Evil is now set before her,
she may by her own free power without any further help from God choose the
good if she list, or the evil if she please. And this is that whereon they
affirm consists Vivisicatio Voluntatis, the quickening of the Will, which is
not the giving of some new power unto it, which it had not before, but only the
restoring of it to the free use of that Power which it always had, but could
not exercise.

Here Is then the sum of their opinion in brief, When a man unconverted hears
the word of the kingdom, he understands it and is affected with it
irresistably and necessarily. By so doing he has a power to believe given
him, that is, His will has recovered the use of that natural freedom which
it always had, so that now he stands indifferent, he may if he will assent
to the promise of grace, he may if he will dissent from it: this Act is
absolutely in his own power to do or not to do it, and by this Act done he is
converted and not till then.

This is that leaven of Arminianisme wherewith of late the whole lump of sound
doctrine has been sowred, this is that fretting leprosy which will scarce
ever be healed but in the ruin of those our neighbor Churches wherein the
disease first bred. Let us always pray that God will keep this our Church, and
us her Children safe from the danger of this infection. That we may the better
avoid it, let us rippe up this swelling ulcer, and wring out the rottenness
and corruption that is gathered together in it: taking a particular view of the
several errors which are like a bed of snakes folded one in another in this
dunghill: They are these;

1. That there is no other illumination of the understanding in divine things,
but the ordinary apprehension of the sense and meaning of the Word, wrought in
us by the clear evidence of the things delivered, and the ordinary help of
the Spirit, perfecting and assisting natural reason and judgment.

For herein they all agree, that although the Gospel could not possibly have
been found out by natural reason, yet being once revealed, it may be fully
understood by natural reason. In so much that he, who is industrious and has
a good judgment, may know all that is needful to be known, without any
Supernatural light infused into his understanding by the Holy Ghost. It seems
these men in their study of Divinity never sought after, nor ever did find any
other help besides their own natural abilities; and therefore they think
other men have no more help than themselves had. We may probably judge so, by
those Heretical opinions, the immediate offspring of their natural reason,
wherewith they have now so troubled the quiet of the Christian Church. Had they
been taught of God, and the eyes of their understanding opened to follow the
directions of Gods Spirit more than their own Natural wisdom: they might
have learned to have judged otherwise of themselves and all their opinions too.
But how partial soever their judgments are, we know the judgment of God to
be just and infallible, who knows us better than we do our selves, and He
tells us, Rev. 3. 17. 18.
That we are blind, Ephesians. 5. 8.
that we are darkness till we be made light in the Lord, Io^ 1. 5.
that when the Light shines in darkness, the darkness comprehends it not,
that 1 Cor. 2. 14.
the Natural man cannot perceive the things of the Spirit, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them because they are spiritually
discerned. Besides this censure of God upon our natural ignorance in divine
things, we have the practice of the Saints, acknowledging their natural
disability, and praying for the illumination of the Spirit, which the Arminians
scorn. Hence those frequent supplications of the Prophet David, Open Psalm. 119.
mine eyes that I may see the wonders of the Law, O give me understanding that
I may live, Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, Make me to understand
the way of thy precepts, with many such like prayers, wherein it were much
perverseness to affirm, that David prayed only for that knowledge of the
meaning of the Law, whereto by study and use of his Natural parts he might
possibly attain. And what shall we say to that prayer of the Apostle Paul
which he makes for the Ephesians, [That God would give them the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of Christ, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18.
the eyes of their understanding being enlightened, that they might know what
is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance
in the Saints]? Surely an Arminian will hardly say Amen to this Prayer. For to
what end is it? had not Paul preached the Gospel to the Ephesians plainly
enough, had not they heard and believed it, were they not men of reason and
judgment that could understand what Paul meant when he preached or wrote unto
them? what need then to pray yet for the spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, and
inlightening their eyes, when things were so revealed as they could not choose
but know and see them? Yes, there was and is still great need we should make
this Prayer, now the Gospel is revealed to the Church, yet to pray for the
Spirit of Revelation to reveal it to our hearts, and to inlighten the eyes of
our mind, not only to understand the literal sense of the Word by the help
of that Common light of the Spirit which shines ordinarily in the Church, but
to comprehend with all Saints the height, depth and largeness of Gods love,
the riches of his glorious inheritance, the pretiousnesse of the promises of
Grace, the power and saving virtue of the Gospel, the rare excellency and
amiablenesse of all divine truth. Which none can do without the special This
their opinion is plain, as by other so by those words of theirs in their
Defense of the 4. article, pa. 164. whereunto our Divines proving a defect and
inward disabilitie in man's understanding out of these Scriptures that tells us
we are Blind, and Darkness, etc. they answer that these Metaphors resolved
into their proper sense note unto us, Nihil aliud, quam (^egenitos) rerum (...)
^arum and voluntatis salutiserae ignaros and nas^ios (^uisse) a^ proinde ^tiam
a dei timore (...). At ex hoc aliud nihil conclud^ potest quam ^os indigere
Clara v^ritatis propositione, ut scientiam co (...) See al^o p. 168. 169.
work of the Holy Ghost, changing the Understanding from Natural to
Spiritual, by an immediate infusion of such a quality as inables it to
discern aright of Spiritual things. I conclude this point with one reason
more, If to the understanding of spiritual things there be no other
illumination required, but only the clear evidence of the object plainly
represented to the understanding, without any further work of the Spirit upon
the Understanding it self, infusing into it a special strength to apprehend
the things that are proposed to it: then it would be known whether these men
think that our intellective Faculty has got any hurt and defect by Adams
fall, yea or no. It is manifest that they think that man's fall has not
brought any defect and weakness upon the power of man's understanding, no not
in Spiritualib^s. For, mark it, when Divine things are in a plain and lively
manner declared to the understanding, is there any defect in the faculty that
must be first amended by the Spirit, before it can have the perfect knowledge
of those things? No, say they, so therebe the common assistance of the Spirit
preserving unto us the right use of reason and judgment, we may, without any
supernatural work of the Spirit, understand spiritual things when they are
plainly expounded unto us. Why then here is all the difference between Adam and
Us, His Understanding was perfect and happy, because he had both the Power to
conceive of things he was yet ignorant of when they should be clearly
revealed to him, and also the Actual knowledge of wonderful variety in all
things. Our understanding is imperfect and unhappy, because by our fall we
want the Actual knowledge of almost all things, especially Spiritual, but yet
we still retain the same power that we had in Adam, to understand any
spiritual thing when it is once clearly discovered unto us. So that according
to Arminius school, the understanding of man since the Fall is like unto our
Eyes in the dark: the eye is well and without blemish needing no cure of any
defect in it self, yet it sees naught, because the Object is not enlightened;
so soon as light shines on that causing a clear discovery of it, the eye
without further ado, can easily perceive it But this is yet the very pride and
gall of an Heretical spirit, secretly accusing the whole mystery of Gods
revealed wisdom, whether in the book of nature or of Scripture, as if it were
wrapped up in Obscurity and Darkness. We forsooth have eyes and we need not
that God should restore unto us the Faculty of Seeing: only we are in
darkness because things that are to be known are in darkness, if God will
take away obscurity from them and make them evident to be known, there is no
such infirmity in us but we may know them if we be attentive. Let us from our
hearts detest this odious popish imputation of obscurity laid upon Nature and
Scripture, as if the cause of all our ignorance were not now in the weakness
of our Understanding, but in the darkness of Gods revealing himself to us.
And let us detest that opinion which leads us upon this absurdity: and learn
we to confess our blindness, to pray that God will give us eyes, and restore
our understanding to its first perfection; else, though the light shine round
about us making all things wherein God is to be known most appparant and
visible, yet we may still lie in darkness and perish in our ignorance. This
is their first error touching the Understanding, of which I shall have occasion
to speak more in handling the parts of Faith. I now proceed to the second
touching the affections, which is this:

2. That even in Divine things the motions of the Affections necessarily follow
upon the illumination of the Understanding. So that when the understanding is
rightly informed and thoroughly convinced, the affections are presently excited
in all motions conformable to the things known.

It is very strange that men of so deep learning, should yet profess so much
ignorance in the estate of Man's corrupt nature, as to dream of a
Correspondency and dutiful subjection of our Passions unto our Reason, so that
when this is rightly taught, they will be truly affected even in Spiritual
things. Nothing more could be said of Adam in his innocence, and to affirm
this touching Man corrupted is to give the lie to Reason, Authority and all
Experience which speak the contrary. The truth is this, as we are fallen out
with God, so are we at odds with our selves: and our affections are not more
often misled by, our erroneous understanding, than our understanding and right
judgment is haled aside by our vicious affections. What man in the world, that
knows himself, but will confess that even in naturalibus and moralibus, much
more in spiritualibus he may often say with Medea -- Video meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor? Wherefore we reject this Opinion, that there is no vicious
inclination properly inherent in the affections, besides that which is brought
upon them per t^n^bras mentis, through the error of the understanding: we
detest this assertion as a fond and false imagination, and we confess with the
Apostle, that even when we know, allow of, consent unto the goodness of Romans 7.
the Law, and delight in it in part, yet then we cannot always do what we
would, but through the Law of Sin in our corrupt wills and affections, are
led captive to disobedience. Their third error is this:

3. That the affections may be, excitati, stirred up and quickened with true
love of goodness and hatred of evil, before such time as a man be converted.

The Arminians are wonderful obscure in explicating unto us their new invented
opinion concerning the Excitation of the Affections, which they make the second
work of Grace preceding man's true Conversion. They tell us not in plain
terms what affections they mean, nor yet what kind of Excitation and
Vivification it is they would have. Wherefore we are more particularly to
enquire of both. For Affections or Passions in man they are of two sorts:

1. Sensual belonging to the Sensitive Appetite, and directed by the
fantasy: these are common to brute beasts with us, and arise from one like
temper and constitution in both. The object of these is all Natural good or
evil.

2. Rational, appertaining to the reasonable Appetite or Will, and guided by
the Understanding. These are proper to man, and they have their original from
the substance of the reasonable soul, in which they always remain, not only
when it is in the body, but even when it is severed from it. For fear, hope,
love, hatred, joy, grief, etc. are in the damned and blessed Spirits as well
as living men. The object of these properly humane passions, is all Moral and
Spiritual good or evil. I need not among so many learned, Artists stand
curiously upon the distinction of these two sorts of passions in man: the
identitie of names in both sorts has caused some confusion; but in reason the
diversity of their nature is evident. Wherefore I go on to see what is meant
by Excitation or Stirring up of the affections: whereby we can understand
nothing else, but their right and orderly motions about their proper objects.
As in the particulars, Sensual passions are then duly excited when they are
moved about any Natural good or evil, according to the instinct of Nature in
brute beasts, and according to the same instinct of Nature in man, but guided
and moderated by right reason. Reasonable Affections are then duly stirred up,
when their motions about all Spiritual and Moral good or evil, are
conformable to the quality of the object affected, and to the rules of a
rightly informed understanding.

Let us now see what affections they be that grace works upon, and how they
are excited before men are converted.

For Sensual affections tending to a mere Natural good or evil, albeit it
be most true, that Grace sanctifying us throughout has a singular work upon
them too, in moderating the excess, and repressing the distempered motions of
such passions as arise from our Natural or Personal temper, as of choler,
lust, etc. yet we will not be so uncharitable, as to think our adversaries
mean these affections in this business: For

1. It is a strange fancy, to think that grace should begin to rectify the
inferior, faculties in a man, before it have put in order the superior, to
rectify the sensitive appetite, and leave the will disordered. God is no such
preposterous Physician, who, cum capiti mederi debeat, cur^t reduviam, when the
head is sick applies a plaster to the ^ingers ends.

2. Again, what singular preparation to Faith is it, that our natural
affections be well qualified in their motions about natural and bodily things?
I confess it is good they should be so, but what special virtue has that to
procure unto man's will a free exercise of its liberty in Heavenly or Spiritual
things? as the Arminians affirm the excitation of the affections does. Unless
we should go further, and make Spiritual things the object of the Sensitive
Appetite, which were to elevate it far above its natural power, and is an
absurdity too gross to be imagined by any learned man.

Wherefore it must be that other sort of affections which we call Rational
and Humane, whose object is virtue or vice, all Spiritual and Moral good or
evil. Of these then we are to enquire how in an Unconverted person they are
stirred up in their motions about such objects as are Spiritually good or
evil. The Arminians give a very large allowance of grace to an Unregenerate
man, and they tell us, that Besides the knowledge of sin, a sorrow for it in
regard of punishment, a fear of Gods wrath, a desire to be free from it, (all
which we confess may be in a man Unregenerate) besides these, there are, say
they, in such a one, a deploring of his Spiritual death in sin and utter
impotency to do any good, a grief for the offending of the divine Majesty, a
desire of Grace and the Spirit of regeneration to be given him, a hungring and
thirsting after Righteousness and Life, a love of Goodness and hatred of
evil, Humility, Prayer, and Confession of sins, an inward purpose of heart
to set upon a reformation of life, in brief, an Unregenerate man may offer to
God the sacrifice of a contrite and broken heart, yea God may give a man a new
heart, and yet he not be converted till afterward, as some of them affirm,
shamefully abusing that place, Ier. 24. 7. Ye will wonder what manner of thing
these men make the Conversion of a sinner to be, who ascribe so many things to
a man unconverted, as they can hardly tell what more to attribute unto him
after his Conversion. But to make short, let us ask them touching this change
of the heart and affections in a man unregenerate, whether these Stirrings of
his affections moving him toward Grace and Godliness be true or counterfeit.

If these motions be indeed true and right, so that an unconverted man do
truly sorrow for his sinful state, truly grieve for Gods displeasure,
truly desire the grace of regeneration, heartily thirst after righteousness,
unfainedly love the truth, if he be truly humble, can pray, confess sin,
purpose amendment, and all this truly without hypocrisy, then we desire to
be resolved in these doubts:

1. What can be done by a man after his Conversion, more than he can do in
these things before he be converted? At all times he can but do them truly,
that is, spiritually: and this he may do as well before as after Conversion.

2. Whether it be not admirable and unconceivable to any man's understanding,
how the affections can be thus moved, and yet the will remain untouched. For
whereas they say that a sinner may out of true sense and sorrow for sin,
truly desire grace and freedom by Christ, before such time as his will does
assent to the promise of Mercy, it is most strange, how it is possible that a man
should heartily and unfainedly desire the benefit of the Promise of grace in
Christ, and yet at the same time not assent and embrace the promise offered
unto him. It Is as if we should say a man may Desire a thing and yet not Will it:
when as to desire is nothing but an action of the will. And the very same is
true of all the affections, that they are but diverse Motions of the Will about
diverse objects, (as the irrational passions are of the Sensitive Appetite) and
therefore to make such separation between the Will and the Affections in the
reasonable soul, as that the Affections should be Excited and yet the Will not
moved, is, to speak favorably, a very unlearned imagination.

3. Whether that argument used to comfort distressed consciences, namely, That
he who truly desires grace, has true grace, whether I say this argument of
Consolation used by the skilfullest Divines and accounted hitherto unanswerable
by men or devils, be not now by this doctrine utterly made of no worth, if
this of Arminius his followers be to be allowed, that a man may unfainedly
desire to be good and to be regenerate, and yet be unconverted and so without
all true goodness as yet. But that assertion of our Divines, [That the true
desire of grace, is from true grace, and a part of true grace] shall stand fast
as founded on Scripture and sound Reason, when all Arminianisme shall lie in
the dust.

If these Motions in an unregenerate man be not True, but False and
Counterfeit, then have they made much ado to little purpose, preparing a man
to that Faith and Conversion which is true, by counterfeit and hypocritical
means. But they will say that these desires and affections though they are not
Spiritual, yet in their kind they are true and not counterfeit, because they
are true Moral or Natural desires. To which I answer, that the rule to judge
of the truth of our desires is this, We must compare our affections with the
Nature of those things that we do affect: if our affections toward them be
such as the Quality of the things themselves require, then are they right and
good: if not, they are false and evil: as to make it plain by an instance or
two; When a husband loves his wife but only as his whore to satisfy his lust,
this love though it may be very ^ervent and not dissembled, yet it is a false
love because it is not Matrimonial agreeable to the quality of a Wife the
object thereof. When Balaam desired the death of the righteous, no question but
he spoke as he thought without dissembling, but yet this his desire was false,
because he desired it not according to the true nature thereof, as it requires
a sanctified life to bring us to a happy end; which Balaam would none of. When
a Turk hopes for heaven that there he may live in carnal pleasures,
according to Mahomets beastly ^aw, it is true that he hopes, but it is false
that he hopes truly, because he mistakes the quality of Heavenly joys which
are spiritual not carnal. So in like manner (generally) when Spiritual
things are affected spiritually in such a manner as is conformable to their
nature and quality, then are our affections rightly and well moved toward
them, as to love goodness because it is of God, to hate sin because it is
contrary to the holiness of Gods nature and law, to desire grace, to the end
that it may correct the corruption of nature, to wish for heaven, that we may
have communion with God in the beholding of his glory and our constant
worshipping of him. These affections are true, but they are such as never arise
in the heart of man till it be purified and made Holy by the Spirit of Grace.
But on the contrary, when Spiritual things are affected only as things that
are Naturally or Morally good or evil, such affections are false and of no
worth: as if a man desire grace because it is a commendable quality, or
redemption, because it is good to be free from misery, or heaven, because it is a
pleasant thing to be at ease: such affections are as far from truth, as the
eye is from right seeing, when it mistakes green for yellow, or a man for a
post. And such, in a man unconverted, are all his Affections about Spiritual
things. Wherefore when they tell us of a true Love of goodness, a true Hatred
of evil, etc. in a man unregenerate, they speak strange paradoxes against
reason and Scripture, affirming that they who have not the Spirit, are natural
men, Iud. ver. 19. and that the Natural man perceives not the things of the
Spirit, and cannot Spiritually discern, and therefore not Spiritually desire
them, 1 Cor. 3. and again, that whatsoever is borne of the flesh is flesh;
Ioh. 3. 6. Albeit therefore we deny not but that there are ordinarily many
Preparations whereby God brings a man to grace, and that the Word works many
effects, both upon the Heart and lives of men even whilst they are as yet
destitute of true Grace: yet as for those affections which our Adversaries
place in m^n unregenerate, we affirm that they are not antecedents but
consequents and parts of true Conversion. For can he that is dead in sin
bewail his Spiritual death? Can he that is in the flesh, and so an enemy to
God, yet greve for displeasing of him? Can he truly desire the Spirit of
regeneration, that is of the Ioh. 14. 17.
world and cannot receive the Spirit because it sees him not neither knows
him? Can a man thirst after righteousness and yet not be Mat. 56.
blessed nor satisfied? Can a man hate evil, who yet Psalm.
loves not the Lord? Can he love God that is 1 Ioh. 4. 7.
not borne of him? Can he be humble that has not the sanctifying Spirit, one
Gal. 5. 23. Col. 3. 12. Mat. 11. 25.
fruit whereof is meekness and humbleness of mind? May a true prayer be
made without the help of the Holy Zach. 12. 10. Romans 8. 26.
Ghost? Will there ever be a true Confession in the mouth when there is not
Faith and Repentance in the heart? How can that heart be a new heart, a
contrite and broken heart sensible of sin, which is not yet changed out of
stone into flesh? Can he have a full purpose of heart to Act. 11. 23.
amend his life and cleave unto the Lord, whose heart is not yet touched with
sanctifying Grace? Whatsoever shadow of these things may appear in an
unregenerate man, it is certain none can be done in truth but by those only in
whom the Holy Ghost has begun the work of true Sanctification. I might stand
upon the further proof of every particular were it needful: but I pass on to
their fourth Error, which is concerning man's Will:

4. That the Will of man is not capable of any Habitual qualities inherent in
it, whether of grace or corruption. Only a mere liberty it has to Will or
Nill any thing, and besides this liberty there never was, is, nor can be in it
any other quality. Whence it follows, that the Will is not to be termed good
or evil from any inward disposition of it self, but only from the actions of
it according as it is lead or misled by the light or darkness of the
understanding, and by the rectitude or depravation of the affections.

Of all the issues of Arminius brains this is one of the most deformed, that
the Will of man has not in it either grace or corruption, any virtuous or
vicious inclination of it self; a bare liberty to choose or refuse, that it
has, and nothing else. Against which strange noveltie we have to oppose these
reasons:

1. The Image of God consisting in righteousness and holiness was in every
part of man's soul; and therefore in the Will as well as the Understanding. And
if so, then besides the liberty of the Will, there was in it a righteous and
holy inclination toward God and Goodness in the first creation of it. Which
Habitual disposition to goodness is corrupted, and a perverse inclination to
evil come in place thereof. If they deny that righteousness and holiness is
in the whole soul, it will trouble them much to tell unto what part it must be
restrained.

2. The constant tenor of Scriptures ascribes unto man's Heart corruption and
grace, as much, nay more than to any other part of man. That the Heart of man
is the root of all evil works, out of it come evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, and such other things as defile a man, Mat. 15. 18, 19. That the
Heart is deceitful and wicked above all things, Ier. 17. 9. That in
regeneration the Heart must be renewed, made clean, softened, of stony made
fleshy, That the Heart is the seat of all Spiritual gifts, as Uprightness,
Purity, Goodness and Honesty, Faith, Lowliness, and many more, spoken of in
every chapter of the Bible almost. In which places by the Heart to understand
our Sensual and brutish affections, were most absurd. And if as it is, the
Soul of man be there meant, it cannot be but a nice subtilty beyond the
intention of Scriptures to exclude the Will from having any part in that good
or evil which is attributed to the Heart: as if by the Heart were meant only
the understanding part of the Soul.

3. We prefer the uniforme judgment of all the learned hitherto, above the
opinion of one Armini^^ and his followers; who, as they make the Understanding
the seat of all speculative Habits, so for all practical Habits, whether
Moral or Theological they place them in the Will. With whom agreeably to
Scripture and sound reason, we maintain that there was in Adams will, besides
the liberty thereof, an Habitual holy inclination to all that was good, though
with a possibility of embracing evil; again, there is in our wills since the
Fall, besides some kind of liberty, an Habitual vicious quality making them
averse and froward in choosing the good, prone and inclinable to embrace the
^vill, so that man now does naturally drink iniquity like water, Job 15, 16.
and make a pastime of doing evil, Prove. 2. 14. And therefore as Adams will was
truly good, not only in the actions but in the inward qualities thereof: so
our will is truly and properly corrupt, not only in its evil actions, but
also the inward vicious disposition thereof. This is the fourth error, the
fifth is but a consectary of the former; namely,

5. That the wll of a man Unregenerate has a natural freedom to choose any
Spiritual good thing as soon as it is made known unto him.

For, say they, the Will of man has no other property but only liberty: when
man fell and lost other good qualities, his will had no hurt, but retained its
liberty perfect and entire. So that an Unregenerate man after once he knows
any Spiritual good thing offered unto him, has naturally as much freedom of
will to embrace it, even as Adam had in his Innocence, or as any man can have
after his Conversion. But this opinion falls to the ground with the former upon
which it is built, presupposing that there is no vicious quality in the will
drawing it to evil. But we know that to be false, and therefore we confess,
that until such time as God do heal that disease and replant in our wills
their primitive integrity, they are utterly dead in sin, captives and
bondslaves of corruption. So that however they have some liberty in Natural,
Civil, or External Spiritual things: yet in regard of true Grace and
Holiness they have no liberty at all to will and choose that, but are wholly
enthralled unto sin; according to that of the Apostle, Romans 6 20. When ye
were the servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness: and, Romans 8. 7.
The carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the Law of
God, neither indeed can be. Do they not then manifestly give the Scripture
the lie, that affirm a man in the state of unregeneration (who, without doubt,
is, if any be, a servant of sin, and carnally minded) is notwithstanding free
unto righteousness, and may be even of his own natural power subject to the
Law of God, commanding him faith and obedience? There are yet other errors: the
sixth therefore is this,

6. That man's Conversion begins in the Act of Believing, [Actum fidei and
conversionis Deus primo and rigide ab homine erig^^ ad salutem obtinendam and
poenam ^^^dend^m] Defens. sent. ^em. circa 4. Art^c. page 154. 155.
not in the Habit of Faith infused.

I have heretofore touched upon this point in showing the falsehood of that
assertion of theirs, That Conversion begins in some work that we do, not in a
work that God first does. Here you are further to note whereto tends this
opinion, and that is, to establish their other opinion of Falling away from
grace. For seeing Conversion is nothing but the Act of Believing, and this Act
is freely in our power, as not to do it at first, so when it is once done, not
to repeat it often for the continuance of our Conversion, it follows thence
that as it was in our power not to become Converts by not doing that Act, so
being Converted, it is in our power to relapse by not continuing to do it. For
which purpose they deny that there is any such thing as the grace of Faith
infused into the heart; yea, that there is any constant habit of Faith at all,
and that a man is not termed a Believer from the Habit, but from the Acts of
Faith, which being transient and vanishing, Faith cease when they cease. So
that belike when a godly man is asleep Even in sleep there is peace of
Conscience in the godly, and that is a fruit of Fai^. Prove. 3. 24. 25, 2^.
he has no faith, when Noah and all his Family were asleep in the Arc, then
Faith ceased in the Church; and seeing by faith we please God, men asleep or
dying in a Lethargy do not please God. It Is wonder but these men will deny all
other Habits too: and say that David had no skill in Music, but that his
right hand had forgot her cunning as soon as he had laid his Harp aside. They
may as well deny the one as the other, both are alike ridiculous. There is yet
one Error more, and that is this;

7. That man's Conversion is properly nothing but the Act of Believing the
Promise of Grace.

This restraint of our Conversion unto so narrow a compass, as first to bring
it from the Habit of Faith, to the Act of Believing, and then to appropriate it
to that Act without so much as once mentioning any other graces: this narrow
conceit touching our Conversion is that which has filled the writings of many
learned about this point with much darkness and confusion. They so speak and
write of Conversion as if it began in that one and only Action of man's will
Consenting to the promise of mercy in Christ. But this is without all ground.
To convert is not only to believe, but to repent, to love God and our
Neighbor, to abstain from every evil way, to practice all duties of Piety
and Goodness: these acts are as proper and immediate parts of true Conversion,
as Faith. Nor does the Scripture so much as intimate any such limitation, as to
appropriate our Conversion to the Act of Faith: nay, it is manifest that the
Scriptures when they speak of man^ Turning unto God, do join repentance and
other godly Acts together with Faith: as appears by that solemn invitation of
men unto God [Repent and believe the Gospell] so often used in the New
Testament.

Let us now for conclusion at this time lay all these errors together, and see
what is the final upshot of this Opinion: all things being reckoned, it is this,

That in a man unregenerate there is naturally very little or no Corruption,
and unto his Regeneration there is required little or no Grace.

That I be not thought to slander them, both will appear unto you to be true,
thus, First that they annihilate and overthrow the Grace of God; for whereas
the Understanding, Will and Affections are in our Conversion chiefly to be
respected, it is manifest that by their doctrine, Grace has no work upon any
of these. Not upon the Understanding to inlighten it, for, say they, that's done
by the clear Evidence of the things that are to be understood. Not upon the
Affections to rectify their motions; for, say they, the affections follow the
understanding, and are presently in order as soon as that is informed. Lastly,
not upon the Will to incline that to embrace the Promise: for that, say they,
is left absolutely to its own Liberty, and of it self it may consent or
dissent. Where then is any work left for Grace? unless that glorious Grace of
God in bringing a Sinner unto himself, so much magnified in Scripture and by
all men, be now at last nothing but only the Revelation of the Gospel unto
mankind. Which we confess is a great grace, but yet without another that's
greater, is not sufficient to Convert a sinner. Thus Grace is excluded. Let Us
see what they think of man's inherent Corruption. This they also extenuate, and
tell us that we are not so weak nor wicked as we have been always thought
to be. For why? our understanding needs not any supernatural restoring of
decayed sight; if divine things be plainly set forth to view we can see well
enough. Our affections are not of themselves vitiously disposed, but only
through the error of the mind; correct that, and all is amended. Finally our
Wills have not rebellious inclination in them, but they can of themselves
without further help choose that which is good. So that if Arminius be not
deceived in his, we may now change our opinion of ourselves, and think that
we are at least something. But what then is become of that Sin that dwells
in us, of that Universal Corruption and Disorder of our whole nature, so much
spoken of, so much complained of? Is it vanished? It Is not so well; but these
men have vanished away in their imaginations, and have disputed so long of Gods
Grace and man's Corruption, till in conclusion they have lost both, and are
become wilfully ignorant of the one, and malicious enemies to the other.

Hitherto the Explication of their Opinion, their Errors, and the general
issue of them: We are now in the next place to unfold and confirm that truth
which is to be maintained touching this question, viz.

Whether it be in Man's power so to resist the grace of God, as finally to
hinder his own Conversion.

We maintain the Negative, that where God purposes to save, no power of man
can destroy. The truth hereof will plainly appear unto us, if we shall
consider distinctly how a man may hinder the Work of Grace.

1. In the Antecedents and Preparatory means to his Conversion. 2. In his
Conversion it self.
For the Antecedent preparations to bring men unto Conversion, they are either
Outward; namely, The Observation of the external parts of Gods worship, as
frequenting the Word preached, Prayers, Sacraments, keeping of the Sabbath,
attention and industry in the hearing, reading, and meditation of the Word: or
Inward the effects of the ordinary grace of God in the use of those means, as,
1. Knowledge of the will of God in the main matters of Religion concerning
Faith and Practice. 2. Touch of Conscience in the sense of sin arising from a
clear discovery and conviction of a man's forlorn estate. 3. A Fear and
horror of Gods punishing vengeance, joined with a natural grief of heart that
he is brought into so much unavoydable misery. 4. A thought and wish for
freedom by some means or other. 5. Some slight hope of help from the promise
of grace so generally made as none seem to be excluded, upon the apprehension
whereof some kind of joy will also arise in the heart. All which together may
cause some kind of reformation of life in doing of many things gladly, and a
not unwilling abstinence from others. Touching these preparations unto
Conversion, you are to note these three positions.

1. That they are in themselves good and necessary.

This is to be observed against those overbroad and unadvised speeches of some
which have given occasion unto our adversaries to fasten upon us this
imputation, that according to our Doctrine, Act. and Script. Synod Remonst. in
declarat. sentent. de 3. and 4. Art. page 12.
Zelus omnis, cura and sludium ad obtinendam salutem adhibitum ante ipsam Fidem
and Spiritum renovationis vanum est atque irritum, quinimo noxium magis homini
quam utile and fructuosum. Which assertion were most dangerous, because it
opens a wide gappe to let in all profane contempt of the exercises of Religion:
man having hereby a good excuse for the neglect of all duties of Piety,
because all their care and diligence in the use of them were not only to no
purpose but to an ill purpose, until such time as they were truly converted.
But this is a slander; our Divines teach no discouraging Doctrine to blunt the
edge of men's good desires, and to beat them off from all religious endeavors.
No, they press upon men ever whilst they are unconverted, the necessity and
profitablenesse of all those forementioned preparations: in regard,

1. Of the nature of the things themselves which are good, and our very
necessary obedience to do them, being strictly enjoined by the commandment of
God.

2. Of the event that follows upon them according to Gods promise and his
ordinary proceeding in the work of grace: which is such that he bestows not
his grace ordinarily but upon those that conform themselves to the doing of
those things.

Nevertheless our Divines teach this also, which is true and warrantable:

1. That all these preparations are no Efficient causes to produce grace of
Conversion in the heart, however they prepare a man to be the fitter to
receive it. And therefore where God is not pleased to afford his Sanctifying
Spirit, they prove vain and fruitless.

2. That how good and necessary soever these preparatory works are, yet the
doing of them is unto a man unregenerate an occasion of sinning. And so in the
consequent, to him they may prove harmfull. As for example: When an
unsanctified man hears the Word, Prays, performs any duty in Gods worship
or in a Christian life, in the doing of these things he always commits some
sin 1. Tim. 1. (...).
or other: because he wants a pure Heart, a good Conscience, and Faith
unfeigned, without which he cannot but err^ in fulfilling Gods commandments.
But then will some say, if it be so, that the doing of every good duty is unto
such a one an occasion of sinning, he ought not then to do it, because he is
bound to avoid all things wherein he shall certainly sin. To which I
answer, that the inference were good if this avoiding the occasion of one
sin, did not draw him upon another sin that were worse. But here see what a
snare sin has laid to entrap a wicked man, which way soever he turns, he
falls, and is taken: if he hear the Word, he sins because he mingles it not
with Faith: if he hears not the Word, he sins, because he turns away his ear
from hearing the Law: if he pray he sins, because he prays not in Faith; if
he pray not he sins and is accursed, because he calls not upon the Name of
the Lord. What shall he do then? I answer, he must do his duty what God
commands, though he cannot choose but commit a sin in doing of it, by
reason of his corruption and infirmity. Of two sins, whereupon not God, but
Himself has put himself inevitably to commit one of them: He must choose
the least, rather sinning in the manner in not doing of it so well as he should,
than ^ailing in the matter, and quite neglecting the duty it self. For this
is certain, when God commands a duty absolutely to be done, it is a greater
sin not to do it at all, than to do it amiss: because, our disobedience is
Total in not doing, but only Partial in doing it otherwise than we ought. As
for a man wilfully to refuse to hear the Word, is a fouler fault, than to
hear it with a forgetful and disobedient heart, though this be a foul fault
too; but yet there is more hope of the latter than the former. Wherefore we may
not pretend our infirmity as a just excuse for the neglect of our duty: I
cannot do it well, therefore I will not do it at all, is no good collection,
unless I may be blameless in my omission of it; which here I cannot be.
Ministers then are to urge upon all men indifferently the necessity of all
Christian endeavors tending to their Conversion; and hearers are not to balke
Gods commands upon pretenses of their own sinful disabilities: God must be
obeyed as far as we can go; if we sin, it is our fault besides the intention
of the commandment. And who knows whether our diligence in doing something,
may not be more beneficial to us, than our sinning in many things may prove
hurtful? whilst God bestows grace upon us in the use of those ordinances
whereto in some sort we conform our selves, though with much sinfulness and
infirmity. This of our first position: the second is this,

2. That the Reprobate unregenerate, in whom these preparations to grace are
wrought, may and do wilfully neglect them, thereby procuring their final
obduration in sin. The third is this,

3. That the Elect unregenerate may and do for a time resist these
preparations to Conversion, thereby deserving this final obduration; but God
by his special grace continues these beginnings unto their perfect Conversion.

I will handle both these positions together, containing the manner how far,
and by whom those means and preparations to Conversion may be resisted and
made fruitless. We affirm then that it is in the power of every unregenerate
man, whether Elect or Reprobate, to neglect and oppose those gracious means
whereby God calls them unto Conversion. This is apparent, whether we respect
the outward or inward means of Conversion. For the outward in all Gods holy
Ordinances, they may every one of them be neglected. Men have the command over
their bodies to move them as they please, and they may sit at home or travel
abroad without worldly or wicked employments, when they should be at Church;
they may stop their ears, talk with a companion, read some book that
pleases them, while the Minister is in speaking: they may set their thoughts
aworke in their Chests, in the Stews, in their Storehouses, any where but
where their bodies are, about any thing save the Sermon: they may avoid the
often use of the Sacrament, and make such shift as not to appear before the
Lord scarce once a year: men may choose whether they will sleep or pray, fast
or surfeit of fullness, read and study Gods word, or man's writings.

Again, for the inward works of grace, all unregenerate men oppose the light
of their knowledge, resist the checkes of conscience by presumptuous sins,
strive to blot out the sense of sin, and to cast off the fear of the
Almighties punishment; they may stupifie all such motions of affections as tend
to goodness, by diverting them upon vain delights. These things, and more,
they may do, yea, and they do also, though some more, some less. For it is
most certain, that no man thus ordinarily called unto grace, by these means,
was ever so dutifully obedient to the voice of Gods calling, as to yield
presently without striving and much opposition. No, let the best man living,
who has well observed himself before and Corrected us as an untamed Heyfer.
^^r. 31. ^8.
after his sound conversion, be brought to answer in this case, and he will
confess, that in all those means whereby God fairly woed him to convert unto
him, he always was strangely perverse, careless, scornful and froward in
every motion of grace: till Gods spirit had thoroughly wrought upon his heart.
Wherefore we affirm, that Every one whatsoever does carry himself so
stubbornely against this Preparatory grace of his conversion, as that he
deserves thereby to be forsaken of God and left to final imp^nitency. Nor can
that be the cause why God converts this man and not another, D^. S^^t. ^em de
3. and 4. ^rt p. 10.
quia hic novam opponit contumaciam, ^ll^ non opponit, as the Arminians falsely
affirm: for all are contumacious and rebellious against this grace of their
vocation: but the reason is because when both rebel, God justly forsakes one
in his rebellion, and most mereifully follows the other with fresh supply of
more powerful grace till he have healed his rebellion, and caused him to
return.

Thus then both the Elect and Reprobate resist: but the Elect for a time, the
Reprobate finally. The difference is from God. The Reprobate neglect and cast
off him: Prove. 1. 24. and seq. 9. Chron. ^4. 2^.
wherefore in justice he neglects and casts off them, leaving them to follow
their own wills, and the counsels of their reprobate mind. Being so
forsaken, their hearts become as hard as the ^^ather millstone, their
consciences scared, their affections dead: all sense of grace or sin worn
out of the soul, and ^all obstinacy against God fixed therein. And in this
sense we grant there may be a ^all resistency against Grace, namely in the
reprobate opposing and wilfully neglecting all those outward means of Grace,
all those inward works of grace whereby they were invited and prepared to
Conversion. Of this rebellion do the Scriptures in every place complain and
accuse the ungodly, that [when Ier. 6. 16. 17
God bids them walk in the good way, they say, They will not walk therein;
when he bids them harken to the sound of the Trumpet, they say, We will not
barken] that, [they Job ^1. 14.
say unto God, Depart from (...) we desire not the knowledge of thy wayes]
that [ ^sa 65. 2. Romans 10. ^lt.
God stretches forth his hands all the day long to a rebellio^s and
gainesaying people] that [hee Prove. 1. 24.
calls and they refuse] that Ezekiel. 12. 2. Act. 28. 27.
[they have eyes to see and will not see, ears to hear and hear not] that
[they Act. 7. 51.
resist the Holy Ghost] that Esa. 63. 10.
[they Rebel and vex his Holy Spirit] that [Christ Mat. 23. 27.
would have gathered Jerusalem but she woulld not] that [hee Ioh. 5. 34. 40.
preached unto the Jews to the end they might be saved, but they would not
come unto him that they might have life.] with a thousand the like testimonies
Psalm. 58. 5. Act. 13. 46.
setting forth the stubbornness and hardness of men's hearts in rejecting this
grace of God offered to them, and despising the riches of his goodness that
should lead them unto repentance. All which places noting out unto us a s^all
resistency, are to be understood not of that Special grace whereby God intends
to work man's Conversion, as our Adversaries pervert them, but of that common
grace in the ordinary Antecedents of man's Conversion whereby God calls all
unto himself. Of which grace we confess that it (...) Cor. 6. 1.
may be received in vain, that Mat. ^5. 25. 28.
this talent may be hidden in the ground and become unprofitable: as Scriptures
together with lamentable experience testify in three Mat. 13. 19. and seq.
parts of ^oure that hear the Word unprofitably, in those temporary outside
seeming Christians, who Heb. 6. 4. and seq.
after illumination in the truth and much affection to goodness, quite
fallaway: and (...) Pet. 2. 21.
after they have known the way of righteousness turn away from the holy
Commandment given unto them. So that by this fault, all comes utterly to
naught, and they perish ^ally in their natural corruption.

But now the Elect albeit they are also disobedient and froward at the first,
yet God forsakes them not, but in mercy goes on to perfect the work that he
has begun, till Grace g^ts the victory over their Corruption Till that their
outward fashionable s^vice of God be turned into true spiritual worship,
their knowledge made effectual to all holy practice, their consciences
sprinkled with the blood of Christ and freed from legal terrors, their
worldly sorrow turned into godly grief, their slight wishes and hope of mercy,
changed into zealous prayers for, and firm belief of Pardon, their partial
and halting reformation of life, turned into perfect and sincere obedience.

And thus far of the ordinary preparations to Grace, and how far they are
resisted: I come in the next place to our Conversion it self. Which is to be
considered two ways.

1. In actu primo, as it is the work of Gods Spirit on us, renewing our corrupt
nature, healing all vitions, infusing all virtuous inclinations into each
faculty; by which Habitual infused qualities they are disposed to all
Spiritual and Holy actions. This is the work of God by his preventing grace.

2. In actu sicundo, as it is our work converting our selves to God in all
holy operations of Faith, Love, and godly Obedience, which Acts we do by the
help of Gods subsequent and assisting Grace.

Of Conversion in both senses we are to enquire, how far it may be resisted
and hindered: touching the first, namely, our Habitual Conversion in the
infusion of all gracious habits, this conclusion is to be defended.

That in our first Conversion or Sanctification we are merely Passive, and
cannot by any Act of ours either work it our selves, or binder Gods working of
it.

This is apparent by the Scriptures, which testify unto us what our state is
before Conversion, what the work of God is in our Conversion: namely, That we
are dead in sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. Col. 2. 13. Matthew. 8. 22. Ephesians. 5. 14. That we
are blind, and very darkness in regard of Spiritual knowledge, Rev. 3. 18.
Ephesians. 4. 17. and 5. 8. Matthew. 6. 23. Luc. 4. 18. John 1. 5. Act. 26. 18. 1.
Cor. 2 14. That our hearts are stony, destitute of all sense and motions of
goodness, Ezekiel. 36. 26. and 11. 19. Again, that Gods work in our Conversion
is a raising from the dead, Ephesians. 2. 5. Col. 2. 12. Rev. 20. 6. John 5. 21.
25. A restoring of sight to the blind, Luc. 4. 18. A new generation and birth
of a man, Ioh. 1. 13. Ioh. 3. 3. Another creation of him, Ephesians. 2 10. Psalm.
51. 12. 2. Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 6. 15. The giving of a new heart of flesh, and
taking away of the old stony heart, Ezekiel. 11. 19. Out of which and many the
like places, we conclude, that a man can do no more in the effecting or
hindering of his first Conversion, than the Matter can do in regard of the
Form, to receive or reject it, no more than Adams body could resist the
entrance of the soul into it, or Lazarus carcass and the dead bones in
Ezekiel could refuse the spirit of life's coming into them, no more than an
infant can hinder its own conception and birth, or the world the creation of
it self, no more than the bodies of those sick persons whom Christ cured by
his word, could hinder the restitution of health when Christ commanded them to
be whole, or the eyes of the blind could nill the restoring of their sight, or
the air that is dark can refuse to be illightned: in brief, a man's heart
can no more hinder the work of Gods grace in changing it out of stone into
flesh, than the body of Lots wife could resist the force of his power in
turning it out of flesh into a pillar of salt. Against this Doctrine of man's
Passivenesse in his first Conversion, our adversaries object many things,
qualifying the rigor of those censures the Scriptures give touching our utter
disability, eluding their force by many subtle shifts, all devised only to
this purpose, that our Conversion may not be thought to be altogether of grace,
but shared between the grace of God, and some power of our own See the
defense of the Remonstrants opinion about the 4. Article exhibited in the
Synod. in the acts of the Synod printed by the Remonstrants, Rev. 3. 17.
To allege and answer every cavil were a business of more length than
difficulty: unto them all in general I answer, That he that takes a man's
judgment touching man's abilities, he follows the sentence of a blind corrupt
Judge, and that in his own cause. It is the Lord that judges us, and it
becomes us to submit to his censure, not to extol our selves when he
abaseth us, lest we be found liars like those hypocritical Laodiceans,
boasting that we are rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing
when in the mean God knows though we know not, how that we are wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, standing in need of all things.
Wherefore let this truth always stand firm, that as no man can prepare
himself by any strength of his own effectually to work his Sanctification,
either alone by himself, or as a coworker with the Spirit of grace, so no man
can hinder the work of Gods Spirit when he intends to bestow this first grace
of Sanctification upon a sinner.

This of Habitual Conversion in the internal renovation of all the faculties,
which cannot be resisted or hindered: in the next place we are to consider of
Conversion as it is our act, consisting in the operations and exercises of all
gracious habites infused, as when we actually believe, repent, and do other
good works. This Active Conversion is nothing but the practice of
Sanctification, when being made holy and good, we do good and holy works, as
a man after he is raised from death, or restored to health, performs the
actions of a living, of a healthy man. For that similitude of S. Austins is
certain, Non ideo currit rota, ut sit rotunda, etc. as a wheel runs not that
it may be round, but because it is round; so the will believes Ad Simply. l.
1. quest. 2.
not that it may be regenerate, but because it is regenerate. And therefore
that is an error of the coursest bran, when our adversaries make the act of
Believing to go before our Sanctification: whereas nothing is more certain than
this, that all holy actions whether of Faith or any other grace come from that
common root of holiness infused into our souls. Now then touching these
actions proceeding from grace inherent the question is, how far they are in
man's power to refuse the doing of them: and the question may be laid generally
touching all good works inward or outward, thus: Whether or no that man who is
truly sanctified may refuse to do any good and holy work at all; for if any
one be in his power to refuse it, all may be in his power by the same reason.
But yet because Faith is a principal grace, and all the dispute is touching
the act thereof, we may restrain the question unto it, though whatever can be
spoken of man's power about the action of Faith is appliable to all other
gracious actions whatsoever. The question therefore is thus, Whether after that
a man is once sanctified and regenerate, it be in the freedom of his will to
choose whether he will actually believe and assent to the Promise, or not? For
the explication of this point, How far every good action is in a godly man's
power to do or leave it undone: you are to note that there is a double
beginning or Cause of every gracious action in a man regenerate.

1. The spirit of God by his exciting and Cooperating grace,

2. Man himself renewed and sanctified in all his faculties. The former is
termed Principium a quo, the latter Principium quod: man works, but he must
be moved thereto and assisted by the Spirit of grace: both together concur to
the producing of every holy action. I say both together: for although man in
his first conversion was merely passive, Gods spirit working all without man's
help: yet Man in performance of any holy act is not merely Active, able to
do all of himself without Gods help. No, he is partly Passive, partly
Active: Passive as he stands in need of Gods grace to stir up, guide, and
strengthen the endeavor of each faculty in the doing of good: Active in as much
as being thus helped by Grace, himself willingly moves himself to every godly
work. Now by reason of this concurrence of man with God, these operations of
grace are properly called Man's work, not Gods work in man. So that when a
regenerate man believes, this act though it be caused by Gods Spirit, yet it is
done and exercised by Man voluntarily moving himself in that action, and
therefore we say it is Man that beleveth, not Gods spirit that believes: as
if the act of believing were wrought in man's Will by the Spirit of God, in the
same sort, as Iugglers work strange motions in their Puppets, which seem to
do wondrous feats, but it is an unseene hand that's the cause of all. Such gross
conceits should not have been devised by ingenuous minds, and put upon so
plain and clear doctrine as that is touching the concurrence of Gods grace
with our strength in all Holy actions whatsoever. The point is easy to him
that will understand, Every good desire and good work is partly from man,
because he wills it, he works it, but principally from Gods Spirit, because
he makes Man to will and to work it. Without which cooperating grace, man by
Habitual inherent grace could do no good work at all; according to that of
Christ, Ioh. 15. 5. Without me ye can do nothing, and of the Apostle, Phil.
1. 6. He that has begun the good work will also perform it; and again,
Phil. 2. 13. It is God that works in you both the will and the deed, even of
his good pleasure: and again, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I have labored more abundantly
than they all, yet not I but the grace of God which is in me.

These things thus explaned, we are yet further to note that in a man
Regenerate, there are two contrary qualities inherent in every Faculty:

1. Grace, in a rectified holy inclination to goodness, infused into it. 2.
Corruption in a vicious Quality disposing it to evil.
These two Qualities abide in the regenerate, and oppose one another, till
sin be finally overcome and abolished by death. Upon these undeniable grounds
let us proceed to declare what is a regenerate man's resistance that he makes
against the working of Grace in hindering the performance of any good work:
which you shall perceive by these two conclusions:

1. A man regenerate so far forth as he is Spiritual, never resists the
work of Grace, but is constantly most willing and forward to the performance
of all holy actions.

None can be so ignorant in the mystery of Sanctification as to deny this; and
therefore they tell ^ge wonders in Divinity, who teach that man's (...) put in
aequilibrio, hanging like a beam upon (...) to bow either way, and
indifferently disposed to (...) good or evil. A very dream it is, contrary to
all S^ ^^d ^^perience, whereby we are taught that (...) ^^ing regenerate and
made spiritual, as it is so, (...) so far from standing upon terms of
indifferency, deliberating whether it shall yield, or whether it shall deny
obedience, whether it shall believe or not believe, etc. as on the contrary it
does most constantly and eatnestly desire in all things to obey always. A man
whose eye God has truly enlightened and touched his heart by the finger of his
sanctifying Spirit, does not stand in a mammering, shall I, shall I? shall I
believe, shall I obey, were I best do this good work, or shall I let it
alone? No, all his desire is now for godliness, the weight and strength of his
resolutions and affections lean wholly to obedience, his will chooses the good
with full purpose to cleave to that only, turning it self from evil with much
hatred and detestation.

This constant determination of the spiritual will unto obedience and that
only, is a thing most manifest in Scriptures and experience of all the Saints,
in their prayers, purposes, desires to obey, their joy when they could do it,
their grief when they could not. Let thy kingdom come, thy will be done, is
the prayer of every faithful soul not standing upon quarrelsome terms of
yielding or refusing, but wholly submitting it self and suing for obedience.
Oh, faith David, that my ways were directed that I might keep thy
testimonies, Unite my heart unto Psalm. 119.
thee that I may fear thy name, Incline mine heart unto thy testimonies; with
a thousand such prayers of that holy man, showing the firm resolution of a
sanctified soul only aiming at obedience. Lord increase our faith, prayed the
weak Disciples, Lord I believe, help mine unbelief, that new convert; in
both we see an earnest desire, not an indifferent deliberation. That prayer of
the whole Church is excellent, Psalm. 68. 28. Lord confirm that which thou have
wrought in us; and more fully, Cant. 1. 2. Draw me, we will run after thee.
Here Is no resistency, no hanging back, or standing aloof off in a doubtful
devising what to do; but as soon as these Virgins (in the first verse) have
smelt the favor of the precious ointments of Christ's grace, poured out into
their souls, they love him, him only, him entirely, they will go, they will run
after him: and whereas corruption clogges them in their course, they still show
their readiness to come, by their willingness to be drawn. And such is the
temper of every regenerate man; His obedience is his Hearts joy and desire, and
there is nothing that grieves him more, than when he is carried away by his
carnal will and unsanctified part, against his spiritual and gracious
resolutions, as may appear for all, by that bitter complaint of the Apostle,
Romans 7. the latter end of the Chapter. Wherefore the regenerate Will stands not
Newter between sin and grace, but takes part with grace against sin, in a
constant resolvednesse to hold with God and Goodness, against all things that
are contrary to them, according to that of Christ, [The Spirit indeed it
willing, but the Flesh is weak] and that of the Apostle [They Marc. 14. 38.
Romans 8. 5.
that live after the Spirit savor the things of the Spirit.]

Now this is that most blessed work of the Spirit of grace in the regeneration
of man's will, namely, the taking away of that resistency which our adversaries
so stiffely and odiously stand for against us and the truth. They say that
grace leaves the will in indifferency, so that it has power to resist: we
maintain the contrary, that the proper work of grace in sanctifying our will,
is to determine and incline the motions of it only to obedience, and to take
away all power of resisting or disobeying. Which appears thus, To disobey and
not to believe is an act of the greatest sinfulness that can be. To be able to
commit this act comes not from power and strength, but from weakness and
infirmity: Perfect strength and liberty is to have no power nor will to commit
any sin at all, as it is in God, and the blessed Spirits, and Christ's
humanity; to be able to do that which is evil is from weakness, from
corruption. Now in the sanctified will this corruption is in part done away by
grace: so that so far as the will is made Spiritual, it neither does nor can
resist and be disobedient; it does not, because it cannot: it cannot, because
it will not; it will not, because by this new infused grace and holiness it is
made [alwaies willing] to obey. But this point is cleared by the late worthy
Bishop of Salisbury.

The second conclusion is this,

2. That a man regenerate, so far forth as be is carnal, does always resist
the work of grace, being unwilling and backward to perform any holy action.

This is manifest by that of the Apostle, Romans 8. 5. They that are after the
flesh savor the things of the flesh: and again, Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts
against the spirit. In experience nothing is more certain, even the best men
in their best works, and best temper, do sensibly feel many twinges of a
froward heart, crossing and interrupting their cheerful performance of holy
duties. From which rebellion of the Law in our members against the Law in our
minds, the most sanctified man in the world is not free, but as long as he
lives he has cause to complain with the holy Apostle, [When I would do good
I am thus yoaked Romans 7. 21.
that Evil is present with me.] In this opposition of two contrary principles
of all our good and evil actions, we have to observe these two things,

1. The necessity of the concurrence of Gods cooperating grace in all holy
actions, to be done after our first Conversion. For if God should give unto us
a power only to do well, by the infusion of Habitual grace, and then should
leave us unto our selves for the exercise of the Act, it is apparent that we
should never bring this power into Act by our own strength. For whereas we are
sanctified but in part, and there remains in every faculty a corrupt
inclination to evil as well as an holy disposition to good, did not the Spirit
of God constantly and powerfully assist us in well doing, Corruption would
prevail against Grace, and lead us captive unto the Law of sin that is in our
members. Not that Corruption is stronger than Grace, but because we without the
aid of Gods Spirit should be more ready to follow the sinful motions of our
corrupted nature, than the sanctified inclinations of grace. And if Adams will
being only mutable, but not as yet tainted with any inward corruption,
nevertheless wanting the effectual assistance and support of Gods grace, was
so easily seduced by temptation: much more our Wills, that are holy but in
part, would quickly be enticed and drawn away by the deceiveablenesse of
inward concupiscence, and by the subtilty of Satan's temptations, if the Spirit
of God did not work mightily in us; repressing the motions of sin, and
ayding us against all outward provocations to disobedience.

2. The true cause and root of that irregularitie which is found in the
obedience of a regenerate man. Which is not that indifferency or freedom our
Adversaries contend for, whereby it is in the power of a man regenerate at all
times to choose whether he will do good or evil, but it is that opposition
which the Flesh makes against the Spirit: by reason whereof a regenerate man,
when by Grace he constantly desires to obey, is by Corruption hindered in the
performance This is plain by that of the Apostle, Romans 7. 19. 20. I do not
the good things which I would, but the evil which I would not, that do I: Now
if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the sin that
dwells in me. And again, Gal. 5. 17. The flesh and spirit are contrary one
to the other, so that ye cannot do the same things that ye would. Whence it
is manifest, that when a regenerate man fails in his obedience it comes not to
pass because his will is free, and so willing to do that which is evil, but
because his will is not so free from the power of his corruption, as it desires
to be, but is partly in bondage under the command thereof.

To conclude this point, There is in every regenerate man a possibility or
power of Resistencie always remaining so long as any corruption abides in him,
which will perpetually make some opposition more or less in the performance of
every good work. But for the prevailing act of Resistency whereby such good
works might be quite hindered, we affirm that by the power of assisting
grace effectually ayding the regenerate Faculties, that act is taken away. The
flesh may strive, but the spirit does overcome: Infidelity may cast many
doubts, but Faith at last prevails: Sin and the World may plead much worth
and loveliness, but yet in fine the love of God overtops all earthly base
delights, and fills the soul with the only desire of enjoying that alone most
blessed and infinite goodness. Thus Amaleck may fight, but Israel will get
the victory: a victory indeed certain in regard of the event, but with some
uncertainty in the Combat, wherein Israel is sometime put unto the worst. For
you are to note that albeit in the general as touching those maine and
principal Acts of believing, repenting, persevering in obedience, etc. grace
does work so effectually with man's regenerate will, that corruption cannot
hinder it in the exercise of those Acts: nevertheless, in many particular
actions after his first conversion in the continued practice of Sanctification,
he may obey the enticings of his corrupt concupiscence, against the motions of
the Spirit of grace. For many times in sundry particulars of Christian
practice, God is pleased to deny that effectual assistance which at other
times he affords, and then he leaves us unto our own strength, for experiment
to try what is in us, for humiliation in discovery of our weakness unto us,
for exercise of Christian watchfulness in making diligent use of all gracious
helps, and the like good purposes. In which case, a man that is thus left unto
himself, presently lends an ear to the deceivable suggestions of Sin and
Satan, whereby, wanting a rescue to bring him off clear in this assault, he
is vanquished and though with much unwillingnesse, led away a prisoner unto
those his spiritual Adversaries. During the time of which bondage, though
grace show it self so far, as to cause many an heavy sigh, an hearty prayer
and longing wish after its former freedom, yet can he not make a fair escape
from his corruption, till Gods spirit return and bring li^ with (...),
breaking the gates of Brass, and cutting in sunder the 2 Cor. 3. 17.
bars of Iron, that is, enlarging the heart that it may again freely run
the way of Gods Commandments. And thus we confess that a regenerate man may
resist the grace of God; he may 2 These 5. 19
Quench the Spirit, he may Ephesians. 4. 30.
Grieve the the Spirit, he may Heb. 3. 12.
Depart away from God through an evil and deceitful heart, he may Psalm. 107.
11
Rebel against the words of God, and contemn the counsel of the most high:
opposing all motions of grace, in these raging fits of his corruption, which
still furiously struggles for life after it is mortally wounded in our
regeneration. But these desertions are not perpetual: corruption may for a
time let the exercise of some particular graces, but in all and always it
shall never hinder: God who has given unto a regenerate man a power to believe
by the changing of his will through the infusion of a constant inclination to
all spiritual good, will also cause the Act of believing infallibly to ensue,
by the assistance of Cooperating grace, so powerfully strengthening the
regenerate will, and so effectually restraining the rebellious motions of
corruption, that the will shall not choose but do that, which above all things
in the world it most desires to do, namely, believe and obey the Gospel.

Now to shut up all touching this point of Man's liberty in resisting the grace
of God, the sum of all is this. Before true Conversion all unregenerate
persons do resist the gracious means and preparations to their Conversion,
the Reprobate finally, the Elect for a time, till Grace become victorious in
their perfect Sanctification. In this their first Conversion or Regeneration
the Elect are no way Active either to work it, or to hinder it.

After their Conversion in the doing of all good works immanent or transient,
they resist not so far as they are Spiritual, they cannot but resist so
far as they are Carnal. And though in time of temptation and Spiritual
desertion the flesh do not only resist but also prevail, to the hinderance
of many particular gracious actions, yet for those maine and principal Acts of
Faith, Repentance, Love of God, Hatred of Evil, etc. the Spirit is infallibly
victorious both to do them after the first Conversion, and also finally to
persevere in doing of them. Which comes to pass thus,

1. By Habitual grace infused, the Sanctified will is constantly determined to
embrace all Spiritual good.

2. By assisting grace the will is stirred up, provoked, allured and inclined
to obedience, through the proposal of the promises, and the heavenly
suggestions of the holy Spirit.

3. By the same assisting grace all contrary motions of concupiscence are
subdued and kept under. So that nothing can hinder obedience to follow; because
by grace the will is made willing to obey, and by grace all impediments in
obeying are taken away: now when all lets are removed, what can let a willing
mind to do that which it desires?

Hence you may perceive the vanity and odiousness of those imputations of
Manicheisme and Stoicisme, which our adversaries the Jesuits and Arminians
throw upon this Orthodoxe Doctrine, crying out upon us, as if we destroyed
nature, offered violence to the will, took away all liberty from the will, and
turned it in the mere necessity of those natural instincts and inclinations
that are in brute beasts: yea, as if we made the will like a dull and
senseless block, that cannot move it self a jot in any action of grace. These
are unworthie calumnies, raised out of malice or ignorance in the great work
of Sanctification: for refutation we need but deny what they barely affirm^;
and tell them again, that by our doctrine, grace does not destroy but perfect
nature. It takes not away but restores unto the will the true liberty thereof,
which consists not in the instability of a Weather-cocke, to move any way, in
an indifferency to will and do any thing, but in a fixed determination to will
and do nothing but what is good. Which determination is not from any violent
compulsion of an external Agent, as if the will were moved by grace
unwillingly; nor yet by imposing upon the will any natural necessity from some
internal principle, as if the will did incline to good unwillingly without
reason and choice, like the natural propensity in a stone to move downwards,
or the instinct in brute beasts. No, this determination of the Will to will
only good, is from an internal cause, viz. Habitual Sanctity infused into
it, after which infusion the will inclines it self immutably, yet freely to
that alone which is Spiritually good. It cannot choose but will it, yet it wills
it freely: for to affirm that this immutable inclination to one part takes
away all freedom from the will, is to deny that there is any freedom of will,
either in unregenerate men and damned spirits whose wills are inclined only to
evil, yet they sin freely, or in God, in the elect Angels, in the Saints
departed, in the manhood of Christ, all whose wills are immutably, infallibly
Est enim quaedam necessitas voluntaria, as Moulin truly, Anat. Armin.
and after a sort necessarily inclined only to good, and yet they will it most
freely without all force or Physical necessity. The nearer we come unto these,
the nigher we are unto Heb. 12. 23.
perfection in every faculty. And certainly most desirable is that necessity,
or immutability, or servitude, or determination, or call it what you will,
whereby our wills are so disposed as they cannot but choose the good, cannot
but be servants of righteousness, cannot but endeavor always to obey, cannot
but be holy and happy. Who would think himself wronged that is thus blessed, or
imprisoned that is thus restrained? Surely it is admirable what strange benefit
these Iesuited Arminians have found out in that property of man's will, which so
fiercely they strive for, namely, that it must always be indifferently
disposed to good and evil, having an equal power to will both alike. Is this
so rare a privilege of nature? what, such an excellent virtue to be able to
commit an horrible offense, to disobey the Gospel, to despise Gods grace, to
be a slave to sin, to do enough at any time to damn ones self? call we
this a prerogative of Nature, and is it worth so much contention as has been
made for it? They deserve to enjoy it that are so much in love with it. But you
are to know that this pertinacity in pleading for Natures prerogatives, is
nothing but a cunning pretense to debase the dignity of grace, and to arm man
against God in all pride and contumacy, as if we could frustrate his works,
and bring his counsels to naught, and that if we do obey when he calls us,
we may triumph in our strength, if we do not obey, we may yet glory in our
malice, whereby we could make void Gods holy intentions of doing us good. But
how happy had it been for those collapsed Angels, and for all Adams
posterity, had his and their wills been created with that immutable
inclination to goodness, wherein the Elect Angels and Saints departed are now
confirmed? And how happy shall we also be, when we shall be able to obey as
those heavenly Spirits now do willingly, constantly, unchangeably, having
neither will nor power to disobey? This service of God alone is perfect
freedom; and if the Son make us but in this sort free, then are we free
indeed. Let us while we here go mourning under the burden of our flesh, and
that sin which hangs on so fast, let us often send up a wish, a prayer to
Heaven for the full accomplishment of our redemption: sighing within our
selves, and waiting till we also be delivered from the bondage of that
remainder of corruption in us, into that glorious freedom of the Sons of God.
Amen.

We have, by the grace of God, finished the first point that in the beginning
I proposed touching the Antecedents 2. General.
of Faith; namely our Vocation and Conversion unto God. Wherein has been
showed at large by what means and in what manner a sinner is made partaker of
the grace of God unto salvation. In which search, I have endeavored to go no
further than I could see the Scriptures lead me the way: contenting my self
with that knowledge of this secret and wonderful work of Grace, which might
be to you and me most profitable: letting pass those curious speculations
which have been conceived touching these things by men that have discovered
more willingness to dispute and quarrel, than good affection to learn or
teach ought aright in so holy a business. My aim herein has been, to let
you see what is the original and generation of that most precious grace of
Faith, whereof we are to speak. The sum of all that has been more at large
delivered, is thus much in brief: that Sanctification or inherent Grace is at
the first wrought in the soul of an elect sinner, merely and only by the
Spirit of God infusing into the soul new abilities and perfections in each
power thereof. This work of the Spirit is such, that we cannot by any worth
of ours deserve it, we cannot by any inward power of our own effect it in
part, or in whole: lastly, we cannot by any liberty and strength we have so
forcibly resist as to hinder Gods spirit when he intends to work it. Now of
this our Sanctification, Faith is a part, being an inherent gracious quality
infused into the soul at our effectual Conversion or Regeneration. For its
original therefore it is Divine, being wrought in us by an immediate action of
the spirit of Grace, and not any way springing from the liberty of our wills, or
strength of our corrupted nature. We are then now by the assistance of God, to
come unto the explication of the nature of Faith it self, to show you what
this grace is, wherein the Being thereof does consist. An inquiry it is full of
much difficulty; but the absolute necessity and singular profit of this
knowledge must enforce every one of us to use the uttermost of all godly
diligence in searching out the nature of so glorious and useful a Grace as
Faith is. The whole frame of Christianity turns upon this hinge; Faith like
blood runs thorough every vein of the wholebody of Religion, it gives life
and direction to every holy action, its the staff of our strength, the support
of all our comfort, yea, the life of our souls lies upon it, and by it the
just shall live or by nothing. Wherefore it concerns us nearly both to know
what it is, and when we know it, to be sure that we our selves have it. Not to
have Faith, is to want Christ and all hope of happiness: not to know what
Faith is, is a strong presumption of not having Faith. The Apostle concludes
both in that exbortation of his to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 13. 5. wherewith we
also ought to be admonished; Prove your selves whether you are in the faith:
examine your selves, know ye not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you
except ye be reprobates?

To come then to the unfolding of the essence of Christian Faith: I shall begin
at the lowest step thereof, and so by degrees ascend higher. 1. In the first
place showing unto you the nature of Faith or Belief in general, as this word
is taken in the largest extent in relation to all civil or natural things. 2.
In the next place explaining the meaning of this word Faith as it is used in
special about Divine and Supernatural things declared to us in Scriptures.
The opening of the nature of Belief in general will give much light for the
understanding of the special consideration thereof: therefore I begin with
that first:

Not to trouble you with reckoning up all the improper acceptions of this word
Fides, (...), and to tell you that sometime it is taken for Fidelity or
Trustiness, (...), as when a thing is done or spoken bonafide, faithfully or
trustily, and in that exclamation Vestram fidem! etc. sometimes for Arguments
or Proofs, from Reason or Authority brought to breed belief in another, which
acception is usual in Rhetoritians, Arist. 1. Rhet. c. 2. (...), etc. Quintil.
l. 5. cap. 10. Haec omnia [argumenta] generaliter (...) appellant, etc. Faith
or Belief in the proper acception of the word, is [an Assent to such matters
a^ are known only by Revelation from another.] This definition agrees to
belief as it is taken in the largest sense: the Genus i^ Assent, the
difference is taken from the object whereto Assent is yielded, and that is such
things as we understand only by another revelation. Both parts will be
plainly understood, if we distinguish between three sorts of knowledge
[Cognitionis (...)] that are incident unto man:

1. The first is Scientia (...), Knowledge properly so Vid. Scot. sent. l. 3.
did. 24. quaest. unica.
called, which is bred in us by the evident certainety of things presented unto
our reason or sense. When we understand such principles and conclusions in all
arts and sciences as are demonstrable by evident and infallible reason, or when
we know such particulars as come under our senses when they are rightly
disposed.

2. The second is Opinio, (...), Opinion, an imperfect knowledge of things not
clearly presented unto reason or sense; when we apprehend things in part and
obscurely, so that we cannot absolutely say it is this or it is that.

3. The third is Fides, (...), Belief, which is a knowledge grounded on
testimony and authority of others, when we assent to those things whereof by
our own sense and reason we have no certainety nor evidence, only we believe
them, because such and such have told us they are so. These three diverse
apprehensions of things we express in forms of speech agreeable; the first,
when we say, I know this to be so: the second thus, I think it is so: the last
in this, I believe it is so. A great difference there is between these three
apprehensions of the understanding as every one may easily discern: but more
clearly thus it stands.

1. Knowledge whether it be of things past, present, or to come, has evermore
certainety in the subject, and evidence in the object accompanying it. For the
things that are known must be always apparent to the senses or to the
understanding. To the senses by the proportionablenesse of the qualities in the
Object, and due application of them to the Organ. To the understanding by the
bright light of reason shining in the things themselves. Wherefore the Object
of knowledge is evermore evident, and being thus evident and apparent, the
apprehension thereof in the Subject, by the sense and understanding must needs
be clear and most distinct: whence arises such an assent unto the truth of
the thing, as is most firm and certain, excluding all doubting whatsoever: as
for instance, that the Fire is hot, the Water moist, the Sun light, that,
Quicquid dicitur vel negatur de Universally, dicitur vel negatur de Particulari,
and, Quae convenient in uno tertio, inter se convenient, with the like; these
things are evident, making such a lively impression upon the senses, and so
clearly discovering their reasonableness to the understanding, that we
strongly assent unto their truth without all doubting.

2. Opinion is contrary unto knowledge, and always has uncertainetie in the
Subject, and inevidence in the Object, attending on it. For some things there
are of their own nature uncertain and contingent, whereof our best knowledge
is but a doubtful conjecture: as that a red evening and a gray morning should
bring a fair day. Again, those things that are in themselves certain enough
and necessary, yet unto us they will be but only probable and conjecturall, if
either our senses through weakness and distemper perceive them not thoroughly,
or our understanding do not clearly apprehend the nature and reason of them.
Whence it follows, that for want of clear evidence in the things themselves,
our assent unto their truth will be always wavering and doubtful, without any
fixed determination to embrace any side resolvedly, but so holding it self to
that part which for the present seems most probable, as that it is ready to
shift it self unto the other side, when better reason shall be discovered.

3. Belief partly agrees, partly differs both from the one and the other: for
it partakes but of one property, namely, certainety in the Subject, though very
variable, but never of evidence in the Object. Both shall appear unto you in
order. For the Object of belief it may be certain and necessary in it self,
but qua tale it is never evident to the believer. For evident, as I said
before, those things only are which by their own proper quality and light
work a clear apprehension of themselves in the senses, or understanding, or
both. Now such things are not believed but known: as for instance, what we
see, hear, touch, taste, or smell by these senses orderly disposed, we do not
say we believe it, but we know it, as that the Fire is hot, the Water cold. He
that relates unto me an accident that himself has seen, He knows it, but I
that hear him, do believe it. Again, things that we understand by manifest
and infallible reason, those also we know, we do not believe: as for example,
If an Astronomer foretell an Eclipse to fall out an hundred years hence, he
does not believe, but he knows this effect will ensue by the infallible motion
of the Heavens: but an unlearned man that finds this in an Ephemerides, he
only believes it. But now that which is the Object of Belief, so far as it
is the Object thereof, does not fall under the clear apprehension either of
sense or understanding, by its own natural light. For things believed are of
three sorts, Past, Present, or to Come. Of things Past before we were, and of
things to Come, it is not possible for us to get any knowledge from the things
themselves, by our sense or reason, unless it be Astronomicall demonstrations,
as was touched before, or such Physical effects as depend upon necessary
connection of their causes. Touching things Present, but yet far removed out
of the reach of sense, and eye of reason, as what is now done in foreign
Countries: there is the same impossibility of knowledge by the proper evidence
of the things themselves. In every one of these our sense utterly fails us,
and our reason which begins at sense, fails us also; and cannot supply the
defect of sense by a necessary deduction of one thing out of another: and
therefore it is impossible for us to get the knowledge of these things
otherwise than by history and records of times past, by discourse and relation
of things present from such as have seen and known them, by predictions of
things to come. Wherein though we may understand, and that clearly enough,
what is recorded, discoursed of, and foretold, yet will the truth of these
things be always inevident to us, unless our own sense or reason could also
comprehend them. As for instance, when we read any part of the Roman
History, as the description of the battle at Cannae, in Livie, we understand
perfectly what he says, and we believe it also: but unto no mortal man was
the truth of this accident, evident, but only to such as were then living, who
felt and saw that calamity of the Roman state. So, when a traveller reports
unto us what he has seen in foreign parts; we understand what he says, and
do happily believe him, but nothing of all that he says is evident unto us,
till we our selves have seen the same things as well as he. Take it then
Universally thus: All Objects of Belief are known only by the relation and
telling of another. But no relation of any thing which another makes unto me,
can make the thing related evident unto me, i. e. so to represent it to my
senses and understanding, that my apprehension of it should be the same with
his that has had the experimental knowledge of it. Let a man describe unto
another the fashion of some stately building, or the situation of some City
which he has seen, though he do it in the most lively manner that may be
possible, yet can heenever turn his Auditor into a Spectator, and make the
thing he Segnius irritant animum demissa per aures, quam quae sunt oculis
subjecta fidelibus. Is true only in comparing of writing and speaking about
abstract matters.
describes evident to his apprehension, unless by his discourse he were able
to communicate unto him his own eyes. So the most exquisite discourse of some
point of Philosophy made unto a yongue auditor in that science, cannot make the
point evident unto him, unless the reader could with his words convay his own
understanding into his hearer. Such descriptions and discourses can only effect
thus much, that the hearer shall frame unto himself a more lively imagination
of things related to him: but yet till his own eyes, and his own reason have
fully informed him by immediate experiments from the thing it self, that
imagination or conceit cannot make the thing truly evident. And in that case.
let a man (for example) that has never seen the King, but only heard him
discribed, Or let a grounded Scholar compare the conceits of things he has
now by his own reason, with those which had he being a novice, etc.
or seen his picture, let him compare that imagination which he has of him by
those means, with that other which the very beholding of his person will cause
in his mind: and he shall manifestly perceive that our knowledge of things
which we get by another relation, falls wonderfully short of that other
knowledge which is bred in us by the proper evidence of the things themselves:
and that the difference is great between the knowing of a thing per speciem
propriam, as the seeing of a living face, and the knowing of the same thing per
speciem alienam, as the seeing of a lively picture.

Hitherto of that property wherein Belief and Knowledge do differ, namely,
evidence of the object, Knowledge is an assent to things evident, Belief an
assent to things inevident. The other property follows, wherein Belief agrees
with Knowledge and differs from Opinion, and that is Certainty in the Subject.
For in Opinion the Assent is always uncertain, and if not equally
indifferent, yet inclinable to either side, even when its most strongly carried
toward one. But in Belief the Understanding passes over its assent and
approbation unto the truth of one part, whereupon it fixes and rests it
self. And therefore that definition of Belief, which Suidas has, that (...),
or (...), Vehemence of Opinion, or a vehement Opinion, comes far short of
truth and exactness: for even a vehement opinion has always uncertainetie of
Assent necessarily joined with it: but it is not so in Belief, wherein, as in
Knowledge, the Assent may be certain without all doubting. Now of this we are
to enquire, what those grounds are whereon men build the Certainty of their
Assent in matters of Belief, they are these three:

1. The Authority of the Speaker.

2. The Consequence of things spoken, in regard of some good or evil in it of
great moment, that concerns us.

3. Some Eperiment in part of the truth of that which is related. According to
the diversity of these three things, our Belief increases more or less in
certainty and strength of Assent: which appears thus;

1. For the speakers authority, two things there are that win credit unto his
testimony: 1. Wisdom and Skill that he be not deceived himself. 2. Fidelity
and Honesty that he will not deceive us. Both these are needful, for neither
do we believe a simple man though honest: nor yet will we trust a wise man,
if he be not honest. But when we have a full persuasion of a man's wisdom and
faithfulness by experience formerly had in other things, then we give full
credit to his words.

2. The nature of the thing much alters the strength of our belief: for if it
be a slight matter, that touches us not with any apprehension of special
delight or commodity, benefit or danger redounding to our selves, be the
relation of it never so true, and our understanding of it clear enough, yet we
heed not the matter much, nor does the mind fix it self upon it in any
settled and firm assent. But if the matter be of some great consequence that
touches us nearly, we believe, as sooner, so with more strength and intention
of assent. What we much desire or greatly fear, we easily believe, and though
our apprehension of it be not very clear, yet we are willing even to force
upon our selves a persuasion of it.

3. Experiment also in part does greatly add unto the strength of our belief.
A story or prophecy whereof we evidently know some part to be true, we do
more easily and firmly believe the rest. A learner that hears a discourse of
some conclusion in Nature or Morality, if he perceive some part of the truth
evidently, he is the more willingly induced to assent unto his teacher in all
the rest. One or two conclusions thoroughly understood, marvellously strengthen
our assent to the truth of those that we do not as yet comprehend.

Where all these meet together, there belief is firm and certain: so far
as any fails, so much is our assent weakened. But of the three, the authority
of the speaker is the chiefest, whose wisdom and fidelity certainly known
unto us, will move us to a certain belief of those things, wherein we
apprehend no great matter of consequence, nor discern any evidence of the
truth at all: whereas if one that has neither wit nor honesty tell us of a
matter of greatest moment, whereof we also see the probability and truth in
part, yet does he not persuade us to belief, though he may move us to a strong
suspicion.

Thus then you see that assent, being the approbation of the truth of any
thing, is common to Knowledge, Opinion and Belief: but with this difference,
In exact Knowledge our assent is always firm and unremoveable, in Opinion it is
always wavering and mutable, in Belief it is certain, but more or less
according to the different concurrence of those three forenamed grounds. Now
out of that which I have spoken, let these two conclusions be carefully
observed:

1. That all Knowledge is more certain than Belief, which rule you must
understand in things of the same kind, not of diverse, thus: He that most
firmly believes any truth upon the former grounds, is not yet so certain of
it as he that perfectly knows it; as a Countri-man who strongly believes that
the Sun or least Star is bigger than the whole Earth, upon the affirmation
of a learned and honest Mathematician, is not yet so certain of it as when
afterward he knows it by infallible demonstration. But now in diverse kinds
our belief of some things may be more certain than our knowledge of others:
as our belief of divine things upon Gods testimony, may be more certain than
the knowledge of humane things by the light of our reason; because our
understanding has always this prejudice, that in the general it may possibly
err, but Gods Word cannot err at all.

2. That perfect Knowledge takes away all Belief: Cognitie 1. Abstractiva
(...) evacuat sidem. 2. Intuitiva evacuat. Scot. ubi supra.
that is, (for so you must understand it) perfect knowledge of any thing
excludes all belief of the same thing: otherwise, perfect knowledge in one
thing may help our belief in another, and knowledge in part of the same
thing, does much strengthen our belief of the other part. But here in this
opposition between knowledge and belief, your must always remember what
knowledge we mean, namely Scientiam Intuitivam, or per Visionem, that
knowledge which is had by beholding things in their proper nature: but not
Scientiam Disciplinarem, or per Revelatione^, that knowledge which is got by
discourse and relation of others. And so these two propositions, [We believe
what we know not] and [We believe what we know] are not opposite each to other:
for it is true, we believe that which we do not know, namely, by the proper and
immediate sight of the things themselves: and it is true also, we beeleeve that
which we do know, viz. by relation, which so far forth represents to us the
nature of the thing related, as that we are not ignorant what it is we do
believe. Where it must also be observed that the difference is great between
these two sorts of knowledge, in regard of the assent that is given to matters
thus known. Knowledge that is by Vision or Intuition of things that are
presented to the sense or understanding in their proper evidence, inforceth
assent unto the things known. For in this case the apprehension of the thing
is so clear, that the understanding cannot but approve the truth of it. And
therefore the College of the Sceptikes of old, was little better than a
Society of fools, and their (...) or (...), Perpetual doubtfulnesse of all
things was somewhat worse than madness, when they would not assent that they saw
the Sun shine when they looked on it, nor that the fire was hot, when they
felt it burn, nor would be certain of any principles or conclusions in reason
and nature. And such was Anaxagoras his dull, melancholy, or wilful frenzy to
maintain in good sadness, that the snow was black. For such is the natural
assinity between evident truth and our understanding, that though we would,
yet wecannot but subscribe and yield our allowance and assent unto it. Whence
it falls out many times, that a Usurer, a Chuch-robber, or some other not
willing to leave this or that course, though doubtful whether lawful or not,
dares not for his life read such or such a book written on those subjects, for
fear lest he should be made to know more than he is content to practice, and
that his conscience should be convicted in spite of his will.

But now it is not so in that other knowledge by relation: let a thing be never
so plainly delivered, so that we fully conceive the meaning of that which is
spoken, yet if neither our own sense nor reason do convince us, we The cause
is, because there is a possibility that the wisest and honestest men may
deceive us or be deceived. Every created understanding is ^lis, and therefore
binds not o^^ assent.
may choose whether or no we will believe and assent unto it, embracing it for
a truth. It is the very natural property of man, never to be satisfied with
others reports, till we our selves have seen and known the thing it self by
evident experience. Draw the liveliest picture of any man, the most curious
landship of any country, it contents not, we must see both the one and other.
Set down the most tried experiments in nature taken by most skillful Artists,
this pleases not others till their own trial confirm them. Generally, every
man would feign see with his own eyes, hear with his own ears, understand
by his own, not another man's reason. In which inclination of nature lies the
original of all the distrust and diffidence that is in the world, and also the
cause of those restless inquiries which we make one after another into the
same things. Whence it comes to pass that whilst we are bul^ed in examining
our forefathers inventions, and posterity also employed in making trial of our
examinations, neither we nor they have much time to add any thing unto the
increase of learned knowledge. Hence also may we guess at one cause why many
Sciences, even for some thousands of years have kept one pitch, and not grown
above that dwarfish stature they had in their infant invention: and also what
the reason is why many that read most, prove not the deepest scholars; for no
greater impediment to exact learning, than to make use of other men's
understandings, and neglect our own. It would also hence appear, that
History, a pleasant and profitable imploiment, is yet of all studied learning
the weakest to give full satisfaction to the mind of man: because that depends
wholly upon such grounds of truth, as man's mind desires not to depend upon at
all, namely, another tongue, eyes, and ears. And it is observable, that very
usually those that are of credulous and passive understandings, least able to
employ their own strength in painful and attentive inquiries after knowledge,
such do not unwillingly apply their diligence to that course of study,

But I am very sensible, that hitherto you may judge my Discourse has had more
Philosophy than Divinity in it. If it be an error in this place, I confess
it: and crave your pardon for it: only thus much let me say, that I could not
tell well how to avoid this general consideration of the nature of Belief,
in regard that the knowledge thereof will clear our passage to that which
follows. You have then heard what evidence there is in the object of Belief,
what certainty in the assent given to it, how it differs, how it agrees with
Knowledge. There remains but one thing more to be cleared in the General, and
then I have done with it. Belief was at first defined to be an [Assent to
things known by revelation]: but now ye are further to know, that all assent
is not of the same kind and degree, but differs according to the diversity of
the Objects assented unto. Therefore we must observe, that of the Objects of
Belief

1. Some are represented unto us only as True and Good in themselves, without
any special relation to our benefit and commodity. Unto such things, whether
past, present, or to come, the understanding and will of Man do yield that
common assent and approbation, whereby they allow of the Ttuth and Goodness of
every thing, that is apprehended by them as true and good in what kind soever
it be. This is called a bare assent, or Credulitas; Belief in strict terms,
when we only believe it is good and true, and go no further.

2. Some are revealed unto us not only as True and Good in themselves, but more
specially as containing some excellent truth and goodness that concerns us in
regard of some benefit that we shall get thereby. In these things our assent
is with adherence, affiance, trust, and dependence upon the thing revealed. For
as in general all Truth and Goodness draws the faculties of the soul to an
approbation of them when they are known, so much more does the goodness and
truth of those things, which are proportionable to our nature and necessities,
wherein we may claim special interest and commodity, unite our wills and
understanding in strong assent and adherence unto them. This kind of assent is
in strict terms called Faith or Trust, Fides, Fiducia, which imply much more
than Credulitas, Belief. Fidere in the property of the word is a degree beyond
Credere, importing an assent with reliance and confidence. Now the proper
object of this assent is nothing but Promises of some good hereafter to befall
us. And promises are never believed, unless they be trusted upon: as a
Captive cannot be said to believe him that promises to ransom him upon a day,
unless he trust and depend upon him. In which case we cannot distinguish
between Belief and Trust, It Is an erroneous curiosity to make Fiducia a
consequent of Fides, and to say, Therefore I trust a man because I believe the
truth of his promise, that he will do what he says: there can be no good
construction of such a saying, for it is as much as this, I trust him because I
trust him; or if the meaning be thus, I believe the trust of his promise,
therefore I trust upon it, id est, I seek not to any other means for
obtaining the good promised, but only his promise: then Fiducia shall be the
not seeking to other means: but this is false, for not to seek to other
means, is a consequent of trust reposed in the promise. For where there is a
continued Act of believing or trusting to the Certainty of performance, there
the mind does acquiescere, rest it self in the promise, which acquiescentia
is the not seeking and moving after further means to help it self.
Fidem and Fiduciam, to make them two several Acts, which are but one and the
same; as is manifest thus, A promise is a revelation of some such truth as
shall be beneficial to me in particular. In Threatenings the matter is the same
mutatis mutandis. Our Belief of them too is more then a general assent, but it
wants a name, something it is proportionable to Fiduria in promises, but the
effects are diverse, for Fiducia in promises, breed joy and hope: but a firm
assent to the certain accomplishment of Threatenings breeds fear, and
despair, if they be unavoydable, if avoydable, vigilance to escape them.
The truth of such a promise consists in the certainty of performance. The
goodness of the promise consists in the quality of the thing promised more or
less excellent. But now to trust (fiduciam ponere, fidem habere) upon a
promise is not to believe the goodness of the thing promised (for that often
is known perfectly enough) but to bebeleeve the Certainty of Performance of
it unto me: as for instance, if a rich man promise to pay a poor man's debts,
the poor man needs not believe the goodness of the promise, for he well
knows the benefit thereof. What then must he believe? The truth of it: where
in stands that? in the performance, that the rich man will certainly do for
him what he has said. Now what is this else but to trust him? So that Belief
and Trust or Affiance are here essentially one and the same thing.

Thus much of Faith or Belief taken in its largest extent, I come in the next
place to the Special consideration of Faith, as the word is Christian, applied
unto Divine and Supernatural matters, revealed in the Scriptures. Faith in
this use of the word has a double acception:

1. Improper, and so it is taken three ways.

1. For the object of Faith, the things believed, either

1. Generally, for the whole doctrine of faith delivered in Scriptures, as 1 Timothy 4. 1. In the latter times some shall depart from that Faith, and shall
give heed to spirits of error and doctrines of Devils. See many the like
place, 1 Timothy 3. 9. Gal. 3. 2. and 1. 23. Act. 6. 7. Iud. verse. 3.

2. Specially for Christ himself the chief object of Faith. Gal. 3. 23.
before Faith came, id est, Christ; compared with ver. 19. 24. 25.

2. For the external profession of Faith and Religion, as, Romans 1. 8. Your
Faith is published throughout the whole world. See Act. 14. 22.

3. For that virtue which we call Fidelity or Faithfulness in words or deeds,
whether it be in God, Romans 3. 3. shall their unbelief make the Faith of God
without effect? or in Man, Tit. 2. 10. that they may show all good faith or
faithfulness [(...).]

This of the word taken improperly: the next acception of it is,

2. Proper; where to give such a description of Faith, as may comprise in
general terms all the degrees thereof, it may be fitly defined thus [Faith is
an assent given by the reasonable creature to the truth and goodness of all
divine revelations]. The terms of this definition are large, and require a
diligent explication, that we may with more facility attain our chief intent,
in judging aright of the nature of saving or justifying Faith. Wherefore in the
definition I prove three things to be considered of it:

1. The Object of Faith [divine Revelations.] 2. The Subject of Faith [the
Reasonable creature.] 3. The Genus of it viz. [Assent.]
Of the nature and properties of these in that order I have proposed.

1. The complete Object of Faith is, All divine Revelations of whatsoever
things the Creator shall make known unto the reasonable creature. These
Revelations are of two sorts.

1. Some immediate from God himself, by vision, dream, or other secret but
infallible suggestion. Such revelations of divine things were made unto the
Prophets, Apostles, and other holy men of God: who as they believed certainly
the thing revealed, so they knew infallibly the truth of the revelation it
self, that it was from God and not an illusion of Satan or their own brain.
If you ask me how they knew it, as when the Word of God is said to come unto
any one of the Prophets, telling them inwardly what they should preach or
answer in such or such a business, or when Saint Paul indicted one of his
Epistles, how did he or they know that the thoughts which then came into their
minds, were from immediate work of the holy Ghost? I answer, it is not possible
for any man to describe the manner of it, unless himself had been acquainted
with the like Revelations. But this is certain, God-where he comes, makes
himself known, and such were the lively characters of heavenly majesty,
brightness, and cleernesse imprinted on those Revelations, that mortal minds
were infallibly ascertained of their Divinity. Yea Balaam himself, though he
could have wished with all his heart not to have known or believed those
revelations that so unkindly crossed his hope of preferment: yet when once the [
Number. 24. 2.
Spirit of God comes upon him,] he utters his parable with this preface, [
Verse. 3. 4.
Balaam the son of Beor has said, and the man whose eyes are open has said,
He has said which heard the words of God, which saw the vision of the
Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his eyes open.] He that was at
other times driven by the devil into furious motions of mind procured by
spells and enchantments, is now as forcibly moved [ 2. Pet. 3. 21.
(...)] or borne away by the power of the holy Ghost, who in this revelation
makes so clear a discovery and strong impression of divine truth in the mind
of Balaam, that the Wizard Number 24. 13. [I cannot pas^ the commandment of the
L. etc.]
cannot but speak what he knows and believes, though it quite undo his own
desire of Greatness, and Balacks hope of Victory. Whence also this rule
follows generally true, That where the revelation is infallibly known to be
of God, there will be a firm assent to the truth of the things revealed The
reason is, because every created understanding is evidently convinced of this.
That God can tell no lie.
Now we are further to note, that upon such immediate revelations and
suggestions of the Spirit, is grounded that Faith which is usually styled, the
Faith of working miracles. A gift proper to the primitive times of the Church,
bestowed then on many for the better establishment of the Gospel among
unbeleeving Gentiles or Jews. Though the words of the Promise run largely,
Marc. 16, 17. yet it seems not likely that every private true believer had
this privilege, but rather that it was bestowed on such as Thus prophecy and
gift of miracles are joined together, Mat. 7. (...).
were Preachers and Publishers of the Gospel for confirmation of their
doctrine. And amongst them it was given not only to the truly faithful
believer, but to others also, as appears by Judas to whom this power was given
as well as to the rest of the twelve, Matt. 10 1. and in many other reprobate,
Matt. 7. 22. Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied, etc? The proper
ground of this faith and assurance of working some miraculous effect, was the
special and particular suggestion of the spirit. Other motives there were
further off; as the general persuasion of Gods omnipotency, the belief of
that promise which Christ made to his Disciples, Matt. 17. 20. [Verily I say
unto you, if ye have Faith as a grain of mustardseed, ye shall say unto this
mountain, remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove, and nothing shall
be impossible to you.] but more specially that larger promise he made at his
Ascension, Mark. 16. 17. 18. [And these signs shall follow them that believe:
in my name they shall cast out devils, they shall speak with new tongues:
They shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not
hurt them: they shall lay their hands on the sick and they shall recover.] But
these grounds were not sufficient to give assurance of performing this or that
miraculous act, without a special and particular suggestion of the Holy Ghost,
informing them inwardly both touching the time when, and matter wherein they
should work a Miracle. For as all believers had not that power, so such as had
it, could not do wonders when and in what kind they pleased: but were to
expect a special warrant and direction from the Spirit; like unto Peter, who,
though a faithful believer, yet durst not venture upon a miraculous attempt of
walking dry-shod upon the water, without a special word from Christ, bidding
of him come unto him in that manner, Matt. 14. 28. 29. In these times, wherein
this special direction cease, and also miracles have no use (unless for
conversion of a Country where the Gospel has never been preached,) this
gift also is ceased. Thus much of the first sort of Revelations to be
believed: the other follows.

2. Some Mediate, delivered from God, by others, unto us. Such were the answers
and Sermons which the Prophets and Apostles made by word of mouth unto the
people, such is now unto us the whole written word of God, which is now the
only ordinary object of our Faith. Now touching the Scriptures, we are to
enquire how far things revealed in them may be known, how far they must
be believed. You have heard before the difference between Knowledge and
Belief; that is an assent to things evident, this, to things not-evident:
therefore seeing those things that are written are generally the object of our
faith, we must diligently examine what evidence there is to be found in these
things, or whether any at all; that so we may know what to judge of that
assertion of our adversaries the Papists, who make obscurity one essential
property of Faith. In the opening of this question, Whether things revealed in
Scriptures be evident to Man's understanding, let these distinctions be observed
in the first place,

1. The Scriptures contain in them matters of three sorts, viz.

1. Precepts and Declarations of the doctrines of Religion, whether in the
higher mysteries thereof, as of the Trinity, Incarnation of Christ, etc or in
other inferior points of Sanctification, Piety, and moral Practice. And unto
this head may be referred all such discourses of natural things as are found
in the Scripture; as of the winds, thunder, etc.

2. Histories of matters of Fact past and gone, as of the Creation, Fall of
Man, the Flood, etc.

3. Predictions of things to come hereafter, whether they be merely
Prophetical, or withal do contain some special Promise or Threatening
concerning those to whom the prediction is made.

2. There is a twofold Evidence,

1. One of the Narration, when it is made in Words and Sentences, so plain and
perspicuous, that the Understanding conceives clearly what the Speaker or
Written means.

2. Another of the thing it self that is related, when either our senses do
plainly perceive it, if it be a thing sensible, or our understandings do
manifestly behold the truth and reason of it, if it be only intelligible. This
distinction is most manifest in all discourses, and specially in Mathematickes,
where the meaning of a Proposition or Problem may be clearly understood, what
is to be known or done, before one jot of the Demonstration be understood,
how and wherefore it must be so.

3. We must distinguish of Man's understanding in a twofold estate;

1. Of Natural corruption, as it attaines no further light of knowledge than
that which may be gotten by the ordinary gift of God in the course of a learned
education, and painful study of Humanity and Divinity for such ends as men
propose unto themselves.

2. Of Grace and Regeneration, when the Understanding is enlightened; and the
eyes of the mind opened to discern of spiritual things according to their
spiritual nature. Herein also lies a great difference, because all things that
are inevident to a man unregenerate, are not so to the regenerate.

These things thus distinguished, let us set down the truth touching this
point in some few conclusions, which follow:

1. All things revealed in the Scriptures, whether they be Doctrinall,
Historical, or Prophetical, may be known in the evidence of the Narration,
not only by such as are truly sanctified, but by those also, who, remaining
unregenerate, enjoy only the benefit of common illumination.

This conclusion is to be observed against that injurious accusation wherewith
those of the Romish Church have standered God and his written Word, that the
Bible is an obscure book not to be understood. A fond and impious conceit, if
ever any were. The Scriptures are obscure, say they, but to whom trow ye? To
their learned Clergy and illuminated Doctors? No, they can understand them
well enough, they are able to reconcile all seeming contradictions, to reduce
all tropes and figures to their plain meaning, to note the various acceptions
of words, to dive into all hidden mysteries of the text, and over and above the
just meaning find out many spiritual senses of it, that the author never
thoughton. This they can do; and for witness of it, we have of their own
writing infinite volumnes both of Controversed Divinity decided, if we
believe them, by Scripture rightly understood, and also of Commentaries upon
the text, which testify unto us as no small painfulnesse in searching out, so
much peremptorinesse in defining the true sense of the most Difficult places of
Scriptures. And surely well they may be confident, having besides their own
and others wits, the help of the Popes infallibility, in which respect one
would think they should now make an end of writing, or at least of jarring one
with another in their opinions and interpretations. For may we not think that
the Popes are very uncharitable who being endued with an infallible Spirit, do
not sitting at ease in their chair compile at last an absolute Commentary upon
the Bible, after which no Jesuit of them all should dare to vent his own
private opinions? or it may be it is bashfulnesse in the Friars not to trouble
his Holiness about so small a tri^^e as is the right meaning of Scriptures,
unless we say, that the Romish Apollo is not at leisure to utter Oracles from
his trivet, unto every poor Friar that intends to trouble the world with a new
book. Here questionless is a great fault, but let them take it among them:
mean while we see their own practice confuting their own opinion of the
Scriptures obscurity, unless they will give us leave to think, that all their
preaching, disputing and writing has been about they know not what. But, (say
they) the Scriptures for all this are obscure to the Laity! And are they so?
whose fault is that but the Clergies? whose duty it was if pride and laziness
would have given leave, to have seen their people better instructed. If
Scriptures are plain unto themselves, why did they not make them plain unto
others? or must we in earnest speak that of the Romish Clergy, which Job does
of his friends in derision [No doubt but they are the people, and wisdom
shall die with them;] as for the poor snakes, the Laickes, they, simple
souls, have not Job 12.
wit enough to understand the meaning of plain words. To such their proud
contempt of Gods people, we may with indignation oppose that of Job, Even these
have understanding as well as they, yea and are not inferior unto the greatest
part of them, unless they could give the world better proof of their deeper
wisdoms. But what if they be inferior? are the Scriptures obscure, because
some things are hard to be understood by the ignorant and unstable minds? So
we might say of the plainest book that ever was written of Logic, that it is
obscure, because a fresh man does not understand it.

It is no prejudice to the cleernesse and perspicuity of the Declaration, that
there be some things in it which are hard to be conceived by some men at some
times. We do not account the prophecy of Esaias touching Christ which the Eunuch
read, to be a dark and obscure prediction, but we know it was clear and plain
enough, though the Eunuch a raw proselyte understood not the meaning of it. It Is
much we cannot be as charitably minded of the Scriptures, as we are of other
books in our ordinary studies, wherein when we find some things difficult, we
can suspect our selves rather than the author, and when afterward we understand
him, we do not censure him of obscurity, but blame our own dullness, that
could not apprehend things plainly enough expressed. And me thinks the
Jesuits might be content to give God Almighty leave to write but even as men
of greatest understanding do, namely, to comprise much matter in few words.
They might know that in such writing, (and such is the style of all the
Scripture) things may be expressed very distinctly and properly, which yet
cannot ^^ply be understood at first reading, but after some study. In which
case twere a reasonable thing for our adversaries to persuade the world that
the Bible were at least as easy a book as some humane author, and that the
abundant riches of knowledge in it did by the least deserve as much pains in
the search of it, as a piece of Aristotle, some hard Poet, on some intricate
crabbed scholasticall discourse of some Jesuit. Did they not greatly mistrust
the discovery of their own errors by such an insinuation of Scriptures
facility, they would never discourage their disciples from them, and yet exhort
them to the study of many an obscurer author. For our selves, we have learned
better things, than to bring God in suspicion with man of envy and fraud, as
if he had caused a word to be written for instruction of men which they should
not understand, and in it had laid a snare to intrappe men's souls in Heresy
and false opinions, by perverting the Scriptures to their own perdition. No,
against such calumnies we oppose Christ's censure of his own words (for such
are the Scriptures) Prove. 8. 8, 9. All the words of my mouth are in
righteousness, there is nothing froward or perverse in them (no danger of
Heretical infection). They are all plain to him that understands, and right
to them that find knowledge (nor intricate obscurity that no man can tell what
to make on it.) Yea, we dare avouch that did the simplest of people use but
half that diligence that they ought in attaining Christian knowledge, and
would take but as much pains to understand the Scripture as they do of the
Evidences of their Land^ or the Statute book, or such like, experience would
quickly tell them, that the Scriptures are not so far above the reach of
their understandings, as now generally all men not book-learned do conceive,
to the infinite prejudice of Christianity. But however, must the Scriptures be
obscure, because men are careless, is the Bible a hard book, because common
people understand it not in Latin, are all things in it darksome and
intricate, because one man understands not this or that particular, which yet
another does, or those of the present age perceive not the meaning of such or
such a prophecy, which the next age may clearly understand? These are weak
inferences, and such as cannot overturne our first conclusion, namely, that all
Doctrines, Histories, Prophecies, and whatsoever else in Scriptures, may be
known and understood by the perspicuity of the narration in the literal
meaning thereof, by all sorts of men bad and good. For what history of the
Bible can be named that may not be plainly understood, I say not by a learned
or godly, but even by any man? What prophecy, the meaning whereof has not, or
will not be plainly found out? What text of doctrine, whereof some have not or
shall not understand the right meaning? and when it is once found out, may not
all understand what one does? yea take the deepest mysteries of Religion, as
about the Trinity, Incarnation of Christ, Resurrection, Life everlasting,
Regeneration, and the like, there is none of them so obscurely set down in
Scripture, but that the declaration of them has light enough to discover unto
us what that thing is which we do believe, so that we may give an account of
our Faith in that behalf. Nor is this knowledge of divine things by tht
evidence of the narration any peculiar privilege of the godly, but common unto
the unregenerate. For Charity, though it could wish, yet cannot be so blind as
to suppose, that every one who is able to interpret Scriptures, and to write or
preach soundly of the doctrines of Divinity, is a man truly sanctified by the
Spirit of grace. Experience and Reason make good the contrary, that a singular
measure of knowledge, and no measure of sanctification are competible. Who sees
not abroad in the world many wicked and ungodly wretches abounding in
knowledge, and yet destitute of all true piety? and is it not so in the Devil,
who as in knowledge he surpasses the best of men, so in malice far exceeds the
worst of all creatures? The cause is, for that, this knowledge is only a
degree and necessary antecedent unto saving Faith; and is not so essentially
linked unto it, but that it may be where Faith is not. Its easier to inform
the understanding than to subdue the will and affections, the mind may be
plainly taught, whilst yet the heart remains froward, unbroken and
untractable: the very heart and life of Faith is the strong inclination and
union of the Soul unto the truth and goodness of spiritual things,
preferring them in our choice above all other things whatsoever, which gracious
motion is the proper work of Gods spirit powerfully binding and drawing the
heart to embrace that good which is offered unto it: but it does not
necessarily follow the right and clear information of the Understanding.
Whence it is both possible and easy for an unregenerate Christian by the help
of common illumination to go far. I say by common illumination,
understanding thereby, that course of the Revelation of divine truths now
usual in the Church, consisting in the knowledge of all Arts, skill of
Languages, use of other men's labors in their Writings and Commentaries,
conference and hearing of the learned living, and accustomed painfulnesse in
study of any kind of knowledge. By these means, a Christian, presupposing the
truth of holy Writ, may in the state of unregeneration, prove excellent in the
understanding of Divine mysteries. He may understand all and every the
Articles of Christian belief, all Controversies in matter of Religion, all
duties of Piety in Christian practice, any Sermon or Treatise tending to holy
instruction, any place of Scripture of darkest and doubtfullest interpretation.
Yea, in these things many times Sanctity goes not so far as those common
graces do: and you may know by experience, that the holiest men have not been
always the happiest expositors of Scriptures, nor soundest determiners of
Controversies, but that both of Papists and Protestants many times men of
ungodly lives and Idolatrous profession have equalled and exceeded others in
their Commentaries and Treatises. And does not the trial of every day show
that many a wretched man and vile hypocrite may yet make so good a Sermon (even
about the most spiritual points of Christianity) and so heavenly a prayer,
that those who are of quickest sight, yet seeing him but a far off, may deem
him sound hearted? So easy a matter it is for love of this world, to learn
Religion by rote, and to teach the tongue to speak, what the heart does not
affect. This of the first conclusion, the next is this:

2. All Histories and Predictions are known unto the most illuminated
understandings, by no evidence of the things themselves, but only by evidence
of the relation.

I shall not need stand long in proving this conclusion. In many precepts and
doctrinall discourses, sense and Reason may have something to do, but in
matters Historical and Prophetical, Faith only bears sway. For Histories of
things past and gone there is no knowledge at all to be had of them otherwise
than from authority of Scriptures relation. That the world was drowned, Noah
saved in the Arc, etc, does not appear unto us by any argument from the
things themselves, evident to sense or reason, but only by the story. So for
Prophecies, promises, threatenings, they are not evident, till the event make
them evident. As that the Jews shall be converted, the Papacy rooted out,
etc. we know these things only by the Word foretelling them. In neither of
these kinds can our sense be informed, or our understanding convinced of their
truth, and therefore we must rest upon Revelation believed. Of these two
kinds principally is the Apostle to be understood, in that description of
Faith which he makes, Heb. 11. verse. 1. where he uses two words to express
the objects of Faith, the one (...), Things not seen; the other (...), Things
hoped for. Things not seen are of a more large extent, and comprise all both
past and to come; things hoped for have a special relation to promises of some
future good. Both are the proper objects of Faith, which is always drowned in
the sight of things that were unseene, and possession of things that were hoped
for.

The third and last Conclusion follows, which is this:

3. Precepts and discourses of Dogmaticall points mentioned in Scriptures are
in part known by the evidence of the things themselves, both to the regenerate
and also the unregenerate.

This conclusion is of manifest truth, as shall appear thus. In Scriptures
there are doctrinall discourses of diverse sorts: some of matters belonging to
Nature and Morality, others of mysteries peculiar to Divinity. Of the former
sort are those manifold allusions, similitudes, and other passages of Scripture
about the properties of living creatures, of Plants, of Mineralls, of Meteors,
and other natural things mentioned often in Job, Ecclesiastes, and diverse
other places. And also those sundry precepts of Oeconomickes, Ethickes, and
Politickes, scattered as in the whole body of Scriptures, so specially
collected in the book of Proverbes. Now in these things albeit it be true,
that by reason of our extreme ignorance in many things, which greatly
prejudiceth our exactness of knowledge in any, we do in part firmly rest
even in these common matters upon the truth of Gods revelation, yet it cannot
be denied but that they are in part evident unto our sense and reason. It were
no hard matter for a man that has but little goodness, to make an exact
commentary of all Philosophical matters mentioned in Scriptures: much grace
needs not to the writing or understanding of such a book as Vallosius his
sacra Philosophia. And there is no doubt but a mere Moralist or Politician, had
he no more goodness in him than ever was in Mach^avoll, should he but
diligently read Salomons Proverbes, the book of Ecclesiastes, and other parts
of the Bible that touch upon things within his Sphere, would evidently see that
there is in these Scripture-precepts the most pure and exquisite reason of all
true Honesty and Policy in the world.

But now in other points that are the more proper doctrines of Divinity of a
higher and more spiritual nature, some there are that can never be
comprehended by any evidence of reason, no not of the most illuminated in this
life: such are the mystery of the Trinity, the union of two natures in one
person in the Incarnation of Christ, That there is a Catholic Church, etc.
Some again there are which may be in part evidently known in their proper
nature, but yet only by such as are truly sanctified and illuminated by the
Spirit of grace; not by the unregenerate. I need give but one instance, it is a
large one, and takes up at least one half of Christian Religion: and that is
the whole mystery of man's Regeneration, and his estate in Grace in this life.
Wherein a thousand particulars there are clear and evident unto the sanctified
and spiritual man, which the carnal man knows no otherwise than by rote and
relation. That wonderful change which the Spirit of God works in raising a
sinner from death to life, the power of a saving Faith, the nature of godly
sorrow for sin, of peace of conscience, of joy in the holy Ghost, of Gods
sweetest mercies in the remission of sins, the infinite comfort the soul
finds in his favorable countenance, our communion with Christ, of the The
book of Canticles which treats of that spiritual and heavenly fellowship the
sanctified soul has with Christ, cannot be thoroughly understood in the true
life of it, but by those that are sanctified.
testimony of Gods Spirit and our Conscience in point of Adoption, the whole
art of our Spiritual warfarre, containing the wiles and subtle methods of
Satan and Corruption in tempting, with the admirable power of Grace and
Spiritual wisdom in making resistance and overcomming: these things, with
the like, wherein consists the very soul and life of Christian Religion, are
very riddles unto the man unregenerate, and when he hears them spoken of and
pressed upon him, his heart is overflowed with a kind of bitter humor
between admiration and scorn, that another should speak so earnestly about
that, wherein he finds no such great matter of consequence. No, he knows
these things only by the book, experience and evidence of them in his own
heart he has none; and therefore his knowledge of these things is cloudy,
uncertain, hovering, floting in superficial flourishes of Rhetorical
discourse, not piercing into the substance and life of the thing it self; and
where he comes near to it, it is but the imitation and bare repetition of
others inventions, whereunto his own barren head and graceless heart that
little to add of new store. Whence it falls out in common experience, that in
these points of Divinity, and in such cases of conscience as nearly concerns
the Spiritual estate of man: you shall have many a godly Minister of mean
gifts but of an holy heart, yea many a plain and simple man in regard of any
depth of other knowledge, that yet will discharge himself with greater skill
and dexterity, and give better satisfaction, than some of those that may
challenge the praise and admiration of being deep Divines and learned Teachers
in Israel. And this is no small fault wherewith Popish Schoolmen and Casuists
are taxed by our Divines, that even the words of Regeneration, Sanctification,
etc. are somewhat strange to be found in their writings, and that their
discourses and decisions in matters of that kind are intentionall, foreign,
dull, and heartlesse.

Thus we have seen touching this Object of Faith, namely, Gods written
Revolations, How far forth they are Evident and may be Known, how far forth
they are Inevident and must be Believed. Briefly thus, All things in Scripture
may be known by the plainness of the written narration, else the study of
Divinity were a vain and impossible attempt. All things in Scripture cannot be
known by the sight and evidence of the things themselves, for then were Faith
utterly taken away. Wherefore again, Points of Nature and Morality may be in
themselves evident to all, but the proper mysteries of Divinity can be in part
evident only to the Regenerate. Now by this we must learn what to judge of
the Popish doctrine, which makes Obscurity one essential property of Faith.
Faith, say they, is an assent given to any proposition revealed by God Propter
authoritatem revelantis: and two essential properties this assent has: 1.
Certainty, 2. Obscurity. Of Certainty we shall speak hereafter; concerning
Obscurity we yield unto them thus far: That all the Objects of Faith are
Obscure, that is, in the Apostles sense, (...), Things not seen, and
comprehended in their proper nature by our senses or understanding. And so not
only the more secret mysteries of Religion, as the Trinity, Incarnation, etc.
whose depth and largeness our reason cannot compass, but all other matters
Historical or Prophetical, which are easy enough to be understood, are
notwithstanding Obscure, that is, Inevident, not lying open to the direct view
of body or mind. But this does not please our Adversaries, it is not want of
evidence in the thing revealed, but want of perspicuity in the Revelation it
self which they understand by obscurity. Their meaning is thus, Faith is an
assent to obscure Propositions, that is, to Propositions not understood,
whereof we know not the meaning. I, this is it, this is (as a learned man
speaks) one root of Popery in grain, whence originally issues out that
black darkness of superstitious ignorance, which covers the face of all that
part of Christendom, where Romish tyranny has the upper hand. And yet that
we may here also gratify them a little, we confess that Christians can for
a need yield assent to such propositions whereof they understand not the
meaning. We have reason to yield as much respect to Gods writings as Socrates
did sometime to an obscure book of Heraclitus, (...), says he, (...); so when
in reading the Scriptures we meet with many hard sentences, and dark Laert. in
Socrat.
prophecies we know not the meaning of, we also can say, That which I
understand I believe for truth, that which I understand not yet I believe too
that is a truth whatsoever it be. But in this case it is manifest, that this
assent is full of trouble and confusion, and whereas faith gives rest and
satisfaction to the mind, this fills it with anxiety and distraction: will any
man not strangely careless and blockish, becontent with such a faith as this,
I believe I know not what? And if in some particulars, even pure necessity
cause us for the present to be contented with such a belief, because of our
ignorance: must it therefore be brought in as a general and essential
property of Faith, that it is an assent to things obscure or unknown? But this
makes much for the advancement of the Catholic cause, and therefore the
factors for Rome have reason to stand stiffely in defense of this their
doctrine, for so when they have dropped in the ears of their disciples, this
poison, that the faith of a Christian is an assent to things obscure, to he
knows not what, they have at one stroke nailed their ears to the doors of
their Church, and made them their slaves for ever, and won them over to their
blind Canonical obedience, as to believe, so to do they know not what. The
sum of our Adversaries doctrine in this point is briefly expressed by Becanus
in his Theolog. Scholasttom. 3. cap. 1. Quaest, 3. who therein follows his
leaders the rest of the Jesuits and Schoolmen. To the Question An Revelatio
primae veritatis, ut sit formale objectum fidei, debeat esse obscura? he
answers affirmatively, that Divine revelations as the objects of Faith must
be obscure, and that in a twofold respect:

1. Ex part^ rei revelatae: Revelatio enim non debet clard and evidenter
ostendere rem revelatam. A very strange conceit; Revelations must not declare
things plainly and evidently. why so? When God revealed his will to the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles did he not do it plainly, and did not
they clearly understand what was meant by the Revelation? They did. But happly
the Jesuits meaning is a little better. The revelation must not clare and
evidenter ostendere rem, that is, no revelation has this force of it self, Vt
rem revelatam exhibeat nobis Praesentem, ut clare and intuitive videamus rem
narrat^^. If this were all the Jesuits mean by this doctrine, we would
subscribe unto them, and willingly grant that revelation does not make things
Present and offer them to our view: for if they were present, and seen, what
need a Revelation? In this sense we easily admit the proofs which they bring,
for Faiths obscurity, out of Heb. 11. 1. that faith is (...); of things which
we behold not by the eye of sense, or reason: and out of 1 Cor 13. 12. (...).
True, the things that we believe, are now known by us in this life, no
otherwise than as we do know a man whose face we behold in a glass, but do
not behold his person: but our knowledge of the same things in the life to
come, is as when we know a man standing before him, and looking him full in the
face. So the Scriptures are (...), a glass wherein we may behold the shape and
picture of all things to be believed, but it is the picture only, not the
substance and body it self. Were this all our Adversaries intended, the
difference between us were at an end: things believed are obscure, id est,
Non-praesentes, non-visae: we grant it. But this does not fully fit their
turn; for though the things themselves be obscure, that is, not immediately
seen and looked upon, yet the narration of them in Scriptures may be
perspicuous, and plain to be understood. Now they like not this, all is quite
marred if they give way so far, as to grant that the Scriptures are plain to
be understood. This may not be tolerated in their Schools and Pulpits, and
therefore it is that in their Sermons and writings upon that subject they so
bestirre themselves like a heard of wild beasts, to raise up all the dust
they can, whereby to darken the light of that bright most Sun. And this is the
thing that they aim at in their description of Faith, when they tell us that
it is an assent to obscure propositions, their meaning is villainous to lay a
ground for ignorance and implicit belief, that it suffiseth a religious
Christian to salvation that he believe in gross the truth of all which the
Scriptures and Church do deliver, though he understand nothing at all
distinctly. Let him jumble over his Creed in Latin, and understand never a
letter, yet is he a good believing Catholic, and it suffices that the Creed
be recited by him in Persona Ecclesiae, as Becanus out of Thomas very
conceitedly affirms. Tom. 3. cap. 8. quaest. 1.. 10.
So in stead of distinct knowledge necessary unto saving faith, they breed in
their people a dull, turbulent and confused assent to something but they know
not what: which is indeed rather a stubbornness and wilfulness of
resolution, than the well advised belief of a Christian. Just so do Sorcerers
and Witches believe confidently in the virtue of a number of Verses, Spells,
Characters, etc. which they cannot tell what to make of: and such is the
Magical Faith of those whom the Romish Whore has bewitched with her
enchantments. Nor has this opinion of Obscurity in matter of Faith any ground
at all in those two places before alleged. For the first, in Heb. 11. ver. 1.
Faith is an argument of things not seen. Most true, they are not seen,
because Faith apprehends them, and sight destroies Faith. But what then, are
they unknown too? No, for Faith is (...), an evident argument even of these
things that are not seen. Yea, but whence does Faith fetch this argument? not
from the things themselves, for they are unseene. Whence then? from the
Revelation and Declaration of them in the word, which makes them clear to the
apprehension of the believer. Again, in that 1. Cor. 13. 12. [Wee now see
through a glass darkely.] True, we see things but as in a looking glass,
therefore we see them darkely: for let a man first view the shape of any thing
in a glass, and afterward look on the thing it self, his first knowledge of
it will be but dark in comparison of the latter. Nevertheless it is not so
dark and obscure, but that a man may describe what thing it is he sees; if
he behold a man's face in the glass, he may distinctly tell that such a man
has such a visage. In the like manner the Revelations of Scripture are like a
clear well polished glass, free from dust, ^lawes, crackes, or other
deformities: in them we may behold all the mysteries of Religion clearly
represented in their shapes and proper colors, so far forth as is needful
for us to see them in this life: and when attentively we mark what is shown
unto us, we may take distinct notice of every thing that is to be believed by
us, in all articles of Christian Faith. And this knowledge is in it self
distinct and clear, though compared with that other proper immediate beholding
of the things themselves, face to face as the Apostle speaks, it may justly be
termed Dark, and (...). Let one instance make all plain in Gal. 3. 1. the
Apostle says that Christ was described unto the Galatians (...) before their
eyes, (...), being crucified among them. Why this was not possible, that what
was done at Jerusalem on mount Golgatha, should be seen in Galatia many
hundred (...) 2. Cor. 3. (...).
miles from it. How then was Christ described and crucified in the sight of
these Galatians? It was in the clear and manifest declaration of him by the
Apostles preaching. Which though it could not make the sufferings of Christ so
evident unto the Galatians, as they were unto such as stood by the cross of
Christ and saw him suffer; yet so clear and distinct was the representation
thereof, (...), in the mirror of the Apostles preaching, that the Galatians
faith in this case was not an assent to things obscure which they understood
not. Its one thing then for a matter to be present unto us in it own nature,
another for it to be perspicuously and plainly set forth in a narration: in
which latter sense we affirm against the Romanist, that all objects of Faith
are not Obscure but Evident in those Revelations of them which are made in
Scriptures.

2. Ex part Dei Revelantis. For, non constat nobis clare and evidenter
revelationemillam propter quam credimus articulas fidei, a Deo factam esse. No,
is it not evident to us that the Scriptures are of God? To whom then? was it
evident to the holy men of God to whom they were first inspired? Yes, the
Jesuit grants that, but yet hear his words, Number. 12. [Prophetae and Apostol^,
says he, habuerunt tantum evidentiam revelationis, non autemevidentiam Primae
veritatis. Tamet si enim evidenter cognoscerent, Deum esse, qui ipsis revelabat
mysteria fides, non tamen evidenter cognoscebant Deum esse sum veracem, qui
nec falli possit nec fallere. Vnde sequitur assensum illorum quem habuerunt
circa mysteria fidei, fuisse obscurum, and ejusdem speciei, cum assensu fidei
nostrae.] See ye this Jesuit, how he would blow away with one blast all the
certainty of Christian faith, and so bring the matter about, that there shall
be no sure footing for it, unless it be in the authority of the Church, and
the Popes infallible fancy. Revelations of Scripture are not evident to us that
they are of God; to the Prophets and Apostles they were indeed evidently known
to be of God, but yet see the mischief, the Truth of God, the Revealer, was
not evidently known unto these holy men, nor were they infallibly certain,
but that God might and would tell them a lie. A foul blasphemy, and I know not
whether he do deserve the name of a Reasonable creature who is not himself,
or thinks there is any, that is not infallibly, evidently, and most certainly
convinced of this truth, that God cannot be deceived himself, nor will
deceive any. But touching this point, that we have no such obscure tottering
foundation for our faith, but a most sure and clear word, full of brightness
and majesty, like light shining into our souls, and by it own characters
discovering it own divine original; of this hereafter more fitly in handling
the certainty of Faiths assent.

Now in the mean time for conclusion of this first point touching the Objects
of Faith, How far forth they are Evident or Inevident, these two confectaries
may be noted out of what has been said:

1. Knowledge by sight takes away Faith: that is, so far as sight goes, but no
further: for as we said of Belief, in general, so here Evident Experience of
the truth in some things does help our Faith in other. Whence it is usual Fides
non habes meritam ubi ratio habet experimentum. Psa^. 77. John 20.
with the godly to strengthen their faith in the promises for time to come, by
calling to mind Gods mercies of old, and that evident trial of them they have
had in time past. And Thomas because he saw the Evident truth of Ghrists
Resurrection, did more firmly believe the rest of the mystery of man's
Redemption by him. But otherwise in the same things as sight waxes, so Faith
waineth, the greater light and certainty drownes the less; and where Knowledge
is perfect, the Faith, though it remains in the Habit, yet it cease in the
Act. This is manifest by that opposition which the Apostle makes between Faith
and Sight, 2. Cor. 5. 7. [(...),] what this walking by Faith is, is plain
Chap. 4. 18. [We look not on the things which are seen, but on the things
which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal.]

2. A distinct explicit knowledge of divine things in the Revelations of them
in Scripture, is necessary to the being of Christian Faith,

By explicit knowledge, I mean, the understanding of the articles of Belief,
so far forth as they are plainly declared in Scriptures. This Historical
knowledge (for so we may term it synecdochic^^) of the letter and meaning of
the Scriptures in such things as it proposes to be believed, is required to
the being of Christian Faith, as a necessary antecedent thereof. For though
this knowledge may be where Faith is not, yet Faith can never be where this
knowledge goes not before. Ignorant in this sense and Unbelieving are terms
reciprocal. As perfect knowledge by sight excludes Faith of the thing seen,
so does perfect ignorance of any thing destroy all Faith of the same thing. I
say, of the same thing; for a man may be absolutely ignorant in some things,
yet a believer in others: and therefore we do not mean that such an
explicit knowledge is necessary to faith, as that we must distinctly
apprehend all points of Faith, before we believe; for the Apostles (when yet
they were true believers) were ignorant in many Marc. 16. 22. [This shall not
come to thee] Mat. 17. 23. [They shall kill him, etc. and they were very
sorry.] Ioh. 20. 9. [They k^ew not the Scriptures that he must rise from the
dead] Act. 1. 6. Marc. 9. 31. ^2. about Christ's temporal kingdom. Act. 10.
14. 1^. 34. of the calling of the Gentiles.
articles of Faith, as Christ's Resurrection, Ascension, etc. But this we
affirm, that where there is total ignorance of any one article of Faith,
there can be no Belief at all of that article: as for example, He that says
I believe a holy Catholic Church, and yet knows not what a holy Catholic
Church is, what ever he say he does not believe it. That such a blind credo
is not properly an assent of Christian faith, I prove thus. To assent or
dissent is an action of the Understanding or of the Will: if of the
Understanding, the object of it is Truth or Falsehood: if of the Will, the
object of it is goodness or evil. For the assent of the Will the case is
manifest, that it does never assent unto and allow of the goodness of the
object, or dissent from and disallow the evil of it, until there be knowledge
and apprehension of both. For this approbation or reprobation of any thing by
the Will, cannot be without Election, nor Election without foregoing
deliberation and judgment of the understanding upon the thing that is chosen
or refused. Again for the Understanding, how can it assent unto the Truth or
dissent from the Falsehood of such things whereof it has no apprehension at
all? For so here should be an Act without an Object, at least an irrational
act of the rational part of man. For if the Understanding assent or dissent
without understanding of whereto or from what, is not a non-ens the object of
such an act? and is not such an act more like the natural propensions of
senseless creatures whereby they are carried to unknown ends, than the
judicial determination of a reasonable man? Though the things believed exceed
reason, yet the revelations of them are not above our knowledge; and our assent
unto them must be so far forth rational, that if we cannot give a reason of
the thing believed, yet we must give a reason of our belief.

A reason of our belief is then rendered when we understand that testimony and
authority wherein the thing to be believed is revealed unto us. This only makes
our assent reasonable. For as in Scientificall knowledge and opinion the
understanding never assents till the nature of the thing it self be known
either fully or in part: so in belief the understanding assents not till the
meaning of the relation or testimony be understood, what that thing is
distinctly, whereto it must assent. In the two former we give the reason of
our assent from the thing it self known, in the last we give the reason of
our assent from the authority of the revealer. In every one our assent
presupposes knowledge, in the former of the thing it self, in the later of
the Revelation, Wherefore that implicit faith of the ordinary Papist, who
following the doctrine of his Teachers contents himself that he gives his
assent in gross unto all what ever is in the Bible and Churches traditions,
that it is true, whilst yet he understands scarce any Article of his religion
distinctly: this their implicit assent is merely brutish and unreasonable.
Contrary to the express precept of the Apostle Paul, Romans 12. 1. commanding us
to offer unto God (...), a reasonable service; and Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 15. bidding
us be ready to give an answer; ((...), not a bare answer (...), but with a
defense) to every one that demands of us (...), a Reason of our Faith. Now it
would be known of the Romish Laiety what reason they can give for their faith,
what Apology they are able to make for it, when as they are utterly ignorant
of Scriptures the only reason and defense of our Faith. And is not their
service and worship of God, the very unreasonable motion of an unintelligent
beast, that's ordered by his driver but understands not why, and for what reason
and ground? Where particulars are not known, there may be a general kind of
belief. But this general belief is not an actual assent to the truth of any
particular thing revealed, till that particular be known and understood.
Actual assent to particular truths is then only when they are known: and
according to the increase of distinct knowledge, so this assent increases.
Before there is this distinct knowledge there can be no more but Praeparatio
animi, a resolution of the mind to yield assent to any particular if it be
once known: Which though it be good when we can do no otherwise by reason of
unavoydable ignorance, yet to teach that this is sufficient to true faith, is
to teach men to be careless of all religion. It Is good where there is knowledge
in part, and when for the rest, ignorance is seen, bewailed and avoided by all
earnest desire and possible endeavor to get knowledge in all points: but it is
monstrous flothfulnesse to be content with this, that in general we believe
all, though we assent to nothing in particular. This were indeed a short cut to
heaven, if no more were required to Christian faith, but to force upon ones
self such a resolution as this; Here is the Bible, I am resolved to believe
all that it says, but for particulars I Will look no further, let the Church and
those that are learned look to that. How far such a blind resolution is
from Christian faith and piety, besides experience, (which testifies that all
those who have true faith in some things, do always much lament their
ignorance, and eagerly desire the increase of distinct knowledge) the
Scriptures also do abundantly witness unto us. Wherein no exhortation more
common then this unto the increase of Knowledge, yea, (...), etc. as the
Apostle prays for the Collosians, Col. 2. 2. And for the Corinthians he
wishes the like, (...), 2 Cor. 8. 7. How many prayers of the Saints do we
find they have made for knowledge, every where mentioned? How often is Faith
and Knowledge coupled together? Ioh. 10. 38. 1 Ioh. 4. 16. etc. yea, many times
confounded and taken one for the other, 2 Cor. 4. 14. Esa. 53 ^1. Ioh. 17. 3.
etc, Again, this knowledge is easy to be had by the aid of the holy Spirit
inwardly inlightening and teaching the faithful, when they use such means as
he has appointed. See for that purpose, Ier. 31. 33, 34. 1. Cor. 2. 10. 12.
2. Cor. 4. 6. Ioh. 14. 21. where Christ promises to show himself visibly
[(...)] to those that love him. Were knowledge a thing impossible, or very
difficult, or unprofitable, some pretense there were to plead for ignorance,
but when it is so often commanded us, when it may be so easily had, when it is so
useful in the having, so dangerous to want it, its now impudence to patronize
ignorance as a friend to Religion, which is a professed enemy to man's reason.
Wherefore it is a shameless assertion of Bellarmine, De Iustif. l. c. 5. That
Faith may better be defined by ignorance than by knowledge. A pestilent
conceit, which once rooted in men breeds in them an horrible contempt,
distaste, and neglect of Scriptures and all Religion, as matters not possible
nor necessary for them to comprehend. But this is a gull put upon poor people
by the Clergy, thereby to excuse their own idleness in not teaching them, or
to gain the admiration to themselves for being the only oracles of Religion,
that so they may bear rule over the peoples faith. Or else the god of this
world has blinded these Leaders eyes, and they, not willing to go to hell
alone, put out also the eyes of the people, to the end they may not know more
than themselves, or all that themselves do, and so their knavery be
discovered. For us, let us detest a doctrine so contrary to the profession of
Christianity, that takes away all care and study after godly knowledge, and
makes way for the entrance of Heresies, Profaneness, and Irreligion: nor rest
we in our seach after divine things, till we be able to say with the Apostle
[I know whom I have beleeved] 2. Tim. 1. 12. and with the true worshippers of
God [Wee worship that which we know] Ioh. 4. 22.

Hitherto of the First Part proposed to be handled in the Definition of Faith
generally taken, namely, the Object of it, which are all Revelations of what
kind soever made by God unto the Creature. We come unto the Second point,
namely, the Subject in which this Quality of Faith is inherent, which in the
Definition was expressed to be the Reasonable Creature. Within which Latitude
we comprise all created understanding, whether of men or of Angels. Of living
men there is no Question, not of the best of men that ever were, Adam in his
innocence and Christ. That Adam had Faith it cannot be doubted by any who
knows that the cause of his fall, was his not perseuering in a firm belief
of that threatening, [In the day that thou eatest, thou shall die.] When his
ascent to the truth of this revelation once tottered, Satan presently closes in
upon him, and so plyes him upon the advantage, that he leaves him not till he
had laid the Happiness and Honor of that glorious creature in the dust. For
the Humanity of Christ, what was in innocent Adam, was also in him, as is
apparent by those [Prayers and Supplications, which in the days of his flesh,
he offered up with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him
from death] Heb. 5. 7. and that complaint upon the Cross in his greatest
agony. [My God, my God, why have thou forsaken mee] Mat. 27. 46. Those prayers
were made in Faith, and so [Hee was heard in that which he feared]: nor was
his complaint, though very pitiful, and fetched from the lowest depth of Misery,
without much strength of Faith, whilst yet he calls him his God, whom for the
present he found his enemy. Moreover, though Christ as the Son of man was
ignorant of the time of the end of the world, yet no question but he did
perfectly believe the Article of the last judgment. Touching Angels, we have
S. James testimony Mat. 13. 3^.
of the evil Spirits, Iam. 2. 19. (...) They believe that those chains of
darkness in which they are now imprisoned shall be everlasting, and that they
shall be made much heavier upon them by a multiplication of their torments in
the judgment of that great Day, as Jude speaks, Jude 6. This they believe
with such horror, besides a world of other particulars which by revelation of
Scripture they know will fall out. For there is no doubt but the devils though
they tempt men to unbelief, yet do themselves believe the truth of the
Scriptures, which they know well enough to be of God. Their rage and malice
against them, proves it evidently.

For the blessed Angels we cannot deny unto them nothing what we grant unto
the accursed, but as their knowledge of many things is more clear and exact
then it is in the Devils, so is their faith unto others much more firm and
resolved. Whence though they know not the day and hour of the end of the
world, Mar. 13. 32. yet they believe it with joy, expecting the augmentation of
their own happiness by access of the Churches accomplished ^ain. Idol. l. 1.
(...). 7.. (...).
glory. Nor do the Spirits of just men, who lived by Faith in this life,
utterly cease to live by Faith after their translation into heaven: for even
when they are there, they yet still believe many things both past and to come,
as the resurrection of their bodies, everlasting life, etc. And that prayer
which the Saints in heaven make for auengment of their bloodshed upon the
Earth, [How long Lord Holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood
on them that dwell on the Earth?] Reu. 6. 10. is certainly a prayer made in
Faith. Wherefore you see that every part of the world has faith in it, Faith
on earth, Faith in heaven and Faith in Hell too. Whereas there is Created
Reason, there also there is Faith. The reason is this, because Perfect Vision
only takes away all Faith: and where all things that may be known, are
evidently seen, and looked upon being comprehended in their proper nature,
there is no faith at all. But now there is no Created Intellectual Nature but
it may understand more by revelation, then it can comprehend Intuitiue, by
beholding the thing it self. And therefore all Future things which do nor
naturally depend upon necessary causes, cannot be known unto the Angels
themselves, but only by revelation from God. Whence the Apostle Peter speaking
of the mystery of man's redemption by Christ, 1 Peter 1. 11. affirms, that
even the Angels were greatly desirous to behold that wonderful mystery [(...)]
to sto^pe down and look into it, as we do into dark and obscure places.
For such was the mystery of the Gospel, even secret and hidden from the
knowledge of Angels, till God by revealing it unto the Church, made it known
also unto them: as the Apostle shows Ephesians. 3. 10. In like sort for matters of
Fact long ago past, even the Saints in heaven have no evident knowledge by
Uision, but only by revelation: they must still believe the stories of the
Bible, know them they cannot by sight, unless we should believe that vain
opinion, De Speculo Trinitati^, that the Saints beholding the face of God, do
as in a glass behold in Sin all things present to their view: which is justly
rejected by the learned as an impossible thing. We dare not be curious in
these things, pressing too far into those matters which we have not seen:
thus much we may with reason affirm, that God alone is without all belief
whatsoever: because he only is Perfect in knowledge, most distinctly
comprehending at once all things past, present, and to come, calling the things
that are not, as if they were: in whose sight all things are manifest yea
[(...)] Heb. 4. 13. stripped stark naked, and presented to his view in their
proper shapes. Only such an absolute infinite knowledge, takes away all Faith
in any kind whatsoever.

As for the creature, it knows but in part, and therefore it m^st in part be
always bound to believe, whatsoever the creator shall reveal unto it.

Thus in the general you see that tho Reasonable Creature is the Subiectum
quod of Faith: but we may yet more particularly enquire of the Subiectum quo,
in which Faculty of the Reasonable Creature, Faith is resident. In every
Intellectual nature there are usually made two Distinct Faculties: First, The
Understanding: Secondly, The Will. The Object of that is Truth: The Object of
this, Goodness. Now then Faith being an assent to the Truth and Goodness of
Divine revelations, we must see in which of those Faculties it is resident, or
whether in both. Our Adversaries teach that the Assent of Faith is an act of
the Understanding only, not of the Will. This opinion we reject as erroneous,
because Divine Revelations are essentially as Good as they be true, nor has
their truth any prerogative above their goodness: and so Faith is given but by
halues unto one part of the Object, where there is not as well an Election and
Approbation of the Goodness of it by the Will, as an ascent to the truth of it
in the Understanding. Wherefore we affirm that this Assent of Faith is an act
of the Understanding and of the Will, both together approving and allowing the
truth and goodness of all Divine things. In which assertion you are to note
that we do not make the Habit of Faith to be inherent in two diverse subjects,
nor this act of Assent to come from two diverse Principles, or two several
Faculties of the mind: but we affirm the subject is but one and the same,
namely, the intellectual Nature. For I take it with diverse of the Learned, yet
as they do under correction of the more Learned, that those Speculations about
the real distinction of Faculties in such Spiritual Substances as are the
Angels and souls of men, are but mere subtleties of the School, without any
true ground in nature it self. He that shall in an impartial search after
Truth and Full Satisfaction, thoroughly examine the same Distinction of
Faculties in the Sencitiue Soul, that the Common Sense, Fantasy, and Memory
are three powers of it really distinct, as in Nature so in place: let him but
examine the weakness of the ground of this distinction, and the inexplicable
difficulties that do accompany it, he shall find upon study of the point,
that it is no Heresy in Philosophy to hold, that our grand Master has herein
affirmed more then will be ever understood or thoroughly justified by any of
his Disciples. As in these material Forms, so much more in those Spiritual
Essences, Faculties have been multiplied beyond necessity, and that thought
to be done by more, that may be performed by fewer helps. Our Senses have in
this case deceived our Reason, and because we find in Compounded bodies diverse
actions and motions to flow from diverse qualities, we have therefore imagined,
that in Simple Spiritual Substances the case must be alike, and there is no
remedy, but we must Understand by one Faculty, Will or Nill by another,
Remember by a third. Whereas all these several actions flow immediately from
the lively and active essence of such a Spiritual Substance, without any such
distinct faculties that need come between the Agent and the Action. For our
purpose it appears, that the Understanding and Will are not distinct Faculties
that have distinct actions: Thus,

First, The Understanding essentially includes the Will. For the Understanding
has a natural inclmation to Truth, as the Will has to Goodness: It abhors
Falsehood, as that does Evil. This desire and love of Truth is (...), this
refusal and hatred of Falsehood is Nolitio: and so Velle and Nolle are actions
even of the Understanding too, and this proposition [Intellectus vulirerum, non
(...) salsum] is most true and proper.

Secondly, The Will essentially includes the Understanding. For to will or nill
any thing good on^uill, is an action either of knowledge, or of ignorance. If
of ignorance, then the Will in reasonable nature shall be an unreasonable
Faculty, which is blindly carried to the embracing or refusing of that, which
it self knows not at all, but only it is known to another faculty, the
Understanding. But this were an absurd imagination to make the Will Facultatem
non-intelligentem, and to appropriate unto it such a motion as is destitute of
knowledge, like a blind man that is led by the seeing he knows not whither. So
should the Doctrine of Free Will in any kind whatsoever, fall to the ground:
For how is the Will free, but because it may choose this or that? How can it
make choice, unless it do also understand, campare, advise, and deliberate
about the nature and consequences of things offered unto its choice? Wherefore
it is manifest, that Intelligere and Iudicare are actions belonging unto the
Will also, and that this proposition [Voluntas intelligit bonum aut malum] is
true and proper. Thus in regard of the actions Valends, and Intelligendi, we
have no reason to make a distinction of Faculties, where the actions are common
and indifferently agree to each of them. If one faculty can do both, what
reason is there to make two? And if the Philosopher be in the right, denying a
distinct faculty for the Memory in the reasonable soul, because the
Understanding suffices to that, for as much as eiusdem est seruare Habitus and
^^s vti, we have the same reason to hold the Understanding (...). l. 6. (...).
12, 31.
and Will to be no distinct Faculties, seeing, eiusdem est intelligere and
velle.

Thirdly, The Object of the Understanding and Will are one and the same. For
Truth and Goodness are essencially the same thing. In Natural things it is
most plain, that their Truth and Goodness is all one. Their goodness is
nothing but the Truth of their Being in their perfect conformity to Gods
understanding and will, when their Essence and Qualities are perfectly the same
which they had by their creation. When the Creature is as it was made, then it
is both True and Good: so far as any part of truth is lost, so much of
goodness is gone. And this appears by the contrary; Malum and ^alsum in the
creature, opposed to this natural goodness and truth of it, are both but one
thing: namely, any Defect or Excess in the parts or degrees of their Essen^e
and Qualities, otherwise then according to the Truth of their Creation. Such
defects and excesses we call Errors, Untruths, and Evils in nature. So that if
we consider Truth and Goodness in the nature of things themselves, it is not
possible to make any real distinction between them. What things are in our
opinion, it matters not much. Our conceit we have of them, makes them not
either true or good. Nor is gold and precious stones any jot the better or
worse, because civil nations have them in greatest account, or Tartars and
other Sauadges despise them as toys and unnecessary to man's life. Where the
Essence of any thing is entire and perfect, there is Truth and goodness,
though all think nothing, or think otherwise of it. And let us think as long
as we will, we cannot conceive any natural thing as true, but we must conceive
as Good too. Witness all I ogicke rules, Philosophy, Mathematickes, there is
no conclusion, how unpleasant soever it seem to be: but if it be apprehended
as True, it also affects the understanding with joy, delight, and contentment
in the goodness of it. It delights because it is true, and so Truth quatenus,
Truth is good. So that unto such as ask, wherefore are the Mathematickes good?
I answer, Because they are True: a part of Gods created truth, of which it is
blasphemy to hold and affirm that any the least part is evil and naught
worth, nor deserving a man's study. All Truth is amiable, like God the Author
of it: and goodness is so essentially incorporated together with Truth, that
they cannot be severed in our knowledge or affection. Now in moral and Divine
things the case is much more plain, That their Truth consists wholly in their
Goodness, nor can it be imagined, how virtue should be said to be true, but
only because it is good, or what the Truth of Grace is, but only the
Goodness of it, Wherefore generally that rule is Cortaine, Bonum and Verum
conuertuntur, and their praedication each of other is not only in the
Concrete, Verum est bonum, but also in the abstract, Ver^ est bonitas, and o
cont^. (...). And so the Scripture takes these two indifferently, as Genesis 1.
31. When God had created all his works, he looked on them, and saw that they
were Very Good. They were true as well as good, but one includes both. And John
8. 44. it is said touching Satan, that He abode not in the Truth: that is, in
that perfect and good condition wherein God created him, for he fell from his
goodness, as well as from his Truth.

By this it appears that this distinction which is made between the truth and
goodness of things, is not from their Nature, but from our esteem and conceit
of them. We measure the goodness of things by our own ends, and the use we
have of them: such things as fit our purposes and are proportionable to our
necessities, those we account good, and Such things we make the Object of our
wills, because we desire them, with a more notable degree of Constancy and
vehemence: Other things, though very good in themselves, yet because they touch
us not, and our desire of them is slight and vanishing, we make them the object
of our understanding only, as if we apprehend in them nothing but bare Truth.
As for example, he that shall discourse unto an intemperate man in his
temperate mood, how shameful and unseemly a thing it is for a Christian to
be overcome of drink, to be a servant to his appetite, to wallow in filthy
pleasures, to be seen in base company, and hase places, and shall tell him
how comely and commendable a virtue sobriety is, how gracious an ornament of a
man, how necessary a duty in every Christian: when you tell him of these
things, he understands you, and assents not only to the truth, but to the
goodness of what you say. But here is the mischief, his resolution stands
otherwise, sottish delights prevail against all sober advise, and the stronger
desires of pleasures drown those faint affectious toward Temperance. How in
this case, the truth and goodness of the virtue commended, is but one thing:
and the intemperate man did a^t that same time apprehend and approve of both in
general, wishing that it were with him, as it should be, and is with other
men. But now when anon after he comes to put in practice what he thus knows
and allows of, long Custom and ill persuasions do so far darken his former
apprehension of the Goodness of the thing, that now there seems to be nothing
left in his head but a general notion of the Truth of that which he heard at
such a time. So then, Truth and Goodness are not two several things, nor
apprehended by two several faculties: but one and the same thing, known and
desired by the same faculty. The difference lies only in the diverse degree of
our apprehension, which varies according as the things apprehended seem to
have more or less agreement with our particular uses and necessities. Where
matters fit us in particular, there our desires are Strong and Constant: When
they agree to us only in the general, then our General Desires not well
rooted, are choked and stisled by contrary affections in the particular
performance. It fares with men as it did with Shimei; Salomons commandment of
not Departing the City is Good, till Shimei have a Servant take his heels and
run to Gath: and then Shimeis belief of Solomans threatening must give way to
his Covetous desire of recovering his runnagate Servant. 1 King. 21. 38.
So in matters of Religion, men know and approve of their truth and goodness
in general, wishing that themselves had all the grace and piety which is so
much spoken of, but when after they compare it with their more pleasing
contentments in this or that kind, they renounce the Goodness of Religion, and
hold it only as a Truth. Of which diversity in assenting to the goodness of
things in general and in particular, more shall be spoken hereafter in the
next point.

For conclusion of this point touching the subject of Faith, we do not
appropriate faith either to the Understanding, or the Will, nor yet refer it to
both, as unto two distinct faculties; but we place it immediately in the whole
intellectual Nature, whether of man's soul, or of Angels. In which we follow
the sentence of the Scriptures, that seat Faith in the whole heart; as Romans
10. 10. [With the Heart, man belieueth unto righteousness:] and Acts 8. 37.
[If Luke 24. 25. [O souls and flow of heart, to ^elieue all the Prophets hau^
spoken.] (...). 6. ^0.
thou belieuest with all thine heart.] Now it is a thing manifest that in
Scripture the heart is taken for the Whole soul with all its powers and
operations, as of understanding. 1 King. 3. 9. Solomon asks of Godan
[vnderstanding Heart] of Willing, and Choosing. Act. 7. 29. [In their hearts
they went back to Egypt.] 1 Cor. 7. 37. [He that st^n^^th firm in this Heart]
i. in his purpose and resolution. Again, of the Affections, Mat. 6. 21. [Where
the treasure, there is the Heart also] i. Love: for Romans 1. 24. of the memory,
Luke 1. 16. They did those words in their hearts: so Luke 21. 14. We need not
go seek ont any trouble some distinction of faculties, wherein to place
faith, seeing the Scriptures speak simply of the whole soul, and neither
Nature nor Scriptures do intimate any necessity at all of mal^ing such a
difference.

We come now to the third and last point proposed in the definition, or the
Genus under which it is comprehended, that is, Assent: about which we must
enquire after two things.

1 The Certainty of this Assent of Faith. 2 The Diverse Degrees and Essential
Differences whereby the assent of Faith in Gods Elect is distinguished from all
other Faith.
The Certainty and strength of our assent unto Divine Truths, springs from
these three fountains,

1 From the Infallible Authority of the Revelation. 2 From the excellent
greatness and worth of things Revealed. 3 From the manifest experiment of some
part of their Truth, known unto us. Of these in order.
The first and chiefest ground whereon is built the Certainty of faiths assent,
is The Infallible truth and Authority of Divine Revelations. I call this the
chiefest ground, because it is that whereunto finally all our Belief is
resolved. For ask the question, wherefore do you firmly believe the Articles
of the ^reed? The answer is. Because God has revealed them in Scriptures, to
be believed. The reason of which answer is this, because, What ever God says,
istrue. Now this is a principle in Nature, as well known to the reasonable
creature, as that they have reason, it is graven deep upon the conscience of
every one, which tells him, That God is so infinitely Wise, that he can be
ignorant of nothing, that none can circumuent and over each him. And again,
that he is so infinitely good, holy and Just, that no ^ie can come of this
truth; as John speaks; John 2. 21. Wisdom it self cannot be deceived,
Truth it self cannot deceive; and God is both. Wherefore none but a Jesuit
like Beca^, whose wits have served an apprentiship in the mystery of lying and
aequiuocation, under the Father of ^ies, would have affirmed, that the Prophets
and Apostles, though they knew it was God that revealed heavenly mysteries unto
them, yet they knew not Evidently whether God was not deceived himself, or
would not deceive them. Alying surmise much like that of the Serpent when he
tempted the Woman, Yea says he, has God indeed said so? Yes, the woman
answers, God has said so, and we know it. But Satan replies, Are you sure
that God spoke true when he said it? The Devil then denied it, and Becanus
staggers at it, as a thing very doubtful, telling us, that when God speaks.
man cannot be evidently certain whether he speaks true or false: But we reject
with abomination such a suggestion to Infidelity, that strikes at the root of
all Christian Faith, and shakes the lowest foundation-stone in all that
building; we know and are evidently assured, That God is truth, and in him, or
of him, there is no Lie. From this first ground of faith in Gods Essential
truth, we draw another, that whersoeuer any Revelation is certainly known or
believed to be of God, there the reasonable creature does fully assent to the
truth of things revealed. Whence all the holy Penmen of Scriptures did for
themselves most certainly believe the truth of all things they delivered,
(though sometimes they understood but darkely, 1 Pet. 2. 10. 11.
what was the meaning of that which they spoke and wrote) because they knew
that they were taught them immediately from God. Yea, the devils themselves,
when they know, as they do, these revelations to be from God, howeuer they
tempt men to distrust, and out of malice, raises up lies and slanders upon Gods
truth, yet in the mean time are themselves clearly convinced of this truth,
and do assent unto it in their consciences. The devil knew well that Gods
threatening to Alam was a certain truth, even whilst he persuaded him it was
but a lie. And when he inspired the Pharisees to call Christ. Samaritan,
Beelzebub, a possessed Daemoniacke, a Deceiuer, and all to naught, even then
himself could not but confess that he was that Christ Jesus, the Son of the
most high God: Mar. 5. 7. But this is the malice of Hell, to sight against the
Light, and furiously to oppose what we cannot but acknowledge to be truth.
Well, Thus far then our Faith goes upon a sure ground, That whatsoever God
says, is true: And again, When we know evidently that God says it, we are
ready to believe it without further question. But here in the next place is all
the doubt, How know we infallibly that God is the Author of the Scriptures,
and that such things as therein are proposed for us to believe, are revealed by
God himself?

This is a fundamental Question, wherein it greatly behoues every Christian to
be rightly informed. It would require a large discourse to be prosecuted
through every particular: I shall but only touch upon the general, and give
occasion to each one carefully to bethink himself, that his faith be built on
the rock, and not upon the Sand.

The Question is, How is it known certainly that the Scriptures are the very
word of God? it has two branches.

1 Toaching each several part of Scripture, as it was revealed and given to
the Church of God, How did the People of the Jews know, that what was
delivered by Moses and other Prophets after him, from time to time, was the
word of God? To which I answer, they knew the writing and Preaching of Moses
and the Prophets, to be of divine Inspiration, partly by the holiness of the
Doctrine which they taught, the lively power and work whereof the hearts of
the godly then felt, partly by the miracles which they wrought for confirmation
of their prophetical office, partly by the certain and infallible
accomplishment of all their prophecies. Of which trial of Prophets and their
prophesies, we have a general rule set down, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. etc. I will raise
them up a Prophet from among their brethren like unto thee, and will pur my
words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I command him. 19.
And whosoever will not hearken unto my words, which he shall speak in my
name, I will require it of him. 20. But the Prophet that shall presume to
speak a word in my name which I have not commanded him to speak, or that
speaks in the name of other gods, even the same Prophet shall die. 2^. And if
thou think in thine heart. How shall we know the word which the Lord hathnot
spoken? 22. When a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if the thing
follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord has not
spoken; but the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously: thou shall not so be
afraid of him. By the same means were the preaching of Christ, also the
preaching and writing of the Apostles known in their times.

2 Touching the whole Scripture as it is now completely delivered unto us in
writing: How can it evidently and infallibly appear unto us, that what we
find written in the Bible, is of divine inspiration, the very oracles of God,
not man's Inventions? In the solution of this Question, our adversaries of the
Romish, and we of the Reformed Churches differ irreconcileably. We affirm
that the Scriptures are known to be of God by themselves: they maintain, that
we cannot be certain of the Scriptures Divinity by any other argument, then
the testimony of the Church, which say they, does infallibly propose unto us,
what is to be believed, what is not to be believed. So that ask a Roman
Catholic, Wherefore do you certainly believe such and such Articles of Faith:
His answer will be, Because the Church, which can discern what is, what is
not of God, has infallibly decreed such and such things to be believed.
Against which impious doctrine, we except, and say, That by this means our
Faith is resolved either into nothing at all, or at the furthest, but only into
humane Authority.

1 That is resolved into just nothing, but runs round in a Circle like a
mill-horse. For ask a Roman Catholic, why do you believe the Pope cannot
err? His answer is, because the Scripture says so, Tues Petrus etc. and,
Orauipro te ne deficiat sides tua, and Sum v^b scum ad consummationem saculs:
with such other places. But how know you that those places are Scripture, and
that that is the right meaning of those places? He answers, because the
Council of Trent and the Pope say so. Yea but how know you infallibly they do
not err in saying so? He answers, Because the Scripture affirms, they
cannot err: for, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock, etc, This is the Fayries
dance, wherein men smitten with the spirit of giddiness, are led round in a
ring, being never able to free them, or find any resting place whereon to fix
the assurance of their Faith.

2 That at best, their faith is resolved finally into Man's Authority. Which
appears thus, ask a Papist. Why do you believe Purgatory? He will say,
Because God in his word has revealed it as an Article of Faith. Zach. 9. 11. I
have loosed thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water, i. out of
Purgatory, and Luke 16. Lazarus was carried into Abraham's bosom. i. into
Purgatory. with such like. Well, but why do you infallibly believe that this
is Gods word, and that this is the meaning of it? He says, Because the
Church, i. Counceis and Popes say so. He can go no further, unless he will
run round. Here then he must stay, resting his Faith on man's Testimony and
Authority. Which he does manifestly, forasmuch as it appears not by any
argument from the Scriptures themselves, that such a doctrine as Purgatory is
contained in them, and therefore he assents to the truth of it finally and
only because the Church for sooth, has conceived the meaning of those places
to be such. Now this is not to believe the Scriptures, but to believe the
Opinion of the Church, that is to say, of men like our selves. Here Tom. 3.
^l. School. cap. 8. q. 8. Quo^odo resoluating (...) si^e?
Becanus helps at a dead lift by a school distinction, thus.

Fidesresoluitur Formaliter in Deumprimam veritatem reuelantem. Directive in
Ecclesia^ propter infallililitate^ propone^dt.

The shift of a Sophister. What Faith is it that is thus resolved, Theological
or Humane? Neither says he, Theological Faith is resolved into Gods
authority; Humane is resolved into man's authority; as to believe an Article,
because Calui^, or Lutber teach it, or say we, because Pope Paul the fifth,
Gregory the 13. or any other Pope, Cardinal, Bishop or Bishops teach it. What
says is it then which is resolved into the Churches authority? It is says the
Jesuit, neither says, neque pure diuina, neque pure humana, sed quasi media
inferior is cuinsdam ordinis. Just so I take it, men use to speak when they
cannot tell what to say, It is Quasi, and Aliquomodo, and Alicuius generis,
etc. It is something, if they could tell what. But be it what it may be, if it
be not a divine Faith, What shall become of the vulgar sort in their Church,
must they be saved by such a middle kind of Faith between Divine and Humane?
This is a new way to heaven of the Iesui^es invention, wherein it will be a
matter beyond his skill so to conduct a poor unlearned Catholic, that he step
not aside, leaning too much vpo^mans authoriti, whereon he should not trust at
all; and too little on Gods, on whom he should altogether rely. Plain folk
have no skill in such nice distinctions, of believing God Formaliter, and the
Church Directive: and it will trouble the authors of them to give a reasonable
meaning of them.

For what is it to believe the Church Directive; is it to be drawn by the
Churches direction in the ministerial Preaching and application of the
Scriptures, unto belief of the Articles of Faith? We grant such a resolution
of our faith into the Churches authority, as a motive to induce and persivade
us to believe. But Becames denies that the Church is to be reckoned inter
motiua fidei, and Ibid. Number. 7.
therefore he must needs account it, inter formales rations fidei, as a case
of reason and proper foundation of our faith, whereinto it is resolved
formaliter. And so it is, for there is never a Papist that will believe any
thing that God says, but only for this reason, because the Church allows of
it. It is not the light and Evidence of Gods word, by it own self, Euincing
its own Divinity, and Interpreting its own meaning, it is not this they rest
upon; if they did, what need they go further? but it is merely, formally, and
directly the Testimony and Opinion of men, whether Fathers, Councels, Popes, or
whomsoever they please to style the Church.

This impiery is horrible, and so maine an error in the foundation of Faith,
that it makes the whole frame to ^otter, fastening the consolation and Hope of
man, upon the uncertainty of another man's testimony, thereby throwing him into
inextricable difficulties and doubts; besides offering intolerable indignity
unto God, in giving such authority unto his servant and vassal, as tends to
the contumely of the Lord and Master. For so it is when a few men met together
in a Councell-house, or one poor sinful illeterate Pope shall be deemed of
power sufficient, and judgment infallible, to set themselves down upon the
bench, and to call that word which shall judge them at the last day, unto the
bar, and there to interpret, ratify, or nullify, what and how themselves best
pleases. We might wellbe ashamed of our religion, when we dispute with
Athiests and infidels, if we had no better reason to confirm our Religion,
but our own testimony, because we say, it is the truth: and the Romish Church
might blush, when she pleads for her infallibility from those places formerly
mentioned, and yet in sine has no other warrant from them but only this, it
is so; and it shallbe so, because she her self has decreed that only to be
the true meaning of those Scriptures.

But to leave these absurdities and blasphemies, and come to the truth; that
which we maintain touching the Certainty of the Scriptures Divine authority,
is this, viz.

That we are infallibly ascertained of the Scriptures Divinity by the
Scriptures themselves.

I or as in other Sciences there are always some principles Per se not a and
indemonstrabili^, whence other things are proved, so in Divinity, all
conclusions in point of Belief and Practice are proved by the Scriptures, but
for the Scriptures they prove themselves by their own natural light,
manifesting their Divine Original whence they are, and their right meaning how
they must be understood. They are Primum ^^sibile, not like Color which cannot
be seen till light make it apparent, but like Light it self, which makes all
other things manifest, and it self too, by it own proper Quality. Wherefore
when we are asked, why we do believe the Articles of the Creed; we answer,
Because they are revealed in Scripture: Again, How are you sure the Scriptures
are the Word of God? we answer, we know it by the Scriptures themselves, the
Spirit of God opening our eyes to see those natural and lively caracters of
Divine truth, which are imprinted upon those sacred volumes. Lastly, If we be
asked, How know you that this is the right meaning of such or such a place? We
answer, We know it by the Scriptures, which being diligently examined and
compared together, plainly discover their own right expesition. In these
answers we rest, finally resolving our Faith into the Word of God alone, and
nothing else. As for the Authority of any one man, or all men in the Church,
we give it all due reverence according to its place and degree. We acknowledge
the Decisions of Councels and Synods about controuersed Articles of Religion,
the continual Preaching of the Word by the Ministers thereof, the manifold
expositions of Doctrines of Divinity, and Books of Scriptures by the Learned
in their Writings, all these we acknowledge with due regard and thankfulness,
to be blessed means for the breeding and growth of Christian Faith: because
they all do or should point us unto the Scriptures, holding forth the light of
them, that we may the more clearly diseern it in its true brightness. Thus
they are helps to make us see the truth, but no causes why we belee^e it: this
we do for its own sake, not their saying. And unless what they teach, do
appear unto us clearly out of the Scriptures, we freely confess, that
although their Reverence will cause us to Suspend our Judgment, and thoroughly
to examine the Cause, yet their bare authority cannot command our assent to
any article of Religion that shall be proposed unto us. The rule of the Apostle
prohibits us, 1 Cor. 2. 5. Our faith may not stand in the Wisdom of Man, but
in the Power of God.

Our Adversaries here think that they have us upon an advantage, and caught us
in a circle too, as if we also ran round from the Scriptures to the Spirit, and
again from the Spirit to the Scriptures, thus: How know you the Scriptures to
be Gods Word? By the Spirit revealing the same to my heart and conscience. But
how know you this revelation of the Spirit to be true? By the Scriptures that
testify, The secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him: Ps. 15.
But how know you this and the like places of Scriptures to be Gods Word? By the
Spirit, again. Thus they suppose we are entangled: but they mistake us and our
doctrine greatly in this particular. We teach indeed that we know the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, by the Spirit of God inwardly Revealing and
Testifying the truth of them unto our Consciences. But it must here be
diligently observed, what kind of Revelation or Testimony of the Spirit it is
whereby we may be said to be sertified and assured of the Scriptures Divine
Truth. It is not any inward suggestion and inspiration different from those
revelations that are in the Scriptures themselves as if the Spirit did by a
second private particular revelation assure me of the truth of those former
revelations made in the Scriptures. We have no warrant for any such private
revelations now, nor is there any need of them; and such as look for them, may
easily embrace their own presumptuous fancies, in stead of a Revelation from
heaven. How then does the Holy Ghost reveal unto us the truth of Scriptures? I
answer, By removing those impediments that hindered, and by bestowing those
graces that make us capable of this knowledge. There is in us a twofold
Impediment: First Ignorance, whereby our eyes are closed that we cannot see the
light (...) Second, Corruption, whereby, although we see the light, yet we
cannot but naturally hate it and turn from it. The Holy Spirit cures both by a
double remedy: First, of Illumination, restoring our decayed understanding to
some 1 Job. 2. 27. of the ^no^uting.
part of its primitive perfection: Second, of Sanctification, infusing into our
desires and affections some degrees of their primitive Holiness and purity.
By this work of the Spirit, Opening the eyes of our minds that we may
Understand Luke 24. 45.
the Scriptures, and see the wonders of Gods Law, and also Rectifying our
corrupt affections, that we may love and embrace the Holiness of Divine
things: by this means, I say, is the Divine truth of Scriptures revealed to
us. For presently upon this Opening the eyes of our minds, we see the glorious
brightness and light of the Scriptures shining into our hearts, and we
discern in them the apparent characters of heavenly Majesty as clearly as a
seeing man beholds the Sun. Also, after this renewing of our Sinful
inclinations, we find presently that our Souls, and those things which the
Scriptures do reveal unto us, have a singular sympathy one toward another,
our love that we bear to the beauty and Holiness of the Word is strong, and
that command which the Word has over us, is most powerful and awful: so that
now we have as kindly a relish of the goodness and excellency of Scriptures,
as a healthful stomach has of wholesome food. By these things which we
clearly see in the Scriptures, and evidently feel in our selves, we are fully
ascertained in our souls that none but God is the Author of so He menly and
Holy Mysteries. In this sense we still pray for the Spirit of Revelation, Ephesians.
1. 17. so called in that place, because it inlightens the eyes of our
understanding, as in verse. 18. that then we may see the excellency of Divine
mysteries revealed to the Church. Other inward and secret revelation of the
Spirit we acknowledge not in this business. Now there is no such circle, as
our Adversaries would drive us into, but a plain and straight way. How know you
that the Scriptures are Gods Word? We answer, By the Scriptures themselves: by
that wonderful light and excellency of truth and Holiness shining in them.
Here we would rest and go no further. But yet if we be asked. How we come to
see this Light? We answer, It is by the only work of the Spirit of God, giving
us eyes to see, and hearts to love this Light. If we be further urged, How know
you that you do indeed perceive such a light as you speak of, or how can you
make it appear to another, that you are not deceived therein? To these
questions we answer. That the former is idle, just as if one should ask him
that ga^ then the sun, How know you that you now see the Light: And for the
What can he answer but this, I know it, because I see it. To demand a reason of
bence, it absued.
later, it demands an impossible thing, as if a blind man should require him
that sees, to prove unto him by sound argument, that he beholds such or such
things: which cannot be done. In short, A man enlightened and sanctified by the
Spirit, does perceive the truth of holy Scriptures infallibly by their own
proper light and for his own proper use; albeit he be not able to demonstrate
so much to another, to make him see what himself does.

Now here we should go further in the explication of this assertion, that the
Scriptures are known to be the Word of God by themselves; and all such
arguments as do demonstrate this truth, should be laid forth before you. But it
would take up a long discourse, and the point more directly belongs unto those
general controversies about the Scriptures, which are moved between us and the
Papists; amongst which, this touching the Infallibly certainty of Scriptures
is at large handled and maintained by the Learned of our side. Amongst whom,
the learned ^ackson deserves due praise and thanks of all that love Learning,
for his diligent examination of this point, in his first and second Book of
Commentaries upon the Apostles Creed. Books that are fruitful of exquisite
observation in this kind, and being as painfully studied as they are with much
diligence and labor compiled; will I persuade my self give much satisfaction
to those that honestly seek for it. I conclude all touching this point with a
threefold admonition, which by way of application I shall briefly dispatch,
intending only to persuade every one not to slight so serious a matter, but
carefully to examine upon what certainty his faith is built.

1 Admonition is this, That in this enquiry after the Scriptures certainty, we
must look that we give satisfaction unto our own souls: but that is
impossible to satisfy all others who are disposed to cavil. The truth of
Scriptures is known unto them for whose benefit they were written, namely, the
elect: and as in another case the Apostle spoke, Romans 11. 7. The elect, have
obtained it, the rest have been hardened: so here, The ^lect do see this
light; the rest are blinded, Wherefore, when the eyes of our understanding are
opened, to see the wonders of Gods Law, to behold the admirable majesty,
purity, holiness, and oxcellence of divine revelations in the Scriptures, when
we feel upon our fowls the awful commanding power of them to bind our
consciences unto obedience, to master our unruly lusts, and wholly to captinate
us unto their Soueraignety; we must not now begin to doubt of the truth of
this which we so sensibly see and feel, because another cauils, and dispises
us, and will not be won with our persuasions to think as we think. For he
that sees the Sun, has no cause to distrust his own eyesight, because he
cannot persuade a blind man by any argument possible that he beholds a most
glorious and excellent light.

2 Admonition is to put you in mind of that danger, wherein careless men, who
build, without having laid a sure foundation. Come to most men and ask them,
Why do you beliue the Scriptures, and these points of religion out of them?
Their answer is, Because they be the Word of God Yea but what persuades you
to think so? Here they are staggered, and have nothing to say, but they are
lead unto this belief by Custom of Education in a Christian Church, wherein
the Scriptures Divinity is generally received for an undoubted truth, and they
believe what they see others doubt not of; else it were a shame for them. But
in the mean time themselves have never labored to get infallible assurance
unto their own consciences, from the Scriptures themselves, by prayer, study,
and all due observation. Now what is the issue of such an ill grounded belief?
I Will tell you: it is partly Disobedience against, and Apostasy from the Truth,
partly Despair, and loss of all comfort in time of need. Where there is only
a slight opinion of the Scriptures authority, there easily follows
Disobedience to all their commands. Tell the Ambitious and distrustful
worldling; That the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, is first
to be sought for, and then other things shall be cast upon him: That godliness
is great gain. That Humility goes before Honor, etc. Tell the unclean
person, that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Tell the Drunkard.
That they who do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Tell the
Swearer. That for Oaths the land mournes, and God will not hold him
guiltless, that takes his name invaine: What do these men think when the
Scriptures are thus brought against their faults? Do they verily believe that
this is the word of God? They will not say otherwise for shame of the world;
but who can believe that their consciences are thoroughly convinced of it, when
there is to be seen so strange a disproportion between their Faith and
practice in these particulars? No, they laugh secretly in their hearts, at the
simplicity of silly men, who tremble at the word, and dare not for their lives,
venture upon the practice of such things as it forbids, which they mean while
freely follow to their great contentment. Furthermore, these men that do thus
rebel against God in one religion, will be ready, if occasion serve, to revolt
from that unto another religion, seeing the grounds whereupon they embrace any
religion, are alike in all. Besides, let me tell them thus much, that this
loose and unsettled faith, is one of the ficry darts, and forcible engines of
Satan, whereby he affaults and overthrows the hope and comfort of many a dying
man. Who having not strengthened himself on this point, by undoubted arguments
and experiments is there laid at, where he lies open and unarmed by such
cunning cauils, shifts, and elusions brought against the authority of
Scriptures, that the poor man not able to clear himself from such
suggestions, falls into an universal doubting of all Religion, and at last,
percciuing his Faith has only grasped at the air, and embraced the empty
shadow of man's authority, instead of the Substance of Divine truth, he is
utterly confounded, and sinks down in despair. If I am able to judge any
thing of the Methods of Satan's temptations, I dare say, that this weapon is
reserved usually for the last combat, and that many a man's faith has perished
upon this rock both in life, and especially in the last agonies and conflicts
with the powers of death and darkness.

3 Wherefore let this be a third Admonition, that every one of us be well
advised, to provide our selves of such arguments for confirmation of our faith
in this point, as will hold water, and abide the siery trial of Satan's
temptations. Vnde seis? is a sore question, and Satan can tell how to enforce
his arguments with better skill then any Iesuie and Heretic. Wherefore let us
look to it in time, that we waver not; but may be (...) rooted and stablished
in the undoubted persuasion of this Col. 1. 23.
truth. We are all very backward in this study (and that's one argument the
Scriptures are divine, because our wretched sinfulnes cannot brook them.) And
again, we are very dull of understanding in these things (which is also a
good proof that they come from a most divine understanding, because our
Natural wit is sharp enough in other things, yet comprehend not these
mysteries) but yet for all this, let us be persuaded with prayer in humility to
follow the counsel of Christ. Search the Scriptures, and the Commandment of
our King the servant of Christ, to set the Scriptures in the head of our
studies, therein laying a sure groundwork of our belief before we have to
do with men. Following this course, we may be bold to expect a full resolution
of this great Question; and experience will in the end make it manifest, a most
sure word (as S. Peter calls it, 2, Pet. 1. 19.) whereon to build our faith. We
shall find that this word is a light shining in a dark place, and that God who
in the creation commanded the light to shine out of darkness, will by this
means shine also into our hearts, to give us the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, as it is, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Thus doing, we
shall be constant in our Religious profession while we live, and also
unconquerable in our Spiritual consolation when we are to dye.

Hitherto of the first ground whereupon the Strength of Taiths assent is built,
namely the infallible truth of Divine Reuelatinos. I proceed unto the next two:
the former whereof is,

The Greatness and excellent worth of the things revealed. They are not toys
and tristes, matters of small moment, that God proposes unto us to be embraced
and believed: But they are the Great things of his Law, that he has written
unto us, Hos. 8. 12. A Law that is Perfect, converting the soul; a Testimony
that is Sure, making wise the simple; Statutes that are Right, rejoicing the
heart; Commandments that are Pure, enlightening the eyes; Judgments that are
True and Righteous altogether, more to be desired then what men desire most,
then Gold, yea then much fine Gold, sweeter then the Heny that droppeth from
the best Honey comb, as the holy Prophet David, Ps. 19. 7. etc. most
emphatically amplifies the dignity and worth of that part of Scriptures which
was in his time given unto the Church. Since then we have a large increase of
this heavenly treasure, The Gospel fully revealed and written for our benefit,
containing in it, The Wisdom of God, and that in a mystery, hid from the
princes of this world, 1 Cor. 2. 7. the deep things of God, v. 10. the riches
of his glorious mystery, Col. 1. ^7. the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians.
3. 8. All both Law and Gospel, old and new Testament are full of admirable
perfection, goodness, and excellency in themselves, and toward us they
contain matters of greatest consequence in the world. He that does these things
says the Scripture, shall live in them: if he do them not, then Cursed is
every one that continues not in all the words of that B^oke to fulfill them.
Again, He that believes shall be saved, he that believes not shall be
damned, Mar. 16. 16. No less matters are set forth unto us in Scripture, then
Blessing and Cursing, Salvation and Damnation, Grace and Sin, Gods favor and
his Displeasure, Heaven and Hell. Now lay all things in this world together,
there is nothing worth the speaking of in comparison of these, or that can bear
any proportion of worth and greatness with them. Wherefore this ought to be a
forceable motive unto us to give all diligence, that we fasten our faith upon
these things with all strength and steadfastness, not barely and slightly
passing them over as things of little moment, but laying them up in our hearts
by deepest and most attentive meditation. It is strange to see how ^xedulous
and apprehensiue men are in other matters that may concern them in their name,
goods, or life. Every little circumstance is enough to persuade them to a
strong belief of that which they fear or hope for. But in matters of religion
there is scarce any thing will' work upon us, we heed not what we hear or
read, promises or threatenings, exhortations or admonitions, all is one to us,
we pass little for one or other, but as the i^^es of old, we count these
things as Strange matters that little concern us. Naturally we are all
Atheists and Insidels, and that of Saluian is true even of the best of us. Omma
a mamus, D^. Gub. lib. 5.
omnia colimus, solus nobis in comparatione omnium Deus vilis est. We can study
any thing but the Scriptures, we can believe any thing but Articles of
Christian Religion, we can love any thing but God and goodness. The truth is,
we do but talk of Religion, being far from any thorough apprehension of the
excellency and worth thereof, whence it comes to pass, that our thoughts of it
are slight and vanishing, our affections toward it cold and forced, our
belief of it nearer to a fancy and weak imagination then a well grounded
faith. Wherefore let us henceforth value Divine things according to their worth,
esteeming of them as better to us then thousands of gold and silver, or
whatsoever is by the world had in highest account. Hence shall we gather
strength and vigor to cleave faster unto Religion in Faith and zealous
affection.

The last ground remains, whereupon the firmness and strength of our assent
stands: and that is,

The manifest experience of some part of the Truth of those things we believe.
It is indeed a commendation of Christian faith that it can believe before and
against Experience. And Abraham's faith is herein a glorious pattern to all
others, who believed strongly the promises, when for a long time he found but
small performances, as may be seen in the story of his life. But gen^^ally
Faith is but weak till it be confirmed by Experience: this gives it life,
making the Heart of a man strong in Confidence and Resolution. See this in an
example or two, 1 Samuel 30. we find David and his men in great distress for the
loss they had sustained at Z^kla^. David sorrows as well as his servants, and
his loss is as much as theirs, but this does not pacific them. David is their
Captain, and they think this nuthap comes by his fault: so in their rage they
intend to stone him. What shall David do in this case, he is but one man in the
midst of a f^rious multitude, slight or resistance cannot help him: see how
his faith helps him out in this exigent. He was now in danger, but he had bin
in as great many a time before and very narrowly had he escaped the snares that
Saul and his Courtiers had laid for his life. But God delivered him there, and
thence he is confident God will help him now. Wherefore when his men rage and
chafe, and forget all faith in God, and respect to their Captain, David is
quiet, and Comforts himself in the Lord his God, as in verse 6. The like
strength of Confidence we find in the same holy man in his combat with the
Philisti^n. 1 Samuel 17. where from experience of Gods help in time past
defending him in his lawful calling, against the Bear and the (...) yon, he
confidently assures himself of the like assistance and victory in that his
right^ous quarrel against the uncircumcised Philistim, v. 36. The same course
takes the Psalmist in Psalm. 77. where being in great affliction and tentation,
he strengthens himself in hope of comfort, by the consideration of Gods
works of old, and all his mercies heretofore showed unto his people. Thus
experience breeds Confidence, and we readily trust him whom we have once
thoroughly tried. Where let me commend unto you a point of Christian wisdom,
the practice whereof will cause a singular increase of Faith in us. It is this,
that we would carefully give our minds to observe all such experiments of Gods
mercies or judgments on our selves or others, as we can take notice of:
comparing the particular event that we see with the promises or threatenings
that are generally delivered in the Scriptures. Look over all the passages and
courses of thy life, and mark wherein God has done unto thee according to his
Word. Thou praiedst such a time seruently, and he heard thee: in such or such a
business then committedst thy way to him, and he brought it about according to
thy desire, beyond thy expectation: thou wast cast upon this or that
extreamitie, and God when thou soughtest to him delivered thee beyond all hope:
such a Grace thou did want, or such a Sin thou would^t feign be freed of, God
helped thee to the one, and against the other when thou did follow such
directions as his Word prescribed thee: at one time thou sinnedst, and as God
had threatened, so wast thou plagued: at another time thou did some good
work, and receiuedst a blessing according to the promise. Again, look abroad
and see how God deals toward others. See in one place a Kingdom plagued for
Idolatry; in another a Country professing true Religion, yet undone by the
wicked lives of the Inhabitants: see here a Usurer, Briber, Oppressor, and
cruel incloser, that has raised his fortunes by all unjust dealing, it may be
whilst he lives himself and family turned out of all a begging, or in his
third heir all this wealth blown away, his name and posterity rooted out, or
left for a curse and reproach upon the face of the earth. There behold a
murderer pursued at the heels by strong vengeance, that never leaves him till
his blood be shed that has shed the blood of another. See elsewhere an
Adultorer eaten up by the secret curse of God, which deuoureth all his
substance no man knows how. One the other side mark how God blesses
Kingdoms, Families, and private persons, wherein, and by whom Religion,
Justice, discipline, civility and sanctity are professed, and in truth
maintained. If we would use diligent observation in this kind, it would quickly
appear unto us, that God is most constant in his courses, That the Scriptures
do contain in them a perpetual and infallible rule that hold true in all
times and ages of the world, according to which God ever has and always will
order his provident administration of all things. We should see the same
punishment still attending upon the same sins, and the like rewards to be still
bestowed upon the like virtues: that God is as near to help us now as ever he
was, and also as swift and strong to plague as he has bin toward men of old
time. This would prove of singular use for the strengthening of our Faith, when
we shall evidently see the event of things to answer in just proportion the
revelations made touching them in the Scriptures. The gross neglect of this
has bred in the world those monstrous sins of Atheism and Infidelity,
wherewith this age is infected as much as any. We have indeed, praised be God,
the Word read and preached, unto us plentifully: but where shall we find the
man, that does [(...)] walk exactly by this rule. Making the precepts of the
Word the ground-plot of all his practice as the Apostle would have us, Gal. 6.
16. When they behold many strange accidents in the world, do they, think you,
judge of them by the Scriptures, searching into them for the reason and cause
of those things, and thence concluding with the Jews in Zach. 1. 6. As the
Lord of Hosts has determined to do unto us, according to our own ways, and
according to our works so has he dealt with us. Nothing less; they have no
such thought come into their minds as this. Lo here how true the Lord is, such
a promise, or such a threatening set down in such a place of the Scriptures. So
likewise, for the getting and using of wealth, honor, friends, learning,
health, or other good things of this life, for the general dispach of
business in men's callings, for the avoiding of troubles that come upon them,
think you that men do call the Word to counsel, as David did, and do they
out of the Scripture take a platform of all their proceeding, applying the
general rule to cuerie particular occasion, and thence observing the Event
accordingly? No, they think of no such matter, and it seems a strange motion
to them, that you will offer to persuade them to love by the Book. They follow
no such rules; the good they onloy, or the evil they escape they thank God
for it in Complement, but are indeed beholding to their wits, friends, and good
fortune: it was their direction they took, and thought of nothing further.
Thus for the greatest part of men, God is not in all their ways, their eyes
are never toward heaven to consider the works of God, and to regard the
Operation of his hands, their thoughts are ^sa. 5. 11. etc.
never upon the Word to observe how every prescription thereof, has its
Probatum est written under it in visibl^ characters of every days experience.
Let us not my brethren walk as fools, but as wise, having our eyes in our
heads to take notice of all such occurrences as have upon them a character of
Gods special work of Providence. If they be abroad in the world, learn
thereby that conclusion of faith which Ps. 58. 11. is gathered from the like
observation [Verely there is a reward for the righteous, Verily Ioh 39. 29.
he is a God that judges the Earth.] If they be private that concern thee in
particular, take such exact notice of all passages of thy life, that thou may
be able to declare unto another and say [Come and hear all ye that fear God,
and I will declare what things the Lord has done for my soule] Ps. 66. 16.
This experimental observation of things past, will fill the heart with
boldness, and confident expectation of the like success for the time to come.
And so much touching the three grounds of Certainty and Strength in the Assent
of Faith.

I come now to the second point proposed touching this Assent, or the diverse
degrees of it, and those essential differences whereby saving faith in Gods
Elect is distinguished from that Faith which is in others. We have showed you
that faith may be in all reasonable creatures, and the Scriptures testify that
there is some kind of faith in the Devils, and wicked men. We must therefore
enquire what their faith is, and what the faith of Gods Elect is, by what
essential difference they are distinguished. You are therefore to observe,
that this assent, by which generally all Faith was defined is twofold.

1 General to all Divine Revelations as good and true whilst barely considered
in themselves, or as they have no opposition to our desires being applied to
ourselves.

2 Particular when assent is given to all Divine Revelations as most true and
good in regard of our selves when they are applied to all our particular
occasions, and compared with all contrary desires and prouocations.

Herein lies a substantial difference of this assent of Faith; there being a
great Diversity between an Assent unto the truth and goodness of things
taken in the general, and an Assent unto the truth and goodness of the
samethings particularly applied, as you shall see in the progress of this
discourse. The former is but an inferior degree of Faith and only a step unto
that faith which is true and saving. It is commonly called by two names: 1
Historical Faith, synecdochically from one part of the object of, because it
believes the Letter of the Scriptures, whether Histories or doctrines that are
expressed therein. 2 Temporary Faith, from the Event and issue of it, because
it perseueres not unto the end, but fails in time of Temptation. It is but one
and same degree of faith that has these two names, which assenting to things
in gross, flies off and disallowes when it coms to particular application.
Such a general assent there is in the Devils, who know the Scripturs to be of
God, and acknowledge the things contained in them to be in themselves, true and
good because from God, though meanwhile they hate both the one and other
bitterly. The truth of God his Word, Essence, and Attributes works upon their
understandings a deep apprehension of its certainty and excellency, even when
they with unspeakable hatred and horror think of it. According James says,
They believe and tremble. James (...).
Such a Faith there is in thousands of Hypocrites and reprobates, who being
enlightened, and convinced of the Truth of the Word, yield a general assent
unto it for the time, as in those Luke 8. ^3. Who receive the Word with joy,
but they have no root: which for a while believe, but in time of temptation go^
away. In those Heb. 6. 4, 5, Which were enlightened, tasted of the heavenly
gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, And have tasted of the good
Word of God, and of the Powers of the world to come, are salve away. In those,
Many that believed in Christ's Name, but yet Christ would not trust them,
because he knew them all, that they were not found at heart, Ioh. 2. 23, 24. In
those many again that at another time believed in him, but Christ gives them a
caveat that they look their faith be ^ound, (...) ye continue in my Word, ye
are verily my Disciples, Ioh. 8. 30. 31. Such a faith was in Simon the Witch,
Act. 8. 13. who believed the Apostles preaching and was baptized, even whilst
yet he remained in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, i. a ^ierce
enemy to that truth which he seemed to believe and profess, and fast bound
unto the love of those sins that he seemed willing to forsake, verse 23. Such
a conception of Faith there was in Falix, who trembled when he heard Paul
dispute of righteousness, temperance, and the judgment to come, Acts 24. 25.
He believed and like the Devils trembled. But Faelix was not temporate, his
wife Drusilla Drusillam a priore eius marito Azizo Emiseuorum rege bland: it is
abduxerat Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 5.
was another man's wife: Felix was unrighteous and covetous, and looked for a
bribe, and this likes him not that Paul should come so close to him, wherefore
he has a shift, and put him off in complement to a more convenient season,
which Faelix will take at leisure. The same imperfect faith there was in King
Agrippa, who hearing Paul's Apology, could have found in his heart to have
been a Christian, had it been a thing in fashion with Kings at that time,
Acts 26. 28. So was the Case with Herod, who heard John Baptist gladly and
reverenced him as a Just man and holy, and did many things willingly, Mark 6.
20. But if John be so bold with H^rod as to tell him of his Incest, He shall to
prison for it, and for all that he is a Prophet, yet he shall dye, if Herod did
not fear the multitude, more then he reverenced John, Matthew. 14. 5.

And thus it is with many men still, who know the Scriptures, and assent to
the truth of such things as they contain; but this goes no further then
generalities, whilst they approve and allow of such things, as they know, to
be good and excellent, considered abstractiuely and in the Universality, and
as they do not cross them in any of their maine desires and delights. And so
long they seem to be as forward in faith and practice as the best.

The Causes of this Kind of Faith in men are many: as,

1. That common grace of the Spirit whereby men are enlightened in the
knowledge of heavenly things. Which grace God bestows upon the unregenerate
and unsanctied more for others than their own good. Some light shines upon
them, whereby they may know and assent unto divine truths for a common good of
the Church, that others may be instructed by their teaching. For Christ in the
building of his Church does also use the help and ministry of such men;
according as Solomon did in the building of the material Temple, who employed
not the natural Israelites, but the relics of the Cananites and strangers
that lived in the land, to be bearers of burdens, and hewers of stone, and
overseers of the work, 2 Chronicles. 2. 17. And these men though unsanctified and
such as do not themselves heartily esteem and affect that which they know,
yet in the general they believe it and willingly teach it to the benefit of
the Church. Again,

2. Authority of men in high account for their knowledge and wisdom. The
esteem that the people had of John the Baptist to be a great Prophet, made
Herod reverence him the more: and the fame that went of Christ drew many to
hearken to his doctrine. And so it is still with hundreds whose faith in matters
of religion stands or falls with their admiration or disesteeme of men's
persons. The same effect has the general custom and consent of the times and
Church wherein we live, whereby men are: they know not how nor upon what firm
grounds drawn to believe those things which they see others hold and maintain
fortruth. Lastly,

3. Some extraordinary work or event confirming the truth of Religion. So did
Miracles in the time of Christ and his Apostles persuade many to believe who
were notwithstanding far from being true believers: as Ioh. 2. 23. [Many
believed in his name when they saw the miracles which he did], but it was not
good crediting of them that believed only upon miracles, therefore Christ
[would not commit himself to them] ver. 24. And thus the Magitian when he saw
the signs and great wonders which were done by the Apostles, he believed and
wondered, when yet his heart was not right in the sight of God, Act. 8. 13. 21.
By these and the like means is this imperfect and general kind of Faith
wrought in men, destitute of all inward grace and holiness. Such motives as
these cause this assent; but there is no Internum principium, no root in
themselves (as our Savior speaks, Mat. 13. 21.) whence this belief
springs: no thorough sanctification of the soul conforming all the powers
thereof unto the purity and holiness of divine things, and inclining the
affections to a constant embracing thereof. These men like Religion well, and
commend it as men do costly Jewels set forth to sale: but when it comes to
the point that this Good Pearl of great price is to be bought, then if God
will let Matt. 13. 45. 46
them have it at their own rates, there is a match made, they will believe, and
be religious, if God withal will spare them the use of some sins and
pleasures they love well: but if it must be purchased at Gods price, with the
sale of all that they have, they are no merchants for such a hard bargain;
with the yongue man they shrink away, sorrowful that heaven cannot be had at
a cheaper rate. Thus when it comes to the proof in particular application and
practice, this kind of faith vanishes away and comes to just nothing.

Thus you have the explication of this first degree of Faith, and withal you
see that this faith falls greatly short of that perfection which is required
unto that says which is saving and justifying. Nevertheless our Adversaries
of the Romish Church maintain that this assent is that justifying Faith
whereof the Scriptures speak.

Their opinion touching this point is sufficiently declared by Becanus, who
follows the rest of that rabble. He Theol. Schol. Tom. 3. cap. 8. q. 1.
disputing of the act of justifying Faith, rejects the Lutherans opinion, who
place Faith in the will and make it to be Fiduciam de misericordia Dei propter
Christum: and says that the doctrine of the Catholics is this, that faith
belongs to the understanding, and is nothing else but Credere sive assentiri
eis quae a Deo revelata sunt. Thence he sets down this Conclusion,. 6.
Actus fidei consistit in assensu quo quis assentitur alicui propositioni a Deo
revelatae propter authoritatem revelantis. In this definition there are two
parts, 1. the Object of this assent, Propositions revealed by God. 2. The
essential difference of this act, taken a formaliratione credendi, and that is
to believe propter authoritatem revelantis. By this says Becanus Cap. 8. q.
2.. 2. assensus fidei constituitur in sua specie essential, that is, the
assent of Faith is made supernatural and justifying, when we believe things
because God has revealed them: for, says he, if articles of faith be believed
upon other motives, as upon man's authority, etc. then this assent of faith is
natural, as in Heritickes and Devils. So then according to Popish doctrine,
that faith which justifies us, is nothing but a bare assent of the mind to
such things as God reveals, because of Gods authority that revealed them. Than
which explication of the nature of justifying, faith nothing can be poorer, and
more below the majesty of so high a grace as faith is. I will trouble you but
with two reasons; proving that this kind of assent is not that faith whereby
we are justified:

1. The act of justifying faith must needs be supernatural, such as cannot be
done without the aid of special grace of Gods spirit. But unto this assent
there is required no such special grace, therefore it is not an act of
justifying faith.

The Major is evident and granted by the Schooleman, Cap. 8. 4. 4. that
something there is in faith above nature requiring a supernatural cause:
whereto the Scriptures plainly enforce him Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace ye are saved
thorough Faith, and that not of ourselves: it is the gift of God. Phil. 1. 29.
Unto you it is given for Christ that not only ye should believe in him, but
also suffer for his sake. So Ioh. 6. 45. Wherefore. 3. he teaches that this
act of assent must be supernatural, partly in regard of the Object, id est,
divine revelations, and partly in regard of the principium or cause by which it
is produced, id est, non per solas naturae vires, sed per auxilium gratiae. We
agree then in the Proposition. For the assumption, That there needs not any
special grace of the Spirit to work this bare assent unto the truth of divine
revelations; this we prove out of the same Schoolemens doctrine, who teach
that the Understanding assents not, unless the Will command it, because, say
they, the act of believing is absolutely in our treewill, Cap 8. q. 5. Well, be
it so. But now, say we, the Will may without the help of grace command the
assent of the Understanding; which we prove thus:

Whatsoever the Understanding by the only light of Nature judges to be honest,
that the Will can desire by the only strength of nature.

But by the only light of Nature the Understanding judges that it is an honest
thing to believe Gods authority revealing any thing to us: therefore the Will
by the only strength of Nature may desire this act of believing, and so
consequently there is no need of Grace to move the Will to command the
Understanding.

It Is Becanus own argument against himself, cap. 8. q. 5. 9. Whereto he would
feign give an answer if he could tell how. Something he says to that Minor
proposition, whereof he thus distinguishes. The Understanding by the only
light of Nature judges it a thing honest to believe Gods authority when he
reveals any thing, Via ac modo naturali, not when he reveals any thing, Via
ac modo supernaturali. Believe it, a rare distinction and full of mystery.
Divine Revelations are of two sorts, supernatural and natural. Again, when
God reveals his will to us by natural means, then the very light of Nature
teaches us that it is honest to believe his authority. But if he reveal
things to us by supernatural means the light of nature does not teach that
it is honest to believe him. Can any thing be more senseless? or will not every
man in the world, excepting a Jesuit, confess, that the very light of nature
teaches him to acknowledge, that it is a very good and honest thing to believe
Gods authority, let him reveal his will unto us which way he please. But it is
the fashion of these writers, to dorre their readers with a distinction, and so
to leave them with a prius conceditur, posterius negatur, distracted and
confounded, rather than any whit satisfied. This of the first reason, That a
man may believe without the help of Gods grace; the second follows, which
also confirms the former: viz.

2. That is no act of Justifying Faith which is found in Devils, Heretics,
Hypocrites, and Reprobates.

But this assent unto divine Revelations, because of Gods authority, is in
those both devils and men. Ergo It is no act of Justifying Faith.

The major is agreed upon, that the acts of Justifying. Faith are found only
in those who are justified: which cannot be said those persons mentioned.

The minor is likewise evident, That Devils, Heretics, Hypocrites, and
Reprobates, may and do assent unto such propositions as God reveals, and that
because of Gods authority who does reveal them. This has been formerly
showed unto you in the explication of the nature of a general Faith; and it is
so clear by Scriptures and experience, that our adversaries cannot deny it.
The forenamed Schoole-man grants it manifestly, as concerning Hypocrites and
wicked livers, who yet profess the Catholic Faith: for disputing, Cap. 8. de
Habit. Fidei, touching that virtue which is infused into the Will, whereby it
may if it list command the Supernatural assent of the Understanding,
heetelleth us that this Virtue is a distinct virtue from all others, and is
neither Charity nor Obedience,. 10. in conclus. and that it is perfect in it
self though it be without them, according as other moral habites of justice,
temperance, etc. are. Whence he tells us. 11. in plain terms, Potest esse
sin^ charitate, ut patet in Christiano peccator^, qui Fidem habet sieve gratia
and charitate. A Christian that is a sinner, may have Faith without grace and
charity. What, Justifying Faith? yea according to the Romish Divinity; for he
may believe the truth of the articles of Religion, because of Gods authority
who has revealed them: and to do this is a Supernatural assent, and the
proper act of Justifying Faith, as these men teach.

Now touching the Devils and Heretics the man is a little more coy. He will
not confess that the Devils yield that assent of Faith he speaks of. They do
not believe the mysteries of Religion Per assensum supernat uralem, i. e.
because of Gods authority: but Per assensum quendam naturalem, qui non oritur
ex pio affectu, sed ex vi and pondere argumentorum, quibus intellectus illorum
convincitur, cap. 11. quaest. 2.. 4. We grant willingly that they do not
assent out of any good affection; nor is that needful to make their assent
supernatural: for in hypocritical, impenitent, and reprobate Catholics
there is no pious affection moving them to believe, and yet if we believe their
Doctors, there is in them a supernatural assent of Faith. But for that other
thing, That the devils believe only ex vi and pondere argumentorum, it is
utterly false: seeing it cannot be doubted but that they believe the truth of
many future contingents, whereof they are not convinced by any force of argument
from the things themselves, but from authority of Gods Revelations in his Word
or otherwise. Which infallible truth of God in all his revelations, is so
clearly apprehended by these damned Spirits, that it makes them to acknowledge
the truth and goodness of that which otherwise they abhor. Wherefore that
comparison which he makes Ibid. 5. 5.
between the faith of (...) and wicked Christians, is most vain and erroneo^
(...) ^ith he, you consider the faith of either of them, w^ ^egard to the
Object, there is par ratio, both being ^d about the same things. But if you take
it with r^^ard (...) honesty of the act, so the assent of the Devils is farr^
(...) than that of bad Christians, who have faith an^ ^rkes. But wherein? He
tells us, The Faith of Ch^ Supernaturalis, Voluntaria, and Honesta The Faith of
Devils is Naturalis, Coacta, and pravis circumstantijs vitiata. All which are
false. For the Faith of Devils is Supernaturallas much as that of wicked
Christians: seeing both believe propter authoritatem Dei revelantis, which is
Cap. 8. q. 2.. 2.
formalis ratio of Supernatural assent. Again, the Faith of devils is as
voluntary as that of wicked men; for it cannot be wrought in either by
compulsion simply: and if the Majesty of Gods infallible truth command the
assent of Devils to that which they love not, does not the same cause also
prevail with ungodly men, who bear as little true affection to God and
Goodness as the devils do. Lastly, the Faith of Devils is as Honest as that
of wicked men. For let any man speak, Is it not as Honest a thing for wicked
ang^lls to believe what God says, as it is for wicked men? If not, wherein
lies the dishonesty of that act in the angels, or wherein stands the honesty
of that act in men? Can there be named any circumstances which make the Devils
Faith dishonest, but that the same or as bad may be alleged against the
honesty of the Faith of wicked Christians? Sure I am what everthese men conceit
of the Honesty of Faith without works in men, Saint James is plain in his
comparison, that it is no whit better than the Faith of Devils, James 2. 19.
[Thou beleevest that there is one God, thou do well:] [the Devils also
believe it:] and do not they do well too? Yes happily better than thou; for
they believe [and tremble] which thou do not.

To conclude, in the last place we object that Heretics have such a kind of
Faith, as the Romanists call Justifying. For though they err in some articles
of Faith, yet others they assent unto because of Gods authority revealing them.
This Becanus denies, telling us that Heretici qui ve^ in uno articulo sunt
infideles omnem fidem amiserunt, cap. 11. quaest. 3.. 4. which answer he makes
upon this ground, That the Habit of Faith is lost by any one act. of
infidelity,. 2. and therefore whereas Heretics believe many things, it is but
upon a kind of custom, and by a humane faith. We reply and say, that that
position; One act of infidelity destroys the habit of Faith, is false and
contrary to reason and Scriptures, as hereafter I shall have occasion to show,
speaking of the opposites of Faith. For the point, we grant that He who is a
persevering Heretic though but in one fundamental article, he has no
justifying faith, not because he has lost it, but because he never had it. But
we affirm, that for that other general faith in assenting to the truth of
divine things because of Gods authority, this faith as he had when he was a
Catholic, so he still has it in part now he is an Heretic: and by the same
faith he believed matters of Religion before his Heresy, by the same he
believes them afterward. And those that are Heretics indeed, or such whom we
style by that name, let them be asked why they believe such and such points of
religion, they will answer truly and resolutely they believe them because of Gods
authority that has revealed them in his Word; and for such things wherein
they dissent, could they be persuaded the Scripture did teach the contrary,
they would for the same authority sake believe the contrary. The Jesuit is yet
urgent upon us, and tells us that no Calvinist or Lutheran believes Gods
authority, but doubts of it. We tell him again that's a foul slander, and
more than he can make good: yes that he will, by a distinction too. Gods
authority considered Abstractive in it self; so indeed we doubt not of. But
Gods authority considered practice in respect of the Church as it is proposed
unto us by the Pastors of the Church, so we doubt of it, because we admit not
the judgment of the Church, but follow our own fantasy, ibid.. 7.

To this we answer, that we pass very little to be judged Infidells upon such
a ground, because we call in question the supposed infallibility and authority
of the Romish Church. We find in Scriptures no such straight relation between
her authority and Gods authority, that if we call hers in question, we must
needs doubt of his. We doubt not of the authority of Scriptures: but we deny
that the Romish Church has any infallible authority of judging and
interpreting them. No one man, nor all men ought to usurp such authority over
our faith. And let the truth be judge who be the greater Insidells, Calvinists
and Lutherans that believe the Scriptures authority for its own sake, or
popish Catholics that will not believe but for man's saying. Thus you have this
second reason somewhat largely; that Faith which our Adversaries call
Justifying, is in Devils, and ungodly men; therefore it is not that justifying
faith which the Scriptures speak of and appropriate unto the Elect, Tit. 1. 1.

Here it is but a vain shift our Adversaries make to run unto that poor
distinction of Fides Formata, and Bellar. de* Iustific. l. 1. c. 15.
Informis: namely that Faith may exist two ways;

1. Vt est conjuncta cum charitate, ut in homine iusto: and then Faith is
called formata and viva, because Charity is Vita animae. In this case, Faith
can Elicere operationes vitales seu aeternae vitae moritorias. Gal. 5. 6. Faith
works by Charity.

2. Vt est separata a charitate, quod fit in homine peccatore, qui amissa per
peccatum mortale charitate, retinet fidem quamdin Catholicus est. This Faith is
called Informis and mortu^, nec potest habere operationes vitales, seu
meritorias. Iam. 2. 17. Faith if it have no works, is dead in it self; and
ver. 26. as the body without the spirit, etc. Becan. tom. 3. cap. 10.. 4. 5. 6.

Thus they would have the quality and proper act of justifying Faith to be in
reprobate men and devils, but yet it does them no good, because it is without
Charity. Faith without Works may be in its nature justifying Faith (because
it is an assent to the articles of Religion upon Gods authority) but yet it
justifies not, because it is without works. Hereunto we reply, that in this
distinction there is not a syllable of sound doctrine, nor yet of reasonable
sense. Thus much we grant, that there is according to St. James. a kind of
^aith without Works, namely a general assent unto the truth of divine things:
but we deny that this kind of Faith is for the substance one and the same
with that Faith which is properly called Justifying. Faith without works is of
one kind, Faith with works is of another; not only in regard of consequent,
because one has works, the other has not: but in regard of their proper
nature, because the quality and acts of the one differ from the quality and
acts of the other. Wherefore in vain do they tell us that the same Faith is
sometime with, sometime without Charity: Justifying Faith is never without
Charity, and that which is, is not Justifying. Unto that conceit that Charity
is the form of Faith, we say it is Metaphysicall, and such as no good
construction can be made of it. He says Charity is Vita animae, he would say,
Vita fidei; but take his meaning, Faith lives by Charity as the body by the
form or soul. Here 1. It Is absurd to make one habit of the mind the form of
the other, we may as well say that Temperance is the form of Liberality. Each
habit of the mind is distinguished by its proper object and actions, and this
the Schooleman cap. 18. quaest. 2.. 3. grants in the strict sense. 2. How does
Faith live by Charity? We say it lives with Charity as its fellow-grace, not by
Charity as its soul. We say without Charity it is dead, yet it is not Charity
that gives it life. The Ies^it says it does, for being joined with it, Faith
can [elicere vitales operationes] perform vital acts. Yea but what are these
actions? Faith has but two acts: 1. proper and immediate, viz. Credere seu
Assentiri: 2. by consequent, Iustificare. Neither of these comes from Charity,
even by these men's own doctrine. Not the first, for Catholics without
Charity may assent to the articles of Faith for Gods authority sake. Not the
second, for to Justify in the Popish sense is to Sanctify, of a bad man to
make a good. Now how absurd is it to say, Faith by Charity Iustifies, i. e.
Faith by the love of God and our neighbor sanctifies us, or (taking Charity
for the Act not the Habit) Faith by good works of prayer, fasting,
almsdeeds, etc. sanctifies us? Both these are senseless propositions; for
it is manifest, that he who has Charity, i. e. loves God and his Neighbor, and
does good works, is not as yet to be sanctified and made good of bad, but is
thereby sanctified already. It Is true that Faith is one part of our
sanctification or inherent grace, and Charity is another; but neither does
Faith sanctify by Charity, nor Charity by Faith, but we are sanctified by both
together. If there by any other vital acts of Faith, they should have been
named. The gloss which the Jesuit adds, whereby he interprets what he
means by vital operations, viz. [aeternae vitae meritorias] such as deserve
eternal life, carries with it as absurd a sense as the other. Thus, Charity
is the form and life of Faith, i. e. Charity makes the acts of Faith to be
Meritorious, s^il. our love of God and man, or our good works, makes our
Faith, i. e. our assent to the Articles of Religion because of Gods authority,
to deserve eternal life. Is there in the Scriptures the least intimation of
such a strange and uncouth meaning, when it tells that we are justified by
Faith? To the places of Scriptures, Gael. 5. 6. Faith works by Charity, (...),
we answer, the meaning of the place is no more but, That in Christianity no
outward matters are of value; that only which is to be regarded, is Faith that
brings forth good works. These good works come from Charity, or inward love
of God and man. This Charity is stirred up and provoked to work through Faith.
So that Faith works by Charity as by that chief instrument which Faith
imployes in the doing of all good works: but Charity works by Faith as by the
moving cause, whereby it is excited to work, according to 1. Tim. 1. 5. (...).
Faith is the first wheel in the clock that moves all the rest, Faith stirs up
and directs the other graces of the soul in their operations, whose strength
and vigor increases according as Faith increases. Tantum amam^, quantum
credimus: and it is clear in all experience, those that have the strongest Faith,
they show the greatest love to God and man, as in Abraham, Moses, Paul, all the
Martyrs. But of this more in showing the connection between Faith and Obedience.

To that other place, James 2. 26. [As the body without the Spirit is dead,
even so Faith without works is dead,] we answer, that S. James understands by
that similitude, not modum Informationis, but necessitatem Vnionis: that good
works are necessarily coupled with a justifying Faith, not that good works
are the form and life of Faith, a priori. They are arguments and effects of a
living Faith, they are not causes that make it living: as is apparent, because
it is impossible any good work should go before justifying Faith, Heb. 11. 6.
Wherefore this similitude is not so to be strained unto a Philosophical
construction; where the Apostle intends no more in all his dispute, but to show
that true saying Faith must of necessity be conjoined with good works. And if
our adversaries be so strict upon the terms of this similitude, it is manifest
that they fit not their doctrine: for so, as the soul is the form of the
body, so works shall be the form of Faith, i. e. an Act shall be the form
of a Habit, which is against reason and their own doctrine, who make the
Habitual grace of Charity, not good works the fruits of it, to be the form
of Faith. S. James therefore is to be taken in the former sense: or else we
may without any violence, Polan. Synta. l. 1. c. 32.
interpret (...) in that place not Spiritum, i. e. Animam, but Spiritum, i. e.
Halitum and Respirationem; and thus the comparison is exact, as the body
without breathing and motion is dead, so Faith without works.

Thus it appears how Faith is slighted by our adversaries, whilst they hold
that the Faith whereby a sinner is justified is nothing but an assent to
Articles of Religion because of Gods authority. Some places of Scriptures there
are they would feign build this upon, as, Heb. 11. 1. Romans 4. 3. Tit. 1. 1.
Ioh. 20. 31. but their arguments thence are so inconsequent and weak, they are
not worth the mentioning or refuting. I proceed therefore from this general
Faith unto that other which is special and particular.

Particular assent of Faith is, when all things revealed by God are assented
unto as most true and excellent in regard of our selves, when they are
particularly applied to our proper occasion, and compared with all desires and
provocations whatsoever to the contrary. When we know and believe those things
that are generally delivered, for our selves, in application to our own use
and practice (as Job was counseled by his friends): so that we believe in
this Job 5. 27.
particular as well as in that, at this time as well as at another. In the
Explication of the nature of such a particular assent, I propose to your
consideration two things:

1. The Root and Cause whence it springs. 2. The Object of it, whereto it is
directed.
1. The true root and fountain whence this Blessed assent of Faith arises is
that grace of sanctification wrought in the heart by the holy Ghost, renewing
the soul in all the powers thereof. It Is not common illumination; for many
know, and despise the truth, or believe it but in general. It Is not the
Authority of all the men in the world that can persuade to it: we should not
then have had so many thousand ^rmons of Prophets and Ministers, learned, holy
and powerful in their doctrine, yet preached to very small purpose with the
most of m^n. It Is not miracles and strange accidents that can force this Faith:
the Jews had plenty of them, yet continued still unbeleeving. It Is only the
sanctifying Grace of Gods spirit that brings this to pass. For, consider with
your selves how deadly an opposition there is between a man's unsanctified
nature, and the wisdom and goodness of God: all his counsels seem but
craft, his words foolishness, his mercies light and not worthy of estimation.
His exhortations, promises, or threatenings are entertained with inward
disdain, and the heart says within it self, Who is God that I should fear
him, or what profit shall a man have by believing his Word, and walking in his
ways? Yea, men that are otherwise ingenuous and of fairer temper, in this case
are full of secret scorn and despite of God and goodness, they account basely
of the holiness of Religion, being privy scoffers and bitter deriders of the
power of Grace, when they are alone by themselves or in company that fits them.
They make a tush at Scriptures, and smile at such persuasions to piety as they
afford, counting it an indignity for men of parts, and resolution to be moved
with fair words of a simple man, though he speak in the words of God. If
their belief and knowledge of the truth be good in the general, yet in the
application the heart makes violent opposition: it begins to hold probable
dispute whether it be wisdom to do so or so, whether they be bound in
conscience considering such and such circumstances; it casts all inconveniences
that may possibly be thought on to discourage it self, yea perchance the truth
it self shall be called in question, and it thinks, Sure I am deceived, Gods
meaning is otherwise, at last it resolves, I may do this and yet fare well
enough, and, If I do no worse I hope twill not be much amiss, and I trust
that these commodities and pleasures I enjoy may well countervaile the neglect
of such or such a small matter.

Thus the heart not washed by the holy Ghost in the laver of Regeneration, but
abiding in its natural corruption, is not nor can be subject to the law of
God: but proves either impudent and Atheistical to deny his truth, or
strangely subtle to shift it off from it self, when it is pressed with it in
particular. But when the spirit of Grace has overshadowed the soul,
sanctifying all the powers thereof throughout, it is admirable to see how it
stoopes to the command of the Word. There is then a singular harmony between
the holiness of the Will, and of the Word: this food of spiritual life
relisheth as sweet and savoury unto the soul, as milk to Infants, or strong
meat to able and healthy men. Regeneration has restored health unto the soul,
whereby it has recovered a true taste of the Lords bounty and goodness,
whence follows a constant appetite thereunto as much as unto corporal
nourishment, as the Apostle argues, 1 Pet. 2. 1. 2. 3. Hence the soul begins
to conceive a high esteem of the dignity of the Word, it sees now nothing so
reasonable, excellent as the wisdom thereof, it beholds nothing ^o terrible
as Gods threats, nothing so lovely as his favor: it sees no ornament of the
soul comparable to Grace, no pleasure like unto the peace of Conscience: it
comprehends an end of all other perfection, but the further it looks into Gods
law, the deeper wonders it discernes: it looks upon the world and reads
Vanity in all the things thereof, and strange folly in men's desires of them:
and now it counts no preferment any whit comparable to the hope of heaven: it
has now Real, apprehensions of Divine things, and conceives of Religion,
(...) as of a Work to be done, not (...), as a business to be discoursed and
talked of: it judges now that there is an absolute necessity of obeying God
though all the world be displeased, and that the regard of saving a man's soul
must thrust out of the way all importunate pleasures and profits that would
press in upon us. Being thus illightened and inwardly touched by the finger of
God, the soul presently puts it wholly upon the certainty and excellency of
Gods truth revealed: it stretches forth the arms of her strongest confidence,
and affiance, unto every branch of the Scriptures, embracing absolutely and
without all limitation the truth, goodness, power, and wisdom of God shining
therein: it believes what it knows, and as it can; where it is ignorant it
prays for knowledge, where weak it sues for strength and increase of faith,
where stubborn it offers it self unto God to be bowed, or broken if he
please; counting it now a happy thing to be crossed in sin, to be met with
at every by-turning, with some reproof or chastisement: let him chide or
strike, it falls down at his feet; and without quarrelling, disputing and
arguing the case, takes all with a Benedictus Dominus, etc. Blessed be the
Lord, and blessed be his Ministers, and blessed be their counsel who have
kept me from committing this sin against the Lord. When thus the heart is
softened and sanctified, then and not before is wrought that habitual Grace
and blessed disposition of the will which we call true Faith, whereby the
Creature is willing to resign up its understanding, desires, affections,
thoughts, words, works, and all to the disposing of his Creator, in such a
sort as by his revealed Will he has or shall make known, believing certainly
that in every thing it is best to follow his counsel. This for cause of true
Faith; next follows

2. The Object of this particular Faith: which is twofold:

1. The whole Will of God revealed unto us in his Word, containing all
Histories, Doctrines, Commands, Threatenings, Promises of what kind soever. 2.
The particular Promise of Remission of sins and Everlasting Life by the death
of Christ, which in one word we call the Gospel.
It is needful thus to distinguish of the object of Faith, because, although
it be but one and the same infused grace of true Faith which respects both;
forasmuch as by the same sacred Habit of the soul, we are inclined to believe
both the whole and each part of Gods will, be it in it self more or less
excellent, or more or less needful to us: nevertheless Faith as it has
reference to these Objects, The whole Will of God, and The particular Promise
of the Gospel, admits of diverse considerations, names, and uses. Faith as
it assents to the whole Will of God in what kind soever, I call Legal, because
it is such a Virtue as is immediately required by the Moral Law, in the same
manner as other duties of the Moral Law are. Forasmuch as all men are bound by
the Law of their creation to give full assent and affiance to all things
whatsoever God shall reveal unto them. And as all other Moral duties are
required of us in their degrees as parts of our outward obedience and inward
sanctity necessary to salvation, so is this of Faith commanded, as (...)
principal grace of the soul, and a prime part of our obedience to the first
Commandment. And so Faith in this respect may be called Saving, namely, as
all other Graces are, because required in their measure as needful to
Salvation.

Faith as it assents unto the special promise of grace, I call Evangelicall,
because it is such an Act as is expressly commanded in the Gospel, the object
thereof being not revealed by the Moral Law. It is called also properly Saving
and Justifying, in regard of the use it now has through Gods gracious
appointment, to be the only instrument of our Justification and Salvation by
Christ. In which distinction between Legal and Evangelicall Faith, we must not
conceive of two distinct Habits of Faith: it is but one gracious quality of the
soul disposing it to the belief of all divine truth, which for the substance
of it was the same in innocent Adam, with that which is in regenerate men. The
difference stands only herein: 1. In the Degrees, Adams Faith was perfect,
because his understanding was fully enlightened, and his affections absolutely
conformable to all holiness. We know but little, and by reason of our inward
weakness believe but weakly what we do know. 2. In the Original, in Adam it
was natural by creation; in us it is supernatural from the holy Ghosts
infusion. 3. In the particular Object, Adam believed God without reference to
Christ the Mediator, we believe chiefly the promise of Grace in Christ, and
all other things with some relation to him. Here then is no new Faith, but a
New object of Faith not revealed unto Adam, whereto our Faith is now directed,
and here is also a singular privilege newly granted unto Faith, that God
accepts it to our Justification in his sight. Otherwise if we look unto the
grace it self as it was in Adam, a part of Gods Image given him by creation,
and is in us a part of the same Image restored by regeneration, so there is no
difference at all: and therefore in that question whether Justifying Faith be
commanded in the Moral Law, there needs no great dispute: it is manifest that it
is enjoined, and that in the first Commandment, as a singular part of that
inward worship due unto our Creator, consisting principally in those three
graces of Faith, Love, and Fear. These things thus explaned, let us proceed
to the unfolding of Faith, taken in the forenamed double relation: and first as
it has reference to the whole Will and Word of God.

True ^aith respects all this, and only this. Only this, because in divine
revelations only is to be found that Infallible truth, which gives
satisfaction to the soul. And again all this, because every part of Divine
truth is Sacrosancta, worthy of all Belief and Reverence: threatenings as well
as promises, precepts, exhortations, admonitions, histori^s, every part of the
Word falls in some degree or other within the compass of Saving Faith. By the
same holy Faith whereby a penitent sinner believes the promise of mercy of
Christ, does he also believe all other promises of this life, with other
inferior matters declared in Scriptures. This is certain: but the chief
point to be noted here is an essential property of true Faith, which stands
in Universality and Uniformity of assent to all things that are from God. This
Universality of assent is to be taken in a twofold regard:

1. Of the Object, the things believed, when the faithful soul gives full
assent unto all things revealed by God, not only to such as it may assent unto
without crossing its own desires and purposes, but unto those also that
directly cross and oppose carnal reason, carnal affections, worldly
pleasures, and all other provocations to infidelity.

2. Of the Time and other particular circumstances, whilst it does most
heartily and inwardly acknowledge the truth and goodness of these things, not
then alone when this may be done without any contradiction and resistance, but
even then also most eagerly fixing the a^^iance of the heart upon them, when
temptations rise, when Heretics dispute and cavil, when humane reason
fails, and falls to arguing of impossibilities and unlikelihoods, when
sinful lusts hale this way and that, when the world threatens or slatters,
when Satan rages or speaks fair, then does true Faith, supported by the
Spirit of grace, stand fast as Mount Sion, or if shaken a little it is not moved
out of his place, but looking beyond all present temptations to unbelief unto
the everlasting and infinite truth and goodness of God, it preferres that
which he says, above all that the flesh, the world, the devil can promise or
threaten to the contrary.

Now in this point stands an essential difference between the faith of Gods
Elect and of Hypocrites. These have always their limitations, they believe
something, but not all: if all, it is but in general, when it comes to
particular proof they bid ^arewell to says, when such circumstances come in
the way, as they love or fear more than they do God. But the faith of Gods
Elect is sincere, fair, open, universal, without distinctions, equivocations,
mental reservations or other hypocritical and Jesuitical sh^fts. The reason
is, because the sanctified soul rightly apprehends the sovereignty of Gods
truth and wisdom, outstripping in Certainty and Excellency all things that
can be set against it; it judges than no good can be equal to that which God
promises, no evil so great as what he threatens, no course so safe as what
he prescribes, whereupon abs^lutely without all qualifications the soul casts
it self upon God, resolving to believe and do as he pleases. Whereupon
though in particular practice, it may be ignorant of some things, and weak in
the application of others, yet in the Habitual resolution and disposition of
the heart, it does willingly yield assent and conformity to all. It Is most true,
that David in a passion may call Samuel a lying Prophet, for (...) him he
should be King, and after abusie dispute maintained upon politic worldly
considerations, c^nci^de that ther^^ no remedy but he must one day perish by
the hand of S^^l: So Peter in a bodily fear may chance deny him in whom yet
he truly believes: so in a^l, a strong sit of pleasures or other violent
encounter may push their buckler of faith aside, but yet it cannot strike it
out of their hands: if they give a little ground, they will not fly the field;
but because the heart is holy and entire, they return to themselves and their
standing, where the shame of a foil taken makes them knit their strength
together, and stand more stoutly in the combat.

But my brethren, here is the mischief and misery of all, when there is a false
heart within that keeps it self in an habitual resolution not to believe and
trust God in such things, or upon such and suchoccasions. For in this case what
ever show of true faith they seem to have in the generality, or some few
particulars, it is most certain that there is indeed nothing at all in that
heart but horrible hypocrisy and infidelity. Such nevertheless is the temper
of all those who having not thoroughly searched out, and resolved to renounce
their evil affections. nor exactly calculated what the profession and practice
of Religion will cost them, nor yet duly considered upon what grounds they
undertake this profession, are become their own carvers in matter of Religion,
taking only so much of it into their belief and practice, as the love of the
world and their dear lusts will give leave. These men are just of the
Samaritans Religion that feared God and served their Images: so they will
believe God, yet obey their lusts. 2 Reg. 17. 41.
But as it was then, none were found more bitter enemies to the restoring of
the Jewish Church and State, than these Samaritans, who by reproaches,
accusations, and conspiracies cruelly vexed that poor people, and hindered the
restoration of their afflicted estate, even then when with fained flattery
they proffered their service, telling the Jews they would build with them,
because they also sought the Lord the God: So fares it with these men, whose
belief and forwardness in some things cannot Ez^. 4. 2.
make demonstration of so much friendship to Religion, as their constant
baulking and faltering in others testifies their hearts to be full of
rottenness and corruption, bearing hateful enmity against God and his Grace.
Take me any man who bewitched with custom, commodity, or pleasure, gives
himself scope and liberty to live in the breach of any of Gods commandments,
be it secret or open: as constant neglect of the duties of religion in private:
accustomed mispending of precious hours due to the business of our studies
and callings; usual swearing; secret thoughts and practices of uncleanness;
unsatiable desires of earthly greatness, and abundance; unjust increase of
wealth, by usury, bribery, or other secret indirect courses; excusing love of
some though lawful pleasures, etc. I say take me such a man that allows
himself in these or the like practices contrary to Gods most holy law, and he
will be found though in name a Christian, yet in heart an Infidel. For try
now the temper and disposition of this man's soul; bring but the word of God
unto it, and you shall see it presently. Lay upon these sins the censure of
the Word in a fair ingenuous and direct reproof, without scossing and bitter
gybing, press it upon the conscience once and again lovingly and sharply,
and see now what strange entertainment Gods word shall find at such a man's
hands. The blood begins to be warmed with wrath and choler, the stomach
rises, and the gall of unchristian malice overslowes, the conscience and
powers of the soul are of purpose turmoyld, that the water being troubled
their own image may not appear in it, the head is presently employed in all
cunning tricks and distinctions to avoid the stroke of the Word, the tongue is
ready with an apology to defend it, and if the hand hold from violence it is
well. Now whence is all this frowardness? Hence, because the heart is
resolved, let God say what he will, yet in this point not to believe that it
is better to follow his counsel, than our own desire. In which case it is
strange to see with what rage and unmercifull fury the Prophets of old, Christ
and his Apostles in their times, were persecuted by those to whom they preached
in all meekness and demonstration of good will toward their souls. The like
fiery opposition have the Ministers of the Gospel and faithful Preachers of
Christ crucisied, found ever since at the hands of their people, when once they
have been touched where they would not be meddled withal. Straightway a whole
Parish will be in an uproare, dirt and scorn is hurld in the face of the
Minister and his doctrine, all froward courses taken to work him woe and
shame, and all this done by those that will yet be counted obedient and
believing Christians. But are they so indeed? they do not deserve so much as
the name. A Faith indeed they have, but not that which is true and rightly
planted. For know this, that True Faith and a constant wilful refusal to be
guided by God in any one particular, whether the doing of a duty, or leaving
of a sin, are as incompetible as Christ and B^^^al. For ask a man that is
thus partial in his courses, You say you firmly believe the promises of the
life to come, that God will pardon your sins and save your soul: why do you
not as firmly believe the promises of this life, but are altogether caring and
distrustful in your affairs? You believe verily that God is offended with
murder, adultery, etc. and therefore you leave them: why do you not believe
also that he is as much angry at swearing, lying, drinking, and such like
disorders? You believe God has forbidden stealing, and you are persuaded it is
naught: why do you not believe that usury, bribery, or idleness in a man's
calling are as bad, being as much forbidden? You believe that it is a good thing
to seek unto God in time of adversity, and when a man's old, sick, and now
near unto death, then to pray, fast, do all good works, and live religiously,
is excellent: why do you not believe that the same courses of Piety and
Holiness are as acceptable to God, as much required of us in time of health,
youth, and prosperity, s^^ing God has equally commanded them at all ti^? Ask
a thousand such questions, he connot answer you to on^. For is it from a
through consideration of Gods truth, wis^^ome, power, revealed in the Word that
he is moved to believe such and such things? If that were the cause, why does
he not equally believe all, when Gods authority is the same in all? Is it from
true love to God and Goodness, that he is content to be ruled in such things?
If that were the cause, it is certain he that loves goodness for its own sake,
would love all things that are good, and love always in a good matter, as the
Apostle speaks.

What is it then? I Will answer for him; it is that which the Apostle speaks of,
Heb. 3. 12. (...), an evil heart full of unbeleefe, that having embraced
certain truths not prejudicial to it self upon vain and worldly
considerations, in others slips the collar, and departs away from the living
God, refusing to accept of his counsel.

The truth of this is most certain from that excellent rule of S. James, Chap.
2. 10. 11. [Whosoever shall keep the whole Law and yet fails in one point he
is guilty of all: For he that said, Thou shall not commit adultery, said also
thou shall not kill. Now though thou do none adultery, yet if thou killest,
thou art a transgressor of the Law.] What, is it equal that he who
transgresses the Law in one point, should be held guilty of the breach of all
the Commandments? Yea, it is most equal and just: for Gods Sovereign
Commandment is the same in all. He therefore that for conscience sake obeyes
in one, will obey in all. He that breaks one wilfully and customarily, keeps
none at all for conscience sake; and if all things hit aright, he will be as
ready to transgress in the rest, as in that one. Wherefore God judges him
according to the disposition of his heart, that he is a transgressour of the
whole Law. So in our obedience of ^aith, Gods truth is the same in every part
of his Word; he that has spoken this, he has spoken that also: he therefore
that upon right grounds believes in one point, will for the same believe in
another: if Gods authority cannot prevail with him in one, that is not the
motive which makes him assent to others: and therefore if occasion serve, such
a one will dissent alike from all; according to which Habitual disposition of
the soul, he is rightly to be judged an Unbeliever. He that rejects Gods
command in one thing, does not much regard it in any thing: he that willingly
slights Gods authority and truth in this point, makes as little account of it
in another.

You have now here, my brethren, opened unto you that Master-veine wherein
runs all that corrupt blood of Hypocrisy and secret Infidelity, wherewith
the greatest part of men professing Christianity are infected. This is that
bitter root of men's Apostasy and backsliding from Piety to profannes, or
from a true Religion to a false. Even this partial and ill directed Faith is
that which one justly calls the greatest part of the Devils Judicial
Astrology, whereby he prognosticateth the downfall of many, who yet seem Saints
in the Church and zealous professors of Religion. Oh, when he sees a man take a
dispensation without asking God leave, craving pardon, with a, God be merciful
unto me in this, and so standing out in this or that known evil practice; he
now knows what to judge of such a man, he sees a prey within the reach of his
snares, which thereupon he sets so artificially, fitting his temptations to his
humors, till in the end he catch his heel in the grin, plunging him into some
abominable practice, to his own destruction, and the disgrace of his Religion.
Who could have thought that many Stars in the Church shining bright in all
outward holiness, could have fallen from Heaven, and their light bin put out
in utter darkness, had not after times discovered, that they always lived in
some secret ungodly practice?

For our selves, if we will duly consider the state of our souls, it will be
easy hereby to make a prognostication unto our selves, what will become of us
hereafter. He that can shift and distinguish, and put off from himself, and
be content to give God the hearing, yet choose to think and do what he lists,
let not his forward faith and zeal in something deceive himself, as it does
the world: but let him write down himself for a counterfeit, whose Faith will
certainly ^aile when it shall be assaulted by stronger temptations.

Now on the other side, that Faith which is true and sound has always this
essential mark, that it does assent Uniformly to all Gods revealed will. It
makes not choice of some where, it must embrace all, it knows God must have
all, or he will have nothing; and therefore it divides nothing to times, and
seasons, and private respects: it believes what it likes not, as well as that
which contents it, as well that that brings disadvantage, as where there is
likelihood of honor or profit. It compares all things within and within us on
the one side, with Gods truth and goodness on the other; and so reckoning the
worst, it finds Gods anger to be worst of all; forecasting the best, it
believes Gods favor to be better than it. Then it resolves, let God say what
he will, to believe that that is good, honest, profita- and excellent to be
followed at all times, in all places, above all things that can be set against
it. This is that temper of the soul which is (...), Faith without faining, 1.
Tim. 1. 5. this is fair, sincere, hearty plain dealing. This is to ascribe
glory to God, and give him his full due, setting our seal unto his truth,
ratifying it by a most willing absolute subscription to all. Such has been
the Faith of the Saints. That of Abraham's is admirable conflicting with so
many, yet conquering all oppositions, being thoroughly grounded upon the
infinite truth, goodness, and power of God. If God bid him leave all, his
friends, his fathers house, the land of his nativity, to go into a strange
country upon hopes of great matters, he is upon his journey straight, and no
entreaty can stay him in Mesopotamia. When he is in Ganaan, where be now his
great possessions? He has not so much as a foot of land given him, Act. 7.
5. not so much as his grave without a purchase from the Hittites. But shall his
seed enjoy it? yea, they shall, but is a long time first, some three hundred
years after Abraham is dead, when the wickedness of the Cananites is full.
But where is the seed it self that shall enjoy it? Abraham waits a hundred
years before he have Isaac. Now he has him shall he live in Gods sight?
No, Abraham must go and cut his own sons throat, and Isaac the hope of
Abraham and of the world, must dye by the hand of his old Father. Who but
Abraham would not here have quarrelled with God, and laid slacknesse, falsehood,
unjustice, and cruelty to his charge? But Abraham (...) doubts nothing all this
while, let God command or promise the most strange, unlikely, unpleasing,
unreasonable thing in the world, he will not question it, it is God that says
it, and therefore he is (...) fully assured that he which has promised is
able to do it, Romans 4. 21.

Moses had a fair way to pre^erment, he was learned, wise a proper person,
brought up at the Court, beloved as the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, every way a
man of singular hopes to become Great in Egypt. This would have made a
Courtier of these times to have borrowed many a point of Law and Conscience,
and strained hard to conceal his Religion, deny his Nation, and turn
Egyptian, at least his head would have been hammering upon a piece of
policy, that the poor Hebrews might have been much releeved by him being a
great man with Pharaoh. But Moses has no such thoughts: his Faith turns his
eyes another way (...), unto the Recompense of Reward; and then Moses comparing
the adversity of Gods people, with the pleasures of Pharaohs Court, the rebuke
of Christ with the riches of Egypt, he concludes, that it is better to be a
bondman among the Hebrews, than a revelling Courtier among the Egyptians,
that its far, far better to be poor and religious for Christ's sake,
though rebuked and scorned of the world, than to be great and ungracious. Heb.
11. 24 25. 26. In a word, read that whole chapter once and again, and see
what is the practice and power of Faith in the Saints of God; you shall behold
in them an absolute, Uniform and constant resolution to believe God above and
against all that can be opposed: when temptations come on every side,
reproaches, bonds, imprisonment, banishment, the sword, the faggot, the gibet,
and a thousand difficulties present themselves, their faith makes way thorough
all, and come what (...) come, they are resolved to [Follow the Lamb whithi^
soever he goes,] Rev. 14. 4.

For Conclusion of this point, let me entreat you to be exhorted each one to
look unto this matter, to try how his heart stands affected in point of
religion: and to remember as long as you live this most precious and certain
truth, That true faith is uniforme, and equally respects the whole revealed
will of God: without limitation to this or that particular, without reserving
to our selves, such or such a wicked resolution, without all provision that no
inconveniences accrue unto us. He whose faith is thus patched up and dawbed
with untempered mortar, let him know for certain that in a frost twill shatter
all to pieces, and when temptations beats upon it, the whose building will
run to ruin. Take therefore I beseech you that counsel of Christ which he
gives in this matter, Luke 14. 25. and seq. Great multitudes then as now, did
run after Christ, very forward to hear and believe his doctrine. Christ
turns unto them and tells them, that it is another manner of matter than they
are aware of, to be his disciple: He that will be so, must hate his father
and mother, and wife and Children, and brethren and sisters, yea, his own life
for his sake, forsaking all, taking up his cross and following him. Doubt ye
not but this seemed to them a harsh doctrine, a very rough and unpleasant
religion. But it is neither better nor worse: and therefore our Savior bids them
bethink themselves what they have to do, like wise builders to cast up their
charges aforehand; like provident warriors to muster up their own forces, and
duly consider their abilities, lest venturing rashly, they at last sit down
with loss and disgrace. The same I speak to you my brethren, Sit ye down
first, take counsel, reckon the cost, see what religion will stand you in:
your lusts must be crossed, the world must be displeased, and despised too,
Satan must be fought withal, hazard of disgrace and damage must be
undergone, friends and goods and life must be parted withal, if need require,
the cross must be borne daily. If now upon these conditions thou art heartily
and freely content to plight thy faith to God, and take Religion with all its
inconveniences, then go on and prosper in this resolution, thy heart is
sincere, and thy faith sound. But if upon heady and slight considerations thou
have put thy self forward upon the profession of Religion, not forecasting the
worst as well as the best of it, then know that thy case is like that of the
Scribe, Mat. 8. 18. who there tells Christ in great forwardness, He would
follow him whithersoever he went. But when the silly man heard Christ reply
otherwise than he looked for [The Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air
have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to rest his head] implying,
that there was little hope to be rich and honorable by being one of his
followers: this now fits not his covetous and ambitious humor, and therefore
upon such an unexpected answer he slinches, Christ's company is too mean and
poor for his great hopes, and for him he shall go alone. A miserable thing it
is for a man thus to come in at last with a Non putaram, I had not thought
religion had required such absolute obedience, I thought I might have done so
and so, and yet have been a true beloever. Had thou not thought it? The more
fool thou, that would not bethink thy self better in so serious a
business. Think then of it now, and think always of it, that he who
beleoves and does only what him pleases, he neither believes nor does any
thing as he ought.

Thus we have done with Faith as it respects the whole course of Religion, and
every part of the Word of what nature soever. Next we are to consider of True
Faith, as it looks toward the particular promise of Grace, and is directed
unto Christ. Which Act though it be particular, yet is of greater necessity and
excellency than all other: because it gives, life as to our souls, so to our
belief of other things, which are believed with relation unto Christ. Faith in
regard of this particular Object and Act I thus define, [It is a grade of
sanctification wrought by the holy Ghost^ in every regenerate man, whereby for
his own particular he trusts perfectly unto the promise of Remission of
finnes and Salvation by Christ's righteousness.] I need not stand at large
upon every particular: That Faith is a sanctifying Grace, part of our inherent
righteousness, that the Spirit of God is the only author of it, that a
regenerate man is the only subject of it, these things have been showed
heretofore. The Object also of it is manifest, by what names soever the
Scriptures express it, namely, the Lord Jesus Christ, or God in Christ, or the
Gospel, or the Promise (...), all comes to one, and we need not be curious.
But touching the proper Act of Faith as it justifies us, a little more at
large. It consists in Trust or Reliance upon the promise for our own
particular, when the soul depends wholly thereupon, looking after no other
help. You have heard heretofore that to. Believe the truth of a particular
promise; is to Trust upon the performance of it to me: and that the Assent of
Faith which is given to such a promise is properly called Fiducia, or Trust.
Now the Promise of grace in Christ is made unto us in particular terms, both
in the Word preached and Sacraments. to assent unto this promise, is not barely
to acknowledge that there is such a thing in the world as Remission of sins
by Christ to be bestowed on some, God knows who: (for this is to believe the
Promise, not as a promise, but as an History) but this assent is of the whole
heart, in Trust, Reliance, Dependence, Adherence, Affiance, or if there be any
other word expressing that action of the regenerate soul, whereby it casseth
and reposeth it self only upon Gods Promise in Christ for the obtaining of
eternal, happiness. That Fiducia is of the essence of Justifying Faith we
make good:

1. From the phraso of Scripture used in this business. Those phrases (...)
Ioh. 1. 12. Romans 10. 14.
(...) Romans 4. 5. Act. 16. 31.
(...) and Ephesians. 1. 12.
(...), to Believe in, or upon, or into God, Christ, the holy Ghost, are not
used as the learned know, by profane Writers, but only by Ecclesiastical:
implying that in Divine matters (...) signifies besides the naked
acknowledgement of the Head, the confidence and affiance of the Heart.

2. From that opposition which is made between Faith and distrust or Doubting.
^am. 1. 16. [Let him ask in Faith (...), nothing doubting.] and Romans 4. 20]
Abraham (...) doubted not thorough unbeleefe.

3. From that excellent place, 2. Tim. 1. 12. where it is apparent that to
believe, is as much as to commit our selves to Christ's trust and keeping. [I
know, says the Apostle, (...), in whom I have believed, or whom I have
trusted] for, as it follows [I am persuaded that he is able to keep^ (...),
that thing wherewith I have entrusted him, or delivered up to his keeping.]
What was that? His Soul unto everlasting Salvation. Wherefore to Believe the
promise, is with Confidence and Trust to rely upon it, resting our souls upon
the performance of it. Which assent of Faith is wrought in the soul in this
manner:

1 A man is enlightened to see his sin and misery: and therewith an utter
impossibility to satisfy God for the one, or free himself from the other, by
any power and merit in heaven or earth, but only by the Name of Jesus Christ:
And this drives him from seeking help elsewhere.

2 The promise of Grace is proposed, and Christ freely offered unto him.

3 Whence in the third place, the Heart touched by the Spirit of Grace, draws
near unto Christ, throws it self into his arms, grasping about him with all
its might, hiding it self in the clefts of this rock from the storms of Gods
furious indignation. It bespeaks Christ in all terms of confidence and
affiance, My Lord, my God, my hope, my fortress, my rock, my strength, my
salvation, Save me or I perish. Have you seen how a tender infant in the
apprehension of some danger approaching runs into the arms of his Parent for
succor? so does a soul pursued by the terrors of the Law, and affrighted with
the fearful sight of Gods frowning countenance, fly with speed into the
bosom of Christ, hang upon him, and most importunately sues to be taken into
his protection. Now, one favorable look from him is worth a thousand worlds,
and if he will but say unto it, I am thy salvation, it will not exchange the
comfort of that word for all the kingdoms of the earth. Wherefore the soul
now thinks of nothing but Christ, to live or die Christ is all in all with it,
him it follows with all strong cries and tears for mercy and comfort, in him
it apprehends plentiful redemption and all sufficiency of salvation, and
therefore having once laid hand fast upon him, to die for it no force shall
make him loose his hold. This work of Faith as it does greatly glorify God,
by ascribing the whole honor of our Salvation unto his only free Grace in
Jesus Christ, so God again is pleased highly to honor it above all its fellow
Graces, by making it the blessed instrument of all the comfort we enjoy in this
present world, thereby giving us assurance of our Justification in his sight by
Christ's righteousness. Whereupon follows in their times, a double comfort
unto the soul.

1. Peace of Conscience, resting it self secure upon the stability of Gods
promise. It has now what to oppose against the severity of Gods justice, and
the accusations of the Law, even an All-sufficient Righteousness in Christ,
able to satisfy them both to the full, whereupon its quieted, and injoyes
abundance of sweetest peace, being freed from those terrors which before
compassed it about on every side.

2. That kind of Fiducia which we call assurance and full persuasion of the
pardon of our sins. This is a fruit of that other Fiducia or Trusting unto the
promise it self, wherein stands the proper act of justifying faith. And it
follows it, not always presently, but after some time, happily a long time
after much pains taken in the exercise of Faith and other graces. For how many
faithful souls are there who steadfastly believe and rest themselves only upon
Christ for their salvation, who yet would give a world to be assured of Gods
favor, and fully persuaded that their sins are pardoned? yet ask them in
their sorrows and fears, can you believe in Christ, committing your souls
unto him, depending only upon him and no other? They will answer, yea, I cast
my self upon him, let him do with me as he pleases, while I live I Will trust
in him. But now this although it should, yet will not satisfy them, they want
joy in the Holy Ghost, there is no testimony of the Spirit in them, they have no
peace, no sense and inward feeling of Gods love, and therefore they cannot be
assured that their sins are pardoned, and that they be in Gods favor.
Whereupon they will be ready to fall back, and tell you they do not nor can
believe in Christ at all. A great mistake, and that which casts many a
Conscience upon the rack, tormenting it with unsufferable fears, where there
is no cause. They have no justifying faith? Why? Because they want full
assurance of the pardon of sins. A false argument. Justifying Faith is not to
be assured of pardon: But to trust wholly upon the promise for pardon. Which
point duly considered, would help us to a singular remedy for the consolation
of consciences distressed about point of their salvation, who whilst they
eagerly labor (and I cannot blame them) for an experimental and sensible
assurance of Gods favor, do too too much neglect that comfort which their
faith would afford them, in that, notwithstanding their fear, they are able
still to commit their souls unto God as to their faithful Creator and
Redeemer. These men should do with their souls as David did with his in the
like temptations; [Why art thou cast down my soul, why art thou disquieted
within me?] Here was little peace and joy, doubts still arising, which causes
him to ask the question once, again, and a third time. But see how he still
answers [Wait on God, wait on God, and again, wait on God; for I will yet give
him thanks, who is my present help and my God] Psalm. 42. 5. 11. and 43. 5.
See, when he has no comfort, here is his comfort, even his faith, that he can
still depend upon God for comfort. The further explication of this point
depends upon the resolution of that practical Syllogism, whereby certainty of
Salvation is concluded; which is this.

Whosoever believes, His sins are pardoned, and he shall be saved:

But I believe, Ergo

My sins are pardoned, and I shall be saved.

The Major here is of Faith. The Minor of Sense and Experience. The Conclusion
is of both, but chiefly of Faith, as it follows on the premises by infallible
argumentation; and partly of sense, as it is founded on the inward experience
of Gods grace working upon our souls. We may take comfort in this conclusion
as we are assured of it by faith, even when experience and sense it self
fails. But of this more, when we shall speak of the fruits and consequents of
Faith:

FINIS.

