THE Famous Chronicle of king Edward the first, surnamed Edward Longshankes,
with his return from the holy land.

ALSO THE LIFE OF LLEVELLEN rebel in Wales.

Lastly, the sinking of Queen Elinor, who sunck at Charingcrosse, and rose
again at Pottershith, now named Queenehith.

LONDON Printed by Abell Ieffes, and are to be sold by William Barley, at his
shop in Gracious street 1593.

THE Famous Chronicle history of King Edward the first, surnamed Edward
Longshankes: with the sincking of Queen Elinor at Charingcrosse, and her
rising again at Potters hith, otherwise called Queen hith.
Enter Gilbart de Clare Earl of Gloucester, with the Earl of Sussex, Mortimer
the Earl of March, David Lluellens brother, waiting on Helinor the Queen
mother. The Queen Mother. MY L. lieutenant of Gloucester, and L. Mortim^r,
To do you honor in your Sovereigns eyes,
That as we hear is newly come aland,
From Palestine, with all his men of warre^
The poor remainer of the royal Fleet,
Preserved by miracle in Sicill Road.
Go mount your Coursers, meet him on the way,
Pray him to spur his Steed, minutes and hours,
Until his mother see her princely son,
Shining in glory of his safe return.
Exeunt Lords.
Manet Queen Mother. Illustrious England, ancient feat of kings,
Whose chivalry has roiallizd thy fame:
That sounding bravely through terrestiall veil,
Proclaiming conquests, spoils, and victories,
Rings glorious Echoes through the farthelt world.
What warlike nation traind in feats of arms,
What barbarous people, stubborn or vntaimd,
What climate under the Meridian signs,
Or frozen Zone under his brumall stage,
Erst have not quaked and trembled at the name
Of Britain, and her mighty Conqueror,?
Her neighbor realms as Scotland, Denmark, France,
Aude with their deeds, and iealious of her arms,
Have begd defensive and offensive leagues.
Thus Europe rich and mighty in her kings,
Has feared brave England dreadful in her kings:
And now to eternize Albions Champions,
Equivalent with Trotans ancient fame,
Comes lovely Edward from Jerusalem,
Veering before the wind, plowing the sea,
His stretched sails filled with the breath of men,
That through the world admires his manlines.
And Ioe at last, arrived in Dover road,
Long shanke your king, your glory and our son,
With troops of conquering Lords and warlike knights,
Like bloody crested Mars orelookes his hosle,
Higher then all his army by the head,
Martching along as bright as Phoebus eyes,
And we his mother shall behold our son,
And Englands Peers shall see their Sovereign.
The Trumpets sound, and enter the train, viz. his maimed Soldiers with
headpeeces and Garlands on them, every man with his red Cross on his coat:
the Ancient borne in a Chair, his Garland and his plumes on his headpeece, his
Ensign in his hand. Enter after them Gloucester and Mortimer bareheaded, and
others as many as may be. Then Longshanks and his wife Elinor, Edmund
Couchback, and Ione and Signior Moumfort the Earl of Leicesters prisoner, with
Sailers and Soldiers, and Charles de Moumfort his brother.
Q. Mother. Gloucester, Edward, O my sweet sons.
And then she falls and sounds.
Longsh. Help Ladies: O ungrateful desteny,
To welcome Edward with this tragedy.

Glocest. Pacient your highness, it is but mothers love,
Received with sight of her thrice valiant sons:
Madam amaze not, see his Majesty
Returned with glory from the holy land.

Moth. Brave sons the worthy Champions of our God,
The honorable soldiers of the highest,
Bear with your mother whose abundant love,
With tears of joys salutes your sweet return,
From famous iourneys hard and fortunate.
But lords alas how heavy is our loss,
Since your departure to these Christian wars,
The king your Father, and the prince your son,
And your brave Uncle Almaines Emperor,
Aye me are dead.

Longsh. Take comfort madam, leave these sad laments,
Dear was my uncle, dearer was my son:
And ten times dearer was my noble father,
Yet were their lives valewd at thousand worlds,
They cannot escape the arrest of dreadful death:
Death that does seize and sommon all alike.
Then leaving them to heavenly blessedness,
To join in thrones of glory with the just,
I do salute your royal Majesty.
My gracious mother Queen, and you my lords,
Gilbart de Clare, Sussex, and Mortimer,
And all the princely states of Englands peers,
With health and honor to your hearts content,
And welcome wished England on whose ground,
These feet so often have desird to tread,
Welcome sweet Queen my fellow Traveler,
Welcome sweet Nell my fellow mate in arms,
Whose eyes have seen the slaughtered Sarazens,
Pil'de in the ditches of Jerusalem,
And lastly welcome manly followers,
That bears the scars of honor and of arms,
And on your war drums carry crowns as kings,
Crown Murall, Nauall, and triumphant all,
At view of whom the Turks have trembling fled,
And Sarazens like sheep before the walls,
Have made their cottages in walled towns,
But Bulwarks had no ^ence to beat you back,
Lords, these and they will enter brazen gates,
And tear down lime and Mortar with their nails.
I^brace them Barons these have got the name,
Of English Gentlemen and knights at arms:
Not one of these but in the Champaine sield,
Has won his crown, his collar and his spurs,
Not Caesar ^ading through the streets of Rome,
The cap^ kings of conque^ed nations,
Was in his princely triumphs ^onoured more,
Then English Edward in this martial ^ight.
(...) your li^s are ^ost in service of the Lord,
Which is your glory and your Countries fame,
For li^s, you (...) have ^ing, lordships, l^ds,
And be m^ counsell^rs in wars affairs:
Soldiers sit down, Nell sit thee by my side,
These be pr^ce Edwards pompious treasury.
The Queen Mother being set on the one side, and Queen Elinor on the other,
the king sits in the midst mounted highest, and at his feet the Ensign
underneath him. O glorious Capitol, beauteous Senate house,
Triumphant Edward, how like sturdie Oaks,
Do these thy Soldiers circle thee about,
To shield and shelter thee from winters storms?
Display thy cross, old Aims of the Vies,
Dub on your Drums tand with Indiaes sun,
My lusty ^esterne lads, Matreueirs thou,
Sound prowdly here a perfect point of war,
In honor of thy Souereignes safe return.
Thus Long shanks bids his Soldiers Bien vene^.
Use Drums, Trumpets, and Ensigns, and then speak Edward.
Edw. O God my God, the brightness of my day,
How often have thou preserved thy servant safe,
By sea and land, yea in the gates of death,
O God to thee how highly am I bound,
For setting me with these on English ground:
One of my mansion houses will I give,
To be a college for my maimed men,
Where every one shall have an hundred marks
Of yearly pention to his maintenance,
A Soldier that for Christ and country sightes,
Shall want no living whilst king Edward lives,
Lords you that love me now be liberal,
And give your larges to these maimed men.

Q. Mot. Toward this erection does thy mother give,
Out of her dowry, five thousand pounds of gold,
To find them Surgeons to recure their wounds,
And whilst this ancient Standard bearer lives,
He shall have forty pound of yearly fee,
And be my Beadsman father if you please.

Longsh. Madam I tell you England never bred,
A better soldier then your Beadsman is,
And that the Souldan and his Army felt.

Edmund. Out of the duchy of rich Lancaster,
To find soft bedding for their bruzed bones,
Duke Edmund gives three thousand pounds.

Longsh. Gramercies brother Edmund,
H^ppie is England under Edwards reign,
When men are had so highly in regard,
That Nobles strive who shall remunerate,
The soldiers resolution with regard.
My Lord of Gloucester what is your benevolence?

Glocest. A thousand marks and please your Majesty.

Longsh. And yours my lord of Sussex?

Sussex. Five hundred pound, and please your majesty.

Long. What say you sir David of Brecknock.

David To a soldier sir David cannot be too liberal,
Yet that I may give no more then a poor knight is able
And not presume as a mighty Earl,
I give my Lord four hundred, four score,
And nineteen pounds:
And so my lord of Sussex I am behind you an ace.

Sussex. And yet sir David ye aumble after apace.

Lon. Well said Da. thou could not be a Camber Britain
If thou did not love a soldier with thy heart,
Let me see how is my Arithmeticke wilserue,
To total the par^ars.

Qu. Eli. Why my lord I hope you mean,
I shall be a benefactor to my fellow soldiers.

Longshankes. And well said Nell.
What will thou I set down for thee?

Q. El. Nay, my lord I am of age to set it down for my self.
You will allow what I do, will you not?

Longsh. That I will Maddam,
Were it to the value of my kingdom.

Qu. Elin. What is the sum my lord?

Longshankes. 10000 pounds my Nell.

Qu. Eli. Then Elinor bethink thee of a gift worthy the king of Englandes
wife, and the king of Spaines daughter, and give such a largis, that the
Chronicles of this land may crake with record of thy liberality.

Parturient montes: nas^tur ridiculus mus. she makes a Cipher. There my lord,
neither one, two, nor three,
But a poor Cipher in Agrum, to enrich good fellows,
And compound their figure in their kind.

Longsh Madam I commend your composition,
An argument of your honorable disposition:
Sweet Nell thou should not be thy self,
Did not with thy mounting mind,
Thy gift surmount the rest.

Gloce. Call you this Ridiculus mus? mary sir this mouse
Would make a foul hole in a fair Cheese,
It Is but a Cipher in Agrum,
And it has made of 10000 pounds, 100000 pounds:

Edmund. A princely gift and worthy memory.

Clocester. My gracious Lord, as erst I was assignde,
Lieutenant to his Majesty,
Hererender I up the crown left in charge with me,
By your princely father king Menrie,
Who on his death bed still did call for you,
And dying, wild to you the Diadem.

Longshankes. Thanks worthy Lords,
And seeing by doom of heavens it is decreed,
And lawful line of our succession,
Unworthy Edward is become your king,
We take it as a blessing from on hie,
And will our Coronation be solemnized,
Upon the 14. of December next.

Qu. Eli. Upon the 14. of December next?
Alas my Lord, the time is all too short
And sudden, for so great solemnity:
A year were scarce enough to set a work,
Tailers Imb^oderes, and men of rare device,
For preparation of so great estate.
Trust me sweet Ned, hardly shall I bethink me,
In twenty weeks what fashion robes to wear,
I pray thee then defer it till the spring,
That we may have our garments point device.
I mean to send for Tailers into Spain,
That shall confer of some fantastickt suits,
With those that be our conningst Englishmen,
What? let me brave it now or never Ned.

Long. Madam content ye, would that were greatest car^
You shall have garments to your hearts desire,
I never red but Englishmen excelled,
For change of rare devises every way.

Q. Eli. Yet pray thee Ned, my love, my lord, and king,
My fellow soldier, and compeere in arms,
Do so much honor to thy Elinor,
To wear a suit that thee shall give thy grace,
Of he on^ cost and workmanship perhaps.

Q. Mot. Twi^ come by leasurs daughter then I fear,
Thou Art too fine ^gard to be quick at work.

Long. Twixt v^a greater matter breaks no square,
So it be such my Nell as may be (...),
The ma^stie and greatness of a king.
And now my Lords and loving friends,
Follow your General to the court,
After his travels to repose him then,
There to recount with pleasure what is past,
Of wars alarums, showers and sharpest storms.
Exeunt all, saving the Queen and her daughter.
Q. Eli. Now Elinor, now Englands lovely Queen,
Bethink thee of the greatness of thy state:
And how to bear thy self with ro^ltie,
Above the other Q^eenes of Christendom,
That Spain reaping renown by Elinor,
And Elinor adding renown to Spain,
Britain may her magnificence admire,
Ttell thee Ione, what time our ^ighnes sits,
Under our royal Canopie of state,
Glistering with pendants of the purest gold,
Like as our seat were spangled all with stars
The world shall wonder at our majesty,
As if the daughter of eternal Ops,
Turned to the likeness of Vermilion fumes,
Where from her cloudie womb the Centaures lap^.
Were in her royal seat inthronized.

Ione. Madam, if Ione thy daughter may advise,
Let not your honor make your manners chang^
The people of this land are men of war,
The women courteous, mild, and debonaire,
Laying the^ (...) at princes feet,
That gouernes w^h familiar majesty,
But if their sovereigns ^ce gin swell with pride,
Disdaning commons love which is the strength,
And surenes of the richest commonwealth:
That Prince were better live a private life,
Then rule with tirannie and discontent.

Q. Eli. Indeed we count them headstrong Englishmen
But we shall hold them in a Spanish yoke:
And make them know their Lord and sovereign.
Come daughter let us home for to provide:
For all the cunning workmen of this I Will,
In our great chamber shall be set a work,
And in my hall shall bountifully feed.
My King like Phoebus bridegroom like shall march
With lovely Xheeis to her g^assie bed,
And all the lookers on shall stand amazde,
To see King Edward and his lovely Queen,
Sit lovely in Englands stately throne.
Exeunt Ambo. Enter Lluellen, alias Prince of Wales: Rice ap Meredeth, Owen ap
Rice, with swords and bucklers and freese Ierkins.
Llu. Come Rice and rouse thee for thy countries good,
Follow the man that means to make you great:
Follow Lluellen rightful prince of Wales.
Sprung from the ^oines of great Cadwallader,
Descended from the ^oines of Trojan Brute,
And though the tari^ous 'Saxons, Normans, Danes,
Have sp^t the true Romans of glorious Troy,
Within the western mountains of this I Will,
Yet have we hope to clime these stony pales,
When Londoners as Romans earstamazde,
Shall tre^bling (...) Lluellens at the gate.
T'accomplish this, thus have I brought you forth,
Disguisde to Milford haven, here attend,
The landing of the lady Aeliner.
Her stay does make me muse, the wind stands fair^
And ten days hence we did expect them here,
Neptune be favorable to my love,
And steer her keele with thy three forked mace,
That from this shore I may behold her sails,
And in mine arms embrace my dearest dear.

Rice. Brave prince of Wales, this honorable match,
Cannot but turn to Cambrias common good.
Simon de Momfort, her thrice valiant son,
That in the Barons wars was General,
Was loved and honored of the Englishmen.
When they shall hear, she is your espoused wife.
Assure your grace we shall have great supply,
To make our roades in England mightily.

Owen. What we resolved, must strongly be performd,
Before the king return from Palestine,
Whilst he wins glory at Jerusalem,
Let us win ground upon the Englishmen.

Lluel. Owen ap Rice, it is that Lluellen fears,
I fear me Edward will be come a shore,
Ere we can make provision for the war.
But be it as it will, within his court
My brother David is, that bears a face,
As if he were my greatest enemy,
He by this craft shall creep into her heart,
And give intelligence from time to time,
Of her intentions, driftes and stratagems.
Here let us rest upon the salt sea shore,
And while our eyes long for our hearts desires,
Let us like friends pastime us on the sands,
Our frolike minds are ominous for good.
Enter Friar Hugh ap David, Guenthian his wench in Flannell, and Jack his
Nouice.
Friar. Guenthian as I am true man,
So will I do the best I can:
Guenthian as I am true Priest,
So will I be at thy behest:
Guenthian as I am true Friar,
So will I be at thy desire.

Nouice. My master stands too near the fire,
Trust him not wench, he will prove a liar.

Lluellen. True man, true Friar, true priest, and true knave,
These four in one this trull shall have,

Friar. Here swear I by my shaven crown,
VVench if I give thee a gay green gown,
I Will take thee up as I laid thee down,
And never bruze nor batter thee.

Nouice. O swear not master, flesh is frail,
VVenche when the sign is in the tail,
Mighty is love and will prevail,
This Churchman does but flatter thee.

Lluel. A prittie worm, and a lusty friar,
Made for the field, not for the quire.

Guenth. Mas Friar as I am true maid,
So do I hold me well a paid:
It Is Churchmans lay and verity,
To live in love and charity,
And therefore ween I as my creed,
Your words shall company my deed,
Dauie my dear, I yield in all,
Thine own to go and come at call.

Rice. And so far forth begins our braule.

Friar. Then my Guenthian to begin,
Since idleness in love is sin,
Boie to the town I will thee hie,
And so return even by and by,
When thou with cakes and muskadine,
And other ^unkets good and fine,
Have filled thy bottle and thy bag.

Nouice. Now master as I am true wag,
I will be neither late nor lag,
But go and come with gossips cheer,
Ere Gib our Cat can lick her care.
For long ago I learned in school,
That lovers desire, and pleasures cool:
Sanct Ceres sweetes and Bacchus vine,
Now master for the Cakes and Wine.
Exit Nouice.
Friar. Wench to pass away the time in glee,
Guenthian set thee down by me,
And let our lips and voices meet,
In a merry country song.

Guenth. Friar, I am at beek and baye,
And a^ thy commandment to sing and say,
And other sportes among.

Ow. I marry my lord, this is somewhat like a mans'mony,
Heeres a wholesome Welsh wench,
Lapt in her Flannell as warm as wool,
And as fit as a pudding for a Friars mouth.
The Friar and Guenthian sing: Lluellen speaks to them. Pax vobis, pax vobis,
good fellows fair fall ye.

Friar. E^ cum spiritu tuo.
Friends have you any thing else to say to the Friar?

Owen. Much good do you, much good you,
My masters heart elie.

Friar. And you sir when ye eat:
Ha^y any thing else to say to the Friar?

Lluel. Nothing, but I wo^d gladly know,
If (...) (...) be your first dish, what shall be your last service.

Friar. (...) ^y be s^ I count it physic,
To feed but on one dish at a sitting:
Sir would you any thing else with the Friar?

Rice. O nothing sir, but if you had any manners,
You might bid us fall too.

Friar. Nay and that be the matter good enough,
Is this all ye have to say to the Friar?

Lluel All we have to say to you sir, it may be sir,
We would walk aside with your wenche a little.

Friar. My masters and friends, I am a poor Friar, a man of Gods making, and a
good fellow as you are, legs, feet, face and hands, and heart from top to toe,
of my word, ^ght shape and Christendom: and I love a wenche as a wench should
be loved, and if you love your self walk good friends I pray you, and let the
Friar alone with his flesh.


Lluel. O Friar, your holy mother the church teaches you to abstain from
these morsels, therefore my masters it is a deed of charity to remove this
stumbling block, a fair wench, a shrewd temptation to a Friars conscience.


Guen. Friend if you knew the Friar half so well as the bailie of Brecknock,
you would think you might as so one move mun^k Dauie into the sea, as Guenth.
from his side.


Lluel. Mas by your leave, we will prove.

Guenth. At your peril if you move his patience.

Friar. Brother, brother, and my good Countrymen.

Lluel. Countrymen? nay I cannot think that an English friar, will come so
far into Wales barefooted.


Owen. That's more then you know, and yet my lord he might ride, having a fillie
so n^re. (warnings:


Fri. Hands off good countriman, at few words and fair

Lluel. Countrymen, not so sir, we renounce thee Friar, and refuse your
country.

Friar. Then brother and my good friends,
Hands off and if you love your ease.

Rice. Ease me no easings, we will ease you of this carriage.

Friar. Fellow be gone quickly, or my pike staff and I will set thee away
with a vengeance.


Llu. I am sorry trust me to see the church so impatient.

Fri. Ye Dogs ounes, do me a shrowde turn and mock me too, flesh and blood
will not bear this: then rise up Rob^ and say to Richard, Read rationem
villicationistuae. sir Countriman, kinsman, Englishman, Welshman, you with the
Wenche, return your Habeas corpus, here is a Circiorari for your Procedendo.


Owen. Hold friar we are thy countriemen.
Rice. Paid, paid, Digone, we are thy countrime^, Mundue.

Friar. My Countrymen? nay marry sir shall you not be my countrymen, you sir,
you, specially you sir that refuse the Friar, and renounce his country.


Lluel. Friar, hold thy hands, I swear as I am a Gentleman, I am a Welshman,
and so are the rest of honesty.


Friar. Of honesty say thou?
They are neither Gentlemen nor Welshmen,
That will deny their country: Come hither wenche,
I Will have about with them once more,
For denying of their Country.
Make as if ye would fight.
Rice. Friar thou wottest not what thou say est,
This is the prince, and we are all his train:
Disposed to be pleasant with thee a little,
But I perceive Friar, thy nose will bide no ^est.

Friar. As much as you will with me sir,
But not at any hand with my wench,
I and Richard my man here.
For here, Contra omnes gentes.
But is this Lluellen the great Camber Britain?

Lluel. It is he Friar, give me thy hand,
And gramercies twenty times,
I promise thee thou have cudgeld
Two as good lessons into my iacket,
As ever Churchman did at so short warning.
The one is, not to be too busy with another man's cattle,
The other, not in have to deny my country.

Friar. It Is pity my Lord,
But you should have more of this learning
You profit so well by it.

Lluel. It Is pity Friar but thou should be Lluellens Chaplain, thou
edifiest so well, and so shall thou be, of mine honor, here I entertain thee,
thy boy, and thy trull, to follow my fortune, in Secula seculorum.


Friar. And Richard my man sir and you love me,
He that stands by me, and shrunk not at all weathers,
And then you have me in my colors.

Lluel Friars agreed: Rice welcome the Ruffines.
Enter the Harper, and sing to the tune of Who list to lead a Soldiers life.
Go too, go too, you Britains all,
And play the men both great and small,
A wondrous matter has be fall,
That makes the Prophets cry and call,
Tum da et di te de te dum,
That you must march both all and some,
Against your foes with trumpe and Drum:
I speak to you from God that you shall overcome.
With a turn both ways.
Lluel. What now, who have we here?
Tum date dite dote dum.

Fri. What have we a fellow dropped out of the element,
What Is he for a man?

Rice ap Mer. Know thou this Goscup?

Fri. What? not Morgain Pigot, our good welsh prophet,
O it is a holy Harper.

Meredith. A Prophet with a moraine,
Good my Lord, lets hear a few of his lines I pray you.

Nouice. My lords, it is an od fellow I can tell you,
As any is in all Wales:
He can sing rhyme with reason, and rhyme without reason,
And without reason or rhyme.

Lluellen. The devil he can,
Rhyme with reason, and rhyme without reason,
And reason without rhyme:
Then good Morgan Pigot, pluck out thy spigot,
And draw us a fresh pot,
From the kinder kind of thy knowledge.

Friar. Knowledge my son, knowledge I warrantye,
How say thou Morgaine, art thou not a very prophet?

Harper. Friar, friar, a Prophet verily,
For great Lluellens love,
Sent from above, to bring him victory.

Mered. Come then gentle prophet, lets see how thou can salute thy prince,
say, shall we have good success in our enterprise or no?


Harp. When the weathercock of Carmarthen steeple
Shall engender young ones in the belferie,
And a heard of Goats leave their pasture,
To be clothed in silver:
Then shall Brute be borne a new,
And VVa^es record their ancient hew,
Ask Friar David if this be not true.

Friar. This my Lord a means by you,
O he is a prophet, a prophet.

Lluel. Soft you now good Morgan Pigot,
And take us with ye a little I pray,
What means your wisdom by all this.

Harper. The VVeathercock (my lord) was your father, who by foul weather of
waire, was driven to take Sanctuary in Saint Mary's at Carnaruon, where he
begat young ones on your mother in the belfrey, viz. your worship, and your
brother David


Lluel. But what did thou mean by the Goats?

Harp. The Goats that leave the pasture to be clothed in silver, are the
silver Goats your men wore on their sleeves.


Fr. O how I love thee Morgain Pigot our sweet prophet.

Llu. Hence rogue with your prophesies, out of my sight.

Mered. Nay good my lord, lets have a few more of these meeters, he has great
^lore in his head.


Nouice. Yea, and of the best in the market,
And your Lordship would vouchsafe to hear them.

Lluellen. Villain away, i will here no more of your prophesies.

Harper. When legs shall lose their length,
Returning weary home. from out the holy land:
A VVel^man shall be king,
And govern merry England.

Mered Did I not tell your Lordship he would hit it home anon?

Friar. My Lord he comes to your time that's flat.

Nouice. I master and you mark him, he hit the mark pat.

Friar. As how Jack?

Nou Why thus: when legs shall lose their length,
And thanks yield up their strength:
Returning weary home from out the holy land,
A VVel^man shall be king,
And govern merr^e England.
Why my Lord. in this prophecy, is your advancement as plainly seen, as a
three halfepence through a dishe of butter in a sunnie date.


Fri. I think so lack for he that sees three halfepence, must tarry till the
butter be melted in the suune, and so forth apply boie


Nouice Nonego master, do you and you dare.

Lluel. And ^o boy thou meanest, he that tarries this prophecy, may see Long
shankes shorter by the head, and Lluellan wear the crown in the field.


Friar. By lady my Lord you go near the matter,
But what says Morgaine Pigote more?

Harper. In the year of our lord God 1272, shall spring from the loins of
Brute. o^e whose wives name being the perfect end of his ground, ^al co^summate
the peace betwixt England and Wales, and be advanced to ride through
Cheapside with a crown on his head, and that's meant by your lordship, for your
wives name being Ellen, and your own Lluellan, bears the perfect end of your
own name: so must it needs be, that for a time Ellen flee from Lluellen, ye
being betrothed in heart each to others, must needs be advanced to be
highest of your kin.


Lluel. Jack, I make him thy prisoner,
Look what way my fortune inclines,
That way goes he,

Mered. Sir, see you run swiftest.

Friar. Farewell, be far from the Spigote,
Exit.
Nouice. Now sir, if our country Ale, were as good as your Metheglen, I would
teach you to play the knave. or you should teach me to play the Harper.


Harp. Ambo, boy, you are too light witted,
As I am light minded.

Noui. It seemed to me thou art fittest, and passing well.
Exeunt ambo. Enter Guenther to Lluellen with letters.
Lluel. What tidings brings Guenther with his haste?
Say man, what bodes thy message good or bad.

Guenther. Bad my lord, and all in vain I wot,
Thou dare thine eyes upon the wallowing maine,
As erst did Aegen to behold his son,
To welcome and receive thy welcome love,
And sable sails he saw, and so may thou,
For whose mishap the Brackish seas lament,
Edward, o Edward.

Lluel. And what of him?

Guenther. Landed he is at Dover with his men,
From Palestine safe by his English Lords,
Received in triumphs like an earthly God,
He lives to wear his fathers Diadem,
And sway the sword of british Albion.
But Elinor, thy Elinor.

Lluellen. And what of her?
Has amorous Neptune gazd upon my love,
And stopped her passage with his forked mace:
Or that I rather fear, O deadly fear,
Enamoured Nereus does he withhold my Elinor?

Guenther. Nor Neptune, Nereus nor other God,
Withholdeth from my gracious lord his love,
But cruel Edward that injurious king,
Withholds thy liefest lovely Elmor,
Taking in a Pinnasse on the narrow seas,
By four tall ships of Bristowe, and with her,
Lord Emerick her unhappy noble brother,
As from Mont argis hetherward they saild:
This say in brief these letters tell at large.
Lluellen reads his brother David's letters.
Lluel Is Longshankes then, so lusty now become,
Is my fair love my beautions Elinor taken?
Villain damnde villains not to guard her safe,
Or fence her sacred person from her foes,
Sun could thou shine and see my love beset,
And did not clothe thy clouds in fiery coats,
Ore all the heavens with winged sulphur flames,
As when the beams like mounted combatants,
Battaild with Pyetion in the fallowed lays,
But if kind Cambria deigne me good aspect,
To make me cheifest brute of western Wales,
I Will short that gainlegd Longshanke by the top,
And make his flesh my murdering fawchions food:
To arms true Britains sprung of Trojans seed.
And with your swords write in the book of Time,
Your British names in Characters of blood.
Owen ap Rice, while we stay for further force,
Prepare away in post, and take with thee,
A hundred chosen of thy countrymen,
And scowre the marches with your Welshmens hooks,
That Englishmen may think the diuellis come.
Rice shall remain with me, make thou thy boade,
In resolution to revenge these wrongs,
With blood of thousands guiltless of this rage,
Fly thou on them amain: Edward, my love
Be thy lives bane. Follow me countrymen,
Words make no way, my Elinor is surprizd,
Robbed am I of the comfort of my life,
And know I this and am not veng'd on him?
Exit Lluellen, and the other lords. Manet, the Friar and Nouice.
Friar. Come boie we must buckle I see,
The prince is of my profession right:
Rather than he will lose his wenche,
He will fight Ab ouo vsque ad mala.

Nouice. O master doubt you not but your Nouice will prove a whot shot, with
a bottle of Methegl^.

Exeunt, ere the wenche fall into a Welsh song, and the Friar answer, and the
N^u (...). Enter the nine lords of Scotland, with their nine pages, Gloucester,
Sussex, king Edward in his suit of Glass^, Queen Elinor, Queen Mother, the
King and Queen under a Canopie.
Iong. Nobles of Scotland, we thank you all,
For this days gentle princely service done,
To Edward Englands king and Scotlands lord:
Our Coronations due sollen nitie,
Is ended with applause of all estates.
Now then let us appose and rest us here,
But specially we thank you gentle lords,
That you so well have governed your g^eefes,
As being grown unto a ag^ all ^arre,
You choose king Edward by your Messengers,
To calm, to qualify, and to compound:
Thank Britains strife of Scotlands climing peers.
I have no doubt fair lords but you well wot,
How factions waste the ritchest Commonwealth,
And discord spoils the seats of mighty kings.
The Barons wars, a tragic wicked war,
Nobles how has i^ shaken Englands strength?
Industriouslie it seems to me you have,
Loiallie ventured to prevent this shock,
For which since you have chosen me your judge,
My lord, will you stand to what I shall aw^rd?

Baliol. Victorious Edward, to whom the Scottish kings
Owe ho ^age as their lord and sovereign,
Amongst us nine, is but one lawful king:
But might we all be judges in the case,
Then should in Scotland be nine kings at once,
And this contention never set or limited,
To stay these iarres we jointly make appeal,
To thy imperial throne, who knows our claims,
We stand not on our titles before your grace,
But do submit our selves to your awarde,
And whom your Majesty shall name to be our king,
To him we will yield obedience as a king,
Thus willingly, and of their own accord,
Does Scotland make great Englands king their judge.

Lorg. Then nobles since you all agree in one,
That for a crown so disagree in all,
Since what I do shall rest inreuocable,
And lovely England to thy lovely Queen,
Lovely Queen Elinor, unto her turn thy eye,
Whose honor cannot but love thee well,
Hold up your hands in sight, with general voice,
That are content to stand to our award.
They all hold up their hands, and say he shall. Deliver me the golden Diadem.
Lo here I hold the goal for which ye striued,
And here behold my worthy men at arms,
For chivalry and worthy wisdoms praise,
Worthy each one to wear a Diadem,
Expect my doom, as erst at I da hills,
The Goddesses divine waited the award,
Of Danaes son: Balioll stand farthest forth,
Baliol behold I give thee the Scottish crown,
Wear it with heart and with thankfulness:
Sound Trumpets, and say all after me,
God save king Baliol the Scottish king.
The Trumpets sounds, all cry aloud, God save King Baliol the Scottish king.
Thus lords though you require no reason why,
According to the consci^nce in the cause,
I make John Balioll your anointed king:
Honor and love him as behooues him best,
That is in peace of Scotlands crown possessed.

Baliol. Thanks royal England for thy honor done,
This justice that has calmd our ciuell strife:
Shall now be ceast with honorable love,
So moved of remorce and pity,
We will erect a college of my name,
In Oxford will I build for memory,
Of Baliols bounty and his gratitude:
And let me happy days no longer see,
Then here to England loyal I shall be.

Elinor. Now brave John Balioll Lord of Gallaway,
And king of Scots shine with thy goulden head,
Shake thy speres in honor of his name,
Under whose roialtie thou wearst the same.
Queen Elinors speech. The welken spangled through with goulden spots,
Reflects no finer in a frostie night,
Then lovely Longshankes in his Elinors eye:
So Ned thy Nell in every part of thee,
Thy person's guarded with a troop of Queens,
And every Queen as brave as Elinor,
Give glory to these glorious ch^stall quarries,
Where every robe an object entertaines,
Of rich device and princely majesty.
Thus like Narcissus diuing in the deep,
I die in honor and in Englands arms:
And if I drown, it is in my delight.
Whose company is cheifest life in death,
From forth whose currall lips I suck the sweet,
Wherewith are dainty Cupids candles made,
Then live or die brave Ned, or sink or swim,
An earthly bliss it is to look on him,
On thee sweet Ned, it shall become thy Nell,
Bo unteous to be unto the beauteous,
Ore pry the palms sweet fountains of my bliss;
And I will stand on tiptoe for a kiss.

Long. He had no thought of any gentle heart,
That would not seize desire for such desert,
If any heavenly joy in women be,
Sweet of ^ll sweetes, sweet Nell it is in thee.
Now lords along by this the Earl of March,
Lord Mortimor ore Cambriaes mountain tops,
Has ranged his men, and feels Lluellens mind,
To which con^es that we^ in wasting be,
Our solle^ne service of coronation past,
We (...) amain to back our friends at need,
And (...) to Wales our men at arms shall march,
And we with them in person foot by foot.
Brother of Scotland, you shall to your home,
And live in honor there fair England friend.
And thou sweet Nell Queen of king Edwards heart.
Shall now come (...) at thy dainty love,
And at coron^tion meet thy loving peers,
When storms are past, and we have coolde the rage
Of these rebellious Welshmen that contend,
Against Englands majesty, and Edwards crown.
Sound Trumpets Harolds lead the train along,
This be king Edwards feast and hollie day.
Exeunt. Enter the Maris of London from Church, and Music before her.
Qu. Eli. Gloucester, who may this be, a bride or what?
I pray ye (...) go see,
And know the reason of the harmony.

Ione. Good woman let it not ostend you any whit,
For to deliver unto me the cause,
That in this unusual kind of sort,
You pass the streets with (...) so.

Maris. Mistres or Madam what ere you be,
Wot you I am the Mayor of Londons wife,
Who for I have been delivered of a son,
Having not these doozen years had any before,
Now in my husbands year of Ma^oltie,
Bringing him a goodly boy,
I pass unto my house a maiden bride,
Which private pleasure touching godliness,
Shall here no way I hope offend the good.

Queen. You hope so gentle mistres, do you indeed!
But do not make it parcel of your creed.

Maris. Alas I am undone, it is the Queen,
The proudest Queen that ever England knew.
Exeunt Maris, and omnes.
Quee. Come Gloucester, lets to the court and revel there.
Exeunt Gloucester and the Queen. Enter Mered^th, David, and Lluellen.
David. Soft is it not Meredeth I behold?

Lluel. All good, all friends: Meredeth see the man,
Must make us great, and raise Lluellens ^ead:
Fight thou Lluellen for thy friend and thee.

Mer. Fight mauger fortune strong our battles strong,
And bear thy foes before thy pointed lance

David. Not too much prowess good my lord at once.
Some talk of policy another w^ile.

Mered. How comes my li^s hurt at this assault?

Lluel. Hurt for our good, Meredeth make account,
Sir David's wit is full of good devise,
And kindly will perform what he pretends.

David Enough of t^is my Lord at once,
What will you that I hold the king in hand,
Or what shall I especially aduize,
Sitting in counsel with the English lords,
That so my counsel may avail my friends?

Lluel. David if thou will best for me devise,
Advise my love be rendered to my hand:
Tell them the Chains that Mul^ber erst made,
To tie Prometheus lims to Caucasus,
Nor furies phanges shall hold me ^ong from her,
But I will have her from the usurpers tent,
My beauteous Elinor: if ought in this,
(...) in this case thy wit may boot thy friends,
Expres it then in this, in nothing else.

David. I there is a Card that puts us to our trumpe,
For might I see the star of Leisters loins,
It were enough to darken and obscure,
This Edwards glory, fortune, and his pride:
First hereof can I put you out of doubt,
Lord Mortimor of the king has her in charge,
And honorably intreates your Elinor,
Some thinks he prays Lluellen were in heaven,
And thereby hopes to coache his love on earth.

Lluel No, where Lluellen mounts, there Ellen flies
Insp^keable are my thoughts for her,
She is not from me in death to be diuorst.

David. Go to, it shall be so, so shall it be,
Edward is full resolved of thy faith,
So are the English lords and Barons all:
Then what may let thee to intrude on them,
Some new found stratagem to feel their wit,
It is enough: Meredeth take my weapons,
I am your prisoner, say so at the least,
Go hence, and when you parle on the walls,
Make show of monstrous tirannie you intend,
To execute on me, as on the man,
That shamefullie rebels against kin and kind:
And lea^ thou have thy love, and make thy kind:
With such conditions as shall best concern,
David must die say thou a shameful death,
Edward perhaps with ruthe and pity moved,
Will in exchange yield Elinor to thee,
And thou by me shall gain thy hearts desire.

Lluel. Sweetly aduized David, thou blessest me,
My brother David lengthener of my life,
Friends gratulate to me my joyful hopes.
Exeunt. Enter Longshankes, Sussex, and others.
Long. Why Barons, suffer ye our foes to breathe?
Assault, assault, and charge them all amain,
They fear, they fly, they faint, they fight in vain,
But where is gentle David in his De^?
Loath were lo^ght but good should him betide.
Sound an Alarm. On the walls enter Longshankes, Sussex, Mortimor, David the
Friar, M^redith holding David by the collar, with a Dagger in his hand.
Long. Where is the proud disturber of our state?
Traitor to Wailes, and to his Sovereign.

Lluel. Usurper here I am, what do thou cra^e.

Lon. Welshman alleagance which thou owe thy king.

Lluel. Traitor, no king, that seeks thy countries sack,
The famous runnagate of Christendom.

Long. Ambitious rebel, know thou what I am,
How great. how famous, and how fortunate,
And dare thou carry arms against me here,
Even when thou should do reverence at my feet?
Yea feared and honored in the farthest parts,
Has Edward been, thy noble Henry's son,
Traitor, this sword vnsheathd has shined often,
With reeking in the blood of Sarazens,
When like to Perseus on his winged steed,
Brandishing bright the blood of Ad^t,
That aged Saturn gave s^ire Maias son,
Conflicting tho with Gorgon in the vale,
Setting before the gates of Nazareth,
My horses hoofes I staind in Pagaus gore,
Sending whole countries of heathen souls,
To Plutoes house: this sword, this thirllie sword,
Aims at thy head, and shall I hope ere long,
Gage and divide thy bowels and thy bulk,
Disloi^ll villain thou, and what is more.

Lluel. Why Longshankes, think thou I will be scarde with words?
No, did thou speak in thunder like to Io^e,
Or should as Br^areus shake at once,
A hundred bloody swords, with bloody hands,
I tell thee Longshankes here he faceth thee,
Whom naught can daunt, no not the stroke of death:
Resolved ye see: but see the chance of war,
Know thou a traitor and thou see his head,
Then Longshankes look this villain in the face:
This Rebel he has wrought his countries wrack,
Base. rascal, had and hated in his kind,
Object of wrath, and subject of revenge.

Long. Lluellen, calst thou this the chance of war?
Bad for us all pardie, but worse for him,
Courage sir David, kings thou know must die,
And noble minds all dastard fear defies.

David. Renowned England, star of Edwards Globe,
My liefest lord and sweetest Sovereign,
Glorious and happy is this chan^e to me,
To reap this fame and honor in my death,
That I was hewed with soul defiled hands,
For my beloved king and countries good,
And died in grace and favor with my prince:
Seize on me bloody butchers with your paws,
It is but temporal that you can inflict.

Long. Bravely resolved brave soldier by my life.

Friar. Hark you sir, I am afeard you will not be so resolved, by that time
you know so much as I can show you, here be hot Dogs I can tell you,
means to have the baiting of you.


Mort. Lluellen in the midst of all thy braues,
How will thou use thy brother, thou have taken,
Will thou let his master ransom him?

Lluel. No nor his mistres gallant Mortimor,
With all the gold and silver of the land.

Mered. Ransom this Judas to his fathers line,
Ransom this traitor to his brothers life,
No take that earnest penny of thy death,
This touch my lord comes nothing near the mark.
Mered^th stabs him into the arms and shoulders.
Longsh. O damned villain hold thy hands,
Ask and have.

Lluel. We will nor ask nor have, see thou these tools?
He shows him hot Pinsers. These be the Dogs shall bait him to the death,
And shall by peecemeales tear his cursed flesh,
And in thy sight here shall he hang and pine.

Long. O villains, traitors, how will I be vengd?

Lluel. What threats thou Edward,
Desperate minds contemn,
That fury menaceth, see thy words effects.
He cuts his nose.
David. O gracious heavens, dissolve me into claie,
This tirannie is more then flesh can bear.

Lon. Bear it brave mind, since nothing but thy blood,
May satisfy in this extreme estate.

Sussex. My lord it is in vain to threaten them,
They are resolved ye see upon his death.

Long. Sussex, his death, they all shall buie it dear,
Offer them any favor for his life,
Pardon, or peace, or ought what is beside:
So love me God, as I regard my friends.
Lluellen let me have thy brothers life,
Even at what rate and ransom thou will name.

Lluel. Edward, king Edward, as thou list be termd,
Thou know thou have my beauteous Elinor,
Produce her forth, to plead for David's life,
She may obtain more then an hoast^ of men.

Long. VVilt thou exchange thy prisoner for thy love?

Lluel. Talk no more to me, let me see her face.

Morti. Why, will your majesty be all so base,
To stoop to his demands in every thing?

Long. Fetch her at once, good Mortimor be gone.

Morti I go, but how unwilling heavens does know,

Mered. A pace Mortimor if thou love thy friend.

Morti. I go for dearer then I leave behind.
Mortimor goes for Elinor, and conducts her in.
Long. See Sussex how he bleedeth in my eye,
That bears fortunes shocke triumphantly.

Friar. Saw haw, mai^er; I have found, I have found.

Lluel. What have thou found Friar, ha?

Mered. News my lord, a Star from out the Sea,
The same is risen, and made a summers day.
Then Lluellen spieth Elinor and Mortimor, and says t^us. What Nell, sweet
Nell, do I behold thy face?
Fall heavens, fleet stars, shine Phoebus lamp no more,
This is the Planet lends this world her light,
Starr^ of my fortune, this that shines bright,
Queen of my heart, load star of my delight,
Fair mould of beauty, miracle of fame,
O let me die with Elinor in mine arms:
What honor shall I lend thy loialtie,
Or praise unto thy sacred dietie.

Mered. Marry this my lord, if I may give you counsel, sacrifice this Tike in
her sight, her friend, which being done, one of your soldiers may dip his
foul shirt in his blood, so shall you be waited with as many crosses as king
Edward.


Long. Good cheer sir David, we shall up anon.

Morti. Die Mortimor, thy life is almost gone.

Eli. Sweet prince of Wales, were I within thine arms,
Then should I in peace possess my love,
And heavens open fair their crystal gates,
That I may see the palace or my intent.

Long. Lluellen set try brother free,
Let me have him, thou thalt have Elinor.

Lluel. Sooth Edward I do prize my Elinor,
Deerer then life, but there belongs more
To these affairs, than my content in love:
And to be short, if thou will have thy man,
Of whom I swear thou think over well,
The safety of Lluellen and his men,
Must be regarded highly in this match,
Say therefore and be short, will thou give peace
And pardon to Lluellen and his men.

Long. I will (...) have time to be aduizd.

Lluel King Edward no, we will admit no pause,
For goes this wretch, this wret^h to the pot,
And (...) Lluellen be pursued so near,
May chance to show thee such a tumbling cast,
As er^ our father, when he thought to escape,
And broke his neck from Julius Casars town.

Sussex. My lord these rebels all are desperate.

Morti. And Mortimor of all most misetable.

Longsh How say you Welshmen, will you leave your arms,
And be true liegemen unto Edwards crown?

Al^ the Sold If Edward pardon surely what is past,
Upon conditions we are all content.

Long. B^ like you will condition with us then.

Sold Special conditions for our safety first,
And for our country Cambrias common good,
T'auoide the fusion of our guilty blood.

Longsh. Go to, say on.

Sold First for our fo^lowers and our selves and all,
We ask a pardon in the Princes word,
Then for this Lords possession in his love:
But for our Country (...) these boones we beg,
And Englands promise princely to thy Wailes,
That none be Cambrias prince to govern us,
B^t he that is a Welshman borne in Wales.
Grant this and swear it on thy knightly sword,
And have thy man, and us, and all in peace.

Lluel. Why Cambria Britains are you so incensed,
Will you deliver me to Edwards hands?

Sold^. No lord Lluellen we will back for thee,
Thy life, thy love, and golden liberty.

Morti. A tiuce with honorable conditions taken,
Wales happiness, Englands glo^, and my bane.

Long. Command retreat be sounded in our camp,
Soldiers I grant at full what you request,
David good cheer, Lluellen open the gates.

Lluel. The gates are opened, enter thee and thine.

Da^. The sweetest sun that ere I saw to shine.

Long. Madam, a brabble well begun for thee,
Be thou my guest, and sir Lluellens love.
Exeunt. Mortimor solus. Mortimor, a brable ill began for thee,
A truce with capital conditions taken:
A prisoner saved and raunsomd with thy life,
Edward my king, my Lord and lover dear,
Full little do thou wot, how this retreat.
As with a sword, has slain poor Mortimor.
Farewell the flower the gem of beauties blaze,
Sweet Ellen, mir^cle of natures ^and,
Fuellen in thy name, but heaven is in thy looks,
Sweet Venus let me s^ct or devil be,
In that sweet heaven or hell that is in thee,
Exit. Enter Jack and the Harper getting a standing against the Queen comes
in. The trumpets sound Queen (...) or in her lit^r (...) by four Negro Mores
(...) of (...) with (...), attended on by the Ear^e of Gloucester, and her four
f^otemen, o^ ^auing set a ladder to the (...) de of (...) (...). (...) sc^ded
and her daughter follo^eth.
Qu. Eli. Give me my pantables.
Fie this hot wether how it makes me sweat,
Hey ho my heart, ah I am passing faint.
Give me my fan that I may cool my face,
Hold, take my mask but see you romple not,
This wind and dust see how it smolders me,
Some drink good Gloucester or I die for drink,
Ah Ned thou have forgot thy Nell I see,
That she is thus inforst to follow thee. (majesty

Gloucester. This aires distemperature and please your
Noisome through mountains vapors send thick mist,
Unpleasant needs must be to you and your company,
That never was wont to take the air,
Til Flora have perfumde the earth with sweetes,
With lillies, roses, mints and Eglantine,

Qu. Eli. I tell thee the ground is al to base,
For Elinor to honor with her steps:
Whose footepace when she progrest in the street,
Of Aecon and the fair Jerusalem,
Was naught but costly Arras points:
Fair I land tapestrie and Azured silk,
My milk white steed treading on cloth of ray,
And trampling proudly under neath the feet,
Choice of our English woollen drapery.
This climat or clowring with black congealed clouds,
That takes their swelling from the marrish soil,
Fraught with infectious f^ogges and ruistie dampes,
Is far unworthy to be once embalmd:
With redolence of this refreshing breath:
That sweetens where it lights as do the flames,
And holy fires of Vestaes sacrifice. spring,

Ione. Whose pleasant fields new planted with the
Make Thamesis to mount above the banks,
And like a wanton walloing up and down:
On Floras beds and Napees silver down.

Glo. And wales for me Madame while you are here,
No Climate good unless your grace be nere,
Would wales had ought could please you half so well,
Or any precious thing in Glosters gift,
Whereof your ladyship would challenge me.

Ione. Well said my lord it is as my mother says,
You men have learnd to woe a thousand ways.

Gloucester. O madame had I learned against my need,
Of all those ways to woo one way to speed,
My cunning then had been my fortunes guide.

Q. Eli. Faith Ione I think thou must be Glosters bride,
Good Earl how near he steps unto her side,
So soon this eye these younglings had espide,
I Will tell thee girl when I was fair and young:
I found such honny in sweet Edwards tongue,
As I could never spend one idle walk,
But Ned and I would piece it out with talk.
So you my Lord when you have got your Ione,
No matter let Queen mother be alone.
Old Nell is mother now and grandmother may,
The greenest grass does droupe and turn to hay,
Woo one kind Clarke, good Gloucester love thy Ione,
Her heart is thine, her eyes is not her own.

Gl This comfort Madam that your grace does give
Binds me in double duty whilst I live,
Would God King Edward see and say no less.

Qu. Eli. Gloucester I warrant thee upon my life,
My King vouchsafs his daughter for thy wife,
Sweet Ned has not forgot since he did woo,
The gal of love and all that longs thereto.

Glost. Why was your grace so coie to one so kind?

Qu. Eli Kind Gloucester so me thinks in deed,
It seems he loves his wife no more then needs,
That sends for us in all the speedy have,
Knowing his Queen to be so great with child,
And make me leave my princely pleasant seats,
To come into his ruder part of wales.

Gl. His highness has some secret reason why,
He wishes you to move from Englands pleasant courts
The Welshman have of long time suitors been,
That when the war of rebels sorts an end:
None might be prince and ruler over them,
But such a one as was their countriman,
Which sure I think his grace has granted them.

Qu. Eli. So then it is king Edwards Policy,
To have his son, for sooth son i^ be,
A VVelshman, well welshman it likes me,
And ^re he comes.
Enter Edward Longshankes and his lords, to the Queen and her footmen.
Longsh. Nell, welcome into Wales,
How fares my Elinor?

Qu. Eli. Near worse, beshrow their hearts it is long on.

Long. Hearts sweet Nell, shrow no hearts,
Where such sweet saints do dwell
He holds her handfast.
Qu. Eli. Nay then I see I have my dream, I pray let go,
You will not will you whether I will or no?
You are disposed to move me.

Longsh. Say any thing but so:
Once Nell thou gau^st me this.

Qu Eli. I pray let go, ye are disposed I think.

Long I madame very well

Qu. El. Let go and be naught I say.

Longsh What ailes my Nell?

Qu Eli. Aie me, what sudden fits is this I prove;
What grief, what pine lung pain, like youngmens love,
That makes me madding tun thus too and from?

Longsh. What, mallencollie Nell?

Qu Eli. My lord pray let me go.
Give me sweetwater, why how whote it is?

Glost. These be the fits, trouble men's wits.

Long. Ione ask thy beauteous Mistres how she does.

Ione. How fares your majesty?

Qu. Eli. Ione agreeu'd at the heart and angered worse,
Because I came not right in,
I think the King comes purposely to spite me,
My finger itche till I have had my will,
Proud Edward call in thy Elinor be still,
It will not be, nor rest I any where:
Till I have set it soundly on his ear.

Ione. Is that the matter then let me alone.

Qu. Elin. Fie how I fret with grief.

Long. Come hither Ione, know thou what ailes my Queen?

Ione. Not I my lord, she longs I think to give your gracea box on theare.

Long. Nay wench if that be as we will ear it well,
What all a mort how does my dainty Nell?
Look up sweet love, unkind, not kiss me once?
That may not be.

Qu. Eli. My lord I think you do it for the nonce.

Long. Sweet heart one kiss.

Qu. Eli. For Gods sake let me go.

Long. Sweet heart a kiss.

Qu Eli. What, whether I will or no? you will not leave? let be I say?

Long. I must be better chidde.

Qu. Eli No will? take that then lusty lord, Sir leave when you are bid.

Long. Why so this chare is charde.

Gloucester. A good one by the roode,

Qu. Eli. No force no harm.

Long. No harm that does my Elinor any good.
Learn lords against you be married men to bow to women's yoke:
And sturdy though you be you may not stur for every stroke:
Now my sweet Nell how does my Queen?

Qu. Eli. She vaunts that mighty England has felt her fist:
Taken a blow basely at Elinors hand,
And vaunt she may good leave being cursed and coy,
Lack nothing Nell whilst thou have brought thy lord a lovely boie.

Veniacion I am sick good Katherina I pray thee beat hand.

Kath. Spain. This sickness I hope will bring King Edward a iollie boy.

Longsh. And Katherin who brings me that news shall not go empty handed.

Exite omnes. Enter Mortimor, Lluellen and Meredith.
Mortimor. Farewell Lluellen with thy loving Nell.
Exit Mortimor.
Lluellen. Godamercy Mortimor and so farewell.

Mere. Farewell and behangde half Sinons sapons brood

Lluellen. Good words Sir Rice wrongs have best remedy,
So taken with time patience and policy.
But where is the Friar who can tell?
Enter Friar. That can I master very well,
And say I faith what has befell:
Must we at once to heaven or hell?

Elinor. To heaven Friar, Friar no fie,
Such heavy souls mount not so hie.

Friar lies down. Then Friar lie thee down and die.
And if any ask the reason why,
Answer and say thou can not tell,
Unless because thou must to hell.

Eli No Friar because thou did rebel,
Gentle Sir Rice ring out thy knel.

Lluellen. And Maddocke towle thy passing bell. So there lies a straw, and now
to the law masters and friends, naked came we in to the world naked are we
turned out of the good towns into the wilderness, let me say Mass, me
thinks we are a handsome Commonwealth, a hand^ of goodfellowes, set a sunning
to dog on our own dis^tion, what say you Sir? we are enough to keep (...)
passage, will you be ruled by me? we will get the next day from Brecknocke the
book of Robin Hood, the Friar he shall instruct us in his cause and we will even
here (...) and well since the king has put us amongst the discarding cards,
and as it were turned us with deuces and traies out of the deck, every man
take his standing on Ma^nocke deny and wander like irregulers up and down the
wilderness, i will be master of ^rule, i will be Robin Hood that once, cousin Rice
thou shall be little John, and hers Friar David as fit as a die for Friar
Tucke, now my sweet Nel if you will make up the mess with a good heart for
Maid marian and do well with Lluellen under the green wood trees, with as
good a will as in the good towns, why plena est curia.


Eli. My sweetest love and this my infracte fortune could never vaunt har
sovereignty, and should thou pass the foorde of Phlegeton, or with Leander
win the Hellispont in deserts, Oenophrius ever dwell, or build thy bower on
Aetuas fiery tops, thy Nel would follow thee and keep with thee, thy Nel
would feed with thee and sleep with thee.


Friar. O Cupido quantus quantus.

Mere. Bravely resolude Madam and t^n what rests my Lord Robin but we will
live and die together like Chamber Britains, Robin Hood, little John, Friar
Tucke, and Maid marrian.


Llue. There rests nothing now cousin but that I sell my chain to set us all in
green and we will al play the Pioners to make us a cave and Cabban for all
weathers.


Eli. My sweet Lluellen though this sweet be gal, Patience does conquer me by
out suffering al.


Friar. Now Manmocke deny I hold thee a penny,
Thou shall have neither sheep nor goat:
But Friar David, Will fleeces his coat,
Where ever lack my Nouice iet.
Al is fish with (...) that comes to net,
David this year thou paiest no de^te.
Exeunt ambo. Enter Mortimor solus.
Mortimor. Why F^er is it so plain in deed,
Lluellen art thou flatly so resolude.
To ro^st it out and roust so near the king:
What shall we have a passage kept in wales:
For men at arms and knights aduenturou^?
By cock Sir Rice I see no reason why,
Young Mortimor should make one among:
And play hi, parton (...) dying here,
For love of his beloved Elinor:
His Elinor where (...) (...) I wott,
The bitter Northern wind upon the plains:
The dampes that rise from out the quec^y plots:
Nor influence of contagious air should touch,
But she should court yet with the prondest d^mes,
Rich in attire and sumptuous in her fare.
And take her ease in beds of safest Down,
Why Mort^ may not thy offers move,
And win sweet E^ (...) Lluellens love,
Why pleasant gold and gentle eloquence,
Have ^yset the (...) Nimphs the fairest dames,
And vants of words, delights of wealth and ease,
Have made a Nun 10 yield Lluellens,
Being set to see the last of desp^ate chance,
Why should so fair a slarre stand in a vale?
And not be seen to sparkle in the sky,
It is enough Jove change his glittering robes:
To see Mennosyne and the flies
Masters have alter gentle Robinhood,
You are not so well accompanied I hope:
But if a potter come to p^ic his part,
You Will give him stripes or welcome good or worse:
Go Mortimor and make their love holidaies,
The king will take a common scuse of thee,
And who has more men to attend then Mortimor.
Exit Mortimor. Enter Lluellen, Meredith, Friar, Elinor, and their train. They
are all clad in green etc. sing etc. Blithe and bonny, the song ended Lluellen
speaks.
Lluellen. Why so, I see my mates of old,
All were not lies that Bedlams told:
Of Robin Hood and little John,
Friar Tucke and Maid marian.

Friar. I for sooth master.

Lluellen. How well they coucht in forest green,
Frolike and lively with oaten teene:
And spent their day in game and glee,
Lluellen do seek if ought please thee,
Nor though thy foot be out of town,
Let thine look black on Edwards Crown.
Nor think this green is not so gaie,
A^ was the golden rich array:
And if sweet Nel my Marrian,
Trust me as I am Gentle man:
Thou art as fine in this at tire:
As fine and fit to my desire,
As when of Leisters Hal and bower,
Thou were the rose and sweetest flowers
How say thou Friar say I well?
For any thing becomes my Nell.

Friar. Never made man of a woman borne,
A Bullockes tail a blowing horn,
Nor can an Asles hide disguise,
A Lion if he rampe and rise.

Eli. My Lord, the Friar is wondrous wise.

Lluellen. Believe him for he tells no lies,
But what does little John devise?

Meredith. That Robin Hood beware of spies,
An aged saying and a true,
Black will take no other hue.
He that of old has been thy toe:
Will die but will continue so.

Friar. O masters, whither shall we, does any living creature know?

Lluellen. Rice and I will walk the round,
Friar see about the ground.
Enter Mortimor. And spoil what pray is to be found,
My love I leave within in trust,
Because I know thy dealing lust:
Come Potter come and welcome to,
Fare as we fare and do as we do.
Exit Lluellen and Mere^th.
Friar. Nell adieu we go for news,
A little serves the Frier's lust,
When nolens volens fast I must,
Master at all that you refuse.

Mortimor. Such a porter would I choose,
When I mean to blind a skule.
While Robin walk with little Io^,
The Friar will lick his marrian.
So will the Porter if he can.

Eli. Now Friar since your lord is gone,
And you and I are left alone,
What can the Friar do or say,
To pass the weary time away?
Weary God wot poor wench to thee,
That never thought these days to see.

Mortimor. Bre^ke (...) and split mine eyes in (...).
Never let me hear those words again.

Friar. What can the Friar do or sal^
To pass the weary time away:
More dare I do then he dare say,
Because he doubts to have away.

Eli. Do somewhat Friar say or sing,
That may to sorrows so lace bring,
And I mean while will Garlands make,

Morti. O Mortimor were it for thy sake,
A Garland were the happiest stake:
That ever this hand unhappy drew.

Friar. Mistres shall I tell you true,
I have a soug I learnd it long ago,
I wot not whether yole like it well or ill,
It Is short and sweet but somewhat brolde before.
Once let me sing it and I ask no more.

Eli. What Friar will you so indeed,
Agrees it somewhat with your need?

Friar. Why mistres shall I sing my creed,

Eli. That's fitter of the two at need.

Morti. O wench how may thou hope to speed?

Friar. O mistres out it goes.
Look what comes next the Friar throes.
The Friar sittes along and singes.
Morti. Such a sitting who ever saw,
An Eagles bird of a Jack dawe.

Eli. So Sir is this all?

Morti. Sweet heart here is no more.

Eli. How now good fellow more indeed,
By one then was before.

Friar. How now the devil in steed of a dittie.

Morti. Friar a dittie come late from the city.
To ask some pity of this less so pretty:
Some pity sweet mistres I pray you.

Eli. How now Friar where are we now and you play not the man?

Friar. Friend Copes mate, you that come late from the City,
To ask some pity of this less so pretty,
In likeness of a doleful dittie,
Hang me if I do not pay ye.

Mortimor. O Friar you grow chollericke, well yole
Have no man to Court your mislers but your self,
On my word i will take you down a botton hole,

Friar. Ye talk, ye talk child.
Enter Lluellen and Meredith.
Lluellen. It Is well potter you fight in a good quarrel,

Meredith. Mas this blade will hold le^ ^ee then Friar.

Friar. Mines for mine own turn (...) (...) his Tools, rise and lets to it,
b^ (...) (...) you love me, I skorne the odds I can tell you, ^ee fair play
and you be Gentlemen.


Lluellen. Mary shall we Friar, let us see, be their staves of a length good, so
now let us deem of the matter Friar and Potter (...) more clatter I have cast
your water, and see as deep into your desire, as he that had dined every
day into your bosom, O Friar will nothing serve your turn but Larkes.

Are such five birds for such course Clerks,
None but my Marian can serve your turn.

Eli. Cast water, for the house will burn.

Friar. O mistres mistres flesh is frail,
Ware when the sign is in the tail,
Mig^ is love and does prevail:

Lluellen. Therefore Friar shall thou not fail,
But mightily your foe assail:
And thrash this Potter with thy slaile,
And Potter never rave nor rail,
Not ask questions what I aile:
But take this tool and do not quail,
But t^rash this Friars russet cote:
They take the Flatles. And make him sing a dastards note,
And cry Pecca^ miserere David,
In am^ ama^: Goc to.

Mortimor. Strike, strike.

Friar. Strike Potter be thou liefe or loath,
And if you will not strike i will strike for both.

Potter strikes. He must needs go that the devil drives
Then Friar beware of other men's wives.

Friar strikes. I wish master proud Potter the Devil have my soul:
But i will. make my slaile circumscribe your noule.

Liuellen. Why so, now it co^tens, now the game begins.
One knave currieth another for his sins.

Friar kneeles. O master short en my offenses in mine eyes.
If this Crucifige do not suffice,
Send me to Heaven in a hempen sacrifice.

Friar kneeles. O masters masters let this be warning:
The Friar has infected me with his learning.

Lluellen. Villains do not touch the forbidden hair now to delude, or to
dishonor me.

Friar. O master, quae nagata sunt grat^ sunt.

Lluellen. Rice every day thus shall it be, we will have a thrashing set among the
Friars, and he that of these chalengers lays on slowest load, be thou at hand
Rice to gore him with thy good.


Friar. A Potter Potter the Friar may rue,
That ever this day this our quarrel he knew:
My pate adle, mine arms black and blue.

Potter. Ah Friar who may his fates force eschew,
I think Friar you are prettily scholde,

Friar. And I think the Potter is handsomely coold,
Exeunt amb^.
Morti. No Martimor here that Eternal (...),
That burns and Ha^s with brands of hot desire^
Why Martimor, why do est thou not discover,
Thy self her knight her liegeman and her lover?
Exit Martimor. Enter John Balioll, King of Scots with his (...). Lords of
Albana, and my peers in France.
Since Balioll is invested in his rights,
And wears the (...) Scottish Diadem,
Time is to rouse ^im that the world may wotte,
Scotland disdaines to carry Englands yoke.
Therefore my friend thus put in readiness,
Why slack we time to greet the English king?
Wi^ (...) message to ^et him know our minds,
Lord Versses though thy ^aith and o^th be taken,
To follow Baliols arms for Scotlands right,
Yet is thy heart to Englands honor knit,
Therefore in spite of England and thy self,
Bear thou defiaunce proudly to thy king,
Tell him (...) finds heart and hope,
To shake o^ Englands tyranny be time,
To reskue Scotlands honor with his sword,
Lord Bru^ see cast about Versses neck,
A strangling halter that he mind his ha^t.
How sa^est thou Versses will thou do this message?

Versses. Although no common post, yet for my king
I will to England maugre Englands might,
And do mine arrand boldly as becomes,
Albeit I honor English Edwards name,
And hold this s^uish contemnment to skorne.

Balioll. Then h^e away as swift as swallow ^lies,
And meet ^e on our rodes on Englands ground,
We there ^hinke of thy message and thy (...).
Sound Trumpets. Exit Balioll. Enter King Edward Longshankes, Edmund Duke of
Lancaster, Gloucester, Sussex, David, Crespall booted from Northam.
Longsh. Now have I leisure Lords to bid you welcome into Wales.
Welcome sweet Edmund to christen thy young nephew
And welcome Cressing^, give me thy hand,
But Sussex what became of Mortimor?
We have not seen the man this many a day.

Sussex. Besore your highness rid from hence to Northam.
Sir Roger was a suter to your Grace,
Touching fair Elinor Lluellens love,
And so ^like denide with discontent,
A discontinues from your Roial presence.

Longsh. Why Sussex said we not ^or Elinor,
So she would leave whom she had loved too long,
She might have f^uour with my Queen and me,
But man, her (...) about her fortune mounts,
And that's a cause she ^ailes in her accounts.
But go with me my lord of Lancaster,
We will go see my bea^ous lovely Queen,
That has inricht me with a goodly bo^e.
King Edward, Edmund, and Gloucester, goes (...) the Queens Chamber, the Queens
Tent opens, she is discovered in her bed, attended by Mary Duchess of Lancast^
(...) of Acon ^er daughter and the Queen (...) (...) his young son. Longsh
Ladies by your leave, how does my Nell, mine own any love, my life, my heart,
my dear, my dove, my Queen, my wife.

(...) N^ (...) thou come, sweet Ned welcome my joy.
Thy Nell presents thee with a lovely boy.
Kiss him, and christen him after thine own name.
Hey ho whom do I see, my lord of Lancaster, welcome heartily.

Lancaster. I thank your grace, sweet Nell well met withal.

Q. Eli. Brother Emund hers a kinsman of yours you must need, be acquainted.

Edmund A goodly boy God bless him, give me your hand Sir, you are welcome
into Wales.

Qu. Eli. Brother there is a fist I warrant you will holde^
Mace as f^t as ever did father or grandfather before him.

Longsh. But ^el in now lapt in Lilly bands,
How with my Queen, my lovely bo^e it stands:
After thy journey and these child bed pains.

Qu. Eli. Sick mine own Ned thy Nell for thy company:
That lured her with thy lies all so far,
To follow thee unwieldy in thy war,
But I forgive thee Ned my ^ms delight:
So thy young son thou see be bravely dight,
And in Carnaruan christened royally.
Sweet love let him be lapt most curiously,
He is thine own, as true as he is thine,
Take order then that he be passing fine.

Longsh My lovely Lady let that care be less,
For my young son the country will I feast:
And have him borne as bravely to the sunt;
As ever yet Kings son to Christning went.
Lack thou no precious thing to comfort thee,
De rear then Englands Diadem unto me.

Qu. Eli. Thanks gentle Lord, nurse rock the Cr^dle, fie:
The King so near, and here the boie to cri^?
Ione take him up and sing a Lullabie.

Longsh. Ti^ well believe me wench godamercie I^,

Edmund. Sl^e learnes my Lord to ^ull a young one of her own.

Qu. Eli. Give me some drink.

Longsh. Drink Nectar my sweet Nell,
Worthy for seat in heaven with Jove to dwell.

Eli. Gramercis Ned, now well remembered yet,
I have a suite sweet lord, but you must not deny it,
Whereas my Lord of Gloucester, good Cla^e mine host, my guide,
Good Ned let Ione of Acon be his bride,
Assure your self that they are thoroughly wooed.

Longsh. God send the King be taken in the mood,
Then Niece it is like that you shall have a husband,
Come hither Gloucester hold give her thy hand,
Take her, sole daughter to the Queen of England.
Longsh. gives her to Gloucester. For news he brought Nell of my young son,
I promised him as much as I have done.
Gloucester and Ione hand in hand. We humbly thank your majesty.

Edmund. Much joy may them betide,
A gallant bridegroom and a princely bride.

Longsh. Now say sweet Queen what does my Lady crave?
Tell me what name shall this young Welshman have,
Borne Prince of wales by Cambrias full consent.

Eli. Edward the name, that does me well content,

Longsh. Then Edward of Carnaruan shall he be,
And Prince of Wales christened in roialtie.

D. Edmund My Lord I think the Queen would^ take a nappe,

Ione. Nurse take the child and hold in your lap,

Longsh. Farewell good Ione be careful of my Queen.
Sleep^ Nell, the fairest Swan mine eyes have seen.
They close the Tent.
D. Edmund. I had forgot-to ask your Majesty.
How do you with the Abbeys here in Wales,

Longsh. As kings with rebels Mun, our right preuails,
We have good Robin Hood and little John,
The Friar and the good Maid; marrian.
Why our Lluellen is a mighty man.

Gloucester. Trust me my Lord, me thinks twere very good
That some good fellows went and scourd the wood,
And take in hand to cudgel Robin Hood.
I think the Friar for all his lusty looks,
Nor Robin rule with their gleames and hooks,
But would be quickly driven to the nookes.

David. I can assure your highness what I know,
The false Lluellen will not run nor go
Or give an inche of ground come man for man,
Nor that proud rebel called little John,
To him that welds the massiest sword of England,

Gloucester. Welshman, how will thou that we understand,
But for Lluellen, David I deny,
England hathmen will make Lluellen fly,
Maugre his beard and hide him in a hole,
VVearie of Englands dints and manly dole.

D. Edm. Gloucester, grow not so hot in Englands right,
That paints his honor out in every sight.

Long. By Gis fair Lords ere many days be past,
England shall give this Robin Hood his breakefall.
David, be secret friend to that I say,
And if I use thy skill thou know the way.
Where this proud Robin and his yeomen rome.

David. I do my Lord and blindfold thither can I run.

Longsh. David enough, as I am a Gentleman,
I Will have one merry flirt with little John,
And Robin Hood, and his Maid marrian,
Be thou my counsel and my company,
And thou may Enlands resolution see.
Enter Sussex before the four Barons of Wales.
Sussex. May it please your majesty, here are 4. good Squires of the Cantreds
where they do dwell, come in the name of the whole country to gratulate unto
your highness all your good fortunes, and by me offer their most humble service
to your young son their Prince, whom they most heartely beseech God to bless
with long life and honor.


Longsh. Well said Sussex I pray bid them come tear,
Sir Dan trust me, this is kindly don of your country me.

David. Villains, Traitors to the ancient glory and renown of Cambria, Morris
Vaghan art thou there, and thou proud Lord of Anglesee.

They kneel down. Enter Sussex with the four Barrons of Wales, with the
Mantle of srise.
Mantle Barrons. The poor country of Cambria by us unworthy messengers,
gratulats to your majesty the birth of your young son Prince of Wales, and in
this poor pressed express their most zealous duty and affection, which with
all humblenes we present to your highness sweet and sacred hands.


Longsh Gramercis Barons for your gifts and good wills, by this means my boie
shall wear a Mantle of cuntries weauing to keep him warm, and live for
Englands honor and Cambrias good, I shall not need I trust courteously to
inuit you, I doubt not Lords but you will be all in readiness to wait on your
young Prince and do him honor at his christning.


Sussex. The whole country of Cambriaround about all well horst, and attended
on both men and women in their best array, are come down to do service of
love and honor to our late born Prince, your Majesty's son and honnie, the men
and women of Sowdone especially have sent in great abundance of cattle and corn
enough by computacion for your highness housheld a whole month and more.


Long. We thank them all, and will present our Q with these courtesies and
presents bestowed on her young Son, and greatly account you for our friends.

Exite 4 Barons. The Queens Tent opens, the King his brother the Earl of
Gloucester enter.
Elinor. Who talks there?

Longsh. A friend Madam.

Ione. Madam it is the King.

Elinor. VVelcome my Lord hey ho what have we there?

Longsh. Madam the country in all kindness and duty recommend their service and
good will to your son and in token of their pure good will, presents him by
us with a mantle of frize richly lined to keep him warm,


Q. Elinor A mantle of frize, fie fie for Gods sake let me here no more of it
and if you love me, fie my lord is this the wisdom and kindness of the
country? now I commend me to them all, and if Wales have no more wit or
manners, then to cloth a Kings son in frize I have a mantle in store for my
boie, that shall I trow make him shine like the son, and presume the
streets where he comes.


Longsh. In good time Madam, he is your own, lap him as you list, but I
promise thee Nell I would not for ten thousand pounds the country should
take unkindness at thy words.


Q. Elinor. It Is no marvel sure, you have been roially received at their
hands, no Ned, but that thy Nell does want of her will, her boie should
glister like the Summers Sun in robes as rich as Jove when he triumphs.

His pappe should be of precious Nectar made,
His food Ambrosia no earthly woman's milk,
Sweet fires of Sinamon to open him by,
The Graces on hi^ craddle should attend,
Venus should make his bed and wait on him,
And Phoebus daughter sing him still a sleep.
Thus would I have my boie used as divine,
Because he is king Edwardes son and mine.
And do you mean to make him up in frize,
For God sake lay it up charilie, and perfume it against winter, it will make
him a goodly warm Christemas coat.


Longsh. Ah Mun my brother, dearer then my life,
How this proud honor slaies my heart with grief.
Sweet Queen how much I pity the effects,
This Spanish pride grees not with Englands prince,
Mild is the mind where honor builds his bower,
And yet is earthly honor but a flower.
Fast to those looks are all my fancies tide,
Pleased with thy sweetness, angry with thy pride.

Qu. Eli. Fie fie me thinks I am not where I should be,
Or at the least I am not where I would be.

Longsh. VVat wants my Queen to perfect her content,
But ask and have the King will not repent.

Qu. Eli. Thanks gentle Edward, lords have at you then,
Have at you all long bearded Englishmen,
Have at you lords and ladies when I crave,
To give your English pride a Spanish brave.

Longsh. What means my Queen Gloucester, this is a Spanish fit.

Qu. Eli. Ned thou have granted and can not revoke it.

Longsh. Sweet Queen say on my word shall be my deed.

Qu. Elinor. Then shall my words make many a bosom bleed.
Reed Ned thy Queens request lapt up in rhyme,
And say thy Nell had skill to choose her time.
Read the paper Rice. The pride of Englishmens long hair,
Is more then Englands Queen can bear:
VVomens right breast cut them off al,
And let the great tree pensh with the small.

Longsh. What means my lovely Elinor by this?

Qu. Elinor. Not be denide for my request it is.
The rhyme is, that men's beards and women's breasts be cut off etc.

D. Edmund. Gloucester, an old said saying, he that grants all is asked,
Is much ^arder then Hercules task.

Glost. Were the King so mad as the Queen is wood,
Here were an end of Englands good.

Long. My word is pall I am well agreede,
Let men's beards milt and women's bosoms bleed.
Call forth my Barbers, Lords we will first begin.
Enter two Barbers. Come si^ra cut me close unto the chinne,
And ^und me even see thou by a dishe,
(...) not a lo^ke ^y Qu^ene shall have her wish.

Qu. Eli. What Ned. those locks that ever pleased thy
Were her desire, where her de^ight does dwell, (Nel?
VVilt thou deface that silver laborinth?
More orient then pimpilde Hyancinth,
Sweet Ned, thy sacred person ought not droupe,
Though my command m^ke other gallants stoop.

Longsh. Madam, pardon me and pardon all,
No justice but the great runs with the small.
Tell me good Gloucester art thou not affeard?

Gloucester. No my Lord but resolude to lose my bearde.

Longsh. Now Madam if you purpose to proceed,
To make so many guiltles Ladies bleed.
Here must the law begin, sweet Elinor at thy breast,
And strech it self with violence to the rest.
Flse Princes ought no other do,
Fair lady, then they would be done unto.

Qu. Eli. What logic call you this, does Edward mock his love?

Longsh. No Nell he does as best in honor does behoue,
And prays thee gentle Queen, and let my prays move,
Leave these ungentle thoughts, put on a milder mind,
Sweet looks, not lofty, civil mood becomes a woman's kind:
And live as being dead, and buried in the ground,
Thou may for affability and honor be renownde.

Qu. Elia. Naie and you preach, I pray my lord begone,
The child will cry and trouble you anon.
The Nurse closes the Tent. Quo semel est ^butarecens seruabit odorem Testa
din.
L. Maris. Proud incest in the craddle of disdain,
Bred up in court of pride, brought up in Spain,
Do thou command him coily from thy sight?
That is the star, the glory of thy sight.

Longsh. O could I with the riches of my crown,
Buy better thoughts for my renowned Nel,
Thy mind sweet Queen should be as beautiful,
As is thy face, as is thy features all.
Fraught with pure honor, treasure, and enricht,
With virtues and glory incomparable.
Ladies about her Majesty, se that the Queen your mother know not so much, but
at any hand our pleasure is, that our young son be in this Mantle borne to
his Christening, for special reasons is thereto moving, from the Church as
best it please your women's wits to devise, yet sweet Ione see this
faithfully performed, and hear you daughter, look you be not last up when
this day coms, least Gloucester find another Bride in your steed, David go with
me..


Gloste She rises earelie Ione, that beguileth thee of a Gloucester.

Edmund. believe him not sweet Niece, women can speak smooth for advantage.


Ione. We men do you mean my good uncle?

Well be the accent where it will women are women, I will believe you for as
great a matter as this comes to my lord.


Glost. Gramercies sweet lady, and habebis fidei mercedem contra.
Exit. Enter the Nouice and his company to give the Queen Music at her Tent.
Nouice. Come fellows, cast your selves even round in a string, a ring I would
say, come merely on my word for the Queen is most liberal, and if you will
please her well she will pay you roially, so lawful to brave well thy Brittishe
lustilie, to solace our good Queen God save her Grace, and give our young
Prince a carpell in their kind, come on come on set your crowds and beat your
heads together and behave you handsomelie.

Here they sing. Enter the Friar David alone.
Friar I have a budget in my nose this gaie morning, and now will I try how
clarkly the Friar can behave him self, it is a common fashion to get gold which
stand, deliver your purses, Friar Dauies will once in his days get money by
wit, there is a rich Farmer should pass this ways to receive a round sum
of money, if he come to me the money is mine, and the law shall take no
vantage, I will cut off the law as the hangman would cut a man down when he
has shaken his heels half an hour under the gallows, well I must take some
pains for this gold, and have at it.

The Friar spreads the lappet of his gown and falls to dice. Enter a Farmer.
Farmer. It Is an old said saying I remember I read it in Catoes Pueriles,
that Cantabit va^nus coram la^rone viator. A man's purse pennilesse may sing
before a thief, true as I have not one penny, which makes me so peartly pass
through these thickets, but indeed I receive a hundred marks, and all the care
is how I shall pass again, well. I resolved either to ride twenty miles about,
or else to be so well accompanied that I will not care for these ruffelers.


Friar. Did ever man play with such uncircumcised hands, sice ace to eleven
and lose the chance.


Farmer. God speed good fellow, why chafest thou so fast, there is no body will
win thy money from thee.


Friar. Sounds you offer me injury Sir to speak in my cast.


Farmer. The Friar undoubtedly is lunaticke, I pray thee good fellow leave
chasting, and get some warm drink to comfort thy brains.


Friar. A las Sir I am not lunaticke, it is not so well, for I have lost my money
which is far worse, I have lost five gold Nobles to S Francis, and if I knew
where to meet with his receauer I would pay him presently.


Farmer. Would thou speak with S. Francis receauer?


Friar. O Lord, I Sir full gladly.

Farmer. Why man I am S. Francis receauer, if you would have any thing with
him.


Friar. Are you S. Francis receauer, Jesus, Jesus, are you S. Francis receauer,
and how does all?


Farmer. I am his receauer, and am now going to him, abids S. Thomas a
Waterings to breakefast this morning to a calf^s head and bacon.


Friar. Good Lord Sir I beseech you carry him these five Noble, and tell him I
deal honestly with him as if he were here present.


Farmer. I will of my word and honesty Friar, and so farewell.


Friar. Farewell S. Francis receauer even heartely, well now the Friar is out or
cash sieve Nobles, God knows how he shall come into cash again, but I must to
it again, there is nine for your holiness and six for me.

Enter Lluellen, Meredith, Potter, with there prisoners.
Lluellen Come on my hearts, bring forth your prisoners and let us see what
slore of (...) is there in their pursenets, Friar why ch^fest t^ou man no body
will offer thee any fou^e pla^e I w^nt thee.


David. O good master give me leave, my hand is in a little, I trust I (...)
recover my los^es.


Lluellen. The Friar is ^d, but let him alone with ^s devise, and now to you my
masters, Peddler, Priest and Piper, throw down your budgets in the mean while,
and when the Friar is at leisure he ^hal tell you wh^t you shall trust to. (^oe,


Peddler. Alas sir I have but 3. pence in the corner of my

Meredith. Never a ^oulder of Mutton Piper in your Taber, but soft here comes
^ompanie.

Enter Longshankes, David, Farmer.
Farmer. Alas gentlemen if you love your selves do not venture through this
mountain, here is such a coile with Robin Hood and his ^bell that every cross
in my purse trembles for fear.


Longsh. Honest man as I said to thee before, conduct us through this wood,
and if thou be robde, or have any violence offered thee, as I am a
Gentleman I will repaie it thee again.


David. How much money have thou about thee?

Farmer. Faith Sir a hundred marks, I received it even now at (...), but out
alas we are undone, yonder is Robin Hood and all the strong thieves in the
mountain I have no hope left but your honors assurance


Longsh. Fear not I will be my words master.

Friar. Good master and if you love the Friar, give aim a while I you desire:
and as you like of my devise, so love him that hol^es the dise.


Farmer What Friar art thou still laboring so hard, will you have any thing more
to S. Francis?


Friar. Go^d lord are you here sweet S. Francis receauer, how does his holiness
and al his good family?


Farmer. In good health faith Friar, have thou any Nobles for ^im?


Friar. You know the dice are not partial and Saint Francis were ten S. they
will favor him no more the^ they would favor the Devil if he play at dice, in
very truth my friend they have favored the Friar, and I have won a C. marks of
S. Francis, come Sir I pray. (...) draw it over I know sir ^e is a good man
and n^uer deceaues none.


Farmer Draw it over, what meanest thou by that?

Friar. Why in nume^atis pecuniis legem pone, pay me my winnings.


Far. What ass is this, should I pay thee thy winnings?

Friar. Why art not thou sir Saint Francis receaue^?

Farmer. Indeed I do receive for Saint Francis.

Friar. Then ^e make you pay for S. Francis that's flat.
(...) on both sides.
Farmer. Help help I am robde I am robde.

Longsh. Vill^e you wrong the man, hands off.

Friar. Masters I bese^ you leave this braw^ing and give me leave to speak,
so it is I went to dice with S. Francis and lost five Nobles, by good fortune
his Cashier came by received it of me in ready cash. I being ver^ des^ous to
try my fortune f^er, plaide sti^l, and as the dice not being bound (...) to
him or any ^an, favored me, I drew a hand and won a hundred marks, now I
reser it to your judgments whither the Friar is to seek ^is winnings.


Longsh. M^rie Friar the Farmer must and shall pay thee honestly ere he pass.


Farmer. Shall I sir, why will you be content to pay half a you promiss me.


Longsh. I Farmer if you had been robde of it, but if you be agamester i will
take no charge of you I.


Farmer. Alas I am undone.

Lluellen. So sir Friar, now you have gathered up your winnings I pray you
stand up and give the messeugers their charge that Robin Hood may receive his
Toule.


Friar. And shall my Lord. Our thrice renowned Lluellen Prince of Wales and
Robin Hood of the great mountain, does will and command all passengers at the
sight of Richard servant unto me Friar (...) Tucke to lay down their weapons,
and quietly to yield for cu^m toward the maintenance of his highness wars, the
^se of al such gold, silver, money, and money worth, a the said messenger
has then about him, but if he conc^al any part or parcel of the same, then
shall he forfai^e all that he possesses at that present, and this sentence is
irreuocable confirmed by our Lord Lluellen Prince of Wales, and Robin Hood of
the great mo^ntaines.


Lluellen. So va^e your budgettes to Robin of the mountain, but what art thou
that disd^nest to pay thi^ custo^e, as if thou scornest the greatness of the
prince of Wales?


Longsh. Faith Robin thou seem to be a good fellow there is my bag, half is
mine and half is thine, but lets to it if thou dare man for man, to try who
^al have the whole.


Lluellen. Why thou speak as thou should speak. My masters on pain of my
displeasure depart the place and leave us two to our selves, I must lope his
Longshankes. for i will ear to a pair of Longshankes.


Longsh. They are fair marks sir, and I must defend as I may, Dau^ be gone,
hold here my hearts, long legs given you this among^ you to spend blows one
with an other, Dauie now Dauie days are almost come at end.


Mortim. But Mortimor this sight is strange, stay thou in some corner to see
what will befall in this battle.


Edward. Now Robin of the wood, alias Robin Hood, be it known to your worship
by these presents, that the Longshankes which you aim at, have brought the
king of England into these mountains, to use Lluellen, and to crack a (...)
(...) his man that supposes himself Prince of ^ales.


Lluellen. What ^r K^g, wel^ome to Cambrias, what foolish Edward dare ^ou
endanger (...) to tr^l these mountains, (...) thou (...) as to combat with
the Prince of ^ales?


Edward. What I dare thou see, what I can perform thou shall shortly know,
I think thee a Gentleman, and therefore hold no scorn to fight with thee.


Lluellen. No Edward I am as good a man as thy self.

Longsh. That shall I try.
They fight, and D^uid takes his brothers part, and Mortimor the Kings.
Edward. Halloe Edward how are thy senses confounded, what Dauy is it possible
thou should be false to England?


Dauy Edward I am true to Wales, and so have been friends since my birth, and
that shall the King of England know to his cost.


Lluellen. What Potter, did not I charge you to begone with your fellows?


Mortimor. No Traitor no Potter I, but Mortimor the Earl of March, whose
coming to these woods, is to deceive thee of thy love, and reserved to save my
sovereigns life.


David. Upon them brother let them not breath.
The King has Lluellen down, and David has Mortimor down.
Longsh. Villain thou die, God and my right has prevailed.


David. Base Earl now does David triumph in thine over throw, aie is me
Lluellen at the fe^ of Longshanks.


Longsh. What Mortimor under the sword of such a Tr^or?

Mortimor. Brave King run thy sword up to the hiltes into the blood of the
rebel.


Longsh. O Mortimor thy life is dearer to me then millions of rebels.


David. Edward relieve my brother and Mortimor lives.

Longsh. I villain thou know too well how dear I hold my Mortimor, r^e man
and assure thee, and the ^ate I bear to (...) long in respect of the deadly
hatred I bear to that noto^ous rebel.


Mortimor. Away, his sight to me is like the sight of a (...), villain I go
to revenge me on thy treason, and to make thee pattern to the world, of
mountains treason, fal^ood and ingratitude.

Exit Mortimor.
David. Br^er a chafes, but hard was your hap to be ouermastered by the coward.


Lluellen. No cow^d Dau^d, hi^ courage is like to the Lion, and were it not
that rule and souerai^tie sets us at (...), I could love and honor the man for
his valor.


David. But the Potter, oh the vi^laine will never out of my mind whilst I
live, and I w^ late to be revenged on hi^ vill^e.


Lluellen. Well David what will be shall be, therefore casting these matters out
of our heads, David thou art welcome to Cambria, let us in and be merry after
this cold cooling, and to prep^re to strengthen our selves against the last
threatenings.

Exeunt ambo. After the Christening and marriage done, the Harrolds having
a^ded, they pass over, the bride is led by two Noble m^n, Edmund of Lancaster,
and the Earl^ of Sussex, and the Bishop.
Gloucester. Welcome Ione Countess of Gloucester, to Gilb^rt de Clare for ever, God
give them io^e, cousin Gloucester, let us now go visit the King and Queen, and
present t^ Majesty's with their young son, Edward Prince of Wal^s.

Then all pass in their order to the kings pauilion, the king sits in his Tent
with his pages about him.
Bishop. We represent your highness most humbly, with your young son Edward
of Carnaruan Prince of Wales.

Sound Trumpets.
Omnes. God save Edward of Carnaruan prince of Wales.

Longsh. kisses them both Edward Prince of Wales God bless thee with long life
and honor, welcome Ione countess of Gloucester, God bless thee and thine for
ever. lords let us visit my Queen and wife, whom we will at once present with
a Son and daughter honored to her desire.

Sound Trumpets, they all march to the Chamber. Bishop speaks to her in her
bed. We humbly present your Majesty with your young son Edward of Carnaruan
Prince of Wales.

Sound Trumpets.
Omnes. God save Edward of Carnaruan prince of wales:
Quee^ Elinor she kisses him. Gramercis Bishop, hold tak^ that to b^ie thee a
Rochell, welcome VVelshman. here Nurse open him and have him to the fire for
God sake, they have touzed him, and wash them throug^e and that be good, and
welcome Ione Countess of Gloucester, God bless thee with long life, honor, and
hearts ease.

I am now as good as my word Gloucester, she is thine make much of her gentle
Earl.


Longsh. Now my sweet Nell what more commands my Queen that nothing may
want to periect her contentment.


Q Eli. Nothing sweet Ned, but pray my king to feast the Lords and ladies
roial^ie, and thanks a thousand times good men and women, to you all, for this
duty and honor done to your Prince.


Longsh. Master Bridegroom by old custom this is your waiting day, Sir
David you may command alample welcome in our court, for your cuntreymen:
brother Edmund revel it now or never for honor of your Englands son,
Gloucester now like a brave Bridegroom marshall this many, and set these Lords
and Ladies to dancing, so shall you fulfill the old English proverb, us (...)
in Hall when beardes wag all.

After the show, and the King and Queen with all the lords and ladies in
place, Longshanks speaks. What tidings bringes Versses to our court?
Enter in Versses with a halter about his neck.
Versses Tidinges to make thee tremble English king.


Longsh. Me tremble b^? must not be news from Scotland, can once make
English Edward s^and agaste.


Versses. Baliell has chosen at this time to stu^e,
To rouse him Lion like and cast the yoke:
That Scots ingloriouslie have borne from thee,
And all the predecessors of thy line:
And make his rods to reobtaine his rights,
And for his homage sends thee all this despite.

Edmund. Why how now p^cockes pratest thou to a king?

Versses. I do my message truly from my king,
This sword and targ^t chide in louder terms,
I bring defiance from king John Balioll,
To English Edward and his Barons all.

Longsh. M^ie so me thinks thou defiest me with a witness.

Versses. Balioll my king in Barwicke makes his Court,
His ^pe he spreads upon the sand^e plain,
And d^res thee to the battle in his right.

Edmund. What Court and Camp in Englishmens despite?

Longsh. Hold messenger, commend me to thy King,
Wear thou my chain and car^ie this to him,
Greet all his route of Rebels more or less,
Tell them such shameful end will hit them all,
And wend with this as resolutely back,
As thou to England broughst thy Scottish braues,
Tell then disdainefullie Balioll from us,
We Will rouse him from his hold, and make him soon^
Disloge his Camp, and take his walled town.
Say what I bid thee Versses to his teeth.
And earne this favor and a better thing.

Versses. Yes King of England whom my heart beloues,
Think as I promised him to brave thee hear,
So shall I bid John Balioll bace from thee.

Longsh. So shall thou earne my chain and favor Versses,
And carry him this token that thou sendst:
Why now is Englands harvest ripe,
Barons now may you reap the rich renown,
That under warlicke colors springs in field,
And grows where ensigns wan upon the plains.
False Balioll ^arwicke arwicke is no hold of proose,
To shroud thee from the strength of Edwards arm,
No Scot thy Treasons fear shall make the breach,
For Englands pure renown to enter one.

Omnes. Amain amain upon these treacherous Scotts.
Amain say all, upon these treacherous Scots,

Longsh. While we with Edmund, ^loster, and the rest,
With speedy iourne is gather up our forces,
And beat these brauing Scots from Englands bounds,
Mortimor thou shall take the route in task,
That revel here and spoil fair Cambria,
My Queen when she is strong and well a foot,
Shall post to London and repaste her there,
Then God shall send us happily all to meet,
And joy the honors of our victories,
Take vantage of our foes and see the time,
Keep still our hold, our fight yet on the plain,
Balioll I come proud Balioll and ingrate,
Persuaded to chase thy men from Englands gate.
Exit Edward King. Enter Balioll with his train.
Balioll. Princes of Scotland and my loving friends.
Whose necks are ouer-wearied with the yoke.
And servile bondage of these Englishmen,
List up your horns, and with your brazen hoofes,
Spur at the honor of your Enemies.
It Is not ambitious thoughts of private rule,
Has fo^st your king to take on him these Arms,
It Is countries cause, it is the commons good,
Of us and of our brave posterity, to arms, to arms.
Versses by this has told the King our minds,
And he has braued proud England to the proof,
We will renumerate his resolution,
With gold, with glory, and with kingly gifts.

Lord. By sweet Saint Ierem Versses will not spare,
To tell his message to the English King:
And beard the jolly Longshankes to his face,
Were he the greatest Monarch in the world,
And here he comes his halter makes him have.
Enter Versses. Long live my lord the rightful King of Scots.

Balioll. Welcome Versses, what news from England?
Like to the measure of Scotlands King?

Versses. Versses my Lord in terms like to himself,
Like to the messenger of Scottish King,
D^ed the Pears of England and their lords,
That all his Barons trembles at my threats,
And Longsharkes himself as dainted and amassed,
Gazde on my face not witting what to say:
Till rouzing up he shakte his threating hair,
Versses quoth he take thou King Edwards chain,
Upon condition, thou a message do,
To Balioll false, periurde Balioll.
For in these terms he bad me greet your Grace,
And gave this halter to your excellences,
I took the chain and gave your Grace the rope.

Balioll. You took the chain and give my Grace the rope,
Lay hold on him, why miscrea^t recreant,
And dare thou bring a halter to thy King?
But I will quite thy pain, and in that chain,
Upon a silver Gallows shall thou hang,
That honored with a golden rope of England,
And a silver Gibbet of Scotland,
Thou may hang in the air for fowls to feed upon,
And men to wonder at, away with him away.
After the sight of John Balioll is done, enter Mortimor pursuing of the
Rebels.
Mort. Strike up the drum, follow, pursue and chase,
Follow, pursue, spare not the proudest he,
That hauocks Englands sacred roialty.
Exit Morti. Then make the proclamation upon the walls. Sound Trumpets. Enter
Queen alone. Now fits the time to purge our melancholy, and be re^enged
upon this London Dame.

Katherina.
Enter Katherina. At hand Madam.

Queen. Bring forth our London Maris here.

Kather. I will Madam.

Queen. Now Nell be think thee of some tortures for the Dame:
And purge thy choler to the uttermost,
Enter Maris and Katherine. Now mistres Maris you have attendance vrgde,
And therefore to requite your courtesy,
Our mind is to bestow an office on you straight.

Maris. My self, my life, and service mighty Queen, are humbly at your
Majesty's command.


Queen. Then mistres Maris say whether will you be our Nurse or Landeres.


Maris. Then may it please your Majesty, to entertain your handmaide for
your Nurse, she will attend the craddle carefully.


Queen. O no Nurse, the Babe needs no great rockeing, it can lull it self,
Katherina bind her in the chair, and let me see how she will become a Nurse, so
now Katherin draw forth her breast and let the Serpent suck his fill, why so now
she is a Nurse, suck on sweet Babe.


Maris. Ah Queen sweet Queen, seek not my blood to spill:
For I shall die before this Adder have his fill.

Queen. Die or die not, my mind is fully pleased,
Come Katherina to London now will we,
And leave our Maris with her nurserie.

Kath. Farewell sweet Maris look unto the Babe.
Exeunt Queen and Kath.
Maris. Farewell proud Queen the Author of my death,
The scourge of England and to English dames:
Ah husband sweet John Bearmber Mayor of London,
Ah did thou know how Mary is perplexed,
Soon would thou come to Wales and rid me of this pain.
Here she dies. But oh I die, my wish is al in vain.
Enter Lluellen running out before, and David with a halter ready to hang
himself.
Lluellen. The angry Heavens frownd on Britains fac^
To Eclipse the glory of fair Cambria,
With sor or aspectes the dreadful Planets lowre,
Lluellen basely turn thy back and fly,
No Welshmen fight it to the last and die.
For if my men safely have got the Bride,
Careless of chance, i will recke no sour event,
Englands broad womb has not that armed band,
That can expel Lluellen from his land.
Enter David. Fly Lord of Cambria, fly Prince of Wales,
Sweet brother fly the field is won and lost,
Thou art beset with Englands furious troops,
And cursed Mortimor like a Lion leads,
Our men have got the Bridge but al in vain:
The English men are come upon our backs,
Either flee or die for Edward has the day:
For me I have my rescue in my hand,
England on me no torments shall inflict,
Farewell Lluellen while we meet in Heaven.
Exit David. Enter Soldiers. Follow pursue: lie there what ere thou be,
Lluellen is slain with a Pike staff: Yet soft my hearts let us his
coutenance see,
This is the Prince I know him by his face,
O gracious fortune that me happy made,
To spoil the weed that chokes fair Cambria,
Hale him from hence and in this buskie wood,
Bury his corpse, but for his head I vowed,
I will present our governor with the same.
Exeunt omnes. Enter the Friar with a halter about his neck.
Friar. Come my gentle Richard my true master servant that in some storms have
stood my master, hang thee I pray thee least I hang for thee, and down on
thy mary bones like a foolish fellow, that have gone far astray and ask
forgiveness of God and king Edward for playing the rachell and the Rebel here in
Wales, ah gentle Richard many a whot breakefast have we been at together, and
now since, like one of Mars his frozen knights I must hang up my weapon upon
this tree and come per misericordiam to the mad Potter Mortimor, wring thy
hands Friar and sing a pitiful farewell to thy pikestaffe at parting.

The Friar having song his farewell to his Pikestaffe a takes his leave of
Cambria, and Exit the Friar. Enter Mortimor with his soldiers, and Elinor.
Mortimor. Bind fast the Traitor and bring him away, that the law may justly
pass upon him and receive the reward of monstrous treasons and villanye,
stain to the name and honor of his noble country for you that slew Lluellen
and presented us with his head, the King shall reward your fortune and
chiualry. Sweet Lady abate not thy looks so heavenly to the earth, God and
the King of England has honor for thee in store, and Mortimors heart at
service and at thy commandment.


Elinor. Thanks gentle Lord, but alas who can blame Elinor to accuse her
stars, that in one hour has lost honor and contentment.


Mort. And in one howr may your Ladishippe reconer both if you vouchsafero be
advised by your friends, but what makes the Friar here upon his mary bones?


Friar. O ^tter Potter the Friar does sue,
Now his (...) master is slain and gone to have anew.

Elinor. Ah sweet Lluellen how thy death I rue.

Mortimor. Well said Friar better once then never, give me thy hand, my
cunning shall fail me but we will be fellows yet, and now Robin Hood is gone,
it shall cost me whot water but thou shall be King Edwards man, only I enjoin
thee this, come not too near the Friar but good Friar be at my hand.


Friar. O sirre no sirre not so sirre, a was warned too lately none of that
flesh I love.


Mortimor. Come on, and for those that have made their submission, and given
their names in the Kings name, I pronounce their pardones, and so God save K.
Edward.

Exeunt ambo from Wales. Here Is thunder and lightning when the Queen comes in.
Enter Queen Elinor and Ione.
Q Eli. Why Ione, is this the welcome that the clouds affordes, how dare these
disturb our thoughts, knowing that I am Edwardes wife and Englands Queen here
thus on Charing green to threaten me?


Ione. Ah mother blaspheme not so, your blaspheming and other wicked deeds has
caused our God to terrify your thoughts, and call to mind your sinful fact
committed against the Maris here of lovely London, and better Maris London
never bread, so full of ruth and pity to the poor, her have you made away,
that London cries for vengeance on your head.


Queen. I rid her not, I made her not away, by heaven
I swear, Traitors they are to Edward and to Englandes
Queen that say I made away the Maris.

Ione. Take heed sweet Lady mother swear not so, a field of prise corn will
not stop their mouths, that said you have made a way that virtuous woman.


Queen. Gape earth and swallow me, and (...) my soul sincke down to Hell if
I were Author of (...) women's Tragedy, Oh Ione, help Ione thy mother ^kes.


Ione. Oh mother my help is nothing, oh she is suncke, and here the earthis
new closde up again, ah Charinge green for ever change thy hew, and never may
the ^ras grow green again but wither and return to stones, because that
beauteous Elinor sincke on thee, well I will send unto the king my fathers
Grace, and satisfy him of this strange mishap.

Exit Ione. Alarm a charge after long skirmishe assault florishe. Enter King
Edward with his train and Balioll prisoner Edward speaks.
Edward. Now trothles King what fruits have brauing boastes,
What end has Treason but a soddaine fall?
Such as have known thy life and bringing up,
Have praised thee for thy learning and thy art,
How comes it then that thou forgetst thy books,
That schoold thee to forgetingratitude,
Unkind, this hand has no^ted thee a king,
This tongue pronounst the sentence of thy ruth,
If thou in ^ue of mine unfeigned love,
Have levied arms for to attempt my crown,
Now see thy fruits, thy gloryes are dispea^st,
And his, for like since thou have past thy bounds,
Thy slurdie neck must stoop to bear this yoke.

Balioll. I took this lesson Edward from my book,
To keep a just equality of mind,
Content with every fortune as it comes,
So can^ thou threat no more then I expect.

Edward So sir your moderation is enfor^t,
Your goodly gloses cannot make it good,

Balioll. Then will I keep insilence what I mean,
Since Edward thinks my meaning is not good.

Edmund. Naie Balioll speak forth, if there yet remain,
A little remnant of persuading Art.

Balioll. If cunning have power to win the king,
Let those employ it that can flatter him.
If honored deed may reconcile the King,
It lies in me to give and him to take.

Edward. Why what remains for Balioll now to give?

Balioll. A^geance as becomes a royal king.

Edward. What league of fa^ where league is broken once?

Balioll. The greater hope in them that once have fallen.

Edward. But foolish are those Monarchs that do yield
A conquered Realm upon submissiue vows.

Balioll. There take my crown and so redeem my life.

Edward. I sit that was the choicest plea of both,
For who so quels the pomp of haughty winds.
And breaks their s^fe, whereon they build their trust,
(...) wanting power they carry not harm.
(...) shall live, but yet within su^ bounds,
That if his wings grow ^ig, they may be clipped:
Enter the Potter and the Potters wife, called the Potters hi^ dwelling there,
and John her man.
Potterswife. John come away, you go as though you slept, a great knave and
be afraid of a little thundering and lightning.


John. Call you this a little thundering, I am sure my breeches finds it a
great deal, for I am sure they are stu^te with thunder.


Potterswife. They are stufte with a fool, are they not, will it please you to
carry the lantern a little handsommer, and not to carry it with your hands
in your slop^.


John. Slops quoth you would I had ta^d at ^ome by the fire, and then I should
not have need to put my (...) in my pockets, but (...) l^e my life I know the
reason of this towle we^ther.


Pot^wife. Do you know the reason.' I pray thee John tell me and let me hear
this reason.


John. I l^e my life son^e of your Gossipse becros leg^ that we came from, b^t
you are wise mistres for you ^om now aw^ and will no. (...) a go^ping in a dr^e
house all night.


Po^terswife. Would it ple^se you to walk and leave of your (...), but st^
(...), what is that rises out of the ground, Jesus bless us John, look how it
rises hig^er and higher.


John. Be my troth mistres it is a woman, good Lord do women gr^, I never saw
none grow before.


Po^swife. Hold thy tongue t^ou foolish kn^ue, it is the spirit of some woman


Queen. Ha let me see where am I, on C^ring green, I o^ (...) green here h^rd
by Westminster where I was crowned and Edward there made King, I it is true
(...), and therefore Edward ^isse not me unless you will ^raight perfume your
^ps Edward.


Potterswife. Orapr^ nobis John, I pr^e ^ll to your prayers for my life it is
the Queen that chases thus, who s^cke this da^e on Charing gre^ne, a^ ^ow
(...) (...) up on Potters Hiue, and ther^ore tru^e (...) i will g^ to her.

Here let the Potterswife go to the Queen.
Queen. Welcome good woman, what place is this, sea o^and I pray show to me.


Potterswife. Your Grace need not to fear you are on fi^e gr^und, it is the
Potters Hiue, and therfoere cheer your Majesty for I will see you safe
conducted to the Court, if case your highness be therewithal pleased.

M^ke a n^se, (...) how.
Queen. I good woman conduct me to the court, that there I may bew^ile my
sin^ull life, and call to God to save my wretched soul, won a^ what noise is
this I hear?


Potterswife. And like your Grace it is the Watermen that calls for passengers
to go VVestward now.


Queen. That fits my turn, for I will straight with them to Kings town to
the Court, and there repose me till the king come home: and therefore sweet
woman conceal what thou have seen, and lead me to those Watermen, for here
does Elinor droupe.


John. Come come here is a goodly leading of you is there not, first you must ^ake
us afeard, and now I must be troubled in carrying of you, I would you were
honestly l^id in your bed so that I were not troubled with you.

Exeunt ambo. Enter two messengers, the one that David shall be hanged the other
of the Queens sincking.
1. M^s. Honor and Fortune wait upon the Crown
Of Prince^e Edward Englands valiant king.

Edward. Thanks Messenger, and if my God vouchsaf^
That winged Honor wait upon my throne,
I Will ^ake her (...) her plu^bes upon their heads,
Whose true al^egeance does confirm the Crown,
What news in Wales how wends our business there?

2 Messeng The false disturber of that was^ed soil,
With hi^ adherents is surprised my King:
And in assuran^ce he shall start no more,
Breathles he lies and headles to my Lords,
The circumstance these lines shall here unfold.

Edward. A harmfull w^ede by wisdom rooted out,
C^n never hurt the true ingratted plant,
But what is the news Sir Thomas Spencer bringes?

Spenc. Wonders my Lord, wrapped up in homely words,
And Letters to info^rme your Majesty.

Edw. O Heavens, what m^e these miracles portend?
Nobles my Queen is (...) but what is more,
Reed brother Edmund reed a w^drous chanc^
Edmund reeds (...) ^ine of the Queens sincking.
Edmund. And ^not heard ^or red s^ strange a thing.

Edward. Sweet Queen (...) sincking is a (...) taken
Of pride, wherewith thy (...) man's (...) did swell,
A dangerous mal^die in the heart to dwe^l.
Lords march we toward London now in ^ast,
I will go see my lou^ lie Elinor,
And comfort her after this strange ^ffright,
And where she is importune to have talk,
And secret conference with some Friars of France,
Mun thou with me and I with thee will go,
And take the sweet confession of my Nell,
We will have French enough to p^rlee with the Quee^

Edmund. Might I advise your royal majesty,
I would not go for millions of gold:
What ^nowes your grace disguised if you wend,
What you may hear in secrecy reuealde?
That may appeal and discontent your highness,
A goodly creature is your Elinor,
Brought up in niceness and in delicacie,
Then li^en not to her confession Lord,
To wound t^y heart with some unkind conce^te,
But as for Lancaster he may not go^.

K. Edrard. brother I am resolude and go I will^
If God ^iue life, and cheer my dying Queen,
Why Mun, why man, what ere King Edward heates,
It lies in God and him to pardon all.
I Will have no ghos^lie Fathers out of France,
England has learned Clerks and Confessors,
To comfort and absolve as m^n may do,
And i will be ghos^lie Father for this once.

Edmund. Edmund thou m^ist not go although tho^ di^.
And yet how may thou here thy King denie^
Ed^ard is gr^ious, merciful, meek and mild,
But (...) when ^e finds he is beguilde,

Edward. Messenger hie thee back to Shrewsbury.
Bid Mortimor thy master speed him fast,
And with his fortune welcome us to London,
I long to see my beauteous lovely Queen.
Exeunt omnes. Enter Dau^d drawn on a hurdle with Mortimor and officers
accompanied, with the Friar, the Nouice, the Harper. and Lluellens head on a
spear.
Friar. On before, on before.

Nouice. Hold up your torches for dropping.

Friar. A fair procession, Sir David be of good chea^ you cannot go out of
the way having so many guides at hand.


Nouice. Be sure of that, for we go all the high way to the Gallows I warrant
you.


David. I go where my star leads me, and die in my countries just cause and
quarrel.


Harper. The Star that twinckled at thy birth,
Good brother mine has mard thy mirth,
An o'de said ^aw Eart^ must to earth,
Next year will be a pitteous death,
Of Hemp I dare lay a penny:
T^is year is ^angde so many.

Friar. Well said Morgan Pigot Harper, and Prophet for the Kings one mouth.


Nouice. ^unda ted^ tedo dote dum, this is the day the time is come Morgan
Pigots prophecy and Lord Lluellens Tragedy.


Friar. Who says the Prophet is an Ass, whose prophecies come so to pailc:
Said he not often and sung it to, Lluellen after much ado,
Should i^ spite heave up his ^hin, and be the highest of his kin:
And see aloft Lluellens head,
Empalled with a crown of lead:
My Lord let not this South-^aire lack,
That has such cunning in his jack.

Harper. David hold still your clacke.
Least your heels make your ne^ crack.

Friar. Gentle Prophet and ye love me for spe^ me' not, (...) the worst ^ke in
the world to stir a wirche or anger a wise man, master ^ffe have we any
nast, best give my horses some more ^aie.

Exeunt omnes. Elinor in childbed with her daughter Ione, and other Ladies.
Qu. Eli. Call forth those renowned Friars come from France,
And raise me gentle Ladies in my bed,
That while this faultring engine of my speech,
I lean to utter my concealed guilt,
I may respect and so repent my sins

Ione. What plague a^cts your ro^ll Majesty?

Qu. Eli. Ah Ione I perish through a double wars,
First in this painful prison of my soul,
A world of dreadful sins help thee to sight,
And Nature h^uing lost her workin^ power,
Yeeldes up her earthly Fortunes unto death.
Next over War my soul is over preast,
In thee my Conscience laden with misdeedes,
Sittes seeing my Cons ience to ensue,
Without especial favor from above.

Ione. Your Grace must account it a warriors cross,
To make resist where danger there is none,
Superdewe your Fever by precious Art,
And help you still through hope of heavenly aid^

Qu. Eli. The c^relesse sleep rule on the mountains tops,
That see the Seaman floating on the swerge,
The threatening winds comes springing with the floods
To ouerwhelme and drown his craised keele,
His tackestorne, his sails borne over boarde.
How pale like Vallowe flowers the mountain standes^
Upon his hatches waiting for his iearke,
Wringing his hands that ought to play the pomp,
May bla^e his fear that laboreth not for life.
So thou poor soul may tell a servile tale,
May council me, but I that prove thy pain.
May he^re thee talk: but not redress my harm,
But ghastly death already is addressed,
To gleane the latest blossom of my life,
My spirit fails me, are these Friars come?
Enter the King and his brother in ^riersweeds.
King. Dominus vobiscum.

Edmund. Et cum spiritu tuo.

Qu. Elinor. Draw near grave Fathers, and approach my bed:
Forbear our presence Ladies for a while,
And leave us to our secret conference.

King. What cause has moved your royal Majesty,
To call your servant from their countries bounds?
For to attend your pleasure here in Englands court?

Qu. Eli. See you not holy Friars mine estate,
My body weak inclining to my grave.

Edm. We see and sorrow for thy pain fair Queen.

Qu. Eli. By this eternal signs of my defectes,
Friars consecrate mine ineternall grief,
My soul, ah wretched soul within this breast,
F^nt for to mount the Heavens with wings of grace,
A hundred by flocking troops of sin,
That stop my passage to my wished hours.

King. The nearer Elinor, so the greatest hope of health,
And daine to us for to impart your quiet.
Who by our prayers and counsel ought to arm,
Aspiring souls to scale the heavenly grace.

Qu. Eli. Shame and remorse does stop my course of speac^.

King. Madam you need not dread our conference,
Who by the order of the holy Church,
Are all anointed to sacred secrecy.

Qu. Eli. Did I not thinke^ naie were I not assured,
Your wisdoms would be silent in that cause,
No fear could make me to be wraie my self,
^ue gentle fathers I have thought it good,
Not to rely upon these Englishmen,
But on your trothes, you holy men of France,
Then as you love your life and Englands weal,
Keep secret my Confession from the king,
For why my story nearelie touches him.
Whose love compared with my loss delights.
With many sorrows that my heart affrights.

Edmund. My heart misgiues.

King. Be silent, follow Friar.

Qu. Eli. In pride of youth when I was young and fair.
And gracious in the king of Englands sight,
The day before that night his Highness should,
Possess the pleasure of my wedlockes bed,
Caitife accursed monster as I was,
His brother Edmund beautiful and young,
Upon my bridal couch by my concent,
Enioies the flower and favor of my love.
The King be holds his brother w^fully. And I becam a Traitresse to my Lord.
King, Facinus scel^s, in fandum nefas.
Edm. Madam, through sickness, weakness, and your wits, twere very good to
bethink y^ ^fe before you speak.


Qu. Eli. Good father not so weak but that I woe,
My heat dothrent to think upon the time,
But why exclaimes this holy Friar so^
Oh ^aie then for my faults religious man.

King. It Is charity in men of my degree,
To sorrow for our neighbors heinous sins:
And Madam, though some promise love to you,
And zeal to Edmund brother to the King,
I pray the Heavens you both may soon repent.
But might it please your Highness to proce^de,
Unto this sin a worser does succeed.

Qu. Eli. For Ione of Acon the supposed child,
And daughter of my Lord the English King:
Is baselie borne begotten of a Friar.
Such time as I was their ai^ed in France,
His one lie true and lawful son my friends,
He is my hope, his son that should succeed.
Is Edward of Carnaruan lately borne,
Now all the scruples of my troubled mind,
I sighing sound within your reverent ears,
Oh pra^e for pity, pray for I must die.
Remitte my God the folly of my youth,
My groaned spirits attends thy mercies seat,
Qu^ene Elinor dies. Fathers farewell, commend me to my King,
Commend me to my children and my friends,
And close mine eyes for death will have hi^ due.

King. Blushing I shut theie thine inti^ing lamps,
The wanton baits that make me suck my bane,
(...) hardened slames did never refl^ct,
More hidious slames then from my breast arise,
What fault more vilde unto thy dearest Lord?
Our daughter base begotten of a Priest,
And Ned my brother partner of my love,
Oh that those eyes that lightened Cesars brain,
Oh that those looks that mastered Phucebus brand,
Or else those looks that stain Melisaes far,
Should shrine discreet desire and lawles lust,
Unhappy King dishonored in thy stock,
Hence feigned weeds, unfeigned is my grief.

Edm. Dread Prince my brother if my vows avail,
I call to wit^es Heaven in my behalf,
If zealous prayer might drive you from suspect,
I bend my knees and humbly crave this boon,
That you will drive misdeedes out of your mind,
May never good betide my life my Lord,
If once I dreamde upon this damned deed,
But my deceased sister and your Queen,
Afflicted with recurelesse maladies,
Impatient of her pain grew lunatic,
Discovering errors never dreamde upon,
To prove this true the greatest men of all,
Within their learned volumes do discord,
That all extremes, and aland in naught but extremes,
Then think oh King her ago^e in death,
Bereaues her sense and memory at once,
So that she spoke she knew nor how nor what.

King. Sir fir, fain would your highness hide your faults,
By cunning vows and glosing terms of Art,
And well thou may delude these listening ears,
Yet never allwage by proof this jealous heart,
Traitor thy head shall ransom my disgrace,
Daughter of darkness, whose accursed bower,
The Poet fained to live upon Auernus,
Whereas Cimerians darkness checks the Sun,
David's jealousy afflict me not so sore,
Fair Queen Elinor could never be so false,
I but she vowed these treasons at her death,
A time not fit to fashion monstrous lies,
Ah my ungrateful brother as thou art,
Could not my love, naie more could not the law,
Naie further, could not nature thee allure,
For to refrain from this incestuous sin,
Have from my sight, call Ione of Acon here,
Exit Edmund. The lukewarm spring distilling from his eyes,
His oaths, his vows, his reasons rested with remorce,
From forth his breast impoisoned with suspect.
Feign would I deem that false I find too true.
Enter Ione of Acone. I come to know what Englands King commands,
I wonder why your Highness greetes me thus.
With strange regard and unacquainted terms.

Ki. Ah Ione this wonder needs must wound thy breast,
For it has well nigh slain my wretched heart.

Ione. What is the Queen my sovereign mother dead
Woes in unhappy Lady we begone?

King. The Queen is dead, yet Ione lament not thou,
Poor soul guiltles art thou of this deceit,
That ^ath more cause to curse then to complain.

Ione. My dreadful soul assailed with doleful speech,
Ioynes me to bow my knees unto the ground,
Beseeding your most royal Majesty,
To rid your woeful daughter of suspect.

King. I daughter Ione, poor soul thou art deceived,
The King of England is no scorned Priest.

Ione. Was not the Lady Elinor your spouse,
And am not I the offspring of your Ioins?

King. I but when Ladies list to run as^raie,
The poor supposed father wears the horn,
And pl^ating leave their Liege in Princes laps,
Jone thou art daughter to a leacherous Friar,
A Friar was thy father hapless Ione,
Thy mother in profession vows no less,
And I vilde wretch which sorrowed hard no less,

Ione. What am I then a Friars base borne brat?
Presumptuous wretch why preasse I fore my king,
How can I look my husband in the face?
Why should I live since my renown is lost?
Away thou want on weed, hence worlds delight.
She falls groueling on the ground. Por^ne abbasia come vintoet (...), (...)
chain b^ceail fr^n glisproni alfi^nco.
King. O som^o Dio come i gu^dneo humans,
Spesse offuscan son danu membo oscunro,
Hapless and wretched, lift up thy heavy (...)
Nurse not so much as thi^ unhappy chance,
Unconstant Fortune still will have her course.

Ione. My King, my King, let Fortune have her course
Fly thou my soul and take a better corse,
Aies me from royal state I now am feign.
You purple springs that wander in my veins,
And whilom wants to feed^ my heavy heart,
Now all at once make have and pity me,
And stop your powers and change your native course,
Disolue to air your lukewarm blouddie streams,
And cease to be that I may be no more,
Your curled locks draw from this cursed head,
A base her pomp for Ione is baselie borne,
Ah Gloucester thou poor Gloucester have the wrong
She suddenly dies at the Queens beds feet. Die wretch, hate death, for Ione
has lived ^oo long.

King. Revive thee haples Lady grieve not thus,
In vain speak I for she reuiues no more,
Poor hapless soul thy own espected mones,
Has wrought her soddaine and untimely death.
Enter Edmund, Gloucester, running with Ladies and conuaies ^one of Acon away.
Lords, Ladies have, ah Gloucester a^t thou come,
Then must I now present a Tragedy,
Thy Ione is dead, yet grieve thou not her fall,
She was too base a spouse for such a Prince.

Gloucester. Conspire you then with Heavens to work my harms?
O sweet aflwagers of our martial miss,
Desired death deprive me of my life,
That I in death may end my life and love.

King. Gloucester thy King is partner of thy heaviness,
Although nor tongue nor eyes bewraie his mean,
For I have lost a flower as fair as thine,
A love more dear, For Elinor is dead,
But since the heaven lie ordinance decrees,
That all things change in their prefixed time,
Be thou content and bear it in thy breast,
Thy swelling grief as needs I must mine,
Thy Ione of Acon and my Queen deceast,
Shall have that Honor as beseemes their state.
You peers of England, see in ro^all pomp,
These (...) bodies be entombed straight
With tried colors covered all with black,
Let Spanish steedes as swift as sleeting wind,
Conuaie these Princes to their sunerall,
Before them let a hundred mourners ride,
In every time of their enforste aboade,
Rear up a cross in token of their work,
Whereon fair Elinors picture shall be plaste,
Arrived at London near our Pallas bounds,
Interre my lovely Elinor late deceast,
And in remembrance of her roialtie,
Erect a rich and stately carved Cross,
Whereon her stature shall with glory shine,
And hence forth see you call it Charing cross,
For why the chancest and the choicest Queen,
That ever did delight my royal eyes,
Their dwell in darkness whilst I die in grief,
But soft, what tidings with these Purciuants?
Enter Messenger approach from Mortimor.
Messenger. Sir Roger Mortimor with all Sussex as earste your Grace by message
did command, is here at hand in purpose to present your Highness with his
signs of victory, and trothles Balioll their accursed King, with fire and
sword does threat Northumberland.


King How one at fliction calls another over,
First death torments me, then I feel disgrace,
Again Lluellen he rebels in Wales,
And false Balioll means to brave me to,
But I will find provision for them all,
My co^ shall conquer death and shame,
And Mortimor it is thou must have to wales,
And rous^ that Rebel from his starting holes,
And rid thy King of his contentions foe.
Whilst I with Elinor, Gloucester, and the rest,
With speedy journey gather up our force,
And beat these brauing Scots from out our bounds,
Courage brave Soldiers fates has done their worst,
Now Virtue let me triumph in (...) (...)
Exite: Edward. Gloucester solus.
Gloucester. Now (...) of Acon let me mourn thy fall,
Sole here alone now set thee down and sigh,
Sig^aples Gloucester for thy so daine less,
T^ale death alas has ba^nished all thy pride,
Thy wedlock vows how ought have I beheld?
Enter Mortimor with the head. Thy eyes thy looks thy lips and every part,
How nature store in them to show their Art,
In shine, in shape, in color and compare,
But now has death the enemy of love,
Staind and deformed, the shine, the shape, the reed,
With pale and dimnes, and my love is dead.
Ah dead my love, vile wretch whicam I living?
So wills fates, and I must be contented,
All pomp in time must fade and grow to nothing,
Wept I like Nobe, yet it profits nothing,
Then cease my sighs since I may not regaine her,
And woe to wretched death that th^s has slain her.
Exit Gloucester.
Yours. By George Peele Master of Arts in Oxenford.
Finis.

