Plain Evidences: THE CHVRCH of England is Apostolical, the separation
Schismatic.

DIRECTED AGAINST Mr. Ainsworth the Separatist, and Mr. Smith the Se-baptist:
Both of them severally opposing the Book called the Separatists Schism.

By Richard Bernard, Preacher of the word of God at Worsop.

For truth and peace, to any indiferent Judgment.

PROVERBS 24. 21. My Son, fear the Lord, and the King, and moddle not with
them that are seditious. PROVERBS 24. 27. Turn not to the right hand, nor to
the left, but remove thy foot from evil. Set out by Authority.

Anno. 1610.

Printed by T. Snodham, for Edward Weauer, and William Welby, and are to be
sold at their shops in Paul's Churchyard.

modern book plate EMMANUEL

Collegium Emmanuelis Cantabrigioe


Reuerendissmo in Christo Patri ac Domino D. Tobiae, prouidentia Diuina
Archiepiscopo Eboracensi, Angliae Primati ac Metropolitano, suo Dioecesano
(...), Ecclesiae Anglicanae pacis Maximo Patrono, Patri indulgentissimo, suae
Prouinciae alteri beatissimo Grindallo, Episcopo quondam and Archiepiscopo
aeternae memoriae viro, Hanc suam Brounistarum direptionem, and Schismaticae
illius Synagogae demolitionem, in perpetuum testimonium obseruantiae, summaeque
suae gratitudinis ob illius Gratiosae Paternitatis plus quam vulgarem fauorem
dedicat, consecratque.

Suus in Christo seruus obsequentissimus, Richardus Bernard.


Huius inscriptionis Appendix ad LECTOREM.
QVam vary fuerint hinc affecti homines diuinare cesso. Iampridem sum expertus
quales natura sumus, instabiles nempe, Mari similes fluctuanti, in quo varijs
huc, illuc, ad dexteram modo, modo ad sinistram opinionibus instar nauis ventis
exagitatae circumferimur.

Igitur mihi impraesentiarum pro minimo est, quid homuncio Consceleratus, vel
Scrupulosus quis, vel Sectarius de me dicat: Suo Domino quisque stat aut cadit,
vt inquit Apostolus; and qui Deum quidem ex animo colit, and ita se exercet, vt
intermerata conscientia and apud Deum and apud Ecclesiam illius sit praeditus,
facile susque deque ferat and Impiorum and Sectariorum omnium sententias. De
istis enim, vere dicatur, quot semper fuerint capita, tot etiam sententiae: qui
etiam ita inter se variant, vt vix de Deo ipso omnes ad vnum idem sentiant.
Didici ipse non in incertis fluctuare, vt mos istorum est; non intention bona,
and sola affectione, (post habito iudicio) ambulare: non in verba Magistrorum
iurare, secu ti in iuventutis feruore soleant nonnulli, tantisper dum non
assequuntur ea principia, quae sunt illis a doctioribus immature proposita:
quae tamen arripiunt and auide, sed quodam affectu potius peruerso, quam
intellectu bono. Puer iam non sum, nolo igitur, si Deus voluerit, quouis vento
doctrinae circumferri, in illis incertis casibus, quibus hodie iactantur
nouitatis auidi; and etiam, Deo volente, est mihi decretum, ea tantum,
proprijs, quae video, meis, non alienis, oculis confidenter asserere.

Teneant igitur, vt recte vident, alij, mihi non displicuerit, agnoscam ego
Episcopos, and Archiepiscopos esse in Ecclesia Christi gradus, minime
contemnendos; vt qui principio been fuerunt instituti, ad lites componendas, ad
Schismaticorum vias praeoccupandas, and ad publicam Ecclesiae pacem
conseruandam.

Assero quoque eum esse verum Episcopum, virumque bonum, Archiepiscopatu
dignissimum, qui spartam, quam salna conscientia, est nactus, sedulo ornare
studuerit; qui Ecclesijs eius fidei commendatis semper invigilauerit; qui
idoneos Christi ouibus praefecerit pastores; Illiteratos autem, nulloue
Academiae titulo insignitos, necnon and homines flagitiosos, ac scelerum aliquo
genere insignes sacris initiari penitus recusauerit: qui suis ad hoc viribus
incubuerit, vt fidelium Ministrorum numerus indies crescat: qui denique ita in
puppi sedet vigilans perspicaciter, and Nanem suae Dioecesews (cuius tractat
gubernaculum) ita dirigere conatur, vt (Deo auxilium adferente) nec ad
Schismaticorum scopulos illidatur versus dextram, nec in Haereticorum Syrtes
praecipitetur ad sinistram, dignus is est profecto, qui tanto praeesset muneri,
quique possit vocari vir pijssimus. Cuius est praeterea non posse bonis non
fauere; in leuiusculis Ministros Ecclesiae vtiles and paci addictos tollerare;
clementia paterna alienatos ad se iterum potius allectare, quam a se animos
seueritate aliqua alienare; supplicibus supplicium remittere; sed male
affectos, nequitiae deditos corrigere, and obstinatos ad supplicium dedere.
Cuius etiam est e jurisdiction sua donatisticum Schisma, and Anabaptisticum
furorem fugare; and denique in viperinum illud ac cruentum genus hominum
Pontificiorum fraud vulpina irrepentium intentos habere oculos, ne vineam
Domini depopularentur, manusue sanguineas Dei populo inijcerent, quorum
sanguinem sitiunt, cuius semper fuerunt insatiabiles.

Si huiusmodi Moderator Ecclesiasticus Sanctis Dei and Fidelibus feliciter
contigerit, nonne dignitatem Episcopalem meritus est? quis eum summa
obseruantia colendum non iudicet? Quis sanae mentis, and non (...) furore
Brounistarum accensus virum talem Antichristianum, Christique aduersarium
vocaret? ita vel semel tam indigne, tam nequiter, ne dicam perditissime
cogitare, long a me absit in perpetuum.

Patrem habemus nos diuina prouidentia Reuerendissimum, qualis Theologus ipse,
and quam egregie in Concionibus dominatur, non est vt ipse praedicem. Sciunt
omnes dextre eum posse Scripturas interpretari, and quanto mouetur studio
Christi gregem pascendi quis nescit? Singulis enim Sabbatis, si corporis non
impediat imbecillitas, alicubi docet populos; ex industria, vt videtur, deuitat
controuersias, dum apud rudem populum concionatur, ne, vt alicubi vsu venit,
Auditorum contentione potius quam deuotione implerit animos. Locuples est
oratione, dicit concinne, and ornate, Sermones tamen suos illuminat verborum
claritate. Methodo vtitur perfacili ad vulgi captum accommodata, adeo vt inde
fructum maximum capiant non pauci.

Nota haec quidem non obscure quamuis eat ipse saepissime pauperibus predicatum
in locos perobscuros, vbi dissipatos esse intelliget Paraecos, tanquam Pastore
carentes Oues. In quibus omnibus singular, fere praecaeteris exemplum
inferioris gradus Pastoribus se praebet. Cuius diligentia summa efficiat, alij
vt supinam erubescant negligentiam.

Cuius docendi methodus cursum aliorum vagum, nullo seruaeto ordine, and
incompositum praedicandi modum in ordinem redigat.

Cuius sermonis perspicuitas, materiae grauitas, pura and minime affectata
oration nonnullorum inducat animos, vt vaniloquentiae suae futilitatem prae
pudore deponerent. Est enim hominum genus quoddam, qui cenodoxiae ventositate
vtris more, sufflati, stulte affectant obscuritatem, quo prae se ferant, nescio
quam and Artium omnium and Linguarum scientiam: Pudet istos Thrasones ubique
locorum non extra captum vulgi multa proferre. Sed eo forsan loquuntur, ne
intelligantur; docent isti vaniloqui, sed non vt discant Auditores. Non
cupiunt, vt videtur, Christum crucifixum praedicare, Christo suos lucrifacere:
sed suas animi dotes nundinari, hominum applausum aucupari. Laudem volunt,
esto: habeant mercedem. In admirationem duci auide desiderant, neque hoc eis
denegatur, sed dum miselli Idiotae in istis mirantur, nesciunt quam rerum
peritiam, docti viri ac boni perditissimam in eisdem admirantur stultitiam. Ex
diuinorum dispensatione qui laudibus efferri quaerit, quique placere hominibus
studet, and non dogmata proponere Christiana auditoribus, neque eadem eo modo
tractare sanctissime qui ad condendos sanctos est aptissimus, Ministerij
pietati consentaneus, and ad corporis Christi extructionem accommodatissimus,
secundum sibi concreditum talentum, non est fidelis dispensator, non est inquit
Apostolus, Christi seruus.

Cuius denique in pauperculas Christi ouiculas commiseratio, (quas saepe sacro
aeternae vitae pabulo alere non dedignatur) ignominia quadam alios afficeret,
qui animi fastu ita insole sunt, and Pharisaica elatione ita turgescunt, vt
publicis tantum in Rostris, si dijs placet, locisque eminentioribus videri
cupiant, sed inter Paraecos suos domifastidiant isti Homunciones laborare.
Ditiores sunt istis vnice in honor, hos sibi constituunt patronos
honorificentissimos, hos solummodo colunt, quos tanquam bonos suos Magistros,
and Benefactores isti assectantur asseclae: sed gregem interim pauperrimum
eorum fidei demandatum flocci pendunt, and ex animi superbia in miseras
Ouicularum animas, vt dicam, stomachose perdespuunt.

Quid commemorem, quam mature nuperrime grassantimorbo praesantaneum attulit
remedium? quam cito turbam quandam Separatistarum, ne dicam asperius,
temerariam e ditionis suae finibus exterminauit? Quoru^ alios, vt erat necesse,
quadam seueritate castigauit, non quo crudeli aliquo dominatu ab eo tenerentur,
sed vt a Schismate, ad pacem, and a dolo Seductorum ad orthodaxam veritatem
retraheret. Alios ita tractauit humanitate and suadela, vt facile hos in sanam
mentem retroduxisset, si non nimium priuatis addicti fuissent opinionibus, and
non obstinate affectassent singularitatem.

Sed vt fastigium tandem imponam, and rei metam adiungam, adeo seueritatem
lenitate, gubernandi euram praedicandi sedulitate, authoritatem humanitate,
prouentus amplitudinem liberalitate ita sapide condiuit, vt and ipse summa
colatur reuerentia, and hic viuatur inter nos concorditer. Siquidem de rebus
non necessarijs minime decertatur: Contentionis faces a Brounistis accensae
restinguntur penitus. Hinc fit, vt and fraus Papistarum magis ac magis
Rudioribus per quorundam Ministroru^ industriam detegitur: and Euangelium in
hac tandem part septentrionali felicissimos facit progressus. Inuitis omnibus
pseudocatholicis (quorum non exiguus inter nos alicubi delitescit numerus)
praeualet veritas, and indies magis ac magis praeualebit, si modo Deus
aliquando nos ex sua misericordia a mutuis contentionibus reuocaret, si
Ecclesiasticae gubernationis praepositi, Ecclesiae pacis causa, in rebus
minimis and nullius momenti aliquid concederent, abususque manifestos
corrigendos curarent. Si etiam nos infimae classis Homunculi Superiores
agnoscere, parts primas Primatibus concedere, Anthoritati nosipsos non inuito
submittere, and hoc regimine, potestate Regia, stabilito placide acquiescere
vellemus. Pro quibus apud Deum misericordem effundam ego preces ardentissimas:
cui interea ob eas res, hic fruimur, laus sit maxima, and huius Reuerendissimi
Patris animae salus aeterna: cui Deus in precibus occurrat semper, and
sempiterne beet ita, and remuneret, vt qua ille misellum me dignetur
miseratione in terris, eandem ille abunde cumulatam apud Patrem Coelestem and
misericordem in Coelis inueniat.

Amen. E Musaeolo nostro Worsopiae. Et veritatis and pacis aeque studiosus,
Ric: Bernardus.

THE PREFACE.
AVTHORS of new devices are self pleasing, they are conceited and like only
their own inventions: I perceive it is in vain to persuade. Easier it is to
draw a profane person from Hell gates, then to remove an opinion from a wilful
mind. Schism is the Ship whereon go aboard malcontents, the Winds that set
it forward are violent passions, Will is the Rudder, Obstinacy the Anchor.
Schismatickes are headstrong, they will not see evident conviction: self-love
makes them judge the best of themselves, but their want of Charity very badly
of others. They beguile themselves with show of piety, heat of affection, and
with a strong apprehension of things greatly amiss in others. These can they
see with both eyes, themselves with neither. No Church can pass them, wherein
they cannot see a rock of offense, and a stone to stumble at. They keep a
loofe off from all, they leave one Church, and come not at another; alone they
love to be; singularity is their pathway. The common road of the best
reformed Churches is too foul for their sincerity. Our arguments against them
are paper shot, as they hold: but their weakest reasons against us (if
themselves may judge) are shot of Cannon. They despise every man's endeavor
against them, and are in admiration with their own works. Let any confer
with them, and they shall hear it, I my self sufficiently have experience of
it. By this might I be moved to cease this second labor; but I am not
hopeless to hold some men back, and to gain some also, though I cannot
recover what is wholly already lost. If I might speed in both I would be glad,
if but in one, I am content: in both to loose my labor, I cannot doubt.

Thou have here (gentle Reader) an Answer of mine, and also a Reply unto an
Answer made by one by Mr. Ainsworth the Doctor, so called, of the
Schismatic Church of Brounists at Amsterdam. His answer is, to my book
called the Separatists Schism: what we both say, I pray thee judge after
trial. Let it please thee to read my former book, to discern what I hold,
and here still maintain. If thou have hap to light upon this Answerers book,
so read it, as thou also compare mine and it together. Much has he omitted in
my book, the Epistle wholly, and all the Counsels of Peace: wherein are
somethings, peradventure, in the reading whereof thou shall not judge time
lost. This Answerer in his book only once does mention them, but with this
his Comment upon me, that perhaps I knew no more then CAIPHAS what I said. It
is well yet, that the work is approved, though he judge the Author ignorant
of his own invented labor. He has also passed over very much in the matter
of the Book, touching the chief points between us and them: and therefore
the better to judge of his answer, and to see the truth, read my other Book.

I observe an humor in men arising of idleness, or of carelessness, or of
love only of novelties, or of them all, to read the last only, and to
neglect what before has been written, so take they opinions without trial,
judge without searching, but so can hold nothing certain. A reason to dissuade
men from writing in matters of controversy, except we do write all on both
sides, and make a great volume of a penny Pamphlet, which is too toylesome, and
also superfluous, when books may be compared together.

When I was writing over my reply to this Mr. Ainsworth: which I had thought
should have gone forth so alone, I received by Gods good providence the
Se-baptists book, I mean Mr. Smiths answer also, that so it might not boast
like an Heathenish Golias, against Gods Church, without an encounter, I have
therefore placed him, and ranked him in his due order as he came, and made
answer thereto as is meet, lest this woeful man should still mislead others, as
he does his own self, by his braine-sicknesse: I hear of Mr. Robinsons
answer also; if it had come in, he should also have been replied upon.
Though I be a weak man, and my weapons be against these three Captains of
three Companies, and but a stone in a sling, yet shall Israel prevail: the
truth is strong against all enemies whosoever they be.

They would ouer-loade me with number, but as Elisha said, more are with us then
against us. Indeed I want the help of my brethren: yet I neither do nor will
bid, curse Meroz, the Lord forgive them their Judge. 5. 23.
carelessness, if not the hypocrisy of men herein. If we be the Lords people,
why suffer we the Lord to be blasphemed by these men? if we be not, why halt we
between two opinions? If our standing be of God, let us maintain it; if these
men be in the true and only way, let us make a separation; why stand we idle
in the market place? Here is work, let us labor in the Lords Vineyard, if (in
our judgment) it be the Lords Vineyard; else let us be going. If I were not
persuaded in my soul, that here is the true Church of God, I profess
unfeignedly (by Gods help) that I would renounce my standing, whatsoever wicked
and vncharible hearts censure to the contrary.

But say some, these men will never be answered. No more will the great
Adversary (he and his instruments are importunate) yet must he and they be
ever resisted, till they fly from us. Men fear the end, before they begin:
remove carelessness and idleness, and behold the issue. If thou will not be
public, write in private. They rail (some say) and abuse men, what then? God
will be avenged on Rabshakehs: and their cause gains nothing by their
bitterness. For my part, I will endeavor to further the truth, as far as I
shall be able to give answer to what may be said against it; for their ill
carriage, I will as well as I may bear it patiently. I hope I have in this,
published sufficiently to the world my Faith and resolution, in this particular
truth of the Church, in contending with these our adversaries. In time, if time
may be granted me, I have a purpose to set down, so the truth of this point,
concerning a true, and a false Church, by definitions, and distributions,
declaring the properties and privileges of the Church invisible and visible,
and so of the militant and triumphant, as the order with the several members
thereof shall require: and thereto as an evident plainness of the same to
all, I will add an Historical narration of the Church out of the Scriptures,
from the creation of the world, and so far as the Scriptures evidently
declare it: wherein I will, by Gods help, observe the matter of the Church, the
Worship, the Government, and the Governors of the same, as may give
indifferent men a godly satisfaction in this point of controversy, if other
more fit for this, do not perform it. In the mean space, I judge that herein
I have performed on my behalf, what I ought, and what was expected at my hands
to discharge, for the honor of God, the reverence of our Church, the credit of
mine own ministry, the verity of my undertaken cause against these
Schismatikes, and withal for a just defense of mine own person, wickedly
traduced by some. I look not to satisfy the Separatists, much less the
strange man Mr. Smith the Se-baptist; how can a man quiet them that love
contention? I have endeavored to perform a duty, whereunto I have been
justly called, as I have showed in my former Book; what men may imagine I know
not; how they will judge of my good purpose, I much reckon not; let conscience
acquit me, though all condemn me, I much care not, albeit I desire the
approbation ever of thee a godly and judicious Reader: if so thou be.

I leave thee friend to peruse this labor, I commend the cause, as of great
moment, to thy consideration: weigh well the matter, judge of our reasons,
answers, and the reply without partiality; let thine upright heart effect, as
thy right knowledge in every thing shall settle thy judgment and convince thy
conscience. I leave every one to their own liking, approve or disallow, do
their own wills, so will men in these days, I am one in my self, to them
indifferent: let Truth prevail and God receive glory.

Amen. Farewell.
AN ANSWER unto Mr. Ainsworths first Forespeech, so he terms it, as much
as it touches me.
IN the Forespeech of all his whole Book, he tells his Reader, that my Book
has rather show then weight of reason. It may well be the praise of his
answer to me, if it had but the show of reason. Haste it seems begot it,
travel of mind in coffeehouse brought it forth. The labor will own the
Author, though the child may shame the father. It proclaims indigested
thoughts; it is a Lapwing not void of the shell, leaving the nest, and
fluttering with penny wings, endeavoring to fly, and yet hardly hatched; as the
judicious Reader may perceive.

It seems (says he of my Book) to be penned rather to disgrace others,
then to defend themselves. So it seems to him: this is his charity,
sinisterly to interpret, to suppose a scope in thought not intended, nor by
writing manifested. The end I have set down in my Epistle to the Reader; but
that he does not believe, what remedy? He belike thinks me one in pen, and
another in heart; if so, I suppose herein he takes measure of his own length,
to mete me. If the former distaste him for disgracing them, and not defending
our selves, I hope this will please him, if it will not, I know no remedy. To
abuse him, I intend not, neither to make their cause worse then it is; to
defend our selves he must give us leave: and this is now my drift.

But not better fruit (says he) can be expected from such as rebel against
the light, which themselves once seemed to regard. There is a regard to be had
of truths ever, that regard still I have, but sometime is a seeming regard to
untruths, for to find them out, to hold the truth, and that I profess to
have had touching their way. He calls that light, which I knew of their way,
but I now judge it darkness, through knowledge of the truth now, whereof I was
ignorant then. I see now by the light, their darkness, our truth, their
errors, and yet bewail personal corruptions. My former Book may speak for
me herein, the title thereof tells it them, and this labor will more manifest
it. I then rebel not against the light received, but by the light resist I
darkness, as I judge their uncharitable censuring, separation, and condemning
of us to be. I wish themselves not to be rebellious against God, against his
Church, and against the light of our loving endeavors in the truth, to reduce
them to a better course, to join to some reformed Church, to be no more
Separatists, that they breed no more Anabaptists. But what if it had been
light, even the truth of God, which I did seem to regard, and yet with-stood
my knowledge? can no better fruit then rebellion be expected? The light of
Christ in Peter was withstood Mat. 26.
of him with fearful perjury; the light of the Gospel Gal. 2.
afterward shuffled by through dissimulation, yet Peter was an Apostle, his
denial of the truth sprung through weakness, yet better fruit was by Christ
expected from him, and better he brought forth. You are deep (Mr. Ainsworth)
in censures: All opposing your way, are men in your judgment deprived of
Grace, rebellious against the light: you are presumptuous in censuring; you may
give sentence against all men and all Churches in the world; but none may give
judgment of you? I wish to you less pride, more humility; less dislike of
others, and more charity, with greater dislike of your own selves: the want
whereof is the present enemy to lovely unity, that ever accompanies true
piety, which many pretend, but few truly do enjoy.

AN ANSWER unto the Fore-speech of his An swear to my Book.
IN this his Preface he touches my person, my labor, and shows his purpose
in answering, declares what he makes answer unto, and why only in general,
and concludes with a Prayer for himself to be able to answer me, and others
to discern my work, which is also my desire: for then I doubt not, but such
as well understand the cause between us, will easily condemn their part.

In the beginning he accounts me an adversary come forth to fight against
the truth.

I grant the first, that I am an adversary, to wit, to their Schism; but I
deny the latter, that therefore I fight against the truth, that is the matter
in question; though in my judgment it is out of question that their separation
is not truth, but the error of Schism and Schismatickes.

A while since (says he) I would needs seem to favor it.

[ A while since.] Time is an instructor to a diligent searcher; I see now,
what I then saw not; if I had, the late Separatists had not misled so many: the
few, or rather the none, which now they do win here-away manifests the
same.

[ Needs.] What necessity was there? if I would, I might have gone the way,
they were gentle entertainers, (most seely ones were received, such as now the
Anabaptists have rejected) I needed not to have made any forcible intrusion.
But the man here speaks now besides his Book; it is not material, he has
hereof a supporter, his Talebearer.

[ Seem to fauour] A favor is no sound approbation: and a seeming favor, is
a very small allowance. Out of these words it may appear, that I was neither a
Leader, nor a Setter of others on as, lewdly by words, malicious men belie me:
I profess my self most ignorant of what a Brownist held, before Mr. Smith and
his followers went that way; I never saw a Book of theirs, nor to my
knowledge, the face of a man in the way of the Separation. I confess I was
much moved with fair shows of Scripture, and with great pretenses of
holiness in their way: but I was not removed. Oh, but ask Mr. Ainsworth why I
was not removed; being so moved, why I went not forward? forsooth things not
succeeding to mine expectation, I have changed my love into hatred. Mine
expectation was only the truth; I saw no ill success, but error of the way,
which hindered my course. It is not therefore condemnable to change my love into
hate: Love is an affection only fit for the truth; and hatred must persecute
error. If a man at the first expect truth, and by trial find falshoode, is it
not fit to change affections, and to place them right, which through ignorance
were before misplaced? this man would find a knot in a bul-rush; a fault where
none is.

[ In the bitterness of my zeal, I sent out (says he) my Treatise.] Zeal,
is laudable in a just cause against slanderers of the truth, and the Church of
God their mother: this Zeal likes him not lukewarmenesse is best, it does
their cause no hurt: they would be let alone, that so they might still deceive
the honest heart, and carry away the simple, to a right hand sin of Schism.
I am commanded to be zealous, the lukewarm will God spue out of his mouth: we
have too many Laodiceans; if we were more zealous for the Lord of Hoasts, much
would be amended, Schismatics and Heretics would be abandoned: which I
heartily pray for. Touching bitterness, the whole Book defends me from so
false an accusation. For bitterness let them look to their grand Master,
Barrow; whose spirit was the bitterness of gall and Wormwood, as his railing,
scoffing, and other outrages do show in his Printed Books. It (to wit, my
Book, says he) contains disswasions from the practice of the Gospel. Here
he changes the Title of my Book, to enlarge his sin; He calls their
Inventions, Gospel; and their Schism from Gods Church, the practice of the
Gospel. He would put upon me a labor full of wickedness, but he beggeth
that which he can never make good, nor I ever yield him.

How is it that Mr. Smith has found out their Presbyteriall practice, to be no
practice of the Gospel, but the invention of man, having both an Antichristian
ministry and government in it? And therefore (says he) When the Popish
Prelacie was suppressed, and the triformed Pr^sbyterie substituted; one
Antichrist was put down, and a other set up in his place: or the Beast was
suppressed, and his Image advanced. And therefore as they that submit to the
Prelacie, are subject to that woe of worshipping the Beast; so they that submit
to the triformed Presbytery, are in like manner liable to that woe denounced
against them that worship the Image of the Beast. Thus has Mr. Smith written
of late against these In his book int^tuled: The differences of the Churches
of the separation.
men, who so much brag of the practice of the Gospel. And this he does not
barely avouch, but does proc^ed orderly, setting down his positions, and has
labored to prove them by Scripture, by reasons, and does answer objections
made to the contrary. And therefore I think it not amiss, to set down what
he there says; to show what a laborinth the seely people are run into,
who forsake our Church for Antichristian, their native soil, their harbor
and liuelihood, the company of many truly fearing God, to go into and under
an Antichristian Ministry and government, into a strange Country, among a
people of a strange language, where they spend all, are pinched with poverty,
and live among Schismatickes, Heretics, Papists, Turks, Jews, Arians,
Anabaptists, and among people of all ill disposition, only to avoid some
corruptions here, through officers ill demeanor: the Lord amend them, or
remove them. But let all know, that it is a Christian man's valor rather to
oppose corruptions, then to fly the Church of God for them, and better to
endure corruptions, then to be turmoyled with such distractions, and to be
brought into such confusions, even a Babel of languages, of opinions, of
assemblyes, of governing, of Governors, and what not? It is a blessing to be
well, it is a greater to know to be well, and so to abide.

Now thus writes Mr. Smith in his Book, page 22. Having Page. 22.
spoken of the leitourgie of the Church: now follow (says he) the Offices of
the Church, viz. the Presbytery, and Deaconrie. Phil. 1. 1. Esa. 66. 21. Nu.
3. 5. 10. and 16. 5. 38. and. 17. cha.

The Presbytery of the Church is, the company of the Elders, which are for
the Church in the public actions of the Church, either of the kingdom or
Priesthood. Heb. 13. 17. 1. These. 5. 12. 1. Tim. 4. 14. 15. 17.

The Presbytery is uniform, consisting of Officers of one sort. Esaias. 66. 21.
compared with Exodus 28. 1. and with Number. 11. 24. 25. 1. Tim. 3. 1. 8. Act. 14.
23. Phil. 1. 1. Ier. 23. 1. 4. Ezech. 34. 1. 16.

These Officers are called Elders, Overseers or Bishops, Pastors, Teachers,
Governors, Leaders, Prepositi: which are several names of one and the same
office, consisting of several works or qualifications.

For every one of these Officers must be:

1 An Elder, or ancient in years. 1. Tim. 3. 6. and 5. 1.

2 Ouersee the flock. 1. Pet. 5. 2. Act. 20. 28.

3 Feed the flock. 1. Pet. 5. 2. Act. 20. 28.

4 Able to teach and exhort with wholesome doctrine, and convince the
gainesayers. 1. Tim. 3. 2. Tit. 1. 9. Ephesians. 4. 12.

5 Govern the Church. 1. Tim. 3. 4. 5. 1. Cor. 12. 28.

6 Lead the Church in all the public affairs thereof. Heb. 13. 17

7 Are preferred to place of honor. 1. These. 5. 12. 1. Tim. 5. 17. and special
labor. 1. Tim. 3. 1.

Seeing all the Elders must teach, exhort, convince, feed, ouersee, rule, and
lead the Church, therefore they may all administer the seals of the covenant:
for that is a chief work of feeding, and applying the covenant, and that
perticularly.

Of Reasons proving the Elders to be of one sort, viz. all Pastors.
1 IN the old Testament there was but one kind of Priests, who had all equal
authority, to administer all the holy things (excepting the high Priest, who
typed forth Christ Jesus, the high Priest of our profession:) So proportionably
in the new Testament, there is but one sort of Elders, who succeed the Priests
in the dispensation of holy things. Esaias. 66. 21.

2 As in the old Testament there was the Sanhedrim, which consisted of
seauentie Ancients, for the administration of the kingdom, which was a type of
the visible Church, all which Elders in their first institution, Numb. 11. 25.
did prophecy, and were of one kind under Moses: So in the new Testament under
Christ Jesus, who is the King of the Church, there is a Synedrion, or
Eldership, consisting of Ancients of one kind, who administer for the good of
the Church. Revel. 4. 4. and 5. 6.

3 If Pastor, Teacher, Elder, had been three offices formally differing: the
Apostle intending to teach the several offices of the Church, would have
mentioned them, 1. Tim. 3. but there he only mentions Bishops and Deacons,
according as Phil. 1. 1. therefore Bishops are only of one sort or kind.

4 If the Apostles had ordained three kinds of Elders: Acts. 14. 23. they
would have mentioned them with their several kinds of ordination: but that is
not done: for in one phrase their Election and ordination is mentioned. Ergo,
their ordination being one, their office is one, and not three.

5 If there had been three kinds of Elders at Ephesus, then the Apostle at
Miletum, would have given them several charges, as having several duties
lying upon them: but the Apostle Acts. 20. 28. gives them one general charge,
common to them all, namely, the duty of feeding, the work of the Pastor:
therefore they are all Pastors.

6 Ephesians. 4. 11. Pastors and Teachers are all one office: for whereas the
Apostle had spoken distributiuely before of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, as
intending them several offices; he speaks copulatiuely of Pastors and
Teachers, exagetically teaching that they are both one office.

7 And lastly, if all Elders have the Pastors gifts, and the works of the
Pastor, and the Pastors ordination; then they have all the Pastors office:
But all the Elders have the Pastors gifts, viz. the word of wisdom, or the
gift of exhortation. Tit. 1. 9. and therefore the Pastors work as Act. 20. 28.
1. Pet. 5. 2. which is feeding, exhorting, and so the same ordination. Act. 14.
23. Therefore all the Elders have the same office of the Pastor; and so are
all one sort.

From all this he concludes what is before written: that the Presbyteriall
practice is the invention of man, and Antichristian.

Objections for the three sorts of Elders answered.
1. Objection.
IN this place, the Apostle makes two sorts of Elders, viz. 2. Tim. 5. 17.
first, those that rule only: secondly, those that teach and rule, and Ephesians. 4.
11. the Apostle makes two kinds of those that teach. Pastors and Doctors:
therefore there are three kinds of Elders, formally differing each from other.

Answ. 1. The Apostle to Timothy teaches, that Elders are to be honored for
two works: well ruling, and laborious or painful teaching. And the place
does not import a distribution of officers, but a commendation of several
works of one office, and the speciality consists not in the works of ruling
and teaching, which are common to all Elders, but in the quality, viz. well
ruling and painful teaching; as if the Apostle should say, Elders are to be
had in double honor, for wise government; but much more are they to be
honored for their laborious and painful teaching. That this is so, see Tit.
1. 9. 1. These. 5. 12. 13. compared with, 1. Tim. 3. 1. 4.

2 In Timothy, the Apostle says, every Bishop must be didacticos and
proaistamenos, and therefore that some Elders are only Didacticoi, and not
Proaistamenoi, is contrary to the Apostles intent.

3 In Titus, the Apostle expounds Didacticos, to be able to exhort with
wholesome doctrine, and to convince the gainesayers: how then shall some of the
Elders be Rulers only?

4 To the place of the Ephesians; the Apostle in it speaks copulatiuely of
one office, and exegetically of the principal work of the Pastor, which is
teaching: he does not say, some Pastors, some Teachers; but he says Pastors
and Teachers: expounding the former by the latter, viz. feeding, by teaching,
which is the principal part of feeding, and for which Pastors are principally
commended. 1. Tim. 5. 17. if they labor therein painfully.

Objection. 2.
THe Apostle 1. Cor. 12. 5. 8. 28. says, there are diversity of Ministers;
namely, one that has the word of wisdom, another the word of knowledge,
another that has government, ver. 28. therefore the Eldership consists of
three sorts of Elders, viz. of the Pastor that has the word of wisdom; of
the Teacher, that has the word of knowledge; of the Ruler, that has the
quality of government.

Answ. 1. It is granted that there are diversity of Ministeries, as Ephesians. 4.
11. 1. Tim. 3. 1. 8. Phil. 1. 1. namely, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, Deacons, yet it follows not hereupon, that Elders are of diverse
sorts as is pleaded. See verse. 28.

2 The word Diaconia, signifies sometime, any spiritual work, proceeding
from any member or officer of the Church: as 2. Cor. 4. 8. Alms is called
Diaconia, 1. Pet. 4. 10. Diaconein signifies any work that proceeds from any
gift, so it may signify here, and all the works that follow almost may be
referred thither, only there are certain Energemata mentioned. verse 10.

Objection. 3.
THe Apostle Romans 12. 6. 8. makes an opposition between Prophecy and an
office, and makes five kinds of officers, Pastors, Teachers, Rulers, Deacons,
Widows.

Answ. 1. That is denied to be the true resolution of the place of the
Romans; for although there be five several actions repeated, yet it does not
follow, that there are five several Officers to perform those actions; for
one person may perform them all, and yet be no Officer, viz. teach, exhort,
rule, distribute, show mercy. 1. Cor. 14. 3. 26. 31. Romans 12. 13. 1. Cor. 5. 5.

2 The distributive particle (eite) four times repeated in prophecy,
Diaconia, exhorting and teaching, imports thus much, that the Apostles
intention is not to subordinate, teaching and exhorting to Diaconia, but to
oppose each of these four particulers to other, as thus: Prophecy is the
manifestation of a gift: 1. Cor. 14. 3. Diaconia, is the office, and there are
diverse kinds thereof. 1. Cor. 12. 5. Teaching is one action or work of the
Prophets or Officers. 1. Cor. 14. 26. Exhorting is another action or work of
them. 1. Cor. 14. 3. Hence it follows that teaching and exhorting are as well
subordinate to Prophecy, as to Diaconia.

3 If Diaconia be the genus to these five species following, then I say, that
Diaconia signifies not an office, but a work, and of works there are those
five kinds: that Diaconia does sometime signify a work is plain. 1. Cor. 8.
4. 1. Pet. 4. 10.

4 And lastly, the Apostle that knew how to speak, would never have made
Teaching and Exhorting members distributive, with Prophecy and Diaconia, if
he had intended to have made them species subordinate to Diaconia. Therefore
questionless that is not his intention.

Objection. 4.
THe Apostle by the commandment of Christ writes to the Angels of the seven
Churches of Asia. Reu. 1. and 2. and 3. that is, to the Pastors which are but
one in every particular Church; for so the words are, to the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, etc.

Answ. 1. It can never be proved by the Scriptures, that there was but one
Pastor in a Church. It is plain, Act. 20. 28. that there were many in the
Church of Ephesus, (which was one of these seven Churches) who did perform the
work of the pastor, which is Poimainein, to feed, even all the Elders of
Ephesus. Act. 20. 17. compared with verse 28. And therefore there were many
Pastors, in the Church of Ephesus, in Paul's time.

2 All Churches had Officers of one sort, and one kind of Presbiterie, and
therefore as all the Elders of Ephesus were Pastors, so were all the Elders of
the six Churches of Asia, and of all other Churches wheresoever in the world,
if they had many Elders.

3 The Angel of every one of these Churches does not signify one Pastor
only, in every Church; but either the College of Pastors, if they were many,
or the company of the most sincere and holy men, that most opposed the
corruptions of the Church, or were most holy and zealous in life and doctrine.
And that an Angel does signify a company of men, is plain. Reu. 14. See
Doctor Downehams Sermon, for this point.
6. 8. 9. and 18. 4. And why not a principal Pastor of chiefest note among the
College of Pastors in Cities?

4 And lastly, in all likelihood there were some extraordinary men yet living
in the Churches, either Prophets or Evangelists, that had extraordinary gifts:
whose zeal and holiness might win unto them special estimation in the
Churches: in regard whereof it might be, that the holy Ghost intending his
Epistles to the whole Church, chiefly directs them to those persons so
qualified, as men best able to prevail with the Church, and calls them
Angels, whether one or more, as John the Baptist is called an Angel. Mark. 1. 2.

After all this says Mr. Smith: Seeing all the Prophets of the Church must
have gifts for edification, exhortation, and consolation; the Pastors of the
Church must have gifts for the performance of the same works, Katexochen,
after an excellent manner, and in a greater measure.

The Pastors excelling the Prophets of the Church in the gifts of doctrine,
exhortation, consolation, may also excel one another in gifts: for all the
Elders have not the same measure, or degrees of gifts.

In respect of the measure of gifts in Elders, some excelling in one gift, some
in another, the holy Ghost may give several titles to the Elders or Pastors.

Although some Elders excel in one gift, some in an other, yet it follows
not that therefore they are several Officers; formally differing one from
another: for not the degree, measure, Q. What several kind of gift had Timothy
an Evangelist, from an Apostle?
or excellency of a gift or gifts, but the several kind and nature of gifts
and works, make several kinds of Officers. 1. Cor. 12. 4. 5. 6

The Elder that excels in government most properly may be called a ruler or
governor, although he have the gifts and power to teach, exhort, comfort,
apply, and that by virtue of his Office. Tit. 1. 9. Heb. 13. 17.

The Elder that excels in doctrine, and conuinceth gainsayers, may most
properly be called a Teacher or Doctor, though by virtue of his office, he may
perform all other pastoral duties. Act. 18. 28. and 19. 1. 1. Cor. 3. 4. 6.
compared with Tit. 1. 9. Ephesians. 4. 11. 1. Pet. 5. 2.

The Elder that excels in exhortation, consolation, and application, may
most properly be called a Pastor or Shepherd, though by virtue of his Office,
he is to teach, convince and govern. Act. 20. 28. Tit. 1. 9. Ephesians. 4. 11. 1.
Pet. 5. 2.

And thus Mr. Ainsworth, may see if Mr. Smith say the truth herein, that they
themselves do practice human inventions, and have an Antichristian
Ministry and government: and therefore he that speaks against their way,
or uses disswasions from the same, neither speaks nor disswadeth from the
practice of the Gospel, as he would make his Reader believe, that I have so
done by my former Book. The argument from all that is said, to clear me in
this point, may be thus framed.

Disswasions from Schism, from humane inventions, from a Ministry and
Government Antichristian, are not disswasions from the practice of the Gospel.
This cannot be denied, being an argument from the contrary.

But the disswasions which I have sent forth, are disswasions from Schism,
from humane Inventions, from a Ministry and Government Antichristian. That
their way is Schism, I have proved in my former Book, which in this reply I
also again justify against Mr. Ainsworth, and against Mr. Smith. The rest of
this Minor Mr. Smith, as is here before showed, goes about to prove at large.

Conclusion.
Therefore my disswasions from Brownisme are not disswasions See more touching
this matter in Doctor Fields fifth Book. cap. 26. page 128.
from the practice of the Gospel.

Out of themselves may we see, is one risen to condemn themselves: a Pupil, a
Tutor, a Scholar in Separatisme, a grand Master in Brownisme. He has mete
unto them, as they have measured unto us: we are Antichristian, say they: They
are Antichristian, says he. What then have they gotten by their uncharitable
and lewd Schism?

Now to return again to Mr. Ainsworths Forespeech, where I left it. He says,
that in my Book, is little weight of reason or truth to be seen, nor any
thing which may trouble a discreet Reader. In his first Forespeech, he said,
my Book had a show, and but a show of reason, now here he allows it weight
of reason, though he add the word little. He gives and takes away, he
writes he knows not what. It has little weight (says he) but Reader compare
his answer with my Book, and thou may see that he found himself
ouerloden: the little weight of reason, was more then he could lift, as
appears by all that which he has left behind him. For truth to be seen; he
sees not, the cause is in his blindness, and not in the matter by me
delivered. One but meanly acquainted with their cause (he says) may find out
my deceit. It is hard to find what is not, plainness harbors not such a
guest as deceit; how far I am from fraudulent dealing, let the work be
judge. If a mean acquaintance with their cause can so enlighten their eyes, as
they may easily see my dealing, and weeld the weight of my work; what need
this man speak of a discreet Reader, and tell him of trouble too? where was
his own eyes? and what was become of his discretion in answering, that saw no
more, and discerned so little? He sets my labor light, and yet cries to the
Lord for wisdom to answer me: He makes the meanest a fit Judge for me, and
yet prays for an vnderstandding Reader to discern me: how can these things
stand together?

He is constrained, it seems, by a greater power, to yield me in my labor
more studious endeavor, (though he despise it in heart) then his ill will
otherwise would afford. Thus it falls out with them that against the shining
light, struggle, of an ill disposition, to wipe away undeservedly, what is due
to others, for their own praise.

His end in answering (as he says) is to stop my mouth, and to help the
simple to prevent and to discern, I know not what fraud of mine. He has a
marvelous conceit of his labor: he thought it should come near me, when he
meant with it to stop my mouth: but if he think so idle an answer can put
any to silence, he is much deceived; yet had he stayed my pen, and prevented
this labor, had he but set out my whole labor with his answer: If this had
been done, a Reply had been needless, so little has he aduantaged his
cause, or endamaged me by his answer, as indifferent and learned Readers have
judged.

He offers this as help to the simple: A fit choice, a simple answer to a
simple Scholar. Simple is he indeed that needs so seely a help. For
preventing of offense, he is so far from it, as he and his, with such like,
have greatly increased it, have caused many to fall, and the common adversary
to advance himself against us, to the great hinderance of the Gospel, and to
the hearts grief of many a true Christian soul Such Preuentours of evil may
be rather called Inuentours of mischief. Touching the imagined fraud, which he
lays to my charge, here he says so, but no where in his answer proves any
such thing; had he found it, he would have named it. Surely I was in mine
intendment far from it, and I confess my self to be in nature one, as all
that know me can witness, as it were cast into the mould of plainness: what
I have written, it was done in the simplicity of my heart, as I then was, and
am persuaded of the truth. Let fraud and falsehood stick to the ribs of the
deceiuer, but be it far from me for ever.

[ He thought it needful (as he says) to observe and answer briefly the
principal things by me objected.] A general answer is no answer: what must
become of the particulars whereon the reader must stumble? The truth of the
generals are established in and by particulars, either therefore must these be
refelled, or the other are not truly answered. But herein he took his case:
little credit to his cause, as by the Reply made, does well appear: yet in
this case which he took, he nevertheless would insinuate, that therein he
labored more then was needful: for that many of the principals are in the
Treatise (before written to Mr. Spr.) and in other Books more largely
confuted. If he have refuted any principals of my labor in an other man's
book, it was an idle labor in him to say the same things again unto me, and
omit particulars, which he had never said any thing unto. This does show, that
what he thought he could answer, he spared not to afford thereto a double
labor but where he could not, there he craves pardon for giving so much as
once one single answer. If he say true, that he has refuted any thing of my
Book in any man's labor, I here tell him aforehand, that in so doing, he has
spared me so much labor: I mean fully to reply to his answer made to me, so
much as it is, not doubting but the other can and will answer what comes in
his way, as I should do in the like case. What he means by other Books,
which he speaks of, I know not, he names none. Belike he thinks hereby to
set me a tax to seek them, as well where they are not, as where they are,
through out their contentious works; he that cannot be better exercised, I wish
him that labor to keep him from idleness.

If this his answer serve not the turn, [ All of them may (he says) if need
require, hereafter by some other be particularly refelled.] What he was not
able to refute, (and yet would he be a busy undertaker,) he leaves for
others to refell; if need should require. How needful it was, though this man
make but an If thereof, may appear by an answer made now to the particulars, by
the Se-baptist Mr. Smith, who reprehendeth this Answerer, for so leaving
particulars without defense, to shift for themselves in the plain field: And
therefore he comes forth as a Goliath, to fight for his own gathered host
of the Philistines; I mean his own opinions, partly absurd, and partly
heretical, which he has mustred in his unstable brain by Sophistry,
through coffeehouse, to trouble the host of Israel, the true Church of God
with us.

And thus much for an answer to Mr. Ainsworths Forespeeches: a man busily
interessing himself in a cause, when it seems he knew another to own it,
and to go about to defend it. He should have suffered the other to have gone
before him, except he could have fore-stalled him for the cause, which he
undertook rather (as may seem) to disclaim, denying many things, skipping
over most things, then to defend any thing, for that he answers nothing
soundly: see Reader and judge.

A PREFACE BEFORE the Reply, touching Mr. Smith the Sebaptist, and his Book.
IF any ask, why I do give him a new title to his old name: my answer is; he
wanted, I know, a Godfather, when he was Christened again; now it is an
ancient custom to name then the child, and the susceptors to give it. Indeed
I was not requested by this Childs Parents to be an vnder-taker, nevertheless
upon so extraordinary an act, I will be somewhat exorbitant with my self, to
call him Mr. John Smith, the Anabaptisticall Se-baptist. Notorious acts, we may
read, have made men remarkable, and have gotten them names and titles, for a
memorial of the facts and deeds done; why should not he then obtain what
worthily he has deserved? he is Anabaptisticall, for rebaptization; and he
is a Se-baptist, because he did baptize himself; it is more then Christ would
do: but he could find no whither to So he thought of Baptism in Reformed
Churches; yea, and among the Separation.
go for Baptism; in some Churches it was false, as he imagined; in some true,
but not lawfully to be received, because of some As only among the Anabaptists.
Heresies. But is his Baptism true? No verily, if himself may be made Judge:
for in his Answer to me, page 91. line 28. he says, that a baptized person
must baptize into the true faith of Christ, a person capable of baptism, else
it is not a true Sacrament. Now Mr. Smith did baptize himself, and was not
before by his own judgment and profession baptized; so a person unbaptized did
baptize: and therefore it is no true Sacrament by his own doctrine, as also
unwarrantable from the Scripture. And therefore all his company have received
by him corruption, they have made a false entrance into their new way, by Mr.
Smiths own testimony. He would not go to others to be baptized, for then he
should have been of their Fraternity, and so have lost his own company; but
he would none of that.

He lays to my charge inconstancy: but I profess I was never of them:
indeed through ignorance, which takes that for light which is darkness, and
through affection lead by ignorance, and held on by a foolish good meaning, I
was tossed by the present tempest, sometime to a favoring, but otherwhile to a
great dislike; until by study, and other endeavors, I found out a certain
truth to rest upon, and so stuck to my old, former and first way, wherein I do
walk: is this, as he terms it, inconstancy, Apostacy? Is this to be often
of and on, as it has fallen out with him; whose judgment is instabilitie it
self, whose course is as changeable as the Moon? for:

First, he was a Subscriber, a Conformitant, and as honest Mr. Smiths
changeablenes.
a man then, as ever since, for any thing seen or heard hitherto to the
contrary: this is evident, when first he was made Minister, and when he was
instituted into a living. Whether wholly a Conformist, he best knows: it is
enough that he was, what he was.

Secondly he fell from that, but allowed the authority of Bishops, and
published his dislike against a great point of Brownisme, touching set Prayer,
the saying of the Lords Book on the Lords Prayer. page 91. and in the Epistle
to the Reader.
Prayer: and said in his then judgment, that it was the verily assured truth.

Thirdly; He disclaimed Episcopal Authority utterly, and fell in love with
the doctrine of the Separation, but warily and secretly at the first: for being
brought to trouble, and called into question about it, he renounced Brownisme,
under handwriting, a copy whereof was brought unto me, by one now of their
company.

Fourthly, he after fell to it again, and went unto diverse Ministers, godly
and learned, in conferring with whom he came resolved of the truth against the
way of the Separation: of his Prayer, of his solemn thanksgiving, of his
purpose to go to Amsterdame to reclaim his Tutor Mr. Johnson, I have spoken
in my book, page 37. the truth whereof will be confirmed by the oaths of Mr.
Hi: Mr. N. and Mr. Ho: of whom I have heard these things with their
protestation of the truth, whatsoever he affirms in his own private cause to
the contrary.

Fifthly, for all this he fell quite from us again to Brownisme, See his
answer to me, pa. 124. 108.
and made a Separation: then was that way clearly the truth: yea, says he to
me in his Letter, I marvel you see it not; I profess before the Lord, that
this truth which we testify unto you, is as clear and evident unto us, as
the noone day. Hereupon he writ a Book of Principles and Inferences, in
maintenance thereof.

Sixthly, within a while this Protestation for that so great a truth, turned
into detestation against it, as a falsehood; and that clearnes as noon day
became in his new after thoughts as darkness at midnight. He holds for
truths, what Mr. Ainsworth in his answer to me, rejects for errors: He
judges their worship in part Iudaisme; their Ministry See his Book of
Differences.
and Government Antichristian; of which he has also published a Book, and
there in the Epistle (because he is found so inconstant, to wipe away the shame
thereof, and to cut off offense for afterward) he without shame, professes to
be unconstant, and desires that ever his last writing should be taken as his
present judgment; so there is no certain where he will hold. Miserable people
will you still be led by so changeable a Chamaeleon!

Seauenthly, and lastly, if it prove the last, He has founded a new Church,
he has (if you will believe him) recovered the true Baptism, and the true
matter and form of a true Church, which now is only to be found pure among a
company of Se-baptists. Mr. Smith will Mr. Smith loves singularity, to be one
alone with his company, that is his politic humility.
hold ever this word ( Se) to himself, for in going into Brownisme, he was a
separatist, he held differing opinions from them, and now that he is in
Anabaptisme, he is a Se-baptist, he wholly goes not with that Heretical Sect.
It may seem he intends to have an Oar in every Boat, and a piece of every
profession; holding all, and none wholly, and yet will suppose himself the
best, as if he were an unerring Reformer, having an infallible rule in Scrinio
pectoris to be universally good. If he hold this, let him show his authority
from above, and then have we done. But I see already, without farther time to
read his commission, that he is out of the way. Baptism (says he) is the
door into the Church: there must be then a Church, and a door into the
Church. I ask therefore whether the visible Church was among them or no, when
Mr. Smith did baptize himself? If he say it was none, then he entered into that
which was not, so a door was without an house: and Baptism before the Church.
If he say, they were the Church: I ask how could a visible Church be before
there be true matter of a Church, that is, a company truly baptized as they
hold? His action is therefore altogether extraordinary without Scripture,
without practice of Gods Church formerly: and therefore must he herein have an
extraordinary warrant, or else he is extraordinarily presumptuously wicked.
But by this trick is he dispastored, and is but among them as a private person,
till he be again elected; this is most true: And thus has he been off and on
in the Ministry two or three times. He was made Minister by Bishop Wickam,
that by and by in Brownisme he renounced; and was made Minister by Tradesmen,
and called himself, The Pastor of the Church at Gainsbrough: this has he
lost again, by his Se-baptisticke way, till he be chosen again.

Thus is his inconstancy apparent, and cause sufficient He himself does
overthrow daily himself, a reason sufficient to let him alone: (...)ve easily
suffer present fits in mad men, for that we do know them to be sudden and not
during.
for me to spare my labor in answering his Book, till it were known, what
he would defend and maintain, and stick thereunto; least answering him to
day, he himself tomorrow should condemn the very same that I disallow, and so
my labor be lost. But I will once follow a wavering Reed, a mutable Proteus, a
variable Chamaeleon, and take him as at this present I find him; for that he
In his Book, Page 135.
affirms before the Lord, that except I do make answer, I am not able to
answer.

He supposes himself unanswerable; and therefore he bids me battle. Truth
is unanswerable, but errors broached from an unstable judgment are confutable.
If he hold that I cannot answer for his truth sake, he in this is deceived;
for how can he maintain truth, that knows not what it is; with whom a verily
assured truth is by and by a See by these, his foolish confidence for the
present in every opinion.
verily assured falsehood: with whom that which is now as clear for truth as
noone day, is soon after Egiptian darkness, and plainly error, as is before
showed. A corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit, it cannot bring forth good:
A false Prophet Mat. 7. 17. 18.
beware of, by his fruits thou shall know him, judge of his spirit by the
fruits thereof, here in this Preface manifested, as they are set down in his
Book.

In the forefront of his Book he quoteth nine Scriptures, What first he
intends against us out of Scripture, the same is altogether against himself.
which may be truly understood, as the holy Ghost fore-warning us, to take
heed of him, and his ways. It is he that says, Lo, here is Christ, lo
there: for he said; Lo here is Christ in Protestancie: nay after; Lo, here is
Christ in the reformed Churches: nay, Lo, Christ is there at Amsterdam in
Brownisme: and lastly, Lo, now is Christ only Mat. 24. 23.
with him in Se-baptisme. He is clothed as a Sheep, but as Mat. 7. 15.
a Wolf scatters the Lambs. He it is, that climbeth into the Sheepfold
another way, as none ever did, and therefore John. 10. 1. 10.
is a Thief and a Robber: he steals away the people to destroy them. He
audaciously has, by attempting to plant 2. Cor. 11. 13.
a Church, transformed himself into the Apostle of Christ: And thus by his
pretending all holy duties to God, and a reformation of all corruptions in
Churches, Satan is changed into an Angel of light. For his applying of Mat.
24. 24. 25. to us, it shows as much his folly, as the other his blindness,
that saw not these places as pregnant proofs brought out for him against
himself.

The Book it self in which he makes answer to me, with his other Book of
differences among themselves set him out to the world: for therein he does
show much evil, far from that grace which he pretends.

First, A high Maister-sinne, the Pride of heart, in censuring The intolerable
pride of the man.
all Churches after his conceived opinions, in too boldly expounding Scriptures
after his private judging, in neglecting the witness of learned Divines, and
practice of the Godly, in rejecting by open proclamation the judgment In the
Epistle before his book of Differences.
of all men and Churches, which he calls, The not holding of their Faith at
any man's pleasure, or in respect of persons, and the not binding of themselves
to walk according to other men's lines: in daring to be like a John Baptist, or
an extraordinary man, in his new and unheard of attempts: in seelifying every
man's labor against him, or any man's judgment crossing his opinions, as he of
me says, bringing in Bezaes judgment, Alas for you, this is borrowed Page.
60. in his Answer.
stuff, (as if he scorned to take any man's advise) and then rejects it thus:
It is stark naught, froth and chafe, what has Oh the Humility of this man!
Wheat (so must his opinion be held) to do with chafe, as he esteems of
Bezaes judgment: and this his hie heart and proud spirit appears by these
usual terms: know you: understand you for your learning: know you for your
humiliation: thus he writes often in his Answer, and also in a controversy
between him and Mr. Clifton: for they two are also out: and so Mr. Robinson
stands singled from Mr. Clifton, and the rest with his company, all differing
one from another. So, to avoid corruption, they have fallen into Babell, an
oppinionate confusion.

Secondly, Wilfulness, that follows the former; he contentiously His wilful
obstinacy in error.
maintaining any thing against an opponent, though also he will renounce any
former opinion to be in a new way, but yet of his own mind; he defends, that
the spit whereon the meat for the Passover was roasted, was the Altar, and
withal makes the cross whereon Christ dyed the Altar: wherein he is a gross
Papist, and very absurd, and Mr. Perkins upon the Creed.
for his learning, let him know, that the Altar does sanctify Mat. 23. 9.
the Offering. Now then, did the Spit sanctify the Passover? or did the
wooden Cross sanctify Christ? was not the altar John. 17. 19.
his Godhead, by which he did sanctify himself? Privileges and properties
with him must be one without difference, because they agree generally in aliquo
tertio, they must therefore in special be one and the same; he that thinks
otherwise must be derided of him: his much Logic makes his followers, I will
not say himself, mad; as in his Book of Differences is manifest. Yea, he
can allow Barrowes outrages, raylings and evil speeches, partly under the name
of Scripture Page. 134.
phrases, partly by the example of Eliah and Esaias: and where the said Barrow
out-rayeth from the Scripture phrase; forsooth, he supposes, he knows not
what particular motion of the spirit guided him so to write: what hope is there
to reduce such spirits into the quiet way with other, or to bring them to
confess the errors and boisterous courses in themselves, when they will
suppose Gods spirit to be the author of such railing, from such intemperate
affections, and so distempered a brain?

Thirdly, A wretched or rather a damned conceit of us all, His cursed
Uncharitableness
as we stand visibly here in this public state of our Church, what profession
soever we make, or practice we perform.

To manifest this: as I set in my other Book, page 70. 71. Barrowes censure of
all sorts together unto the view of all: So will I here do Mr. Smiths
judgment of the Church of England, and all therein.

First, our Constitution (says he) is Antichristian: pa. 132. His Judgment of
our Constitution.
and a real Idol. page 11. and so a greater and more abominable Idol, then
any Idol that possibly can be in a true Church.

Secondly, we in the constitution are Idolaters: page 12. What we be in his
fond conceit.
for first, we have (says he) an Idol which we do worship, that is, a false
Christ, page 12. which he calls a false head, a fantastical Christ of our
own devising. page 87. Secondly, we have many Idols, by or in which we worship
Christ: first, a false Church: secondly, a false standing: thirdly, a false
Ministry: fourthly, an Idol Temple: fifthly, the Service Book: sixthly, all
Ecclesiastical Officers and Courts, Parishes, Holy Days, Crosses, Surplesses,
Priests and Deacons: so many Idols (says he) have we. Page 12. with Page 106.

Thirdly, all the People are false matter of a Church, His censure of the
People.
Page 88. the most part being the seed of the Serpent: Page 87. that he
cannot say visibly, certainly, and particularly, that any one has faith or
fear of God in the Churches of England: Page 108. and that we our selves
cannot prove to them certainly that we fear GOD. Page 110.

Fourthly, all our Assemblies are false Churches, and What he thinks of our
Assemblies.
without: Page 23. 83. monstrous bodies, knit together by the spirit of
Antichrist, and the spirit of Satan, unto the head Antichrist: Page 87.
remain in the gilfe of Antichristianisme: Page 84. they are not gathered
together by Baptism into the new Testament of Christ: they have a false
Mediator. Page 117.

Fifthly, our Profession is not the true Faith of Christ simply: His estimation
of our Profession.
Page 85. but the faith of Bishops, or Church of England: Page 117. and we
make profession of a false Mediator.

Sixthly, our Faith is false, devised and stinted. Page. 85. Faith.


Seauenthly, our Covenant with God is a false Covenant. Covenant.
Page, 85.

Eighthly, our Communion Antichristian: Page 132. and Communion.
therefore he likes not that they should be accounted brethren by us; and
says, he detests our Church, has in abomination our brotherhood, utterly
dislikes the brotherhood of the forwardest Preachers, and Professors, and
reiects the fraternity of such as be of us extraordinarily, the rest he
abiureth, Page 26. and abhors to call us Saints. Page 34.

Ninthly, our Worship false, Page 83. a literal stinted Worship.
Booke-worship, flat Iudaisme. Page 105.

Tenthly, our Baptism and Sacraments false. Page 85. Sacraments.
and 116.

Eleauenthly, our Ministers they are as truly in quality What account he
makes of our Ministers.
Antichristian Ministers, as the Romish be: Page, 81. and 46. false Ministers.
page. 83. They be Antichristian convinced Heretics: page 109. they convert
none to the true visible faith, taught in the new Testament of Christ: page 94.
but pervert men from it, page 81. to a false repentance, false Faith, false
Church, false Ministry, false Worship, false Government: Page 116. they
teach a false Mediator: Page 117. they baptize not into the New Testament of
Christ indefinitely and simply, but respectively and indefinitely into the
faith and doctrine which is taught in their stinted book of Articles: Page 85.
that they do challenge at the hands of them that are Infidels and unbelievers
tithes and offerings. Page 120. He says, he dare in the true fear of the
Lord, call the best of us all, a spiritual Thief and a robber: yea, a Wolf
that comes to kill, rob and to destroy. Page 101. And to conclude, that we
are the instruments of Satan, sent by the Lord in his wrath, to keep the
people in bondage, from the obedience of the Faith, taught in the new
testament: Page 95.

Twelfthly, touching our whole Church; that Christ is Of our whole Church.
not our King, Page 86. nor our Priest, nor our Prophet, page 87. that it
denies all Christ offices: Page 87. that in a manner it has rejected the
whole doctrine of Christ's kingdom: Page 91. that it is an Idol: Page 106. a
false Church, Page 106. Babylon, Egypt, Sodom, where the Lords people are held
captives, and that the having of the Word, Sacraments and conversion is, but as
the thief has the true man's pursse: and as the false Church of Jeroboam had,
and as the Samaritanes, the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, and the Ismaelites,
had Circumcision, and the Sacrifices by usurpation: Page 26. That the Faith,
Repentance, and Covenant of it is false, our Church false, the Ministry of it
false, the Worship false, the Baptism false, the Lords Supper false, all
false. Page 116. That the difference between us and them, is more then
between us and the Papists. Page 134. And lastly, that our Law does not
establish, the Prelates and Ministers do not teach, the Church of England does
not profess, the Baptiser does not intend, the Parents and Susceptors do not
consent to, and the Seruicebooke does not mention the Faith of Christ simply,
but the Faith of Bishops, or Church of England.

Fourthly, Perverseness of mind, and an ouerthwarting His perverseness of
Spirit.
spirit to cross the truth, and that diverse ways.

First, by strange and unheard of expositions, as Mat. 24. Strange expositions
of Scripture.
24. false Christ's must be false Churches, to maintain his opinion that our
Church is an Idol: because (says he) a false Church is a false Christ: So
John 10. 3. The Porter must be the Church, to cross in us the work of Gods
spirit. So he expounds many things in the Old Testament to overthrow this
truth, that the visible Church is visible of a mixed company against the truth.

Secondly, by Cauils: as Heb. 13. 17. being objected to Cauils.
prove that the Church is to obey her Pastors, and not the Pastors her: he
answers like a Cauiller thus; The Church must not yield to the voice of the
Elders in every thing that they list, Page 65. which no man affirms.
Obiecting the 1. Cor. 5. 3. For Saint Paul's Apostolical authority, which was
more then a Church, and more then all the Presbytery in giving the incestuous
man to Satan: and also, 2. Cor. 2. 6. to prove that all did not proceed
against him in rebukes: he auerteth the Readers understanding from what I say,
by cauilling and his idle imagination, and affirms that I say, tell the
Church, is sometime, tell the Elders: again, tell Saint Paul, and the Lord
Bishop, that one while I say, the Elders did excommunicate, and another while
Saint Paul like a Lord Bishop in his Court: whether I do so cross my self
(Reader) in this point, peruse my Book, see the particulars, and My Book Page
98.
the scope of alleging the places, 1. Cor. 5. 3. and 2. Cor. 2. 6 and out of
his absurd dealing with me, judge his handling of Scriptures.

He would yet tell the Reader, what I did in my study, when I wrote my sixth
reason, what books were before me: that I was then in wrath and choler
enraged, and so through ignorance knew not what I did. If there were no more
but this, here is sufficient to set out the pride, the folly and lewdness of
this man's spirit and purpose. Pride, in his so contemptible writing and
speaking of another. Folly, in telling what I did in England, and more
particularly what I did in my study, in setting down one reason in my Book:
whilst he in his study coined his new Baptism, to set that stamp upon his new
conceits, and whilst he so played the madling at Amsterdam. And Lewdness, in
shamelesly publishing his terms of reproach, out of mere imagination to
disgrace another: but here it is come to pass, that in what he would have
been held wise, he has showed himself rediculous, and by his folly exposed
himself to laughter.

Thirdly, By idle and very frivolous distinctions: as a Minister does convert
souls, not as a Pastor, but as a Teacher: as if a Pastor were not a Teacher,
when he says himself, they be one and the same office: here is absurdity and
forgetfulness, or Unstableness in judgment.

Fourthly, By most ridiculous absurd Absurd and and beastly similies.
similies, and one very beastly, by which he would set out our Church, from the
mingled seed of an Horse and an Ass in generation, producing a third thing,
but neither a true Horse, nor a true Ass: so is it (says he) where good and
bad persons are joined together: he mentions this two or three times, an
Horse and an Ass, an Horse and an Ass: some man (not I) might perhaps I
acknowledge him to have both more wit, and knowledge then grace to use them.
But better is Balaams Ass, avoiding the angels stroke, and reproouing her
master, then Balaam himself cursing Gods people.
stumble in reading, and by mistaking and contracting of an Horse and an Ass,
call him hastily, a Horsene-Asse.

Fifthly, By Crafty dealing.
craftily detaining from his Scholars, and from the view of the world, the
labors of certain Divines opposing him and his conceits, touching the mere
typical cleanness in the old Testament. He reproves others for not answering
his private letter, before publication of his errors: but he can spread his
heresy, and say nothing to the reasons against it, though he had them many
months before he made this answer unto me. He may pretend desire to see his
errors, and may profess his willingness to disclaim them, but this truly
shows to the contrary: for he writ under his answer to those Divines, If I
err, make me to understand mine error, I love the truth. They made a large
Reioynder, and writ in the end thus: We are well assured that you do err, God
make you able to see it, and preserve your soul from pride and obstinacy.
This their assuredness from their Reioynder he keeps secret, and yet holds
obstinately his opinion, and publishes also again without a confutation of
what they have said. But mark his subscription: If I err, (says he) make me
to understand mine error, I love the truth: but he says not that then he will
forsake his errors: the leaving out of this might tell them his mind, and
that their labor was but lost on him, and so is mine; but I write not to
satisfy his wilfulness, wherein I leave him, till, God remove him.

Sixthly, his judgment in somethings so strange, in some He holds opinions
strange, absurd, erroneous, heretical some, and Schismatic many.
other things absurd; in other erronions, if not heriticall, yet Schismatic:
which of these, either all or but some, the Reader will lay upon his judgment
for his conceits, I do not divine, but how justly I have thus written, his
opinions now by him holden, and here set down does declare. His opinions are to
be considered of, as he begun, and so has proceeded on hitherto. For the
orderly setting down of them.

First, As one disagreeing from us, and all reformed Mr. Smiths several
out-roads, and his difference of opinions in every one of them.
Churches, a Iohnsonean, that is, one agreeing with those of Mr. Johnson and
Mr. Ainsworths Assembly, by which discord from us, and all other Churches, he
became,

Mr. Smith, a Brownisticall Schismaticke.

Who in this standing, held that our Church was a false Church, our Ministry
a false Ministry, and what other opinions else, which I lay to their charge;
and Mr. Ainsworth In the separatists Schism.
maintains in his answer: and every other opinion held by the Separatists, he
embraced as the truths of God, as his letter shows.

Secondly, As differing in some points from the Brownists: for beside theirs,
he added more of his own, as in all those things, where Mr. Ainsworth, in
answering my Book, does leave him to answer for himself, as none of theirs,
by which his disagreement, he became,

Mr. Smith, a Separatisticall Erronist.

Who here in held.

1. That only Saints, that is, a people forsaking all known The opinions for
which Mr. Ainsworth disclaimeth Mr. Smith, as no true Separatist with them.
sins; of which they may be convinced, doing all the known will of God,
increasing and abiding therein, are the only matter in a visible Church.

2. That the power of binding and looseing is given to the whole Church, yea to
every one of them, and not to the principal members thereof.

3. That the sin of one man public and obstinately stood in, he being not
reformed, nor cast out, does so pollute the whole Congregation that none may
communicate with the same, in any of the holy things of God, though that Church
be rightly constituted, till the party so offending be excommunicate.

4. That Baptism here is not administered into the faith of Christ simply, but
into the faith of the Bishops, and Church of England.

5. That our faith and repentance is a false faith and repentance.

6. That Ministers converting men to God, do it not as Pastors, but as
teachers.

Thus Mr. Smith from the time of his first out-breake from us, kept no full
consort with them, to whom he seemed to conioyne, but was as a iarring string
to mar their music, and to make it, by Gods providence, at the length
untunable, that others might not be intised with the seeming melody thereof,
to the unskillful ear.

Thirdly, as one differing so far from the Separatists, as he would have no
communion with them, by which he became,

Mr. Smith The Schismatic Separatist.

Who then held,

1 In his Book of differences, see the Contents, and pages. Page 4.
That the reading out of a book is no part of spiritual worship, but the
invention of the man of sin.

2 That books and writings are in the nature of pictures or images, and
therefore in the nature of Ceremonies, and so by consequent, the reading of a
book is ceremonial: For as the Beast in the sacrifices of the old Testament
was ceremonial, so was the killing of the Beast ceremonial. Page 6.


3 That holy Scriptures are not to be retained as helps before the eyes in
time of Spiritual worship. Page 6.


4 That it is unlawful to have the book before the eyes in singing of a
Psalm. Page 24.


5 That the Presbytery of the Church is uniform, and that the triformed
Presbytery, consisting of three kinds, Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, is
none of Gods ordinance, but Antichristian, and the image of the Beast. Page 28.
of the Church treasure.


6. That the contribution of such as be without, (if they will give any thing)
must be separated from that which themselves give. Many things else in his Book
of differences are set down, which he taught in this Schismatic Separatisme.

Fourthly, As one falling to Anabaptisme, leaving all Churches for that way,
and entering thereinto by baptiseing of himself, whereby he is become,

Mr. Smith the Anabaptisticall Se-baptist.

The opinions at this present held of him (if he be not changed in this month,
since his book came over) may be gathered:

Partly by his strange Act, which shows:

First, That our Baptism, and that of the Reformed Churches, yea, and the
Baptism of the Separatists is false Baptism, because he was baptized again.

Secondly, that true Baptism was no where to be had lawfully: because he did
baptize himself.

Thirdly, that in this case he might baptize himself, and so his Church be a
pure Church, whence men may fetch true baptism, but lawfully belike no where
else. Woeful premises, miserable conclusion: error and arrogance void of true
charity.

Partly, by his answer unto me, wherein he teaches these things.

1 That most properly an Idol is contrary to any ordinance appointed by God in
matter of religion. page 11.

2 That a falsely constituted Church is a real political Idol. page 12.

3 That a falsely constituted Church, is a greater and more What, a greater and
more abomination, then the golden Calfe among the Israelites? or the
abominable Idols which Solomon set up for his strange wives?
abominable Idol, then any Idol that can possibly be in a true Church. page.
14.

4 That a false Ministry, Worship, and Government may be in a true Church,
but not a true Ministry, Worship and Government in a false Church. page. 14.
He sets out this by a Simile: A true man may have a wodden leg, and an eye of
glass: so a true Church, a false Ministry, Worship and Government. A wodden
man cannot have any truth of a man in him, but all in him is wodden; so a false
Church can have no thing true in it, page 15.

5 That a true Church is better then a true Worship, Ministry and Government;
and a false Church worse, then a false Worship, Ministry and Government. page
15.

6 That the visible Church truly constituted is the only kingdom of Christ.
page 16. and such as be not of it are no subjects of Christ's kingdom. page 15.

7 That the visible Church is not only the outward Communion, but especially
and chiefly the inward and spiritual fellowship, which the Saints have with
Christ, and one with another. page 21.

8 That true faith professed in the true Church, is not a thing invisible, but
visible and sensible. page 17.

9 That a man separated from false Churches, and professing the visible Faith
of the true Church, may be yet of it, though for corruption he hold it
unlawful to join unto it: And that a man may be of a true constituted Church,
and not of a particular constituted Church. page 17.

10 That hypocrites are no true members of the visible Church. page 28.

11 That such a one as may forsake all known sin, does all the known will
of God, grows in knowledge and grace, and continues to the end, may be an
Hypocrite, and before the Lord be damned. Page 28.

12 That Stephen was a true member of the visible church, but what Stephen was
in the Lords counsel does not appertain unto us. page 29.

13 That in the constitution of the Jewish Church, there was not required true
holiness. page 30. The heresy of Seruetus that Heretic.

14 That the worship of that Church began outward in the letter, and proceeded
inwardly to the spirit: ours begins at the spirit, and proceeds to the
letter. page 31. Their real or moral wickedness did not pollute their
visible Communion, but only ceremonial uncleanness. page 30. The sons of
Belial very vilde wicked men were visibly clean, then typically, they might
come to the holy things, and not pollute others. page 75. 74. Our moral and
spiritual uncleanness polluteth us visibly. They sacrificed and worshipped to
repentance; we from repentance: their Worship was reconciliation and
repentance to acceptance; but our Worship after repentance, reconciliation and
acceptance. page 30.

15 That in the time of the Law, a Saint was a Typical Saint; so an Hipocrite
was a Typical Hypocrite, and a wicked man was a Typical wicked man. page 30.

16 That the power of binding and loosing is given to Mary Magdalene and
Cleophas, jointly with the rest of Christ's Disciples, page 52. and by Disciples
he understands every brother. page 38.

17 That if the power of binding and loosing be not given to the whole
Multitude, but to the principal members, then he acknowledges the Church of
Rome to be a true Church, and to have a true Ministry, and that what he and
his, with all the Separatists hold, is Schism and Heresy. page 40.

18 That the acknowledging of our Ministers ordination, to be by the Romish
Bishops, is a justifying of Rome to be a true Church; their sacrificing
Priesthood a true Ministry; Orders a true Sacrament; their Mass to be a
true Propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and the dead, etc. page 45.

19 That the twelve were not Apostles, before the holy Ghost descended upon
them at Pentecost. Page. 55. 57.

20 That it may be a question, whether the Church, the multitude, may not
administer the Sacraments before there be officers among them. page 56.

21 That the Church, that is, the multitude, and not the Ministry, is the
true successor of the Apostles. page 57.

22 That Women and Youths may show their dissent in the public congregation in
election of Officers, or in excommunication: and (he says) that sometime
occasion may be, that the Church may consist only of Women. page 63.

23 That in the old Testament, the Magistrates were the utmost means for
reforming abuses, and if they neglected their duty, the people were not to
separate, but to depend upon the Lords redressing: but now the Saints are
answerable to the This is against his Majesty's Supremacy.
Kings then, and have the power Ecclesiastical in their hands, to reform the
abuses in the Church. pa. 76. I hope that his poor misled Scholars are not of
this judgment.

24 That whosoever does convert any from Antichristianisme, and establishes a
people in the true faith, performs that work, either as a Minister of
Antichrist, or as an Apostle, Prophet, Evangelist of Christ, or as a private
man. pa. 98.

25 That the Heart is the spiritual book of the New Testament. page 105.

26 That the letter was a type of the spirit. page 104.

27 That though we preach the true word, administer the true Sacraments, and
pray true Prayer, these cannot be true Worship, offered up unto God in a false
church. page 106.

28 That he which is chosen by good and bad, is no true Minister: page 110. and
yet that a mixed company may appoint one to preach the Word unto them. page 111.

29 That among the Antichristan Papists and Heretics, there is true conceived
prayer, preaching and thanksgiving. pa. 103.

30 That literal stinted Booke-worship is flat Iudaisme. page 105. These
interlaced opinions in his answer, scattered here and there occasionally,
leaving the principals in controversy, till I come to reply upon his answer,
I have set down, that this man's brain, a Smiths forge for casting new devises
and strange opinions, may be beholden, the ill use of his wit, and Satan's
abusing of him, as his instrument, to carry away seely souls, God knows
whither: but undoubtedly to ruin, except the Lords mercy prevent him; which I
heartily desire, partly for his own good, and also for the recovery of poor
Lambs scattered abroad, and taught still by him to wander and go astray. But
to proceed to more fruits of his spirit after the flesh.

Seventhly, his praising and lauding of themselves, with dispraise of others:
for he says;

That their Faith is visible, Repentance visible, their Charity visible, their
Spirit visible, so their Baptism, Preaching, Covenant and judgment are
visible, and so forth, page 118.

That they have foiled the Oxeford Doctors, Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Jacob, Mr.
Bredwell, and Mr. Giffard. page 124.

That the Prelates and Church of England has one Faith; the Puritanes and
their faction another; and Christ (says he) and They a third: thus he
slanderously makes a differing faith where it is not, and proudly affirms
Christ only to themselves, and secludeth others from him. page 116. If Christ
be only with them, and the faith of Christ, then only in their assembly, and
to be of them is salvation, and not otherwise; can the proud Antichristian
Church, or rather Sinagogue of Satan claim more, and boast more loftily
Lucifer-like? Weigh and give judgment. A worthy fruit of Brownisme: Is this a
spirit of temperance, or of fury?


Eighthly, and lastly, his vilde abusiue terms, his railing speeches, and lewd
belying of me. He lays to my charge, deep Hypocrisy, pretense of Zeal,
Inconstancy, Apostacy, blasphemous Uncharitableness, horrible Impiety,
Blasphemy, childish Ignorance and Folly, monstrous Fraud, abominable
Dissembling, shameless Lying, Arrogancy, Pride, and Ambition in my carriage,
boisterous and robustious Disposition, Perverseness of spirit. He tells me
of a bloody mind, that I hunt after their souls, that poison is under my
tongue, that I do raise up false expositions, wrack the text to support
Heresy, thereby making the Scriptures a leaden Rule to my crooked conceits,
and a nose of wax to be wrung, which way my perverse apprehension does incline.

He calls me in a base contempt, a sworn slave to the His Brownisticall
spirit, a Sathanicall railing. His Anabaptisticall Rhetoric.
Prelates, a pharisaicall hypocrite, in the indifferent judgment of those that
love me best, a wrangler; he attacheth me before the Lord, as a deceiuer of the
people, to be a most ignorant shameless peruerter, and false Interpreter of
the Scriptures, he terms me an ignorant Slaunderer, or subtle adversary to
do them hurt, touching their lives. He says I am strangely seduced by Satan;
he proclaims me (so he writes) to the whole Land, to be one of the most
fearful Apostates of the whole Nation, some few only excepted: he says, the
Devil is my father, and compares me to a Dog returned to his vomit, and a
Swine to his wallowing in the mire. And then concludes upon me and others,
that I am manifested by the Lord to be one, that has fulfilled the measure of
my iniquity, and that such as have bin enlightened with their way, and now do
quench it, shall grow from evil to worse, and shall have Gods hand against
them, so as every one shall say, the Lord is avenged on you.

He speaks against me most untruly in private matters touching a greedy
desire of livings: wherein I appeal to every honest heart that knows me, and
to those that are acquainted with the instances he gives. He says, that I
also approved their way: and yet he knows, that I gave him certain reasons
against the same, which he sent back without answer. For his expounding
Daniel, and the Speech of Naaman, so against me, he shows neither fear to
Godward, nor love to man. But to these by-matters in his Letter, have I made
answer at large: and before the printing of my former Book, had I it ready,
which yet I reserved to my self, as some know, thinking it to no purpose so to
contend with him, and supposing he would not have been so shameless, as to
set out to the world a private Letter of the private matters of such a nature,
and lies too. But says he, I did first publish his Letter; this is untrue: he
hereby would save his credit, and blame me, to keep himself from shame. My
Answer to his By-matter, in his Letter, is five sheets of Paper, too much here
to set down, but if any be desirous to see it, I will not now (as before) be
sparing of it. The matter of his Letter concerning his opinions I did publish,
as by them better understanding the Separatists errors, then before; which
opinions I thought fit to make known, and so rather to object against them,
for more evidence of truth, than withal to make answer to private reasons for
them, which might afterward be disclaimed, till the defense of them came
public, as now it is.

In one place of his book page 119 he accuses me of a disgraceful and
hateful intendement toward them, in not publishing their opinion touching
Magistrates, and thereupon blustereth out a Proclamation of Loyalty: saying,
that they and others are as faithful, as the best Prelate of England, and that
the more Pope-like they are, the more traiterous they will prove unto the
civil Magistrate, and if they be let alone, they with the Pope at the length
will take upon them: Petrus dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho: and cause the
Emperor to hold the stirrup, Thus can he not justify his own innocence
herein, if so be he be innocent, but he must needs wrongfully tax others in
a high degree of traiterous aspirings.

Sithen he has called me to speak in this matter, I confess in civil respect
he As a Brownist, but what he does now as an Anabaptist is to be in this point
inquired into.
gives to Princes all just due: but I say, all that he has said, gives them
no way, a cheiftie in causes Ecclesiastical, as a member of the Church, and
therein over it next under Christ, which is the matter between him and me: and
for this, Reader, examine his 23. position before mentioned, and thereby judge
to whom he gives kingly power in causes Ecclesiastical. If this bite, let him
blame himself for barking. I wish his followers to consider this, to prevent
the danger which must necessarily follow.

Thus have I, Reader, as in a glass, even out of his own works and words,
set before thee the spirit of Mr. Smith, not of malice, but of love to the
Seduced, to reduce them, to forewarne others of him, and if God will, that he
may see himself, if with patience he can but read these things. His
profession is to avoid all pollution, to flee all corruption, but his work
shows, that he understands it of others, and still remains corrupt in
himself. Let my former Book be searched through, and see whether I so deal
with him, so term him, so scorn him, so rail on him, as he here does of
me: if I do not, then judge of his pretended sanctity, by such fruit of
impiety. The Lord reduce him to a right way, and rebuke Satan that seeks to
devour.

If I happily, Reader, by occasion slip now and then in this Reply: by any
overthwart term, thou may blame me, but not much; think thou not that I
have just cause to be tart? He commends his sharpness to me as physical, to
vomit my choler, and to cast up ill humors, so he says: let it please him to
take my tartness in words, upon the like commendation, even for some sharp
effectual ingredients, to give him a purge for his loathsome opinions, which
make him sick to death, that so he may recover health, and return back from
Se-baptisme to Brownisme, from Brownisme to Reformatisme, and abide in
Protestancy: and what if he be a religious Conformitant, must he needs fall to
Papistrie? God forbid.

Mr. Smith, let me turn my speech unto you: remember your self, pity your
self in the Lord, if not your self, other poor and simple hearted Christians
miscarrying in judgment, undone in their outward estates through you. Consider
what discord is among you, how God in his justice has divided you, that you
are not of one heart among your selves, that you run on from all, to all, and
yet hold with none: is not this extreme singularity? but you glory in this your
great weakness, you esteem it your credit: Oh, let others judge of you, and
rest not in your good liking of your self. Think it as much credit to come
again to your old way, as you hold it credit to go on and on from one Sect to
another, you well know not whither. If you intend first to see all religions
(as a resolute trauailer) all countries, before you return, it is another
matter: yet I wish it otherwise, and you with us before, if not til then, yet
if then, though not before; we shall be glad to see it, and in the mean space
pray for it. Now to the reply.

A CONIOYNT REPLY both to Mr. Ainsworth, and to Mr. Smiths Answer unto my
Book, called the Separatists Schism.
The first Probability or Likelihood, that their way The first Likelihood,
that the way of the Separatists is not good.
of Separation is not good, nor to be approved, Is the novelty thereof,
differing from all the best Reformed Churches in Christendom.
IN my former Book, Page 21. First I show, why I made this my first
Probability, whereto Mr. Ainsworth says nothing: he happily thought my words
idle, as his own be, and that I did run into by-matter, when he either does
not, or will not understand me. This Likelihood, I set down to prevent, what I
observed, did endammage the Why this Likelihood was propounded.
misleading of the people. Mr. Smith and others, urged the Reformation in other
Churches, and lay that as a bait to catch seely fishes, and went about to
persuade the people, that the way of the Separation, and other Churches
reformation was all one; which is untrue. Which if it had so been,
nevertheless the Separation from us is not good. First, says Mr. Smith, now
they be unnatural children for His Book of differences and Charecter.
their Separation, and their way also an Antichristian way. Secondly, It is
plain that the Scripture teaches no Separation from a true Church, with
condemnation of it, as a false Church. Thirdly, no example in Scripture given
of any separating from true Churches for corruptions; but either for gross
Idolatry, visible Pictures set up to be worshipped, as among the Israelites;
or for open blasphemy against Christ's very Person. Act. 19. 9.


Secondly, I showed how their way was Novelty, in differing How the
Separatists way is novelty.
not only from us, but also from all reformed Churches, to set forth that
singular difference was the drift of my whole book, as also to show that that
singularity is Novelty: which scope, both those Answerers either not
perceiving, The Scope of my former Book.
or not regarding (albeit in the Epistle to the Reader, I admonished them of
it,) they trifle in answering: Mr. Ainsworth also beating withal and hammering
upon his old They dare not set out their singular course by it self, but
ouershadowes it with other things to deceive the simple.
staff, which I purposely avoided, to bring them to give answer unto the
singularity of their way, differing from other Churches as well as from ours,
that so the newness of their way, might be of all discerned plainly.

Thirdly, I proved that they They differ from all the reformed Churches.
differed from the reformed churches: first, by not joining with them:
secondly, by Barrows railing on their manner of government, and he also
approved herein by these Brownists now living: thirdly, I also add the
Excommunicating of such as go but to hear sometime the Ministers of the
reformed Churches, if they were so minded to continue. To this Mr. Ainsworth
says little: Mr. Smith (who deceived the people with a pretending of agreement
with Reformed Churches) nothing at all.

Lastly, I concluded therefore this section from the first It is leuitie,
dangerous and proud presumption, hastily to entertain that way.
probability, that it was both Leuitie, dangerous, and proud Presumption to
entertain that way so suddenly, as they do which go into it: the reasons of
all three are set down: of which these two Answerers speak not a word. If
this be to Answer soundly, and thou Reader, so judge, I do commend thee over
to Brownisme, as one fitter to run of affection, then guided by judgment, to
do what thou do with laudable discretion. These two Champions mock at my
likelihoods; but ere I conclude, they shall find them of more moment, then to
be laughed out of countenance, and hereby themselves caused to change color
with shame of their own folly.

A Reply to Mr. Ainsworths Answer to Page 153.
this first Probability.


If such likelihoods as these have been objected by the Papists, against the
Church of England: and the Heathen enemies the like against the Church of
Christ, with as much color and truth, as now these same be objected against
them, then are all the likelihoods unlikely.

But the former is true, to wit, the Papists and Heathen obiecting the like
likelihoods, the one against the Church of England; the other against the
Church of Christ, and with as much color and truth as these be objected
against them. Therefore are all my likelihoods unlikely.

Mayor follows not, except the likelihoods be all one: it is not enough to
have such like, but the same: for things not the same, but like, are not so
every way like, but that there is some difference to discern one from another,
which difference may force a differing conclusion.

The Minor is most false, and set down without any proof from him: In this he
justifies the wicked words of Heathenish and of Antichristian enemies against
the Church of Christ, against his Mother, to grace him and themselves for
strength in error. Had the Heathen as much color and truth, to condemn
Christ's Church, and the Papists us of Nouel^ie, Schism, etc. as we have herein
to condemn you? Mr Ainsworth either bring good proof for this, else men will
condemn you as foolish and forlorn, and that deservedly.

Secondly, he answers particularly to the Likelihoode after his discoursing
manner, and would free themselves from Novelty.

First, because Kelison the Papist, would bring the Reformed His first reason
why their way is not Nouelty.
Churches within the compass of Novelty, which they seek to remove by
looking for antiquity by the Scriptures.

Though the Papists cannot justly condemn us of Novelty, yet may we condemn
these Separatists of Novelty.
our antiquity, then do they the same also. This consequence rests yet to be
proved by Mr. Ainsworth. Will it follow because we can free our selves from
Novelty against the Papists, (between whom and us, is evident matters of
difference plainly recorded in Scripture, and wherein we with the Reformed
Churches, do accord fully against them) that therefore the Separatists can
acquit themselves of Novelty, whose conceits (wherein they differ from
Reformed Churches, in this matter of Separation) are strange from the
Scriptures, and unheard of in Orthodoxall Churches? Let him defend the
singularity of their way from reformed Churches, and their own so standing
from Novelty, and Mr. Ainsworths tax to be performed.
then does he write to the purpose: but herein is he and all of them mute; he
thought belike that the very naming of Scriptures would manage their
Separation, and fray the simple from condemning them of Novelty.

Secondly, (says he) If it be Novelty to differ from the reformed His second
reason.
churches, then the Church of England is to be blamed, because it differs in
many things from them, etc.



Secondly, I do not mean, that to differ in some or more things, any way from
the reformed Churches, (as it seems he takes my words) is matter of
Novelty, but first, such What differences make Novelty.
differences, as the word does not warrant, neither any Orthodoxall Churches
have ever practiced, nor any approved Histories made mention of, in and from
the Apostles times hitherto: but have been only among Schismatickes, these
differences are Novelty: such are not our differences from Only Schismatickes
have so separated themselves from churches, as these do from us.
the reformed Churches: but yours (Mr. Ainsworth.) Show us, what approved true
Church of God ever used your course of Separation, from such Churches as you
separate from, for the same causes: bring forth your Records and Stories of
times for it: if you attempt it, you shall find your selves of kin to
Lucifer, Donatus, Andius, Schismatics first, and afterward Heretics: if you
boast of Scripture it is vain boasting, for it helps you not; it approves a
Separation, but not your Separation upon such grounds, as you forsake now all
Churches for: If you have faith in this point, and truth in you at all, quote
any practical place of example for Separation, and let the world see, if you
be able to show it, your separating from all Churches now, only so, and no
otherwise; if you cannot manifest this, cease to trouble Gods Churches with
your Novelty any longer. Again, I understand such differences, as unjustly
cause the Authors thereof, to make a division from the Churches of God, to rend
in sunder brotherhood from the true people of God. But such is not our
differences with reformed Churches, for they do acknowledge us Brethren, and
do give us the right hand of fellowship, as a true Church of God with them,
they account not us either Antichristian, or false Churches, but we hear
them: and they us, as occasion serves in the several congregations.

Yea, which is more, Reverend Beza, and Learned Sadel, In their Epistle to the
Lord Archbishop. September. 15. Anno. 1589. Letter. Mar. 8. Anno. 1591.
do give our chief Church Governors honorable titles, and style the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury thus: To the most reverend man and Father in Christ,
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Counselor to the Queens Majesty, Primate
of all England. And Beza says thus to him, my Reverend Lord, and speaks much
to clear him, and the whole Church with him, of suspicion of arrogancy, as
he calls it, if they should account otherwise of them (he means our
Bishops) then their godliness, and dignity, and mutual brotherhood does
require, so far off is that Church of Geneua, from making division from us,
for this cause for which the Separatists so much condemn us.

In the conclusion of his answer to this first Probability, His Answer.
he blames me for standing upon the hard words which some of them have uttered
against the Presbiterie, and tells me, (if I had not a partial and evil eye) I
might have seen many more hard, and reproachful terms used by some of us
against the same, etc.



If the Church of England be in some things Nouelists, and See the vanity of
his own reason.
some of them do give hard words of the Presbiterie, and accuse us to be
Nouelists and Reprochers of the Presbiterie: then are we no Nouelists nor
Reprochers of the Presbytery.

But (says he) in some things the Church of England are Nouelists: and some of
them use Railing speeches against the Presbytery.

Therefore are we no Nouelists, nor Railers of the Presbytery.

Our Church uses no railing speeches against the Presbiterie, but those of
most eminent note among us who have written against it, use reverend speeches
of the chief supporters thereof, and if any particular persons of our Church
have been over sharp in their inuectiues against the Presbyterians, I am not
to justify every particular man's proceeding herein.

I acknowledge Reproachful terms become none, the devil may not be rayled
upon: and therefore Mr. Barrowes outrage herein is detestable, though you
cannot find him worthy of reproof: and yet does he rail upon the
Presbyterians. You approve the Reformed Churches constitution, you will be
also in it, pretend it to the simple, and yet rail upon them, and speak evil
of that you allow, because every way they square not to your Rule. Your weapon
still sticks (Mr. Ainsworth) in your own bowels: all you have said, has not
pulled out of your sides yet my thrown dart of Probability, that your way is
Novelty.

A Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer to Page 125.
this first Likelihood.
THis man in his answer to them, frames forms of my supposed Reasoning,
only to make my Likelihood (to the simple Reader) frivolous, but he neither
frames my Arguments right, neither overthrows them, whilst he would show in
me folly, he very much therein befooleth himself. He frames my first
Likelihood thus:

Novelty is not the truth: the Separation is Novelty. Ergo not the truth.

Mayor for granted, as he may well, for all divine truth is Antiquity: though
for the manifestation of some particulars thereof it may seem to be new.

The Minor he would deny, for that I might so condemn (says he) Luther and
Caluins opinions, because they were new, and so commend Popery, which had a
thousand years prescription against Calvin.

But his consequence follows not, and it is also untrue which he says, that
Caluins opinions were new. For Hystories show, that the Protestants opinions
have been maintained from time to time against the Papists, till Luthers
days, and the prescription of a thousand years, were only the dark time of
Antichristianisme, ouershadowing the clear light of Caluins, or rather Gods
truth, which shone in the Churches Apostolical, and in the times after, till
Antichrist arose and prevailed.

Again he erreth; First, in making new opinions and Novelties New, and
Novelty, are not one.
all one, when Opinions may be called new, in respect either of late
manifestation, or recalling of them again to mind, which were utterly
forgotten, and yet be ancient truths: but Novelty is never truth, as ever
contrary to true Antiquity.

Secondly, by supposing that I take Novelty to be the publishing of true
opinions a fresh, after they have some long time been hid, which is far from my
thought. But Novelty is that, which is contrary to the truth, and true
Antiquity, where and whenever it be set abroach: and this I affirm their
way to be, and thus I frame the reason: The Separatists way is Novelty.


That which is contrary to the truth and true Antiquity, is Novelty. But the
singular way of the Separatists, from all the Churches, is contrary to truth
and true Antiquity. And therefore it is Novelty. The Minor will appear to be
true, if men will weed out their differing way from all Churches, and show that
way distinctly from the same, and try it by Scripture, and true Antiquities,
they shall find it not practiced in, or by any true Church of God. And thus we
see that his framed Reason is against himself, though he made it against me,
and to show therein my simplicity, which he says he pitieth in me. But in
deed he frames not my Reason aright, as every understanding Reader shall
judge, which therefore I thus set down: And let me see what both the former
Separatist, and this strange Se-baptist, Se-baptist.
withal their best Associats, can say to the same.

Such a Novelty divised in divine matters, as causes a difference from all
the best Reformed Churches in Christendom, is likely not to be the good way of
God.

But the way of the Separation, is such a Novelty as causes a difference from
all the best Reformed Churches in Christendom.

And therefore the way is likely not to be the good way of God.

That it is a Likelihood cannot be denied. First, because Likely reasons that
their way is Novelty.
New ways from all Churches, are a probable conjecture of affected
singularity, and also contempt of other Churches, and therefore likely not to
be good. Secondly, because the holy Scripture commends the good way of God,
from the Antiquity of it, to be the old way. Ier. 6. 16. Deuteronomy. 32. 7. And
therefore a new course from all other, affords a likelihood against it not to
be the good way. Thirdly, because the word commends to us the custom of Gods
Churches. 1. Cor. 11. 16. and therefore it is a Likelihood, that a new way
which overthrows the Custom, and breaks peace with all Gods Churches is not
the good way. Can it be less than a Likelihood to be in a new differing way
from all? The Minor is granted of them, and proved here before, and in my
other Book against them. Is it not likely then that their way is not the good
way of God?

Now Mr. Smith, pity not me, but lament your own instabilitie and folly. Make
hereafter your own Arguments, let me frame mine own. Your labor shall be
rewarded with small thanks at my hand. You offer me a counterfeit weapon, and
too blunt to cut: give me leave to make mine own, I can set an edge upon it to
smite with, though you think far otherwise. Be not too highly conceited of
your self, yield to truth, and study to be quiet, and endeavor as much to see
your own errors in running on, as you gave your self to find out corruptions
whilst you were here: be indifferent, and we doubt not of your return from
your self, as some now be returned from you: blessed be God.

The second Likelihood.
THeir way singled from all Churches agrees so much with The second Likelihood
of the evil of their way.
the Ancient Schismatickes, condemned in former ages, by holy and learned men.

This is set down in my other Book: and I showed, first, The sum of that
which is in my former
what Ancient Schismatickes I meant: secondly, by way of prevention, I showed
the good things in those Schismatics, by which they were not inferior, to
these now, in any commendable Book touching this likelihood. Page 24.
good in them. Thirdly, I noted wherein they were Schismatics, not in their
Heresies, the fruit of their Shisme, whereinto they after fell, but for
separating themselves from true Churches, with condemnation for some
corruptions, and holding themselves the only pure Churches: So through pride,
contention, and hatred of other men, without charity, and meekness of spirit
they, as these do now, upon the same causes, brake out from all Churches, and
became Schismatickes. Herein have I showed that their Schism did stand in my
former Book.

Reply to Mr. Ainsworths Answer to this.
Page 155.
Gifford in the margent to prove it. This Doctor cannot see the wood for the
trees, this which I have said may now show it him. I cannot write against him a
Book, and find him eyes too, to see into it. Was it his ignorance or
carelessness, or both? he despised my labor, and therefore he ouersaw, what
others may see there plainly set down. That which was first set down by way
of prevention, darkened his sight, that he beheld not the rest following, nor
answered the first. Yet if he think that my reasons prove them no
Schismatickes, or that the Ancient Schismatickes were not such, for the
forenamed causes; let them, to clear this point, set down truly by the
Word, what is properly a Schism in the Church: who are Shismatickes: wherein
was the Schism of former Schismatics: and why the Ancient Churches did
condemn And us, Donatus, and others for Schismatickes. Epiphanius does speak
otherwise Here Is. 70.
much good of Andius, to be one upright in life, in faith, and full of zeal
toward God, and yet held a Schismaticke. So Optatus, speaking of Donatists,
says; we believe and Lib. 3.
teach the same things, we are baptized, and do baptize after one sort; yet
for dividing themselves from other churches were Schismatikes: from whose
judgment I thus reason:

Those, though otherwise never so godly, that separate from Who are
Schismatickes by the judgment of ancient Churches.
true Churches, like Nouatus and Lucifer, for a stricter course of discipline;
like Donatus for some bad ones in the Church, as they supposed; like Andius for
some lesser corruptions and abuses, they be Schismatickes. This is the
judgment of ancient Book transl. page 35.
Churches, for which see at large, Morneus, de Ecclesia.

But our late Separatists do divide themselves from us upon like grounds: for
a more strickt discipline with Nouatus, and Lucifer; for that good and bad are
mixed together, with Donatus; and from lesser corruptions among us with Andius.
Therefore are these also Schismatickes.

This is also learned Zanchius Judgment, and Saint Augustines Zanch. lib. de
Ecclesia.
opinion is, that they who do break the bond of Fellowship are Schismatickes.
Zanchie fetteth down what a In Esai cap 2. ver. 3 page 119. 120.
Schism is, where are Schismatickes, with the reasons they pretend, as just
causes of separation, and thus he writes:

There is (says he) a departing and falling away in Charity, and the Simbols
of Charity, that is, in the receiving of the Sacraments, partaking of public
Prayers, in the collection of the Alms of the Church, and other such like
Ecclesiastical exercises; to wit, when any man, albeit he does agree with the
rest of the Church of Christ, in the chief heads of Christian doctrine,
nevertheless I know not for what light causes (says he) he with-draweth
himself from the rest of the Church, will not communicate with it in the
Sacraments. Such are called (says he) by a proper word, Schismatics, and such
a departure What Schism is.
Schism, as one should say, a cutting off, (...): for that they cut in sunder
the unity of the Church, by this their departing, and as also, says
Augustine, under the color of faith, they break in sunder the bond of
fellowship.

The causes (says he) which Schismatickes pretend when Page. 121. 122. Five
causes pretended for Separation by Schismatics.
they withdraw themselves from the communion of the Church, are five: Some
difference in doctrine; variety of Ceremonies and Rites; some vices of the
Ministers; the more lewd life of them that live in the Church; and the coming
of all sorts, hand over head, to the Supper of the Lord: all which he proves
to be no lawful causes to forsake a Church of Christ, from the page 122. to
133. And lest any should object the want of Ecclesiastical discipline in a
Church to be a sufficient cause to make a Separation, in Page 224. he says:

Though Princes and Magistrates will not let Ecclesiastical discipline be
restored into the Churches under them, yet may not we forsake that Church for
that cause: Read this worthy learned man: he may give any man, not wilfully
fore-stalled, sufficient satisfaction; he does not only give barely his
judgment, but sets down his reasons, and answers objections. For this see
also Caluins judgment in his Institutions. lib. 4. and on Psalm 26. 5.

Ainsworth says, that this Likelihood is an objection of the Papists; and
look what we can say for our selves against the Papists in this Point, the
same also will as well, if not better, clear them against us.

the Romish Sinagogue of Satan, but that the same will clear them as well, if
not better, for separating from us. A pitiful Doctor truly, that belieueth
and teaches his Scholars in this sort. But let him know, and all his
associats, that we forsake not the Church of Rome, for that they are not in a
true Constitution, or for external Government, We forsake not Rome for the
same causes, for which the Separatists do forsake us.
simply considered, or for some light Ceremonies, or for set Prayer, and for
the Church maintenance by Tithes, or for commixture of bad with good, or for
defects of a Church not fundamental, or for corruptions of a less nature, as
these men do from us, without all warrant from the word: Except they will with
Mr. Smith, expound the old Testament after his fantasy, and so become
Anabaptists.

But we leave (as the Levites did the ten Tribes in Ieroboams Why we depart
from the Church of Rome.
time) the Church of Rome: first, because the head of that Church, is the very
grand Antichrist, the man of sin. Secondly, because it has a false word, for
Canon of faith; their forged unwritten verities, and humane traditions,
equalized with the holy Scriptures. Thirdly, because they have not, neither do
allow the Word of God so much as to be read in a known tongue, or to be had
privately so in the peoples hands. Fourthly, because they make Ecclesiastical
Laws, and impose them as the divine pleasure and will of God, upon men's
consciences, to be done, as true worship to God. Fifthly, because they have many
false Sacraments. Sixthly, because they do commit gross Idolatry to stocks and
stones, their worship is all in an unknown tongue. Seauenthly, because they do
teach most damnable Heresies, as necessary doctrines of faith and salvation,
of which see for many Doctor Willets Sinopsis, and for one and twenty specials
in Mr. Parkins Reformed Catholic. Not one of these in our Church, but all of
them, are detested in word and deed, as all of the Devil, and his grand Son,
the man of sin, Antichrist, and are all evidently and plainly condemned of
us, as being against Gods word in the old and new Testament.

Now (Mr. Ainsworth) if these will as well, or better, clear you from
Schismatic Separating from them, as they do us, in just Separating from
them, then must you prove these self same to be in our Churches, for which
Mr. Ainsworth, an intolerable abuser of the Church of England, except he can
prove what he says.
you so depart from us, else have you in this your answer spoken very
unadvisedly, I might truly, say, most slanderously. If you attempt to make
the seely Creatures misled by you, to believe that either these or the like in
equal Evil, is in our Church maintained and practiced, thereby to maintain
your Separation, as lawful from us, as ours is from Rome, you are worthy of
that which you deserve.

Thirdly, and lastly in his Answer, as he foolishly would clear himself from
Schism, by our Chuches departure from Rome: so would he make me a Schismaticke
in the Church of England. He blames me in his first Fore-speech, as one rather
offensive to others, then defensive for our selves, and what is he (judge
Reader) in his Answer to these Probabilities? does he clear himself from
Schism? or does he not only rather seek to make others as bad as himself?
He is a miserable Physician, that would suck out like corruption (if any such
were) from others, as he and his are infected with all, to cure themselves.
What if our Church were in Schism, and my self a Schismaticke? to find us
out to be like himself, is he and his the less sinful? but the folly of
such Reasoning in this Doctor is before discovered.

Touching the Covenant pretended, so he calleh it, because he understands,
that it was not for them: thus may I say: Mr. Smith taught, that a true Church
should make a We are a people in covenant with God, and have renewed our
covenant also.
covenant with God, and when they fall, renew the same again: he denied us so
to have done, but I showed the contrary. As first, that we had couenanted all
of us by Baptism, when we were thereby received into the Church. This
covenant, after we were come to years of discretion, and admitted to the other
Sacrament, we did renew, and still so do, at that time, which is manifest from
the order established The Book of Common prayer sets down an orderly and
an Apostolical proceeding to receive the Lords Supper.
in the Administration of the Lords Supper; wherein three things are performed.
First, an Exhortation is made by the Minister, to the Congregation to repent of
sin, to bewail their estate: if any have done amiss in any thing, he
forewarneth them not to come to that holy Table. Secondly, the Minister
inuiteth the repentant, whose properties he sets down, and how they ought
to come: Namely, first, with true and earnest Repentance toward God: secondly,
with love and Charity toward their neighbors: thirdly, with an intent to
lead a new life, following the commandments of Almighty God: and fourthly,
with a purpose from thence forth to walk in his holy ways. Thirdly after all this, the people freely do offer themselves and do make a general Confession
voluntarily, with one voice and consent: in which, they first do confess their
sin: secondly, crave pardon: thirdly profess amendment, with a desire to
continue in well doing ever after; whence I thus Reason:

The Churches which voluntarily, after admonition given, The reason framed to
prove our Covenant renewed with God.
do come, and make open confession of sin, crave pardon; promise amendment
ever after: they do visibly renew their covenant with God.

I say visibly, for who at that time can judge the heart, but God alone? And
what is the renewing of the Covenant What is the renewing of the covenant.
with God, but this? viz. the acknowledgement of sin after the offense
committed, craving of pardon, and promising amendment? the performance of the
thing after, is the declaration of the truth thereof, which for the present is
not seen.

But our Parish Churches, both have done, and do so, even as often as they do
receive the Lords Supper.

The Proof of this is our common practice, set down in the Common prayer
Book.

And therefore our Parish Churches, have reneued their Covenant with God. And
then these of the Separation for want of this, cannot condemn us: as I did
show at the receiving of the Sacrament, upon the occasion before named: and this
is that covenant pretended, says he, and not intended, say I, at all to
further them; whatsoever some ignorantly, other maliciously, have imagined to
the contrary. I expounded the words of the Book, declared plainly our former
practice, and our present purpose to be a Renewing of our covenant with God.
Which Mr. Smith not perceiving and denying, did take advantage to lead away
the people, which by the manifesting of this covenant with an earnest
Exhortation thereupon, I endeavored to prevent, as it has so rightly fallen
out, since then:

Some will peradventure object and say:

Obection 1. That the Minister does speak the words.

Answer. And so do the people after the Minister, and do say thereunto, Amen:
which is a consent to what the Minister speaks; also the Minister is their
mouth unto God in Prayer, Esdr. 9. as he is Gods mouth to them in Preaching.

Objection 2. That is made in general of all, and not in particular of every
one, with particular mention of their sins.

Answer. 1. A general Confession of a particular person is acceptable, as
David's was, then much more the general Confession of a whole Congregation. 2.
Let them show an example of a whole Church together making particular
Confession of the sins of particular persons, or any commandment so to do
in the Churches, in the renewing of their covenant with God.

Objection. 3. Perhaps they will say, that all this is done in our Assemblies
upon a Book.

Answer. 1. The Minister reads upon a Book, but the people receive his words
by voice into their minds, and from their inward apprehension give consent to
the Minister confessing, praying and promising for them, and they for
themselves, by saying the words and answering Amen. 2. Though it be in part
from a Book, this makes it not, either to be no Confession, Prayer, and
Promise, or false, so it be with understanding, agreeable to the word of God,
for the matter, and done from the heart. 3. To the people it is all one to
hear their Minister pray from the Book, as from his brain. For it is the
matter agreeing to the words rightly conceived, and in heart affected, which
makes the thing to be approved of God, and not words uttered by the Ministers
mouth, from either his own invention, or a Book by the Churches appointment.

Objection. 4. And lastly, If exception be taken but against this, because it is
in part from a Book:



To conclude this with Mr. Ainsworth, his alleging of Canons, is as his and
their quoting of Scriptures, brought out to condemn others, but prove directly
against themselves. For Mr. Ainsworth and his Company separate themselves from
the Communion of Saints: he and they combine in a new brotherhood: he and
they account the Christians, who are conformable to the Doctrine, Government
etc. of the Church of England, to be profane and unmeet to be joined with in
Christian Profession, so do not we here that remain with our Mother the
Church of England.

A Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer to this second Likelihood or Probability.
MAster Smith frames my Argument thus: They that Mr. Smiths answer, page 126.
in some things agree with ancient Heretics and Schismatickes, are Heretics
and Schismatickes.

The Seperatists do agree in some things with ancient Heretics and
Schismatickes. Therefore they are such, etc.



And by this Argument may Mr. Smith prove himself a Jew, a Turk, a Papist, a
Brownist, an Heretic: for in some things he agrees with them all, and with
Arrians and Familists his next neighbors in his Anabaptisme. The Argument he
reiects as vain and light, and so do I; if it be vain as it is, let the
vain framer of it take it to himself, mine it is not. This second likelihood
I thus form: whereto let him answer.

They that differ from all the best Reformed Churches of A likelihood framed
into the form of reasoning, to prove them probably to be Schismatickes.
Christ, and in that difference agree with, and walk in the steps of ancient
Schismatickes, it is very likely they be Schismatics.

But the Separatists differ from all the best reformed churches, and in that
difference agree with, and walk in the steps of ancient Schismatickes. Ergo,
it is very probable they of the Separation be Schismatickes. The first part
needs no proof: their so walking can be no less then a Probability. The
Minor is evident: first, that they differ from Reformed Churches, and secondly,
in that Separation are agreeable to the Ancient Schismatickes, as is before
declared in this Reply to Mr. Ainsworth: and therefore the Conclusion follows
necessarily.

The third Likelihood.
THey in so bad a manner defend their cause, as it cannot The third
probability.
likely be the truth: first, by strange expositions, because they be so
differing from the general and constant The sum of that which is in my
former Book. Page 25. 30.
opinions of Divines both old and new. Secondly, by impertinent allegations,
pulling and writhing the Text of Scriptures to their purposes, which in my
former Page 26.
book, I have showed to be done four manner of ways, necessary to be
observed of such as would see their deceit in their allegations. Thirdly, by
Sophistical conclusions, deducting upon a false ground one thing out of
another, inferring this thing upon that thing: by which they lead the simple
into a labirynth, out of the which they cannot wind themselves, but run
farther into errors and Sects of Religion, from Brownisme to Anabaptisme, from
this to Familisme; one Sect concluding for the grounds of another, as
manifestly appears among them at this day.

Reply to Mr. Ainsworths Answer to Page 156.
this third Likelihood.
IF it were not to show this man's folly, and to lay open to my own people his
vanity, with the falsehood used in answering, I would cease to make Reply unto
him, but would let giddy heads run, that would with such an answer be
carried away. In this Answer he abuses intollerably Mr. Ainsworths idle
Answer unworthy of Answer.
the unadvised Reader, that compares not my Book and his answer together.
First, he changes my Probability in the Text, and takes the Marginall Note:
see and read both. Secondly, he passes over my three proofs of the
Likelihood; the Exposition of the first Proof, the second wholly, and the
third; also the four ways plainly laid down, showing how they do abuse the
Scripture: of which not one word, but he snatcheth at two Instances given.
Reader, I pray thee read, observe well and judge. In his Answer he is as idle,
as deceitful in his ouer-skipping of my reasons. First, says he, I walk in
the Papists steps, which is idly repeated of him now three times. It seems
this man thinks every thing to be hateful and to be avoided, which the
Papists do, we may not eat, wear clothes, we may not reason in that form,
and also use those Arguments truly, which the Papists use Sophistically and
falsely. He is much beholden to the Papists, for I see not how he could have
made answer to my Likelihoods but for them. If it See Osiander against
Anabaptists.
be ill for us to use Papists arguments, why do they the arguments of the
Anabaptists. I say they use strange expositions, which also I have declared in
my former book, to be such as are contrary to the general and constant
opinions of Divines, Orthodoxall Writers, such as the Church of God never
received: the instances I omitted, but showed that they were confuted by many
under hand writing, and were in the hands of Mr. Smith, whom I expected should
have been the first Answerer to my Book. Besides this Answerer and his
Fellow, is by one challenged for this point, and twenty Positions set down,
which are in some of their hands, this I avouch in my Book; besides Doctor
Allysons book against them. To all he answers, that those to whom their
expositions seem strange, are (says he) themselves strangers from God:
Alluding to Ephesians. 2. 12. as it seems: whether so or not, this is an accursed
proud speech. It is most uncharitable so to censure all, not approving their
expositions: it is high arrogance to appropriate such singularity to
themselves in expounding, as who so hold them strange, are strangers from God,
that is, without Who are strangers from God.
the true God, without Christ, hopeless of heaven; for such are strangers from
God. He leaves to the Godly wise, to discern of their expositions; and so
do I his Answer here, except he mean by his Godly wise, such as be of his
own stamp, as I suspect.

My instance given Acts. 20. 21. he first Cauils at, suspecting my faithful
dealing in citing it truly, as one does allege it: but the place is a proof
to an answer made to a question in a Catechism of Mr. Cliftons; whom in
pity and love to his person I was loath to name: and yet sorrowing for him,
whom I truly and entirely loved in our way, as a man devoted to God, and every
way worthy of love, for his unreprovable life and conversation: I have dealt
truly with his labor herein, as the place with question and answer compared
does show. Let this uncharitable Answerer suspect and suppose what he pleases.

Secondly, he falls from the matter into a by-point, and would prove that we,
whom he in contempt calls Priests, teach not all the truth of God in England,
by our practice, and by our Laws and Canons. He finds fault with me, but
not understanding me, for impertinent discourses, but who does roue now? I do
prove that they do misalledge Scripture: he takes occasion from the Scripture
to tell us that we teach not all the truth of God. When this is the question
between us, he shall receive an answer from us fully: this now shall suffice,
I say that we do teach all Gods truth known to us, if he mean their
conceits, we do no^ teach them, we approve not them for truths.

Thirdly, he runs upon us for misalledging Scripture, by which, as is
showed before in another case, he respects not to grant themselves abusers
of Scripture, so that they may have companions in evil. He referres the
Reader over in some other things, to the former Treatise, The former Treatise
is an answer of his to Mr. Spr.
and so do I, there to receive his answer.

To the places by me brought forth in my Book, page 82. which he cauils at in
his book, Page 167. I answer, that first, he confuteth them not, but does
ask a question, why Page 158.
he may not misalledge Scripture out of the Psalm. 106. 39. Ierem. 23. 15. 21.
against us, which are misalledged? to which I say he may not: albeit I had
mistaken any place, he may not do wickedly, because others do ill.
Perverting of Scripture is great impiety against God: Is this a Doctor to ask
such a question? Secondly; he changes in the end my position, which he first
rightly set down, and for which the places were brought; I say we are Gods
people, We are Gods people.
and I prove it: first, because he has given us his word and wrought
effectually by the same, and by that effectualnes of the word in converting, I
say it is the voice of the Son of God: for all which I quote Psalm. 147. 19.
20. Ier. 23. 22. John. 5. 25.

Now he would make the Reader believe, that I say, that England has Gods word,
because Israel had it: and for this Page 157.
purpose do bring these Scriptures. Is it not woeful, that the man will needs
be blind? Wilfulness deserves correction. If he were so ignorant and seely
as he seems, he should be more worthy pity; then an answer. The other
place which he would make answer unto, is in 1. Peter 2. 9. Lib. de Eccles. q.
pr. page 80. 125.
which I say is properly meant of the Church invisible, as Doctor Whittakers
understands the first verse, and urges it against Bellarmine, and says it
cannot be understood of visible particular Churches. The Apostle writes a
Catholic 1. Pet. 2. 9. is understood of the invisible Church.
Epistle to the dispersed Christians, of whose Election he was persuaded; he
speaks also of a Generation chosen, Elect, of a kingly Priesthood, a holy
Nation, a people set at liberty, such only are those which are in Christ
truly, and visible Churches are not such; experience shows, and the
Scripture in all Ages, that the Apostle speaks thus unto men professing
Religion, the Reason, for that in charity he persuades himself that of all
men, those which openly profess Christ, in a care to please him, are the
likliest to him, to be the Elect of God, and of the invisible Church, and the
rest in the visible church not so reformed, he hops well of, that they are
the Elect before God, though not yet so manifest to men. All the Elect, holy,
living stones, spiritual house, are invisible, and not discerneable to the Eye
of the body, but Tytles belonging to the Catholic Church, as Doctor
Whittakers says, and only seen by the Eye of Faith. If it were meant of the
visible Church, then may the Elect utterly perish; a holy Nation be profane,
people set at liberty, turn again to bondage: yea, Christ's body, which is
the true spiritual House, a royal Priesthood perish, contrary to his word.
Again, men are so called in respect of Christ their Head, and not in respect
of their outward holiness.



of hell, does it speak therefore of the visible Church? This Reason is
altogether without reason, let his wise Reader judge. Saint Paul writes Ephe.
1. 4. He has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world; this was
spoken to the visible Church: was it therefore meant of it, or rather of the
Elect members supposed to be in it? If he say, of the visible Church then in
Ephesus, it must needs then follow (which is contrary to the truth) that a
people chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world may perish; Ephesus
became no Church at length. Moses so spoke to the Israelites: Exodus 19. 6. to
the place of Moses. Exodus 19. 6.
have said to his other reason: secondly, the place expounds it self to be
meant of the invisible Church, though spoken to the visible; it is with a
condition of true hearing, and obeying the Lords voice, verse 5. Now such as
truly hear and do Gods commandments, are only the Elect says Doctor
Whittakers, Lib. de Eccles. Page 80. toward the end: thirdly, these titles
might be spoken of the Jewish Church typically; the high Priest was a type of
Christ, and the people of the Church of Christ, it cannot be therefore said now
so of particular visible Churches, though it was then so. that they show 1.
Pet. 2. 9.
forth the virtues of Christ, but that they should show the^ forth. Declaring
the end of Christ's calling, and withal, giving them a token, to know who they
be indeed that are called effectually, and are of the chosen Generation, royal
Priesthood, and holy Nation: not all that are called are Elect, not all in the
visible Church, are of the invisible, but only such as truly show forth the
holy virtues of Christ our Savior.

Now whether this place appertain properly to the invisible Church or no,
though spoken to the visible in charity, I leave it to every sound Divine to
judge. He puts it over to every member of the visible Church to judge: this man
(it may seem) supposes every true member of the Church able to judge of that
wherein he himself is greatly mistaken: great humility in esteeming well of
other men's good parts, but great seelinesse with all.

Doctor A^ison is answered in a word; in their Judgment, his labor is
unworthy a Doctor of Divinity, says he, and so have they thought best to
pass him over: good cause why, if they could they would have made answer to
him. His course is a death to their cause; he pulls off their See Ainsworth,
Page 116. 124.
vizard, shows of Scripture, the abuse whereof by them is intolerable.

If they would but explain their Scriptures, and show how thence do arise
their singular opinions, no more need to be required of any understanding
Reader to discry the false-hood of their way, and vain (if not impious) shows
of Scripture which they will muster in the margent, if they allude but to the
phrase in Scripture. See the places alleged by them in the Preface to the
Reader, in their Book to his Majesty. Page 6. 7. mark the matter, and the
Scriptures, and see how little they accord. This I profess for my self, that
there impertinent allegations of Scripture wrought in me a just suspicion of
personal ill entents, and after by due trial a reiection of their cause, as
the forgeries of their own heart, which by abuse of Gods most holy word, they
would make him Author off.

Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer to the Page 126.
third Probability.
HIs Answer is only a framing of what I say into this Sillogisme. That is not
the truth, the teachers and professors This is not my reason.
whereof sometimes do give strange Expositions, and thereby do wrest the
Scriptures.

But the teachers and professors of the Separation, do strangely expound and
wrest the holy Scriptures:

Therefore the Separation is not the truth.

Smith thinks of himself, or of me, I let pass. But my reason from the
third Likelihood, is thus framed.

The way which is defended by the teachers and professors thereof with strange
Expositions, impertinent allegations, and Sophistical conclusions, is likely
not to be the truth.

I understand not sometime, as he says in his proposition, but usually, if not
always, whether it be of ignorance, or wilfulness I dispute not; it is
probable, that such a way, being also a singular way differing from all, is not
the good way of God, and the way of truth. But the way of the Separation is
defended by teachers and professors thereof, with strange Expositions,
impertinent allegations, and Sophistical conclusions.

By the way of Separation, I mean not any truth which they hold with us, or
with Reformed Churches, but only that, wherein they do walk apart from all
Churches of God in the world, as Schismatickes, and in the Brownisme which they
maintain so as is aforesaid.

Therefore the way of the Separation is likely not to be the truth, and good
way of God.

The Minor, I have partly showed to be true in my former The Separatists four
ways principally do abuse Scripture: See my former Book, Page 26. 28.
Book, by setting down four several ways of their abuse of Scripture, to
uphold their cause: by which (as general Rules) the particular places may be
tried: partly in this Book, in giving answer to several places alleged
falsely, by Mr. Ainsworth, in defense of his way: If Mr. Ainsworth require
special instances, I refer him over; first to Doctor Allison, who handles
this very point, and only this, in a good big book, it is not yet answered,
and therefore he herein shall save me labor. Then to Mr. Smith himself, who
expounds the places brought by Mr. Ainsworth and his company, to maintain
their threefold Presbiterie, otherwise then they do, and condemns them as
false. Also to Mr. Bradshawes challenge, which is not yet publicly by them set
forth, if they could answer him in this, they be not sparing of their labor.
Lastly, I set him over to the places by him alleged, and of me answered in
this book afterward.

If Mr. Smith do require (as he does) that I produce particular places, I
refer him over to answer Mr. Iohnsons company, condemning him in their
judgment, as an Heretic, for the opinions which he holds by Sophistry,
and abuse of Scriptures: So also I will him to look unto the Reioynder of
diverse Ministers, who have showed him his false exposition upon Math. 23. 2. 3.
and many other out of the New and Old Testament: to all which he has made no
answer, that we know of; I may therefore save my pains, either to add more,
or repeat what others say, sithen they be not answered.

The fourth Likelihood.
THey have not the approbation of any of the Reformed Churches for their course.

They published their Confession but not openly by the The sum of my former
Book. Page 30.
Reformed Churches allowed: They write to learned Iunius, but he allowed not
of their so proceeding, and though they remain as tolerated, yet are they not
in their way by them maintained.

Reply to Mr. Ainsworths Answer to Page 158. 159.
this fourth Likelihood.
A true Church can judge of a true Church.
to discern of a true Church: else none can. The proof of this Mr. Ainsworth
acknowledges, for he says; that men endewed with Gods spirit, can discern
the Church, 1. Cor. 2. 15. Now all the Churches beyond the Seas acknowledge us
for See Page 125.
true Churches, but allow not of them so standing: it is likely then we be in
the true Churches, and they in a Schism, forsaking us as false Churches. For
this see more in my book, Page 177. lightly passed over by this Answerer, and
his fellow helpers.

His reasons given to refell my Likelihood are none at all: yet what he says
let us see.





him in particular: other men's labors, best understood of themselves, I leave
to themselves; not that I cannot make answer to what he there says, but I know
the party with whom he deals, is every way sufficient to encounter a greater
Adversary then this Answerer, though he help himself with Iunius Letters. so
do I: for they be Letters published to their disgrace, if they were capeable
to apprehend shame. Paul says, upon the judgment of mortal creatures.

Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer to this Page 126. 127.
fourth Likelihood.
AS before, so first here he frames a reason of his own head, making his
disciples believe the same to be mine, his Argument is thus set down:

They that are not approved, by the Reformed Churches That is not my reason
neither, but he abuses me, and plays with his own shadow.
have not the truth.

But the Separation is not approved by the Reformed Churches.

Therefore the Separation is not the truth.

Next he gives an Answer thereunto. First, to the Minor denying it, by
proving that the Reformed Churches do approve of their Separation. But the
reason brought to prove it, is not sufficient: which is because the
Universities and Iunius have not disallowed, but being silent, have consented
to them. It seems that he thus reasons:

Whosoever do pass over with silence men's published writings, Mr. Smiths
weak reason, to prove themselves to be allowed of the Reformed Churches.
wherein they have been desired to show their judgment, they consent and allow
of such writings.

This is seely and weak: Men may keep silence, not for that they approve, but
disallow the matter propounded, which sufficiently does condemn it self: and
for that they see the Publishers to be men of a contentious spirit, and will
not be satisfied, neither will see what is amiss, though it be showed unto
them. And this is the cause of many men's silence in this matter among us, and
why not the cause also in others.

But the universities of the Reformed Churches pass over with silence the
published writings of the Separatists, wherein they have been desired to show
their judgment.

And therefore they consent and allow of their writings.

By Mr. Smiths own Argument, the Scripture does approve the Baptism of
Infants.
a consent where the matter is with Silence passed over, I demand of Mr.
Smith, why he disalloweth the Baptism of children, sithen by this his reason,
the holy Ghost consents unto it? if with all he consider the general
commandment for baptising all, Christ's allowing of children to come unto him,
the Circumcising of Infants under Many reasons summed together for Baptism of
Infants.
the Law, the Analogy and proportion of one with the other, the largeness of
the Covenant to the Father and his seed, as to Abraham and Isaac after the
promise, so to the believing Christian Father, and to his child after the
promise: As Faith in Abraham begat Isaac his child, after the power of the
word of Promise to be a visible member of Gods Church: so Faith in a Christian
Father begets a child, after the power of the word of Promise, to be now a
visible member of Christ's Church: Isaac was not the seed by natural
Generation, but Ismael, he was of the word of Promise; so Jacob, and such as
came of him, were accounted the children of Promise, because he was promised,
and Abraham believed against Nature and reason of hope, and so had him. Add
hereto, that the grace under the Gospel extends it self as far and to as
many, as Gods favor did under the law. If therefore a child was by the
parents faith, in the covenant under the Law, much more the children of
Believers now under the Gospel. Examples there be of whole families baptized,
and the Scriptures do not disallow Infants; Children of believing Parents are
holy by their parents Faith: yea, God has out of the mouth of Babes and
sucklings made perfect his praise: David hoped in God hanging upon his mothers
breasts: John Baptist believed, and leapt in his mothers womb for joy. If
children then be holy, if they may believe, if leap for joy, if laud and
praise God, if they be in the Covenant, if God be their God, and all Hystories
show it to be the Churches practice to baptize Infants, and not any man's
inventions, can Mr. Smith justly condemn it? If the Scripture be silent in it,
God allows and consents unto it, by his own reason, whereby he condemns
himself in that he allows.

Secondly, he answers to the Mayor, to wit thus. They that The Separatists
regard not the judgment of any Church.
though they be not approved by the Reformed Churches, and have not the truth
in their judgment: yet he supposes, first, that they may have the truth,
though no church approve of them: and secondly; that they may have the
allowance of Gods Churches, planted by the Apostles, though not the approbation
of the Church now: and thus they sooth up themselves with suppositions, to be
wiser then all Churches, to know more of the Apostolical Churches then any, or
else to have more conscience to follow them then all: one of these they must
needs imagine to be in them, if they chose either, it is pride and folly.
Lastly, he tells me that the Reformed Churches do utterly disallow our
Church, in regard (says he) of the Prelacie. He may in this be answered,
first, with his own answer to us, sufficient to turn his own weapon upon
himself: but secondly, it is not true, he says, as the Epistle of Beza and
Sadeel, in the name of the whole University at Geneua, manifestly declares,
as elsewhere is showed. And thus much for his answer, and reason framed as he
listed, which I renounce: this is my Argument:

Whom the Reformed Churches approve not of in their way, The reason from the
fourth Likelihood.
but allow rather what those deny, it is likely that such are not in the right
way.

But the Reformed Churches approve not of the Separatists in their way: but
allow us for a true Church, which they deny.

Therefore it is likely they are not in the right way.

It is a special property (as has been said) of the true Churches, to have
the Spirit of discerning who are true Churches, who are not: the Spiritual man
discerns all things; 1. Cor. 2. 15. Amongst these, all things, must be
comprehended the knowledge of a true visible Church. For if all these Churches
of God, cannot discern a true Church, but so far should err, as to approve
the Church of England for a true Church and yet be none, and not allow of the
Separatists who challenge so to be: and I say, approve us for a true church,
whom the Separatists condemn, how should a true Church be known, if a true
Church (nay so many true Churches) can judge no better of a true Church? If it
be granted that the Churches have this spirit of discerning, then as it is
likely that we are Gods Church, because they approve of us; So is it likely,
that the Separatists way is not good, or that the Reformed Churches approve it
not.

The fifth Likelihood.
THe condemnation of their way by our own Divines, men of godly life and sound
Doctrine, to wit, Doctor Whittakers, Doctor Willet, Doctor Allison, Mr.
Perkins, Mr. Smith Mr. Rogers, Mr. James, with many other: yea, Mr. Cartwright,
and Mr. Fenner, condemned their way. Page 31. 32.
In my former Book I have showed their several judgments of these men.

Reply to Mr. Ainsworths Answer to Page 159.
this fifth Likelihood.
HIs answer to this Likelihood, contains only a Answer full of contempt
and uncharitableness.
showing of the light estimation of these Divines, and an uncharitable
conjecture of me, how I would have dealt with Christ, if I then had been living:
where he compares them selves to Christ, and these reverend Divines to the
Priests, Rabbis, and Divines in Israel, condemning Christ and his Doctrine,
holding the judgment of these our Divines, to have no more Likelihood against
them, then the Judgment of the Jewish Rabbis and other were Mr. Ainsworth
answers not to the point, and the force of this Likelihood he passes by.
against Christ and his Doctrine. I supposed he would by good reason have
showed, that these men's learned Judgments could not be so much as a Likelihood
to reprove them in their way, but he having not done this, he says nothing.

Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer to the Page 127.
fifth Probability or Likelihood.


Whatsoever Mr. Whittakers, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Willet and the rest say of the
Separation is true.

But they say that the Separation is not true. Ergo, it is not true.

Secondly, he makes answer by another Argument thus:

Whatsoever Herod, Pontius Pilate, Annas, and Caiphas, the learned Scribes and
Pharisees, Teriullus the Orator, and all the learned men of the Jewish Church
say is true, that is true.

These persons all of them with one consent, say that Christian Religion is
Heresy and Schism. Ergo, Christian Religion is Heresy and Schism.



Whatsoever these godly and learned Divines, say and write of considerately, in
a point of Divinity concerning the visible Church, it is very likely to be
true.

First, because these men were better learned, and no less Reasons to prove
the force of the Likelihood.
godly then these which do condemn them: secondly, because they herein speak
in a matter belonging to their calling: thirdly, because it is to be thought
that they had studied the controversy, and spoke not rashly, it is to be
supposed that so godly and learned men, would not rashly condemn under their
hands to after Posterities what they knew not: fourthly, Because these be many
in number, and generally approved of the Churches of God. Is it not probable
that such as be learned and godly, having studied a cause, being approved men,
and many in number, do judge rightly of a cause? Can it not be a likelihood?
Let him that can disprove it.

But these godly and learned Divines, say and write considerately, that the
Separatists course (which is a point of Divinity touching the visible Church)
is wicked and Schismatic.

This I have proved in my former Book, Page 31.

Therefore it is likely that the course of the Separatists is wicked and
Schismatic.

To conclude; he reasons thus for the Separation, and against us:

Whatsoever Christ, the Apostles, the holy Scriptures, and Mr. Smiths reason to
prove themselves right, and we to be out of the way.
the Primitive Apostolic Churches, collected of the Jews and Gentiles, do
allow or disallow: it is to be allowed or disallowed.

But the Separation is allowed, and the Church Ministry, worship and
Government of the English Assemblies is disallowed by the aforesaid persons.

Therefore the Separation is to be allowed, and the Assemblies of England to be
disallowed.

Minor, he says, it is proved in his Book: so he brings himself to witness
for himself, which is a weak proof, if he were a man ever himself. But
sithen he is not always himself, neither in judgment nor practice, his
defense is childish: he should let that which he has written be approved of
other then himself, and his company, before he make it authority to confirm
so false an Assumption as he affirms to be true, by his own book. But
sithen he has no more proof but his own saying, I return his Argument thus
against himself:

Whatsoever Christ, his Apostles, the holy Scriptures, and the Primitive
Apostolic Churches: yea, and all the Churches after Fathers and Counsels do
allow or disallow, is to be allowed or disallowed.

This needs no proof.

But the Separation is disallowed, and the Church, Ministry, worship and
Government of the Church of England is allowed by these persons. Ergo, etc.

If Mr. Smith deny that they disallow not the Separation, And his late Book,
against Mr. Clifton.
then I refer himself to himself, in his book of differences where he
condemns the way of the Separation, practiced by Mr. Johnson and his company
for Antichristian (out of the Scriptures) as he supposes: and if the
scriptures condemn it, then Christ, his Apostles and the rest, except he can
show what Church, what Counsel, what Father ever allowed of such a Separation.
He may read Zanchie de Ecclesia, against such a Separation, and Morneus in his
Book of the Church, in diverse things opposing the Separatists judgment, with
Calvin and others; to whom I refer him, as my witnesses against him. Besides,
the

Scripture against his cause. If he do affirm, that they do condemn our
Church, the Ministry, Worship and government, then I demand whether wholly or
but in part: if but in part, so may any Church of God in the world, as he
himself does the separation, by him sometime so much approved: if he say
wholly, let him bring out his evidences from Christ, from the Scripture. In the
mean season let him answer for this matter, Bishop Bilsons perpetual
Government: Doctor Sutcliffe of Eccelesiasticall Discipline: Mr. Hooker: Mr.
Bells Regiment of the Church: Doctor Downehams Sermon, who have taken the
defense of these things in hand, in which if they err, let these Separatists
confute them, and cease to call for new and more opponents, till these be
ouer-throwne by them: till then I conclude from the premises, that we are to be
allowed, and the Separatists to be disallowed.

The sixth Likelihood.
THe Lords judgment orderly following the Principals ever in that way, and
Gods blessing upon us with spiritual favors, whilst as one says, Gods
Legible curse has been upon the leaders that way, and in part upon others of
them also.

How this is true, I have in some sort in my former Book In my former Book.
Pa. 33.
showed from Page 33. to 42. First, how God has been with us in the
Ministry of the word, in converting many from Popery, in drawing many to
sanctification of life, whereto I add his bestowing of many singular gifts of
utterance and courage for the truth, upon th^se which he uses as instruments
for the same: his adorning of our Church with the martyrdom of Reverend men:
in giving us Kings and Queens, nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers, for a
defense of the Church: So also Pastors, which feed the flock with knowledge
and understanding: his defending of us, and confounding the enemies which have
risen up against us at all times, and that with an outstretched arm. All
which are Gods mercyes promised to his people. Whence I now thus reason:

Upon whom God bestows such great mercies as he has A great probability
that we be gods people.
promised only to his people and Church, it is very likely that such are his
people and Church.

But God has bestowed upon us such great mercies, as he has only promised
to his people and Church.

The particulars have I mentioned, which the Lord has promised to his Church
and people only, if he deny them to be promised of God to his Church only,
let him show the contrary if he can to these Scriptures, for the word and
Ministry. Psalm. 147. 19. 20. Ier. 23. 22. and 3. 15. Mat. 28. 20. For Kings
and Queens, nurses unto the Church. Esaias. 49. 23. and for protection with
blessings of peace and prosperity. Deuteronomy. 28. Esaias. 41. 10. 11. Psalm. 3. 8.
Genesis 12. 3.

And therefore it is very likely that we be his people and Church.

Secondly, I have set down the contrary of them: God Page 34.
blesses not their Ministry, they work upon other men's labors, their chief
men have fearfully miscarryed, and that as they arose in order one after
another. First, Bolton hanged himself: Brown renounced his way, to say no
more: Barrow was possessed with a most fearful spirit of railing, as never
any scurrulous mate was ever more; the two Iohnsons were filled with a rage and
furious fire of contention, one cutting off another, the Son excommunicating
the Father and Brother, the Brother publishing in Print the shame of them all,
and the Father direfully cursing the Read George Iohnsons Book. Page 6.
Son, that all plagues of a disobedient Child might light upon him: Bornet
was taken away with the plague: Mr. Smith now an Anabaptist, and as they call
him and judge him, a condemned Heretic: Mr. Robinson (one yet nearest the the
truth unto us, as I hear, and not so Schismatic as the rest) with Mr.
Clifton have been divided, so is a kingdom at discord within itself. Discord
may be in a true Church, but not to the division of body from body: that is, an
assembly, from an assembly, so as there can be no spiritual Communion held
among them. Of this is no example in the Scripture, nor in true Churches, but
only amongst Schismatickes and Assemblies of Sectaries. I have showed In my
former Book. page 39
also how Gods hand falls upon some of the members, if not upon all in that
way, diuersely, whence I do thus reason:

Whom God has and does follow particularly with spiritual A reason framed to
prove that the Separatists in their censorious way please not God.
judgments in order as they arise one after another, and generally all more or
less, in a way only which these so punished have taken upon them to walk in,
it is very likely that neither those persons so walking, nor the way wherein
they walk is approved of God.

Is it probable that God will follow continually a people with his hand, one
after another, only in one way, and yet approve them in that their way? did
God so ever with any? does not he promise the contrary to his?

But the chief of the Separatists God has and does follow particularly with
spiritual judgments in order as they arise, one after another, and generally
all the members more or less, in the way of their Separation, which they have
taken upon them to walk in.

Thus have I showed, and also Mr. Sprint in his Considerations; which neither
Mr. Ainsworth nor Mr. Smith do deny: the judgments they acknowledge, but the
argument they would make for all that nothing worth, but how good a
probability it is against them, now appears.

And therefore it is very likely, that neither these Separatours, Ringleaders,
nor Separatists their Scholars so walking, nor the way wherein they walk is
approved of God.

Reply unto Mr. Ainsworths Answer to Page 159.
this sixth Likelihood.
George Iohnsons Book, he wholly (in a manner) passes over with silence,
only under pretense of his Answer made already unto Mr. Sprint, urging more
prudently, as he says, this same Likelihood; to which he puts over his
Reader, who must go seek an Answer to what I say, and as I do affirm it,
where it is not to be found: a pretty evasion if he could so escape.

The truth is my Likihood, and Reasons, are not so set Mr. Ainsworth passes by
the instances given of Gods judgment against them, for that he can not answer
them.
down in Mr. Sprints Considerations, as I here urge it. So although Mr.
Ainsworth answer him, which is questionable, yet he has not made answer to
what I say. But he is wise to pass that by, which he well knew (being so laid
open, as it is in my Book) he could never make particular answer unto, but
with great and public shame in the particulars.

I desire the Reader to peruse my former Book, and consider, whether it be not
very likely, that God has been offended greatly with their course: and with
the chief of them from the very beginning of the first known man, to the last
principal Ringleader of the latest out-road of such Separatours.



His Answer.
(says he) page 38. A Canaanite, and a Philistim might have so reasoned
against the Israelites; yea, says he, with as much truth, and more color then
we against them. A very wicked and irreligious comparison, to hold that a
cursed Canaanite and Philistim had more truth thus to reason against the true
Church of God, then we Gods people have to reason against Schismatickes. See
his reason: they had Gods judgments among them, says he, Ergo, the Canaanites
and Philistims might condemn their religion. The consequence is unsavory
salt, but worthy of such a Doctor in Schism. If his Argument be naught, then
perhaps, he will say, our reason is not good against them. This I deny; This
reason is forcible against them, and his weak against us: the reasons why.
and mark Reader, wherein we differ: first, he brings in Canaanites, against
Israelites, and we are a Christian church against Schismatics: secondly, he
brings in a fit comparison for them, notorious offenders punished for
personal transgressions in a holy way amongst Gods people, and we bring in
their chiefest and holiest persons, their Guides and Ringleaders punished, not
for personal faults, which we do not object to them, but for their way in
which they Page. 34. 42.
do walk from among Gods people, as my reasons why, and how, in my former
Book manifests: thirdly, he brings in judgments upon certain members,
as they fell to sin now and then, but we do allege Gods displeasure against
their chief Leaders, with a continuing hand upon them, as they rose up one
after an other to seduce people from us into that way: as we show that Gods
hand was on Bolton, then on Brown, then on Barrow, and Green-wood, then on the
two Iohnsons, then on Bornet, then on Mr. Smith, who is become in their own
judgment, and in ours too, a fearful Heretic. So he should have showed
the like by succession upon Moses and Aaron, then on Joshua, then on Othniel,
Ehud, etc, If he dare make the like comparison between these and themselves,
for their persons and for their cause; if not, he has said nothing to
overthrow this Likelihood. His inserting of Moses and Aaron amongst the wicked
Rebels, as if Gods special wrath did light upon them, is both foolishly and
wickedly done. They died with honor and renown; though it pleased God to call
them away for some sin, before they entered into Canaan, they neither died by
Pestilence, nor were consumed with the Sword, nor burnt with fire, nor
destroyed of Serpents, nor were swallowed up of the earth, as others were: that
Mr. Ainsworth in his Canaanitish conceit, should muster them among the wicked,
to march under Gods wrath to death and destruction. Again, herein God would by
them teach us an Evangelical truth, that not Moses nor Aaron, no Law, either
Moral or Ceremonial, Why Moses and Aaron did die before they came into Canaan.
but Joshua, that is, Jesus our Savior, should bring the Israelites, that is,
every true Believer into Canaan, that is, the Kingdom of Heaven.

He advises me to beware of delivering positions tending to Atheism and
Iudaisem; I accept of it: let him consider that he teach no doctrines tending
to Anabaptisme, Brownisme the ground of Anabaptisme, Familisme, etc.
Familisme, and Arianisme, the fruits of their Brownisme, upon the principles
whereof others have built these Heresies. The Anabaptists cite the same places
for their holy walking from all the world by themselves, which these
Separatists do against us. Read Lucas Osiander, against Anabaptists, and see
how this way of Brownists helps the Anabaptists.

Lastly he makes a comparison between Bolton and He falls into that which
he finds fault with in me.
Judas, and makes in part Judas case better then Boltons: idle and to no
purpose, except to help a Jew to disgrace our Religion, by Judas miserable end.
But he will say, that this arises from my speech, who said, that such an end
the Lord lets not his special instruments come unto, which he denies, and
brings in Judas, one foreordained to that end, and foretold off: of whom I
my self did make Page 34.
mention by way of prevention, describing also what I meant by special
instruments, and gave instances of the same, that I might not be mistaken, to
prevent wrangling: but who can restrain contentious spirits that love to be
wrangling?

Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer to this Page 128.
sixth Likelihood.


It is more then likely, that such as be judged of the Lord, An Argument to
prove that the Separatists have not the truth.
for the way wherein they walk singularly from all other, have not the truth
in that way.

But the Separatists are judged of the Lord, for the way wherein they walk
singularly from all other. Therefore it is more then likely, that the
Separatists in their singular way have not the truth.

My labor in my former Book, from all the instances delivered, is my proof
of the Minor. Now by the Lords judging, I mean not only temporal
afflictions, poverty, banishment and such like, as Mr. Smith would insinuate
to his Reader, that I do as appears by his quoted Scriptures, What I do
understand by Gods judgments upon them.
Eccles. 9. 1. 3. 1. Pet. 4. 17. for these may befall the best I acknowledge;
but I understand the judgment of God upon the soul, as almost the examples
given do clearly prove: and therefore mistaking me, he has not made any
answer unto me, nor proved my Doctrine false. He frames also another argument
from all the instances, to show the weakness of my reason, but as in the
former, so here he does me wrong still; but for answer, I thus amend him, and
let him answer what he can to the same.

If Mr. Bolton before had peace within him, and through An argument to prove
that God is displeased with them.
the way of the Separation came to hang himself: If Mr. Harison and Brown
before carried himself honestly, but in this new way by Mr. Harisons
testimony, behaved himself very lewdly: If Barrow with Greenwood were before
temperate, but in this way immeasurably raging and railing: If the two Iohnsons
lived before like brethren in love to themselves and to their Father, but in
this way one hated another, one persecuted another, one brother laboring to
shame another to the open George Iohnsons book witnesses this at large.
world; one Son excommunicating the Father, and the Father bitterly cursing
that Son: If Mr. Burnet before was of God mercifully preserved, and in this
new way, whilst he was prisoner for the cause, was by the stroke of God cut
off with one of his severe judgments: If Mr. Smith was before in good
reputation with godly men, more stable and constant, but in the inclinanation
to this new way, was given over to hold false and absurd opinions, and very
unstable, sometime liking, sometime in prayer thanking God for preventing him,
before allowed of us, but now disallowed and condemned of the very Separatists
for an Heretic: If some before did walk not dishonestly, but in that way
became filthy persons, and of unclean conuersations: If all of them before
were charitably disposed, meeker spirits, more temperate, less censorious, and
not dispisers of the good in others, but in this way the contrary; then it is
very likely that God is displeased with them for that very way, in which God so
forsakes them.

But all these things have so fallen out to these foresaid persons in this
their new way, as I particularly have proved in my former book. Therefore it is
very likely that God is displeased with them for the same.

He says he is able to say as much of the Officers and Leaders in the Church
of England. When he is able so to produce instances successively from the
beginning, and in such a manner, he is better to be believed, but in the mean
space, his bare word gets herein no credit, but with the foolishly
credulous. As for his examples of Judas, then of Christ, with others, and of
the Apostles they be unfitly matched, and are not as those, which I have
brought out against them.

The last part of his answer, seeking therein to clear himself of
particulars laid to his charge, is answered before sufficiently in the Preface.

The seventh Likelihood.
THe ill success it has had these very many years, being no more increased.

This in my other Book have I spoken of, to wit, Page. 42.
that God aduanceth and prospers, whom he sets on work, and to them he
gives power, with extraordinary men he deals extraordinarily, as we may see
by his dealing in all ages, either in the planting of Churches, or reformation
of them, let them show the contrary if they can. And therefore it is likely
that these new Reformers having so ill success; both abroad, and at home, by
division among themselves, are not set on work by the Lord, as instruments for
his glory in his own cause. The contrary may we see in the Lords cause by
Moses in planting; by Eliah in reforming; by John Baptist; the Apostles; by
Luther, and others his fellow helpers.

Reply to Mr. Ainsworths Answer to Page. 160.
this seventh Likelihood.
He passes over, as his manner is, the reasons and instances given for the
Likelihood, and what is spoken of their voluntary running out of England,
drawing people in danger of a Statute against Fugitives, from under the
authority of their Sovereign into a strange Nation: these things objected,
he has not answered. That which Noah, and by the Patriarchs, be disallowed,
because it prospered little for many years, when the wicked did flowrish.

first, the consequence follows not, the case is not alike. Noah and the rest
had no new way from the Church of God being then it themselves. Noah was in the
declining age of the world, and was by lincall descent and successively a
Preacher, not one that brake out from Gods Church extraordinarily, as these
would be held to do, to plant new Churches, and make new Covenants, wherein,
as I have said, God does give an extraordinary blessing. The place cited to
prove that there shall be few in the Church, He alleges but falsely, the
place of S. Luke. 17. 26.
as in Noah's time, is misalledged: it shows the security that shall be in
the world; but not the fewness of persons in the Church: and at this time it
helps not them, when we do see before our eyes that it is the time of
confounding We live in the time of Antichrists consumption.
Antichrist, who must decrease, and the Church increase, till the fulness of the
Gentiles come in, and the Jews be brought to the truth, as the Apostle does
foreshew. The increase of the Church now has the ground from Gods promise, and
it is a greater Likelihood from thence, that we, that is, all Reformed
Churches, which have forsaken Antichrist, and do multiply greatly in number
against him, since Luthers time, should be Gods Church, then a few out-goers
nothing prosperous in their way.

Again, the not increasing of the Church in time of the Why the Church in the
old time could not increase as the Church of the new Testament may.
Patriarchs, was no cause of stumbling then, for that it was kept in families,
and stood upon such as came by natural generation, from the stock of Abraham;
and therefore could not so increase by Abraham begetting one, Isaac two, Jacob
twelve, as now under the Gospel; one may beget to God at once three thousand
souls as Peter did: and for that then there was not come in the time of
fullness to call the Gentiles.

Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer. Page 129.

THe truth (says he) increases in short space into a multitude. The
Separation does not increase but is kept under: Ergo, the Separation is not the
truth. Thus he reasons for me, but I frame my own argument after this manner:

That which from the beginning for many years, in the time My likelihood
framed into an argument.
of reformation, had ill success, and that by the opposition of the godly, is
likely not to be good, and approved of God: First, because God has promised
success unto his truth after the revelation of Antichrist, to the consuming of
him, as we find 2. These. 2.
to be true since Luthers time: And secondly, because it is probable that godly
men will not so be left continually to oppose so great and essential a truth
to salvation, as these men pretend their cause to be, to keep it so ever
under, but either God in mercy would reform them or correct them.

But the Separation from the beginning for many years, in the time of
Reformation has had ill success, and that by the opposition of the Godly.

And therefore is likely not to be the good and approved way of God.

ergo, every little company is Christ's flock; a weak reason, then the Arians,
the Anabaptists, the Familists are Christ's flock. And on the contrary, if they
be many and a great number, those should not be the Church of God.

Luthers time: and what is his reason, for that the Separation is the same with
Mr. Smith acknowledges the Separatists and Reformed Churches the same in
Essential parts. Reply
the Reformed Churches, in the maine and essential parts, and therefore look
how the Reformed Churches have increased, so much has the Separation
increased. By this reason we and they are come to be one also; I would have
thought, that they and we should never have patcht in one: If he can make
themselves one with the reformed churches and we also our selves one with the
Reformed Churches, upon the same ground, then as they be one with them, so are
they with us, and if they judge them true Churches, so must they esteem of us.
Now that we and the Reformed Churches are one, I thus argue from his reason:
They that agree with the Reformed Churches in the maine and We and the Reformed
Churches agree in the maine truth, and therefore are one true Church in the
constitution.
principal points, are one with them. But we do agree with the Reformed
Churches in the maine and principal points: as the Harmony of Confession, and
the 39. Articles declare. Therefore are we and they one. If they be a true
Church, we cannot be a false: if Mr. Smith herein say true, and his argument be
good, then the Separatists, the Reformists, and the Church of England are one,
and the same in the maine and Essential points of Religion, and therefore
cannot we be separated from, for either false or no Churches of Christ, more
then they separate from other Churches; Let his brethren of the Separation
answer this.

But for the cause of the Separation, considered by it self, it has no
agreement with the Reformed Churches, The Separatists considered in the sole
causes of their Separation agree not with the Reformed Churches.
but is a by-path, and a Schismatic way, from all the the Churches of God in
the world.

His taxing of me for abusing the place of Ezechiel cap. 3. 6. arose from his
hasty misconsturing of my quoting of it, which was but partly an allusion to
the phrase, and partly to show, that to go and to dwell among people that
speak what words they understand not, is not so great a favor, as to remain
where we understand, and are understood what we speak, where therefore we
may do the more good though with affliction, then to run to a strange
country, to ^peake in the a^re.

They that leave a Curse where they come, have the truth. But the Separatists
leave a Curse A strange Argument of Mr. Smiths, to prove that the Separatists
have the truth.
where they come. Therefore they have the truth. The Minor he grants, and I
put him to prove his Mayor. Though the word of God to the Reprobate be the
savor of death to death, yet every doctrine that is so, is not the word of
God. The word of God is but so accedentally, but false doctrine, Heresy and
Schism are so in themselves. These be a curse to others, and to the authors
and bringers, so is not Gods word, and therefore to allege what the word is by
occasion, is no proof for his exposition to uphold Schism. And this much for
Mr. Smiths froth, that is, his idle and deceitful answers to my Likelihoods,
which he calls my froth: whether so or no, let the reader now judge between
us.

To all that has been said I will add a reason, drawn from their
dissensions among themselves: and I thus frame it:

They that daily rend themselves a sunder, so one from another into diverse
parts, yet being all of one constitution, as they renounce all spiritual
communion together, and live as several bodies it is very likely that such
apeople are not the church of God.

For the Church of God are of one heart, and live in Spiritual communion with
one accord, Acts 2. and 4. and to be contentious is not the custom of Gods
Church. 1. Cor. 11. 6.

But the Separatists daily rend themselves so one from another into diverse
parts, though they be all of one constitution, as they renounce all spiritual
communion together, and live as several bodies.

This is apparent by their daily practice, and by instance of these companies
lately departed from us, as is showed before.



Johnson and his Church, Mr. Smith and his company, Mr. Robinson and his
flock; all professing Separation, and yet to stand in a plain division
without a holy communion together visibly, yea, so far are they in discord,
as one will excommunicate and cast an other to the devil: let them show whether
the true Churches of God do so contend, and tear one another: it will not be
found but among Schismatics. Though we have contentions, yet we hold
communion, because we are of one constitution. Therefore the Separatists are
likely not to be the Church of God.

Now before I end my Likelihoods, that they may not so lightly be regarded, I
hear muster them together, that though one seem to be weak considered by it
self, yet all of them together may be a strong reason, and motive to persuade
them to look unto their standing, and to keep others from hasty running unto
them. Conioyntly I therefore as one Argument urge them all against that way,
thus:

The way which differs from all best Reformed Churches A Summarie reason of
all that has been said.
of Christ in the world, which agrees with ancient condemned Schismatics,
which is maintained by great abuse of Scripture, which no other Church of God
in the world approves of, which godly, learned and famous Divines do
condemn, which the Lord by his hand of judgment disclaimeth, which has ill
success, in which one sort of it rends another in sunder, hatefully renouncing
all Spiritual communion one with another, it is very likely that such a way is
not the way of God but Schism.

But such is the way of the Separation, as the particulars which have been
proved do declare. And therefore it is most likely that the way of the
Separation is not the way of God, but Schism.

It is Reader, the sin one the right hand, as there is a sin on the left hand,
as Solomon teaches, Pro. 4. 27. But pray and hearken after the word of God,
which Esai says, Thou shall hear it behind thee, saying, this is the way
walk Esaias. 30. 21.
in it, when thou turnest to the right hand, or when thou turnest to the left.
This grace God grant the Reader: Amen. And thus much for my most likely
Likelihoods.

Now follow Reasons, after the Probabilities, which I will first set down, and
then make a Reply unto both Mr. Ainsworths, and Mr. Smiths answer. The Reasons
alleged against them are threefold: taken first, from the evil of the
entrance into their way: secondly, from the persons grievously sinning in the
way: and thirdly, from their opinions erroneous and false.

Of the Reasons drawn from the entrance into their way: the first I thus frame.
THat way which causes in the entrance therinto, a breach of a lawful union
and fellowship, is not to be embraced.

Because it is against godly peace commended, Romans 14. 17. Commanded, Psalm. 34.
Heb. 12. 14. And against love commanded: Heb. 10. 24. 25. and commended, 1.
Cor. 13.

But the Separation causes in the entrance thereinto, a breach of a lawful
union and fellowship.

First, that it causes a breach, it is out of question, for it Their way
causes a breach of a lawful union and peace.
is a forsaking of our Christian professing: in communion with us; it is a
casting off of the effectual preaching of Gods word here delivered, by what
Minister soever in our standing; it is a renouncing of all spiritual
fellowship with every one here, live he never so Religiously, their Writings
witness this, and their practice also. Secondly, that it causes Reasons
proouing the same.
a breach of a lawful union and fellowship is also an evident truth: first, it
is lawful to hold communion in profession in that whereunto men are come.
Phil. 3. 16. though there It is lawful to hear the word preached among us.
be defects: secondly, it is lawful to hear Gods word among us, being found
to be the truth, and powerful by Gods assistance, preached by men publicly
authorized. First, because the commandment is, to hear and seek with out
restraint of person. Ioh. 6. 11. Secondly, because here it is the voice of
Christ, being effectual upon their consciences; that is, his voice by which
such as be dead do live. John. 5. 25. Thirdly, because the hearing of his
voice, is a mark of Christ's Sheep, and no mention of the persons preaching.
John. 10. 27. Fourthly, because the Lord pronounces them blessed that hear
the word. Revel. 1. 3. Fifthly, because the godly in the Primative time enquired
not so much after a constitution or perfection of a calling, but the truth of
doctrine. Act. 17. 11. So did Aquila and Priscilla, and other Christians
entertain Apollos for the truth of his Ministry, though he knew not so much
as they. Act. 18. 24. 27. Sixthly, because any may preach that have gifts, by
their own confession out of 1. Cor. 14. Page. 132.
and if by Princely authority they be permitted, they may preach, (as Mr.
Smith also acknowledges,) therefore they may be heard out of his own
confession. Seauenthly, because S. Paul did joy in the preaching of such as
preached Christ, of envy, not purely, under a pretense to vex him. Phil. 1.
16. 18. Now if he did joy in the preaching lawfully, he did rejoice in the
hearing as lawful; these be relata one to another. Eighthly, because God does
countenance the word here preached, making many able Ministers, not 2. Cor. 3.
6.
of the letter, but of the Spirit, which gives life; And the truth of this Mr.
Smith acknowledges, that here he received the Page 131. Note Reader, what Mr.
Smith does acknowledge.
seeds of true faith, and invisible conversion, as he calls it, effectual
to his Justification and Salvation in Christ, if he had known no more: and this
power of God here the rest cannot deny. Then let them show whether it be
unlawful to join with that which God himself approves, witnesses are
theirowne hearts: Is not the Word in the mouths of many, the word of
Reconciliation, and can their preaching be so, but 1. Cor. 5. 19.
by the blessing and favor of the Lord, who is the spirit which gives life?
2. Cor. 3. 17. with 6. Ninthly, because as the Corinthians were to hear the
Apostle, upon his reasons, for that he begat them, he their Father, they his
Chil^ren. 1. Cor. 4. 15. he the Lords Ambassador, they the Seal thereof. 1.
Cor. 9. 2. 3. They the Epistle of Christ ministered and written by him and
others, with the spirit of the living God. 2. Cor. 3. 3. So upon the very same
grounds may many, if not all of these Separatists hear diverse of our
Ministers, who may truly speak as the Apostle, (touching the effect of their
ministry) to these and claim them as his children, by the work of the Lord,
in their reformation of life. Tenthly, because our Savior Christ allowed men
to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, Mat. 23. 2. 3.
false Teachers, and his very enemies, who said and did not. Eleauenthly, and
lastly, because there is no Scripture which teaches, that it is a sin to
hear Gods word preached of such as do preach the truth, and as they that heard
it have received thereby Gods spirit of grace by their own testimony, nor any
place forbidding to hear such: and therefore it is lawful to hear the word
so among us.

Thirdly, it is lawful to have spiritual communion with It is lawful to have
spiritual communion with such as be Godly.
such as be godly, that is, such as profess godliness, and do live honestly.
David will have fellowship with such. Psalm. 101. 9. there is no warrant to part
fellowship with the godly, nor any example for it. This will not be denied, it
may be, but if they should perhaps deny any of us to be godly, as Mr. Smith
does, as before is showed, then to persuade them that visibly here be such, it
is thus manifest: first, by the shining graces of God in many in whom may be
found the marks of Saints, set out by M^. Ainsworth: secondly, In his Book of
communion. of Saints.
by wicked persons mocking and abusing such men as have left to walk with them
in the same excess of riot: thirdly, by the judgment of godly learned men
beyond the seas, testifying so much in their writings of us, and in their
Dedicatorie Epistles to special persons: fourthly, by Mr. Ainsworths own
words in his book against me, who Page. 66.
with Mr. Johnson does think, there are true Christians and heirs of
salvation among us, by the appearance of knowledge, faith and fruits thereof.
If any have so hateful an opinion of us as Mr. Smith, let them by the word
prove us all to be without the true fear of God, and then may they deny this
Minor, which here is proved to be true.

And therefore the Separation being the breach of so lawful an union and
fellowship as is here declared, is not to be embraced.

Reply to Mr. Ainsworths Answer to Page 161. 162.
this Reason.
MY answer thus framed, he gives no answer unto, but that which he says, is:

Psalm. 10. 7. he says, he may so complain truly:

What true doctrines the Separatist condemn as false.
doctrines; but some holy doctrines they do condemn, and will not justify
them with us: as namely, that the visible Church is a mixed company of good and
bad, and that in it may be not only Hypocrites, but some of lewd conversation,
and yet be a true Church. This they deny by word, writing, and practice,
contrary that estate of the Church of Corinth, those in Asia, and contrary to
the judgment of the best learned Word and Sacraments infallible marks of a
true Church.
Divines commenting upon the place of Math. 13. Secondly, they deny that the
true word of God preached, and the true Sacraments administered, are infallible
and conuertible marks of a true Church, else why do they deny our church to be
a true Church, having these true marks? Doctor Whittakers against Bellarmine
in his Book of the Church, Quest. 5. Page. 390. and 413. 415.
brings in twenty places of Scripture to prove this, and confirms the same
in Page 425. 435. by many arguments. Thirdly, they deny it to be lawful to
hear any in their own constitution, differing in a published opinion, which
themselves disallow, and the parties persisting therein, they do condemn, as
also the hearing of any in the Reformed Churches, and in our Assemblies
utterly; Mr. Iohnsons Book His Book against the hearing of our Ministers.
shows this, and their excommunicating some for it, is proof sufficient:
which doctrine is contrary to the judgment and practice of all the Churches of
Christ in Christendom. Many other holy doctrines we hold, which they consent
not unto, neither in those which they consent unto, will they have with us
spiritual communion.

The Separatists reasons why they cannot keep communion with us.
keep communion, because they cannot enjoy them without partaking of three
evils: first, is Antichristian abominations imposed: secondly, Idolatry
publicly set up and maintained: and thirdly, Ministers making concord between
light and darkness, under shows of truths, seducing men's souls to
destruction. what are Abominations: and then secondly, what are Antichristian
Abominations: and thirdly, whether every Abomination be sufficient to make a
separation from the true Church, and by the Note these three as necessary to be
known.
word convince us of them, and if so he do, and we yield not, they may
condemn us of obstinacy therein. The second thing is very false, and a mere
slander: if he and all his company can prove from gods word, but this one
thing, that here with us, public Idolatry is set up, maintained, and every
one thereto enforced, they may spare labor in other points, and make an end of
this controversy. It shall therefore much avail them, and be much for his
honesty, and free him from the accusation of an impudent slanderer of his
country, and the Church his mother, to prove this point: and therein first, to
show what is Idolatry by Gods word: secondly, that that idolatry there
condemned is here among us Three things necessary for him to prove.
committed: thirdly, that it is in our public worship, and every one by Law
thereunto enforced: thus shall he clear the cause and give full satisfaction.
If he do not this, I dare tell him he cannot, and if he cannot, he is to be
held an unjust Calumniator in a high degree, both of his Prince, state, and
church. His third evil as he accounts it, is an evil surmised, and he never
shall be able to prove it; that all our Ministers (if he mean not all, why
speaks he without exception?) under show of truths, seduce men's souls to
destruction; his heart knows better, though it send forth such bitter water.



Ainsworth can show this to be against says, love, and sound Divinity, I will
disclaim my thoughts herein.

Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer to Page 130.
this Reason.
HE frames a reason for me: but compare mine and his, and thou may see much
more in his heaped up together, then is in my reason, and the weight of my
reason left out. What I have said to Mr. Ainsworths Answer, may suffice to
give satisfaction to Mr. Smith, for the first part of his Answer to this. His
affirming our faith, repentance, and Baptism to be false visibly, is his bare
word, which I reject as being no divine Oracle, but as both false and absurd,
as is the similitude of the mingled seed of an Horse and an Ass, to prove our
Church essentially corrupted. I leave this beastly conceit with him; fitter for
a Horse and an Ass, then for a man to utter against the Profession of
Christians, and a Christian Church.

The second reason, drawn from the entrance, In my former Book page 46.
I thus frame.
THat way which upon the entrance thereinto, forces on The way of the
Separation forces untruths upon the receivers of it.
them that do enter many untruths, is not to be approved. But the way of the
Separation, upon the entrance thereinto, forces on them that enter many
untruths.

This I prove by these particulars, which are untruths, which every Separatist
is to yield unto, and to hold as truths.

First, That their way, in their singular walking from all (so I understand
ever their way) is the way of God, when it is a proud Schism, as before I have
showed.

Secondly, That their definition of a Church, is a true definition and sound
Doctrine, to which all Churches must agree, or else are not true Churches: the
definition is their third position in their Book to his Majesty, if they deny
Page 44.
that to be sound, then they strive for a Church, and yet cannot tell what it
is; if they hold it current, then I will show it to be false, thus:

A true description of a Church gives not God, his Prophets, and Apostles the
lie.

But the Separatists description of a Church, gives God, his Prophets and
Apostles the lie.

And therefore it is not true, but false and blaspemous.

The Minor I prove from the Scripture plainly, and I will show the description
in three respects to be false, in saying that it is a company separated from
all false ways in the world.

First, for God called Israel his people, and so his church A people standing
in corruption may be a true Church.
in the days of Ely: 1. Sam. 2. 29. yet were they then not separated from all
false ways, and Elyes Sons wicked livers remaining among them. 1. Sam. 2.
12. Moses calls the Israelites Gods people when he was upon the Mount: Exodus
32. 11. and yet they were not a people separated from the wickedness of the
world, but at that time were in their act of Idolatry. ver. 1. 6. In Saul's
time, Samuel calls the people Gods people: 1. Sam. 12. 22. and yet had they
grievously rebelled against God. In Esayes time were they called Gods people:
chap. 1. 3. yet exceeding great wickedness among them: Magistrates wicked.
Chap. 1. 10. 23. and 3. 14. 15. and 5. 7. and 19. 16. and 28. 14. 15. The state
of the Churchill. Chap. 1. 21. 22. 29. and 2. 6. 8. and 65. 11. So Teachers.
Chap. 3. 12. and 14. 16. and 29. 10. Women. Chap. 3. 16. 18. 23. Rich men.
Chap. 5. 8. The Chief. Chap. 10. 1. 2. and 36 3 And all the people in
general: Chap. 24. 5. and 25. 13. and 29. 11. 19. 21. 22. and 48. 4. 8. and
57. 3. 4. 5. and 1. 2. 6. and 3. 8. 9. and 5. 11. 19. and 28. 7. they were
sunck deep in Rebellion: Chap. 31. 6. yet Gods Church and people; which this
definition denies. So in Saint Paul's time, the Corinthians were called the
Church of God. 1. Cor. 1. 1. 2. and yet at that instant time were some in an
Heresy, some in incest, some that had not repented of their filthiness. 2.
Cor. 12. 20. 21. So the Churches of Asia. Reu. 2. and 3. which title of true
Churches could not have been given them, if this definition of the Separatists
were true, and agreeing to every true Church of God at all times, as it ought:
else it is not a general definition, but only for the Church at some time,
which to affirm is ridiculous. But what need I prove this further, that a true
Church may at that very time be a true Church when in the general estate of
it, it is idolatrous, and therein obstinate? sithen Mr. Johnson himself
acknowlegeth so much, contrary In his answer to Mr. White. Page. 15.
to his own defining of a Church, which yet he would salve with a double
answer: First, that such a Church yet may be Gods people by a former calling:
from which then this follows, that such as once have been called, though Mr.
Iohnsons words yield us a proof to be a true Church.
they after become Idolaters, and live therein obstinately, may be Gods people.
If Gods act hold them in, when their own casts them out, what lets us to be a
true Church, seeing we have had a former calling of God, when he brought us
from Gentilisme, having cast off Idolatry, and recovered from Popery the true
word, and the true Sacraments, the Covenant of God, and the seals thereof,
given in the first constituting of it? If this his answer be true, he must
acknowledge us a true Church of God. Secondly, he thus answers; that by Gods
mercy to them, and in respect of his own Name, which is called upon by his
Church and people, such may remain a true Church. This answer also is for us
still, except he can deny us Gods mercy, and that God respects not his name,
which is here called upon: Thus his answering for the corruptions in the old
Church, grants us to be a true Church by the same answer.

Secondly, I prove the description false in this, that the Second reason to
prove his description false.
Church by it must be a company called only by the word of God, as excluding
all other means; and yet many strangers came out of Egypt, and joined
themselves to Gods people, not by any conviction of heart by the word, but
through the wondrous works of God, for any thing we can tell, and yet were
not rejected, but allowed to be of Gods people. Ezod. 12. 38. 48. So many in
Mordecaies time became Jews for fear, and so were accounted. Est. 8. 17. And
many in Ezekiels days, brought by posts, as it 2. Chron. 30.
were by sound of the Trumpet.

Thirdly, the description is not true, because it requires Third reason
against it.
only such as join themselves voluntarily to profess the truth: by which is
secluded the Church of God in Josias time, for that Josias did compel many to
serve the Lord, 2. Chron. 34. 33*
that were found in Israel, and yet a true Church. And thus we see their
principal doctrine to be an untruth.

Thirdly, they that enter must hold that we here are false Another false
doctrine of the Brovvnists.
Christians, for so they judge and censure us; and with this condemnation they
leave us. But they that profess the true Christ, and his truth, and have
received true Baptism, are true Christians. For such be either true Christians
or no Christians; no Christians they be not, and therefore true Christians,
though in many things otherwise corrupted. But we do profess the true Christ,
(even Jesus the Son of Mary, the Jews Messiah,) and his truth, and have
received true Baptism.

Therefore are we true Christians.

Again, I thus prove it: Saints are true Christians, but we are Saints.
Therefore true Christians.

Such as have on them the outward calling of Christianity, and have put on
Christ, are Saints: for so the Corinths were called. But we have on us the
outward calling of Christianity, and have put on Christ by Baptism. Gal. 3.
27. And therefore are we Saints.

Lastly, false Christians are no Christians, but no Christians are we not, and
therefore not false Christians. A false Christ is no Christ indeed; so is a
false Christian no Christian at all: A Jew and not a Jew, says Saint Paul,
Romans 2. 28. 29. Called Jews and are not, but of the Sinagogue of Satan, as
John says, Reu. 3. 9. It is not said a true Jew, and a false, no more can it
be said, a Christian indeed, and a false Christian, but no Christian. Thus we
see some untruths, besides what after shall be manifest in them to be falsehoods
and errors, which those that enter into the way of the Separation, must of
necessity maintain.

Therefore the way of the Separation is not to be approved.

Reply to Mr. Ainsworths Answer hereunto. Page. 162.

no, I used not, in the end of the Book of their Confession) if they be Page
68.
corruptions on our part, do not make a Church (otherwise sound) to be a false
Church: because they in some things are disputable, in some true; but not
evident in all particulars: and are rather of circumstances and manner, then of
matter; and concern some outward order and form, with privileges for the
well being, and are not of the very essence and being of a Church; and
therefore a Church may be a true Church without them, as far forth as we and
they differ, but especially without some of them, which are false doctrines, as
the third and fourth, the fifth in part, the seventh, the latter part of the
eight, the tenth, as they understand faithful: and therefore the want of these
cannot make us a false Church, if withal, that be true which Mr. Smith
auerreth, that there may be a false Ministry, Page. 14.
Worship, and Government in a true Church.

Zeph. 3. 7. and Moses, Deu. 32. 5. which places show they corrupted their
ways, and were as no Children, or worthy to be no Children; that corruptions
make a false church; for what is true cannot ever be false; but good, by
corruption becomes naught; but that which has been a true Church, what
corruption soever in any degree be in it, is ever a true Church, but corrupted,
till the Lord remove the When a Church becomes no Church.
Candlestick, and give a bill of diuorcement, and it become no Church of
Christ, but the Assembly of Antichrist, the Synagogue of Satan.

A man is a substance, but a Church consists in relation or reference to
Christ, as a wife to her husband: but if a wife play the whore never so often
and openly, she may be (by Mr. Bernards distinction, says he) esteemed a
corrupt, but not a false wife: Such a distinction (says he) may I carry to
the stews. Smiths Horse and Ass engendring, and Mr. Ainsworths Stews, comely
Separatisticall Meditations think you? I wish them to write hereafter their
more cleanly See George Iohnsons book and Mr. Whites.
thoughts. Let Mr. Ainsworth know, I make no distinction to uphold baudrie, nor
to cover Incest, nor Buggerie, such speeches occasion their own shame. But to
his Reason.

My Similitude fits not, why? because a man is a substance, Page 136.
but a church consists in relation to Christ. He should have said more directly
and plainly; A man is a substance, a Church is not a substance, but consists
of relation only to Christ; so had the vanity of this answer better appeared
as evidently, as if he had said, a Church without a substance, a wife without
a woman; for the truth is alike in both. I ask him, is not a Church a relation
with substance also? if a substance, then the similitude is good and fit; if
not a substance, but a mere relation, without respect unto the persons and
their conditions, between whom and Christ the relation stands; then I demand
why they leave the consideration of the relation (which as they say, makes a
people the true Church and Wife of Christ) when they speak of us, and other
Churches, and do consider of our persons, that is, of our substances, and our
walking in our profession? The ideacal reference between Christ and a people
his Church, holds them holy in every man's sight, though in themselves
considered many be very profane. In the relation, they be Saints, the body of
Christ without sin, in their own persons beholden, sinful. Therefore if the
Church be always in relation, and so ever to be considered without the persons
as they walk in themselves, there is no pollution, let them hold to a mere
relation, and they shall answer for their fanaticall separation, as others
shall for their Anabaptisticall inspiration.

But because my similitude fits not his purpose, he brings The Similitude of
Husband and wife fitteth well to set out Christ and his Church.
in another of a husband and wife: this he holds a fit Similie, and so do
I: and because he may not afterward start from it, I will show that it is a
most apt Similitude, used by the holy Ghost himself, to set out thereby Christ
and his Church, as Husband and Wife, with the circumstances of marriage making.
First, a man chooses a wife, and takes liking to her, as did Sampson: so does
Christ. John. 13. 18. Secondly, Parents take the woman for their son, as
Sampsons Parents did: so God the Father gives the Church unto his Son. John.
6. 37. Thirdly, the parties are betrothed as Joseph and Mary: so is Christ and
his Church. 2. Cor. 11. 2. And making a covenant declared by words, the man
gives to his Spouse tokens of love, as Isaacks Servant did to Rebecca: So
Jesus Christ gives his word unto his church, Sacraments as pledges of his
favor and the graces of his spirit, the earnest of his love, Ezech. 16. 8. 14.
Fourthly, the parties do marry, and are full man and wife: so does Christ
marry his Church. Osea. 2. 19. 20. Fifthly, they do dwell together: so does
Christ with his Church. John. 6. 56. and 14. 23. Reu. 21. 2. 3. Sixthly, the
husband loves his wife, as Isaac did Rebecca; comforts her, and defends her:
so does Christ his Church. Ephesians. 5. 25. John. 13. 1. Cant. 2. 6. Psalm. 110. Act.
9. 4. 5. Ephesians. 5. 23. Thus have I declared the truth of the aptness of this
Similitude, for that it is most fit to overthrow their cause. If we be the
wife of Christ, then are we the Church of Christ. But that we are his Wife,
(if any particular Church may so be called) it is evident, The Church of
England the Wife of Christ, as well as any other particular Church.
because he has betroathed us unto him, by giving us his Word, his
Sacraments, and has bestowed the graces of his Spirit upon this Church, and in
other things has showed himself a husband unto us, in dwelling among us, and
mercifully defending us, as he did his people Israel: if any deny these
things, the spirit of madness is upon them, and they are deprived of sensible
apprehension. Here, from this Similitude, I propound these questions, to make
evident the cause which we hold against them.

Question 1. Whether a woman disobedient, may be for all that her disobedience,
a true wife.

Answer. Yes: Michol mocked her husband: Zephora was raging: the Levites wife
run from her husband: Judges. 19.
Jobs wife vexed him: yet all true wives. For a woman is a wife, not because
she is obedient and loving, but because Disobedience makes not no wife, but an
ill wife.
she is betroathed and married: her obedience or disobedience argues either
the goodness or badnesse of a wife, but makes not her more or less a wife: a
bad woman married, is as truly a wife, as a good woman. If the husband command
his wife to do his will, to see to the family in his absence, to educate his
and her children well, to correct offenders, and so forth; if she be careless
of all this, is she not a wife? If they say no, and can prove it, many bad
wives will curse them; but some husbands that have them, will be glad and
thank them, for finding out such an ouer-sea crotchet to make a riddance of
them. If she be a wife for all this, as indeed she is, then disobedience and
rebellion disanulleth not the marriage. Thus also it is with the Church. As
what before has been said of the Churches wickedness in Esaias time does
prove: nay, though the wife continue obstinate, yet is she a wife; so is the
church, Gods Church, though she will not hear. Psalm. 81. 11. 2. Chron. 36.
13. 14. 16. and yet verse 15. he calls them his people, though he did
severely punish them.

Question 2. What if a wife play the whore openly and often, is she then a
wife?

Answ. Such a one deserves a divorce, and has lost her power of her husbands
body: but even then she is a wife, so long as the husband will so account of
her; as David did his wife Mychol, married to another; which marriage 2. Sam. 3.
was adultery, especially if she did voluntarily live so: Bethsheba after her
adultery, is called the wife of Vriah, and 2. Sam. 11. 26.
Mat. 19 9. a woman married that may be divorced for adultery is called a wife,
and so is, until the husband renounce her, and give her a bill of
Diuourcement, as none of his wife. If she were not his wife, he could nor
retain her. Thus is it between God and his Church; which, though she commit
Idolatry, (which is spiritual Adultery, and is so called in the Scripture.
Ezech. 23. and 16.) and that she commit it openly and continue in it, yet is
she the Church of God, whilst the Lord will stand to his Covenant as he says,
Ezech. 16 60. and will acknowledge them his people, Ezech. 23. 5.
as he did when they lived in adulteries: until he give her a bill of
Diuorcement, of which, read Esaias. 50. 1. and that he does remove the
Candlestick out of the place, as he speaks, Reu. 2. And therefore, albeit we
were an Idolatrous people; yet that makes not us no wife of Christ, nor Church
of God, until they can prove that God has divorced us, We are to be accounted
Gods Church, till they can show that Christ has divorced us, and removed the
Candlestick.
and taken away his Candlestick from us. If they will judge us to be divorced,
and the Candlestick to be removed: then let them show, first, what is Gods
diuorcement, and what is the Candlestick: secondly, that that Candlestick is
taken away, and the diuorcement made: thirdly, how these be done; that so we
may take true notice of it: let them by Gods word teach us plainly these
things, and if they do, we have cause to hearken unto them; till then, we must
hold our selves the Church of God, being neither in Constitution nor public
practice Idolaters, intertaining no other lovers, but do hold Jesus Christ,
our only head and husband, and therefore are his wife by his own word,
Sacraments, and holy graces bestowed upon us, and not yet taken from us:
blessed be his holy Name. Amen.

Quest. 3. Whether a lawful married woman, through her misbehauiour,
disobedience, rebellion and adultery, can be a false wife?

Answ. False, is taken two ways: first, for deceitful, or fraudulent, or
lying, or corrupt: secondly, for the counterfeit of a thing, not the thing, but
only in semblance like it. In the former sense, a wife wickedly disposed may
be called a false wife, but yet is she a wife, and truly and rightly as a
woman a wife well disposed: as in this sense may a Church be called a false
church, and yet be a church of God. In the latter sense a woman seeming to be
married, and yet by reason of immovable impediments not truly married, cannot
be called a false wife; but indeed, is all one with no wife: for in this sense
a false wife and no wife is all one. A woman that is a wife, is not a false
wife, in this sense, how disorderly soever she be, but is a true wife,
disorderly living. When I say a true wife, I mean only a woman that is indeed
a wife in lawful marriage, and a false wife is the counterfeit woman not
married lawfully, but going under the name of one lawfully married as a true
man in this sense is one verily that is a man, having the lively essential
parts and properties of a man: a false man is one but in semblance like a man,
a portraiture of a man; yet indeed is no man.

Thus may we learn what to think of a Church, when it is called a false
church: corruptions in the first sense makes it a false church but cannot make
it no Church. But an Assembly, We must note the distinction, of a false church
and no church.
in the latter sense, called a false church, is all one with no Church. This
distinction must be diligently observed, to overthrow their condemning of us to
be a false church. If they understand it in the first sense, yet are we then
nevertheless a Church of Christ, for all the corruptions which they falsely lay
to our charge, and can never prove such corruptions to make an nullitie of a
Church. If they hold our Church a false Church, in the latter sense, then must
they prove our Church, to be no Church of Christ at all. For in this sense can
we call a Church of Christ no more a false Church, then a woman married
lawfully and living honestly no wife.

The word, Church, (as is well known) is used for the Assembly How the word
Church, is taken.
of wicked, called the malignant church; this howsoever it is called and shows
it self, is a counterfeit, a false church, that is, it is no Church of Christ,
but the Synagogue of Satan, as it is termed by the holy Ghost, in Reu. 3. 9.
The word, Church, is also taken for such as profess Jesus Christ, which in the
first sense by corruptions may be called a false church, but not so in the
latter sense: for a true Church, that is, a Church of Christ indeed, can be no
more a counterfeit, that is, no Church of Christ, then true Christ may be
termed a false Christ. A true Christian is the sincere professor, one so
indeed, like Nathaniel before God, as he shows himself to be before men; the
false Christian is the Hypocrite who resembles the true Christian before men,
(for before God there are none such) but indeed is no Christian at all before
God, but a very devil; as Judas was, before he was revealed to man, as Christ
called him. To John. 9.
conclude this, The Church (says Mr. Ainsworth) stands in relation to Christ.
Then, say I, that which has right reference to Christ is true, as he is true;
as he is verily Christ, so is that Assembly which has true relation to him
verily his Church. And if we do call it a Church, and dare not call it the
Church of Christ, but a false Church, then we speaking plainly, we hold it no
Church of Christ at all. As a false Christ, is not Christ but a devil, so that
Church, which is a false church, and cannot be called truly the Church of
Christ, is the church of the devil. If therefore they dare not call our
Church, the Church of Christ, then let us see their impudency, if they dare
call it a Church of the devil.

In the end of this his answer, he teaches three things: First, that
corruptions may be in true Churches, and instanceth Corruptions may be in a
true Church.
Pergamus, and Thyatira, which I confess to be true; and in these two churches
greater corruptions, then in ours, which I wish him ingeniously to confess:
for there was the Doctrine of Balaam, of the Nicolaitans, a woman Iesabel,
teaching and deceiving the people, to make Idolaters and fornicatours: which
doctrines our Church abhors. How then are we a false church, with less
corruptions, and they true, with more and greater? Secondly, that some
corruptions make a true Church false, as he calls it: but indeed, the
scripture alleged by him out of Re. 17. 2. and 1. 8. 2. prove not his
Assertion, but evidently show the Church of So it is, as it is considered in
the Apostasy and Idolatry thereof, but not as it was or is in the
Constitution. 2. Kings. 17. 27. 28.
Rome to be the Synagogue of Satan; the habitation of devils; and therefore
the church of Antichrist. Thirdly, that a church may from the first
constitution, by corruptions, be a false church, though it embrace much truth:
his instance is in 2. King. 17. 27 28. etc. But this church was no church of
God, but a congregation of Infidels in the first constitutution; a people
brought from Babylon, from Cuthah, Aua, Hamath, Sepharuaim, and placed in
Samaria in steed of Israelites, Gods people; they worshipped devils, and no
Gods, Succoth-Benoth, Nergal, Ashima, Nibhaz, Tartak, Adrammelech, Anammelech,
and knew not at all the God of Israel, in their constitution; afterward a
Leuite was sent to teach them to know and fear the God of Israel, as if a
Christian Teacher should besent now among Pagans, would yet any for that call
that people from the first constitution a false church, or rather no Church of
God at all? He speaks of much truth held, and corruptions in the
constitution, and that church false in that constitution. Here let Mr.
Ainsworth deal uprightly with his people, and with all the world: first, show
by Gods word plainly, what is A tax for Mr. Ainsworth and h^s com^anie, by
which the truth will be more fully laid open, then yet hitherto it has been.
a Constitution, secondly: what is a false church, a true church, and no
Church; and withal, the evident difference between a false Church, and no
Church by Gods written word: thirdly, what truths in the constitution a Church
may hold, and yet be a false Church, and what corruptions may fall into a true
Church in the constitution, and thereby become a false Church: fourthly, when
it becomes a false Church, and whether then it may have relation to Christ,
and be called a false church of Christ, or else no Church of Christ. The true
manifestation of these things, will fully lay open the error where it is, and
will demonstrate to every one, whether we or they have the truth in this point;
to wit, whether we be a true Church of God or no, better then any thing which
hitherto they have said and written against us. If he and they love the truth
in sincerity, let them manifest these things plainly, but not by bare quoted
Scriptures, but by explanation of the Scriptures brought, and then drawing
their arguments from thence, show how such places of Scripture prove what they
hold. I do profess, if God will be merciful unto me, that the truth I will
embrace with my heart, if herein I should stand in error.

Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer to this.
MAster Smith has gathered up my two Reasons into one, and gives such an
answer as it is, unto both; which I have before replied unto. And thus much
for the reasons from the entrance into the way.

The third Reason.
AN other Reason is drawn from their persons grievously In my former Book.
Pa. 47.
sinnin in their way, and is grounded upon a principle of their own doctrine
and practice, which is, that they may not join with men openly wicked,
obstinately maintaining their corruptions, either in life or doctrine: whence I
thus reason, and frame my argument.

Those that openly transgress, obstinately maintaining their The Separatists
are not to be joined unto.
corruptions, are not to be joined unto.

This proposition is their own, whether strong or weak it is not material, a
weapon of their own making, is of force enough to smite themselves.

The Separatists openly transgress, and do obstinately maintain their
corruptions.

And therefore not to be joined unto.

The Minor proved, the argument overthrows men's allowing of them: three things
I lay down and am to prove: first, that they do transgress: secondly,
openly: thirdly, obstinately.

That they transgress, I have showed in my former Book The sins of the
Separatists.
by six particular instances, as:

First, by separating from every one of us, and condemning Pharisaicall
Separation.
Pharasaically the most godly men, whosoever they be, as too polluted, and
unclean for them to join with, contrary to Acts. 10. 15.

To this Mr. Ainsworth says, I beg the question, and make an idle
repitition, and so deserve rather pity then answer. But whether the question
be begged, see what I before have said, of their thus departing. In saying that
it is idle, he may in so judging find himself idly conceited: one reason may
be brought for diverse ends, and be to good purpose without idleness. Seven
times brings he this reason, the Papists do say, the Papists may say, yet he
judges not himself to be idle. He so much despised me, as he omitted to
answer unto the place in the Acts. 10. 15. his term of pity, is but a word
of mockery, but I let it pass, as Mr. Smith does my words wholly here.

Secondly, by Unthankfulness, as I have showed, first, The Separatists are
unthankful.
unto God by denying here their conversion, or by calling it a false
conversion: secondly, to the Church of England their mother, by desiring to
make her a strumpet, by forsaking her before the Lord refuse her, by accounting
her a false Church, and so none of Christ's, and by holding us bastards that
remain with our mother.

Reply unto Mr. Ainsworths Answer.
Page. 163. 164.
MAster Ainsworth answers not to the proofs of their unthankfulness, but
says they are thankful; yet shows not how they so be, as I show how they be
not, and do now further confirm it out of his own answer: first, he will
Mr. Ainsworths answer condemns him of unthankfulness.
not confess any good he has received in particular: secondly, he cannot
speak in general but with clipping of his speech, with an ( as is meet:)
thirdly, he acknowledges they received good from Instruments, but Ministers he
names not, he will not afford the power of God by them, so much honor; his
thanks to them is to call them in scorn Fellow Priests, and in his bitter
zeal, dangerous Seducers, accusing us of blasphemy, persecution, etc. Mr.
Ainsworth belike reasons thus; because he says they be thankful, though they
abuse us, and will acknowledge no particulars received, yet therefore must they
be judged of us thankful. A goodly reason, if his bare word were witness
enough in his own cause. His Similitude of a Papist enlightened and forsaking
Popery, is unapt: first, he brings in a Papist converted, leaving Rome a
Church of Antichrist, as if it were one with their leaving of us: secondly, one
converted in the Romish Church, when they themselves were converted, if they be
yet converted, by our Church: one may be converted in a Church of Antichrist,
but not by it. In may be extraordinarily, and yeeldes nothing to that where the
conversion is wrought: but, by gives something to the Church, as Gods
instrument, with which he works. Men may be extraordinarily converted in the
Church of Rome; but not both in and by it, as here they were, and others
ordinarily are converted to sanctificaton daily, by the public authorized
ministers of the Church of England.

Mr. Smiths Answer replied upon.
Page. 131.
MAster Smith, as before makes a Sillogisme, but therein frames only an
imagined reason of mine; his own indeed, and none of mine, as now the Reader
may fee. But to this unthankfulness he answers more directly Mr. Smiths
Confession.
and plainly, then Mr. Ainsworth. He confesses he received here the seeds of
true faith invisible, effectual to Justification and salvation in Christ. But
this he abateth diuersely: first, with an if; if he had not known the
Separation: belike then, where it comes to be known, except it be embraced,
all hope of salvation is lost. I demand of him what is now his estate, that
knew it, was in it, and now is departed from it with great contempt of it? Is
it not alike, not to embrace it, and having embraced it, to overrun it, as
he has done? Secondly, that this estate he stood in to salvation, was
invisible and known only to himself, by the inward feeling of his heart, but
not visibly to be so judged by others according to the word. Here he
acknowledges an inward conversion, but not an outward. But if God afford the
greater, he will give the lesser: and can there be true grace inward, even
effectual to salvation, and for some long time, and not appear outward? But
herein he affords not God his due praise, in denying what is true, and hereby
accuses himself to be outwardly wicked, suppressing grace (for true and
effectual grace will not be kept secret but by violence) which he confesses
he had in himself inwardly. He also auerreth a manifest untruth, in saying
that others outwardly cannot judge of one so qualified here inwardly: the
contrary appears by such as see men reformed, and out of judgment from the
word, do behold the conversion of others by the fruits of amendment of life:
as also by wicked persons, who do see such and do mock and so persecute them.
Thirdly, he confesses his unthankfulness, in not thanking us, nor
acknowledging any thanks due for any visible conversion, in which respect
(says he) our Church is barren. As he is hereby unthankful, so untrue; as
both experience and what I have declared does show. If Mr. Ainsworth, hold not
with Mr. Smith, in this opinion, to wit, that here with us is only invisible
conversion, let him tell me what in this case, he esteems of the judgment
of Reformed Churches? If he hold neither inward nor outward conversion, why
deals he not plainly, as does Mr. Smith? if he hold both inward and outward,
why is he so unthankful as to conceal it, and to deprive this Church of her
due, and God of his glory manifested among us?

Thirdly, they sin in Uncharitableness: and thereof be Separatists be very
uncharitable in censuring.
three degrees.

The first degree is, unjust censuring the ignorant, as blinded by the God of
this world, and that those which have knowledge, and come not to them, do
sin against their own consciences, and remain so for fear, favor, profit,
and other wordly respects: also that those See my former Book. Pa. 51.
which have tasted of their way, and seeing at length the same to be a Schism
from Gods people, so leaving them, to be Apostates, and then what not? that
they will grow worse and worse, till God be avenged on them. Thus has Mr. In
his Book against me.
Smith written, and this censuring has passed from the mouths of many, and
written in private Letters of some. Thus to judge is a sin, being against
Mat. 7. 1. 2. and against the holy properties of true love. 1. Cor. 13. which
thinks no ill, ver. 5. and hops all things, ver. 7. and does nothing
contumeliously.

Reply to Mr. Ainsworths Answer Page. 164. 165.
to this Degree.
FIrst, he says, my accusation is an old Popish cavil against the
Protestants: I say it is no cavil, but a just accusation, for they have so
censured us, and this so censuring, to be a sin, is also proved: again,
though Papists cavil like Cauillers, this is no cauilling. For we accuse the
Separatists not falsely, but of what is done, and we do show also the same to
be sin.

Secondly, says he: they pray for us, wish us well, speaking what they believe
and know, to convert us, and so to cover a multitude of sins. Thus would he
be held charitable: Good words: but let them love in deed and truth. They pray
for us, so, if they do as they ought, do they for One being asked of some,
whether he thought them Gods children, whom before he held very virtuous? He
answered, A Turk may be Gods child: and would give no other Answer. Mr. Fr.
Ies.
Turks, Jews, and Papists, with whom they yet will have as soon spiritual
communion as with us. What is then their charitable judgment of us, in their
so praying, with such a separation from us? We pray for them, yet for all
this, he says, we are uncharitable. They speak (says he) to convert us,
and to cover a multitude of sins. Their conversion pretended, is plain
Nothing more against charity then the overthrow of faith.
peruersion of Faith, then which, to wit, to spoil Faith, the root of
Charity, is nothing more against charity: to offer poison for nourishment,
conceits for verity, Schism for sincerity; judge this, by what is here laid
to their charge, and proved in this book against them. Their covering of a
multitude of sins, is nothing less: for their way being evil, they increase
sin upon their followers, and for us, they labor to find all, and more then
all, making indifferent things sins, and truths falsehoods, as does appear here
by what is both laid to their charge for errors, and defended against them for
truths.

Thirdly, He denies that they censure us, etc: If their writings, and ordinary
course of speech did not contradict him, his word might stand with those that
would believe him herein: read Barrowes works, yea, and Greenewood against Mr.
Gyffard, and judge whether the persons be censured or not. I nominate certain
speeches, whereto he makes no answer, as was meet to have done; and not
barely to deny, what by proof is avouched.

Fourthly, He accuses us Ministers of uncharitableness, and our Church of
innumerable abominations and Idolatries, which do abound: but the best is, he
names not one. First, this man's reasoning still is thus: They are not
uncharitable, because we are so; else why answers he thus? Is it not to remove
the censure of uncharitableness from them, which is the matter laid to their
charge? Secondly, If any of us use reproachful speeches, I confess it is a
fault, as also to give any terms to men in hate, choler, malice, and for
revenge, otherwise then in love, by those terms to discover their sin, as
the Holy men in Scripture have done: men by private passion, in private
conference may slip in words, which is not good, and we ought all to be far
from the same; but be it much more far from us in public, and in handling
Gods cause, in speaking from God to the people, so also in writing: for that is
deliberately to sin, to see it before hand, and yet to let it pass, and with
will to do wickedly: oh, that all of Barrowes vein would see this, and
consider. Thirdly, for the sentence of some Ministers, (which he so much
excepteth against) who say, That such Page of my former Book 163.
as separate themselves wittingly and continually from the church of England,
cut themselves off from Christ: he applies this to themselves, which the
Ministers spoke in general: but as he will needs take it, let him hold it as a
just sentence against themselves. The judgment of these Ministers is Such as
do forsake the true Church of Christ, do forsake Christ himself.
just upon this ground held, that our Church is a true Church of Christ. If the
true Church be the body of Christ, do they not in forsaking the body forsake
Christ? And albeit a particular Church be but a member of the whole, yet the
case is all one. A finger forsaking the hand, therein forsakes the communion
with all the rest of the members, and of the whole body, and so also with the
head of that body. If this be not so, then, why is a man (in their judgment)
justly excommunicated, held to be one cast out to Satan, a Heathen, and a
Publican, as one not of the Church of God, though he be excommunicated but by
one particular true Church? If then our Church be a true Church of Christ, as
is in this Book proved, these Separatists have cut off themselves from
Christ, and are (as Mr. Perkins says) Excommunicatours of themselves, and to
be held as Heathen and Publicans.

Lastly, for his bare accusation of us, for innumerable abominations, and
abounding Idolatries; I say, it is as false, as idle; here in his own defense,
and against himself, proouing still his uncharitableness, in thus accusing
their mother so falsely. But these speeches flow not from any just cause in us,
but from the innumerablenesse of his imaginations against us, and the
abominable super-abounding gaulie bitterness within themselves, from which
the Lord once free them.

Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer to Page. 131.
to this first Degree.
HE says, their censure is but the censure of the holy Ghost, and what the
Scriptures do teach. It is great wickedness to do evil and defend it, but
horrible blasphemy, to make the holy Ghost, and holy Scriptures abettours of
men's cursed passions, raylings, and outrages. Let him justify by the
Scriptures his Barrowish raylings, and reuiling terms, and so acquit
himself of blasphemy: till then let him consider and fear, that God will
reckon with him for it, except he repent. Saint Paul never dealt so with
Alexander the Coppersmith, nor with Hymeneus, 2. Tim. 4. 14. 1. Tim. 1. 20. 2.
Tim. 2. 17.
nor with Philetus, nor with false Apostles, neither did Michael so deal with
the devil: but these men can give themselves dispensations for any thing. Is
not this Antichristian pride, and a sign of a presumptuously daring spirit?
Judge by this man's writings, by his Actions.

The second Degree of Uncharitableness, is their desire Separatists
uncharitable in their desires.
to have the preaching of the word extinguished among us, and so Egyptian
darkness to come upon us, rather then it should be taught by any Ministers of
the Church of England: which appears by their persuading, first of Ministers
to leave their Ministry; then of the people to forsake them: and by their
dispising and scoffing at the diligent endeavors. of any of us, in teaching the
people.

Reply to Mr. Ainsworths Answer, etc. Page. 165.

MAster Ainsworths Answer, is not a direct denial, but it is an overthwart
accusation, full of bitterness against us, though covered with fine and smooth
terms. Who says; First, That Egyptian darkness couers our land. Mr.
Ainsworths vile report of our people, Church, and Ministers.
Secondly, That the true light of the Gospel is not yet risen among us.
Thirdly, That our land is Vr of the Chaldees. Fourthly, That we walk in the
light of the fire and sparks which men have kindled to themselves. More
specially touching the the Ministry, he says; 1. It is an Antichristian
Clergy, to be sent back to the bottomless pit. 2. Thorns and thistles, that
can yield no grapes, nor figs. 3. A false Hierarchy and Priesthood. 4. That it
vpholds idolatry, profaneness, humane traditions, pleads for sin, and
against the truth. Particularly of the Ministers without exception, thus he
says: 1. that they be false Prophets; 2. their Vision night, their Divination
darkness; 3. that they deceive the people, and preach lies in the name of the
Lord; 4. that they be Falsers, not sent of Christ: 5. he compares them to
thieves coming in to steal and kill. All this he only says, but brings no
proof: It is enough to answer him that he slanders the people of God,
speaking openly evil, and belying the Ministers of Christ. If a false
accusation be charity, he has herein well acquitted themselves from
uncharitable dealing with us. He says nothing to my proofs, touching the
hearing of Gods Page 52. 53. 54. of my former Book.
word even from us. These he ought to have refelled, had I erred therein, else
has he answered nothing, but turned only his pen to sclandering. I expect
that the next time, he should take up my words better, and answer more to the
matter, else learn to be wisely silent.

Reply to Mr. Smith his Answer to Page 132.
this Degree.
IT is in substance a grant by necessary consequent unto that which I lay to
their charge, and yet would he in words seem to deny it, and so accuse me
for a slanderer. But Reader, mark what I say: They wish the word not preached
among us, rather then it should be preached by any of us in the Ministry. I
say not that they wish it simply, but respectively, this he yields unto, by
wishing the dissolution of our Ministry. The reason by which he would deny,
what I lay to their charge is, because he desires that the Word might by the
Kings commandment, or allowance, or permission, be preached throughout his
Dominions, by men fitted thereunto. But this takes not away what I have said:
for Mr. Smiths answer untrue, and against himself.
here he means, that the King would grant some of them leave to preach in his
Dominions. But herein observe, what he holds partly against himself, and
partly false by insinuation. Falsely he insinuates that the Kings Majesty
allows not fit men to preach the word, for if he do, why wishes he it, as if
it were not? Against himself, because he here grants, that if the King
command or allow fit men, they are to be heard: but such have we, and allowed
by his Majesty's authority, and therefore are such among us to be heard. Let
him answer himself, and the Separatists him herein also; except they will
deny the Kings authority.

The rest of his answer also in some things is still partly against himself,
partly bare affirmations in untruths. Against himself, for that he
acknowledges: first, that the word may be preached without a true
Constitution: then say I, may it be heard, where there is no true Constitution,
Ergo, now among us, though we had no true Constitution. Secondly, that
Preaching is more necessary then a true Constitution: Why then say I, is the
preaching of the word rejected, for want of a Constitution? Thirdly, that men
must be converted and brought to the Faith, before the Church be Constituted,
and they be established in the new Testament of Christ. Then may there be a
people converted, and believing God without a Constitution, and before they be
in Christ's new Testament. A Paradoxe; Can there be Faith and conversion to
Christ out of the new Testament, and without couenantting with God? These men
will teach any thing. His bare affirmations in untruths are: 1. That we Mr.
Smith says, but proves not what he says.
have established an Antichristian Communion and constitution: 2. that we
iumble all the people of the Land together, of what Religion soever they be: 3.
that over us is set an Antichristian Ministry, worship and Government: 4.
that we do maintain it, and refuse wholly all Reformation offered. All said
soon, and only said; he proved none of these things, neither confuteth such
as have publicly defended our Ministry, worship, and Government. Let him
confute Doctor Downham, his late Sermon. Doctor Scutchffes Book, of Eccles.
Discipline. But it is not matteriall what a wavering Reed says of his bare
word: What, have we not renounced Antichrist, and his power over us? does not
our Profession and Laws separate a Protestant from a Papist? And how can we be
called a Church Reformed, if we have refused all reformation? Is it true then,
which here he avouches against us upon only his bare word?

The third degree of Uncharitableness is, that they envy Separatists are
envious and proud.
and are sorry for the prosperity of Ministers and good things amongst us,
contemning and condemning the best, for the best graces of God in them: for the
more religious and painful men be in our way, the more they censure In his
discovery.
them, and rail against them, as Barrowes book does witness; contrary to our
Saviors practice: Mat. 12. 20. against his Commandment: Luke. 9. 49. against
Barnabas rejoicing: Acts. 11. 20. 21. 23. and Paul's joy. Phil. 1. 18.

Reply unto Mr. Ainsworths Answer.
Page 166.
MAster Ainsworths answer is, that they rejoice at good Mr. Ainsworth
equiuocates in his rejoicing*
things among us; but he means his own good things, their Schism, where he
answers not me to my meaning, and takes his schism and their errors for
good things; the thing in question. I never doubted, that they woudl be sorry
or envy the success of their way; this his joy, so understood, is idly
conceived to be the good things which I mean. Then he gesseth at what good
things I mean, but without my thoughts. I understand neither sect, nor
Schism, nor any humerous conceit of parties partaking this way, or that way,
but the preaching of Gods Word; What good things we rejoice for.
the effectual power of it; the increase of Preachers; the many godly
exercises with us; the honest conversation of many; and that their
schismatic way is more and more discovered to many; and as Schism rejected
of some, which did intertaine it, and now have returned, to the joy of many;
that the Gospel is yet vpheld, and Laws made against Popery: these and such
like, are the good things which do prosper with us, and for which we are to
rejoice and praise God.

What sorrow some men, as he says, have at the prosperity of Prelates, as he
calls them, they best know: for my part, I profess with Reverend Beza, long may
the church enjoy them if at would please God, that as they have government in
their hands by Authority, so every one would execute the charge committed to
his trust diligently: for then more envious then truly zealous were they that
would sorrow to see them in prosperity. Prosperity aduanceth the credit
Advancement of learning is good for the Church.
of authority, and hinders not goodness whereas is grace and true fear of
God. It is madness to dislike the advancement of Learning: it is not approved
wisdom to despise ancient general Customs of Churches, not against the
Word: or not to allow good order of Ecclesiastical Superiority in Government,
without which, men run, we see, as many ways, as they have imaginations: and
no end is of out-roads, if the power of authority restrain them not. My hearts
desire is, that what amongst us is allowable, may by good usage become more
lawdable, which by abuse in personal miscarriage does grow contemptible. And
therefore touching the Book he mentions, which I writ, and would have
printed, it is a false report received of him. The Author thereof I challenge
here, therein to have slandered me. Indeed I gathered from their works, what
possibly might have been said in the worst manner against us, only to see what
could be said, better to arm my self against them; and by that and other
means, I did not a little satisfy my self.

Reply to Mr. Smiths and Mr. Ainsworths Answer hereto.
IT is a denial with railing on me, but what is said already, what his
practice is, what here he has uttered before witnesses, is proof enough to
contradict him herein, that denies daily his former self in doctrines and
deeds.

I lay to Mr. Ainsworths charge, that is, to him and his Company, their woeful
abuse of Excommunication: and do produce witnesses for the same, which he
wholly in silence passes over, as neither having any conscience able to defend
it, nor grace to confess the same; to show the spirit of humility, and
impartialitie toward themselves. Mr. Smith denies their rash Excommunicating
any, and yet a Taylour among them was Excommunicated for taking seven
shillings, for making a Doublet and Hose, and standing in the lawful taking of
it: because another Taylour said, he ought to have had but five shillings.
Again, he and they (before The Cap. at Gains.
they went over) Excommunicated one for hearing the word preached by our
Ministers.

Is not this abuse in Excommunication, to cast a man off It is an abuse of
Excommunication, to Excommunicate any for hearing of the word.
to the diuill, for hearing Gods word, which is a thing commanded of God? there
is no precept, no practice of this in all Gods Book; where is hearing the word
of God made a sin, deserving Excommunication? Indeed Pharisaicall Hypocrites
threatened Excommunication for men following our Savior and believing in him:
but our Savior forbad not his to hear them. Mat. 23. This is therefore to be
rather of a proud Pharisees spirit, then of Christ's. But he says, that it is
lawful to Excommunicate one for hearing us: first, because we be false
Ministers. I answer, that if it were so; yet it follows not, that we should
not be heard at all: for so was some of the Pharisees, yet our Savior did give
leave to hear them, so it be with a take-^eed, and a wariness: secondly,
because or Church is a false Church, and so an Idol, and to commit Idolatry
deserves Excommunication. I answer: he takes two things for granted, which we
deny, and he cannot prove: first, that our Church is a false Church; and
then, that a false Church is an Idol: the contrary I shall manifest
afterward, by answering his reasons for the same: thirdly, he asks whether I
will hear a Popish Priest preach, and pray. I answer, that I would, so be he
preach the truth of God, and pray as we do, only to God, in Christ, let him
show Scripture why not? fourthly, because he says, the Lord forbids to hear
false Prophets, etc. Deuteronomy. 13. 3. 1. Tim. 6. 3. 5. Tit. 3. 10. 2. Ioh. verse
10. I answer, that these places be nothing to us, except he can prove us false
Prophets, and Heritiques. He can easily call us so, as he is audaciously bold,
to call S. Augustine an Heretic, which no Church of Christ ever so did name.
It is not the quoting of scriptures; but the true sense, and right application,
which conuinceth an adversaries conscience: let him prove that these are spoken
of us, and there an end of this. And thus much for the third sin, and the
degrees in sinning.

Fourthly, they sin in abuse of holy Scriptures, ill expounding, Separatists
abusers of Scripture.
misapplying, idly alleging, and crookedly wresting them from their true
meaning. For the truth herein, I commend the serious examination of their
quoted Scriptures in their confession, to any indifferent understanding Reader,
and by him herein to be judged, and their cause upon this one point, if so they
please, to be adventured. If they ask particulars, they are too many to
recite; some are answered here in the Reply to their answer to the first
error, which the Reader may consider of; as also of others else where, as he
finds them, and in my Reply by his reading shall meet with them.

Reply to Mr. Ainsworths and Mr. Smiths Answers. Page. 167. 168.

MAster Ainsworth only referres the Reader over to my third probability, and
to their Books, and so do I. Mr. Smith denies not this, but excuses himself
by ignorance, Page. 134.
if he have so done, by not remembering the places, and would have them
produced; as if he neither knew any, neither I knew to produce them; but he
has a Reioynder of diverse Ministers to a Reply of his, wherein they show him
evidently his grievous sin herein, by many instances. He kept this their
labor close, which is so much against him: and does discover fully his
audacious dealing with Gods word. And thus have I proved that they sin in
practice and in doctrine, as shall be more manifested afterward.

The second thing is, that they thus sin openly; which is also evident, by
their ways known far and near, so as this needs no proof.

Fifthly, they sin in their obstinacy, which is the third thing Separatists be
obstinate.
to be proved in the last argument: this is proved by me in my former book,
from, Page 65. to 70. in which discourse is also showed, how they do manifest
their obstinacy.

Reply to Mr. Ainsworths Answer.
MAster Ainsworth with all the help he has had, cannot Mr. Ainsworth not able
to clear themselves of wilfulness.
wipe off their wilfulness. He cannot I say, because he does not, for that
he would do herein what he can. He touches not one reason, nor answers a
word to the diverse instances which I give, and whereby I show them to be
wilful. If the next time, he answer not to what I have said in the other
book, and he now has passed by, he is judged more wilful and perverse, for
that he will not see nor now acknowledge their wilful perverseness, so
plainly made manifest unto them. But says he, we are no Schismatickes, nor
our way Schism, and therefore not wilful in persisting in a good way. By this
it appears, prove their way Schism, and then they yield themselves to be
wilful. Then for this, see my Reply to his answer made to my second
Probability, where their Schismatic course is made manifest unto them: and
also consider what after I say, to manifest our Church a true Church, from
which to depart with condemnation as from a false Church, or for some
particular corruption to avoid spiritual communion in holy things, is a proud
Pharisaicall and damnable Schism. He says that the Papists as easily call us
Schismatickes, as we do them. I grant as easily, but not so truly. The folly
and falsehood of this objection is showed before at large.

Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer.
MAster Smith his answer is: First, that we persist in our Schism from the
Church of Rome: belike he reasons thus; if our departing be lawful to be
persisted in without condemnation of obstinacy, then may they persist in their
Schism from us, and not be justly held obstinate: but I answer, that our
departing from Rome is no Schism, for that Our departing from Rome, is no
Schism, and yet the Separatists are in Schism from us.
Jesus Christ in plain words commands us to come out of her; Reu. 18. 4. There
is no Schism in forsaking that Antichrist: neither are we condemned of any,
but only of the Papists themselves for Schism, as the Separatists be of all:
and we say, that the Papists condemnation of us, is nothing in the partial
defense of themselves, and unjust censure of us. Secondly, to uphold their
departing from us, to be as lawful, as ours from Rome, he dare avouch (for
what dare he not teach after his own conceits,) that the difference between
them and us is more, then between us and the Papists. Mr. Ainsworth before
equalled the causes of their departing from us, and our departing from Rome,
but this man makes our corruptions greater between them and us, then between
us and that Romish Synagogue of Satan; but how false this is, remember what is
said of this in the second Probability.

Sixthly, they sin in their Separatists are railers. If any particular person be
free from this, and other evils, I here do not understand him nor any such.
railing, scoffing, and blasphemies, etc. This have I set forth at large in my
former Book from Page. 70. to 78. and by the word have manifested the same to
be great sins.

Reply to Mr. Ainsworths Answer. Page. 168.

MAster Ainsworth his answer to this is: First, a doubting, with an if such
things be, they themselves condemn them. They be loath to see their sins,
and to confess them: humble spirits sooner confess their own evils, then sit
proudly taxing their neighbors. Secondly, he Mr Ainsworth imputes sin and
blasphemy to the holy Ghost.
says, what I account railing, scoffs, and blasphemies, are no other
speeches, then the holy Ghost has used and applied to like persons. If he
will not be justly condemned of impious blasphemy, let him prove this, else
most accursedly imputes he sin in and by them to the holy Ghost. Let him
tell me where ever the holy Ghost called set Prayer the smoke of the
bottomless pit; singing of Psalms harmonshing some ballad; The Lords Supper a
two-penny feast; that such Ministers as with us preach painefully, and live
religiously, are called by the holy Ghost, ravening wolves, Angels of hell, and
that upon such, are the uttermost deceits, and effectual delusions of Satan.
A woeful man if that he dare charge the spirit of God with such things. He
that dare say this, is bold enough. Thirdly, he seems to make their outrage
herein less, by alleging Martin Marprelates course. Martins course was cursed,
and condemned justly of all sober spirits, yet was not he so badde as Barrow,
that Rabshakah: no scurrulous Mate answerable to this man, his pen was full
of venom, as his head of violent rage, his writings witness it, as I have at
large declared in my other book. If this Answerer will justify him, let him
bear his iniquity: Had his cause been good, yet his manner in handling it
was devilish; what excuse soever may be made for him.

Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer.
He speaks for his fellow Barrow, and tells us, that first, he approues of
Barrowes Scripture-phrases, as fitly applied against us: secondly, other
Phrases also, because he knows not what particular motion of Gods spirit
guided him; for it seems, he dare not but think, what he wrote was of Gods
spirit: thirdly, he dare not censure his mocking, for that he followed
therein Eliah. Thus can they gloze with themselves, and justify any thing, and
all under color of piety; the more damnable their iniquity. Let this man do
his best for Barrow, or rather work wickedness for him, he cannot prove
before God all his Scripture phrases to be aptly applied against us. And what
motion of the spirit can railing, rage, or mad frenzy be, that such a one
cannot therein be judged of? His following of Eliah against Baal and Baals
Priests, was beyond his warrant to mock and taunt the preachers of the
Gospel, from any authority of God. He that sins is worthy of death; so he
that consents and iustifies the wicked, deserves to die, and a woe by Esaias is
pronounced against him. Esaias. 5.


I allege against this man, his published writings: first, Page 71. 73. 75. of
my former Book.
against the Separation: secondly, for his allowing of Bishops: thirdly, for
his justifying of set Prayer, and saying of the Lords Prayer. He answers me
thus; that I may as well allege against S. Paul his Pharasaicall practices,
persecutions, and blasphemies, before he came to the truth, as evidences to
confute christian religion, which afterward he embraced. This answer set
down, is enough to manifest him; and sufficient it were not to regard what he
writes: for as new conceits arise, so In his Epistle of his book of
Differences.
will he every day deny himself; and of late in effect he has published so
much of himself. If therefore he had not adjured me before the Lord to
answer him, I had just cause in every man's indifferent judgment to have been
silent, and to have let him fly without pursuit. He has out-runne himself
with us, and now also what he was with the Brownists; whose assembly he
condemns at this present, to be In his Book of Anabaptistrie called, The
Character of the Beast.
as very an Harlot as the Church of Rome. So then, such as here suffered
imprisonment, and now are with him, suffered due punishment for their
wickedness, and for being in love with an Harlot: may they not by this have
sweet comfort of their troubles for their Brownisme? Note this, Reader, well.

Now follows the matter of Brownisme, the opinions of their own way, errors
arising from their own heart; which being proved, I may conclude that they are
in that their way not to be joined unto, but to be avoided as Schismatickes.

The first Error of the Brownists.
THey hold, that the Constitution of our Church is a false Constitution. This
Mr. Ainsworth confesses to be their opinion, Page 169. This is an error, it
is manifest, for that the Constitution of our Church is a true constitution:
which thus I prove:

an Apostolical Constitution, is a true Constitution, That our Constitution is
Apostolical and true.
such a one is ours: for first, the people of this Nation was converted to
Christ as true Stories do witness, by either Apostles, or Apostolical men:
neither is it to be doubted, but that in their days the Gospel was far
spread, as may appear by Saint Paul's testimony. Romans 10. 18. Col. 1. 6. It
is a Popish error to avouch the contrary, as learned men with us have
maintained against the Papists. Secondly, because we yet hold and maintain the
same things Apostolical, whereby both we and other Churches were made
Christian Assemblies, that is, the Word, external profession of Jesus Christ,
and the holy Sacraments; by which, and for which, the people in the Apostles
days were accounted Christians. The Word makes Disciples to Christ. Mat. 28.
9. Mark. 16. 15. And it is the word reconciling men to God. 2. Cor. 5. 19. by
this, wrought the Apostles. Act. 2. 14. with 37. 38. and 16. 32. 33. This word
given to a people, is Gods couenanting with them: for so the declaration of his
will, by his word is called his covenant. Leu. 2. 13. Deuteronomy. 29. 11. and he
takes such to be his. Deuteronomy. 26. 18. The peoples receiving this word, and
professing their faith to God, is their taking of God to be their God, and
couenanting with him: Deuteronomy. 33. 3. and 26. 17 of such has has he received a
reconciliation. Job 33. 23. 24. And such Professors the Apostles admitted into
the Church, as those that had couenanted with God, and were not to be denied
the seal of the covenant. Acts. 8 12. 37. 38. The Sacraments combine and knit
us together. Mat. 28. 19. 1. Cor. 10. 16. Therefore unless they will deny that
we have Christ's word and Sacraments, and that we do not profess that Christ
to be our Savior, they cannot with any face of truth deny us both to have had,
and now to have one and the same Apostolical constitution; suppose there be
now corruptions, they take not away the nature of a true constitution, so long
as we hold no other word of life, then Christ's; no other Sacraments then he
instituted; nor any other Savior, or means of salvation, but only himself.

if they be a true constituted Church, then are we We are as truly constituted
as they.
so: but they so think of themselves. The consequence is necessary: because
wherein they be Christians, by the very same be we such also: they profess
Christ; and preach they any 2. Cor. 11. 4.
other Jesus, whom we have not preached? They say. they have the Spirit: If
they mean Gods Spirit, where had they it? not here? Have they received another
Spirit, whom we have not received? They have (say they) the Gospel: What
Gospel? Have they received another Gospel, which we have not received? I
then say with the Apostle, we might suffer them: If they can prove it, then we
must believe it. Lastly, they are baptized, and so be we: If we be truly
baptized, then are we in a true Constituted Church; which thus appears:
First, true Baptism puts on Christ; Gal. 27. and a company having put on
Christ, can they be denied to be in Christ? and if in Christ, then his Church.
Secondly, true Baptism admits men not into a false Church, but into the true
Church; if our Baptism be true, then are we a true Church, except we have
after forsaken our Covenant. Thirdly, true Baptism is Gods true Seal, to the
persons so baptized, that he has couenanted with such, and they with him, and
therefore he says, such were borne to him as were in Israel, even, for that
they had upon them Izech. 16. 20.
the seal of Circumcision; the like may be said of such, as have upon them
Baptism. And if we be Gods children by Baptism, and he thereby does
testify his Covenant with us, then are we his people and true Church. This
cannot be denied, unless they can show that God has reuersed his Covenant
with us, though we be baptized: but this they cannot, so long as we do
profess Jesus Christ, and hold his word, which is his covenant with us: though
some do break with him in many particulars, shall the unbelief of some, make
the Faith of God of none effect to all? now God forbid. If they say that our
Baptism is Romans 3. 4.
false and no true seal, as Mr. Ainsworth says, Page 195. I answer; If it be
Christ's baptism, then is it true Baptism, and a true seal: for Christ's
baptism is but one, he has not a true and a false baptism in his Church.
Ephesians. 4. 5. If it be not Christ's, then it is no Baptism at all, and so should
we need to be baptized, because we are not baptized: and then why herein agree
they not with Mr. Smith. The judgment of Divines here, and beyond the sea,
hold our Baptism true. The matter and form are true, and therefore it is
true. If they can show any other matter and form of Baptism instituted by
Christ, then whereof our Baptism does consist, they say something: a true
Minister is for the well being, but a Minister is not of the essence of a
Sacrament.

people gathered together in Christ's Name, for the Constitution.
that is, by his authority and ordinance to profess him, are a true Church,
and so in a true Constitution, for Christ is among We are gathered by Christ's
power.
them. Mat. 18. 20. But such are we, by the power of Christ are we conjoined:
first, in the time of Reformation in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign,
were many by Gods Word and Spirit, joined into the Profession of Christ; which
Word and spirit is Christ's power: now that this power did conioyne them, is
evident; for her Majesty (with many other) in Queen Mary's days professed
freely the Gospel, after whose death they also did uphold and continue it: this
is most evident; and cannot be denied. Then others were by her Majesty's
blessed Rule, brought to the outward obedience of the Gospel. Now, that her
authority was also Christ's power, is manifest; because Princely authority is
his ordinance, and the same has the Lord used to to reform his people, and to
join together his people, as is to be seen in the Example of Ezechias, and
Josias; and therefore are we a people gathered together in the Name of Christ,
that is, by his power and authority to profess his Name, and he is among us,
and in many powerful to Sanctification of life; and therefore a true Church,
and in a true Constitution. Lastly, we all now living cannot be said to be
gathered by the Magistrate, but have been brought into the Church by the Faith
of our parents, and the Churches charitable judgment of us in our infancy, to
have belonged unto Christ, and by his now gathering do we stand a people of
God, confirmed by the word, and vpheld by the authority of the Magistrate.

Our Constitution agrees with Mr. Ainsworths Reason for our Constitution.
definition of a Constitution, Page. 170. The Constitution, says he, of the
Commonwealth of Israel, is a gathering and uniting of a people into a divine
policy. If this definition be Our Constitution agrees with Mr. Ainsworths
description of a constitution.
true, then we agreeing unto this, our Constitution is true: the form whereof
is, says he, Order. First, then we are a gathered and united people by the
word, into the profession of Christ; and knit by Baptism, and the Communion,
and thus, first, under one Sovereign authority; and secondly, tied to this
honor of Christ by wholesome Laws. Secondly, they are gathered into Order, as
was the Common wealth of Israel, for in that policy, persons were gathered
into Families; Families brought into Cities; Cities united into Tribes; and
Tribes subject all under one Supreme power; under whom were others, both in
the Church and in the Common wealth in this order also of Superiority, one
over, and an other under an other; the Church and Common wealth, being one
commixt body in policy, under one King; so as the offices of the several
members might be distinguished in their special ends, and manner of working,
but not be divided bodies altogether one from another in matter of Government,
in which the high Priest Deuteronomy. 17.
did intermeddle about civil affairs, as well as others, not Churchmen, as
we say. Mr. Ainsworth acknowledges and teaches, that all are Church men,
though employed in civil causes; for the distinction of Clergy, and Laymen
(says he) is popish. He holds also that the people have authority to meddle
in Church government, to appoint Tradesmen to sit with their Pastor in cases
of Excommunication; why then may not the authority of Princes be as sufficient
to allow Clergy men, as we speak, to meddle in Common wealth matters, if
they be held fit, upon occasion, not neglecting thereby their Ministry, no
more than the high Priest did omit his Priesthood, though he sat now and then
in other causes? Has a Layman more liberty for to meddle in matters of the
first Table, than a Minister to have to do in matters of the second, being
called thereunto? Is matters between man and man any thing but righteousness?
and is not a Minister to teach that? and if he ought to teach it, may he not
see the same put in execution, even by authority given unto him? an Elder,
that is, a Church man, a Minister, is commended for ruling well, 1. Tim. 5.
besides his labor in the Ministry. And thus is the Commonwealths Order in
Israel here observed: persons are gathered into Families, Families into
Parishes, Parishes into Diocesses, Diocesses into Provinces; and all under one
Supreme regal authority: under whom in church and Commonweal are other in
superiority and inferioritie one to an other, for well ordering this body knit
together, as was the same in Israel. If all things were answerable to this
Order, were there any better, or more exactly agreeing with the Order in
Israel? Thirdly, I say, this is also divine uniting of us together: first,
because it so agrees with Gods Order under the law: secondly, because the
Kings authority, which is Gods authority, has so united us, by his
established laws. This Order is more order, then that confused meeting of
straggling private persons, who under pretense of Christian liberty, will live
under no law, but do what to themselves seems good; of which the holy Ghost
complains, and renders a reason, Judge. 17. 6. and 18. 1. and 19. 1. because
there was no king in Israel. He cries not out for the want of an
Ecclesiastical Constitution, the Order of Aaron appointed by Moses was then
among them, but he laments the want of a King, without whom men did what they
listed. Such a complaint may be justly taken up against these, who do what
they list; now Brownists, now Anabaptists: one allows that, another this, a
third would have he knows not what. One half Excommunicating another half;
they be full of variety, instabilitie is their Christian liberty. Ask some
returned from them, what troubles for every trifle, what carping and censorious
spirits arise up in them? They be a disquiet Sea, never without some storms
arising; they be a very Babel, for that they have no King in their Israel: that
is, of their Constitution, to keep them in obedience. The Holy Ghost
complains three times for the want of a King, to show what a good thing it is
to have a King in Israel; without whose authority, though there be the word,
and a constituted Church, yet will men do what they list. Mark and consider;
the happiness herein, and their misery.

We are a true constituted Church, if their description Reason for our
Constitution.
of the Church: be true: for though I have showed how false it is; yet sithen
they maintain it for true, it is enough to prove by their own judgment
against themselves, that we be a true Church. Now that the Church of England
agrees If their description of a Church be true, we are a true Church
constituted.
fully with their description, it shall appear by the particulars, of this
definition of theirs, set down in their Book to the Kings Majesty, Page. 44.
in the third Position. Every true visible Church, is a Company of people
called, and separated from the world by the word of God, and joined together by
voluntary profession of the faith of Christ in the fellowship of the Gospel. a
Company of people none deny. Called, We are called.
Some internally, as the fruits of the Spirit witnesses, and all externally,
as the general profession of every one declares. Separated Separated.
from the world; in that we by Profession, Laws, and Public meetings, are
severed from Jews, Turks and other Heathen: also from Papists, Anabaptists,
Familists, Arians, Brownists, and all such Heretics, and Schismatics, which
is further manifest by our Public condemnation of them, and also by infliction
of punishment upon them, for their wicked practices: thus are we five ways
separated from false Religions and Assemblies. By the word of God. Thus also
have I proved, that our Church was called: whether hereby be meant, the
Ministry of the word, or Magistacies lawful power commended and blessed in
reformation of the Church by the Word: for that may be said to be done by the
Word, which is done by the allowance thereof. Joined together. Thus is also our
Church, as also I have proved and declared how. For Profession it cannot be
denied, but perhaps they doubt, We be voluntary professors, and how.
how it may be held a voluntary Profession. But if they consider these things:
first, our Sovereigns voluntary Profession with the Honorable Counsel; for
who compels them? secondly, the free proceeding of the Honorable house of
Parliament, where it is allowed for every one to speak freely, and the good
Laws made to establish Religion, and to punish offenders with free consent:
thirdly, the Communalties free chosing of Parliament men, who are their Neh.
10. 29. Leu. 4. 13. 15.
mouth and heart in their proceedings: fourthly, if to these generals, there be
added, the free contributions of many Congregations, for the maintenance of the
Ministry of the word, the many thousands that seek abroad for instruction,
without enforcement of law, there is no reason to judge our Church vnuoluntarie
Professors. What if some dissemble? who knows it certainly? what if some
come for fear? yet so long as they are at a choice of two things, either to
suffer punishment, or to profess Religion, can they be said not to come
therefore voluntarily, sithen that where there is a chose, there is a kind of
freedom? They may see then that we are a people voluntarily professing, this
cannot be denied, except they can prove, that for some, the profession of most
and the chief are not to be esteemed. Of the Faith of Christ: they here show
not what Faith, neither the kinds, nor degrees of Faith: now We have Faith in
Christ.
certainly can any think, but that we all do profess the Faith of Christ;
that is, either, that Christ is Hystorically, or that Christ is a Savior, and
such to hold on temporarily, or else, that he is, to so many as certainly
believe in him, to salvation, a blessed Redeemer? If in but some of these we
have the Faith of Christ, we do answer to the description, sithen they mention
only a Faith of Christ: but we having these faiths, all Hystoricall, some
temporary, and some justifying Faith among us, we herein by their description
are a Church of Christ. in the fellowship of We have fellowship in the Gospel.
the Gospel: first, the truth of the former does infer this necessarily, for
we cannot be a company voluntarily gathered into the profession of the faith of
Christ, and not be in fellowship of the Gospel: secondly, because we are al one
body, and all more or less partaking of the doctrine of the Gospel, and of the
Sacraments of the Gospel: As he that in some thing does join with men in ill,
though he be not absolute with them in all things, has fellowship in
darkness: so on the contrary is it true, touching our fellowship in the
Gospel; there may be a true followship in the Gospel, though such as be so
therein be ignorant of very many truths, else were not the Apostles in that
followship before Christ's Ascension, who were ignorant of many things, and slow
of heart to believe all that the Prophets had said; so Luke. 24.
the Hebrews after much teaching; and if corruptions should hinder, then the
Corinthians had not been in the fellowship Heb. 5. and 6.
of the Gospel, whether we respect the Doctrine of some in a maine point of
Religion, touching the resurrection, or the ill lives of some among them. I see
not therefore how they can deny us fellowship in the Gospel, more than these,
or all the Churches of God in the world.

in a true Constitution, Reason that our Constitution is true.
then much more may it be concluded truly, that our Church has a true
Constitution; being in a state reformed much from all the grosest errors and
absurdest corruptions thereof. Now whether the Church of Rome be in a true
Constitution or no, I leave it to the Reader to judge upon these Reasons.

First, in respect of the time past, and first planting thereof by Apostolical
authority, in Saint Paul's time, Romans 1. and thus I reason after Mr. Iohnsons
own fashion; In his answer to Mr. White, Page. 15.
who uses the like defense for the Church of Israel, committing Idolatry in
the Wilderness; and says, that they were in that Idolatry Gods people, by a
former Calling. If the reason defend them in the very act of Idolatry, why may
it not be a reason for the Constitution of the Romish Church, though it be
Idolatrous and Antichristian?

Secondly, in respect of the time present, because Antichrist, that is, that
Head with his body sits in the Temple of God. 2. These. 2. 4. which must be
understood visibly in respect of the truths of God in Doctrine, and truths in
ordinances of Christ held there (how foulie soever they be corrupted) of which
Gods people among them partake in his mercy to their salvation, and others
from time to time have Se Catal. Testiu^. veritatis.
maintained openly to the preservation of some fundamental points of the
Apostolical Constitution. Now the Temple of God, in which he sits, has a
true Constitution, in which respect, that Church is in a true Constitution.

Thirdly, If the children of the ten Tribes, in their Apostasy, through
Ierobeams idolatry, might be called the children of God by circumcision, the
visible seal of Gods covenant; then why may not the little ones in the Romish
church, be called Christ's, for that they have received true baptism? If so; it
has a true Constitution by true Baptism in their children, who are Christ's
thereby, as the children of the Israelites were the Lords by Circumcision, till
by education they be made Antichristian, and by that offered up to Antichrist,
as the children of the Israelites became Molochs, by the Fathers offering of
them up unto him, as Ezechiel speaks.

Fourthly, Popery or Antichristianisme begun not out of Christianity, as
taking unto it self truths from true Christianisme, but was and is idolatrous
and heretical corruptions brought in by Satan upon the profession of
Christian faith, and into the Church of God; in which, as is said, Antichrist
sits: So as it does not disanull wholly Christianity, but corrupts it, and
covers it over with corruptions, as Jobs body was with sores: of which
similie touching this point, see more at large following.

Fifthly, if that Church need only a Reformation, then it has not made a
nullitie of Religion, and so has not lost the first Apostolical constitution
totally, but it needs only reformation, which ever presupposes truths held
which are sufficient to judge men to be Christians, the corruptions being taken
away. There is required either only a reformation, or a new plantation; but
not this, and therefore only the other; for so we and all other Christian
Churches which are come out of Babylon, do hold it sufficient that we are
reformed from her corruptions, and do not need any primarie couenanting or
Baptising as in the first Planting; which would follow, if we needed more then
a reformation. This Romish Church must be dealt with only as the Church of God
was in Judah: It fell often to gross and Heathenish Idolatry, and so brought
upon the true Constitution an Heathenish worship; of which, when God raised up
good Kings, they were reformed, which was thus: First, what good the Church
held in her fall, that was retained, as being of the true constitution:
Secondly, what evils were brought in upon the Constitution were removed and
cast out: Thirdly, the good things, which for these evils brought in, were
either laid aside, or cast out, the same were again brought in, and used as at
the first. These things are apparent in the days of the good Kings of Judah,
when Religion was reformed, especially in the days of Hezechias and Josias. 2.
Chron. 29. and 30. and 34. and 35. And thus was the Church reformed, and not
newly again constituted, for that they held the constitution in some sort, by
a profession of truths, and by Circumcision, although Idolatry was committed
of them: So is it with the Romish Church, which stands in a true Constitution
by profession of very many maine truths, which are truly of the Apostolical
constitution, as also by Baptism, which we do hold true in the substance,
which if they do retain, and therein agree with us, laying aside their
glosses and corruptions, even their Antichristian abominations, and bringing
in what good things they have laid aside, what does let, but that by such a
reformation, we may judge them a true Church, as now justly we do condemn
them for Antichristian, not in respect of their Constitution, but in respect of
their abominations, brought upon the constitution, and of the good things cast
out by them? for which Antichristianisme we do separate our selves from them,
as others may in the like case. And thus by these six reasons have I proved,
that our Church is truly Constituted.

Reply unto Mr. Ainsworths Answer to this first Error.
WHat Mr. Ainsworth can say hereto I know not; what he has said to my former
book, let us see: he denies us to have a true constitution by two reasons:
first, because (says he) all profane, wordly, and wicked persons are
received, as the matter whereof the Church is builded, contrary to Leu. 20. 24.
1. King. 8. 53. Acts. 2. 40. and 19. 8. 9. John. 17. 16. 2. Cor. 4. 14. 17. 18.

I answer, first, these words insinuate, as if we were receiving A difference
between admitting into the Church and retaining of men already in it.
in strangers into the Church, as if the Church were in planting; which is
deceitful dealing with his Scholars, we cannot be said properly to be
receiving such into the Church, as be already in it, but we retain them that
are in. It is one thing to receive wicked men into the Church, and another to
retain the members that are in it already. He speaks therefore improperly of
us, if not absurdly, especially if he understand the speech of the Church of
England, as he should, and as I do in this point in hand.

Secondly, his accusation is false, for we make not men matter How men be
matter of the Church.
of the Church, as they be wicked or profane; but we retain them, because
they hold the same profession of Christ with us, though in conversation they
do swerve from it, which ill demeanor we condemn in them, by our
Profession, by Laws: and this is manifest by punishment inflicted upon many,
when they be lawfully proceeded against, and till then we retain them, hoping
of their amendment.

Thirdly, his argument is of no force: what though some wicked be retained?
will a false constitution thereupon Though the wicked be not cast out, yet the
constitution is not false.
follow? First, I demand, is an honest society of Tradesmen, a false
society, because some be retained among them who are dishonest? secondly, I
demand, was the constitution of Corinths Church false, because they had among
them wicked men? why then did S. Paul call it a Church of Christ, and a company
of Saints? what may also be said of Thyatira, which suffered Iesabel to teach,
deceive, and to Revel. 2. 20.
commit fornication? what is to be thought of the Church of the Jews, in
Esaias, and ^eremies time, when the people as is before showed, were wicked in
a high degree, and the evil spread among all sorts.

Fourthly, a people are matter of the Church by their Outward profession makes
men matter of the Church.
profession, though they err in conversation; men couenanting in word, are in
bond of society, though performance fail in many things among them: He was a
Jew that was circumcised, whether he was borne of a Jew or otherwise,
howsoever his life was; were not Elies Sons. Saul, Doeg, Nabal, Ioab,
Absalom, and such wicked ones, Israelites outward by birth, by profession, by
circumcision? And what hinders men borne of Christian parents, professing
Christ, and baptized to be Christians, though they be of ill conversation? If
such Jews were not denied to be true matter then, what lets these Christians
to be true matter now? I say true matter, for there is a difference between
true, good, bad, and no matter. These by being so borne, so professing, and
baptized, be true matter, though not good: of this distinction have I spoken
before in my other book. Page 112. 115. Whereto Mr. Ainsworth says almost
nothing, let him either answer now directly hereto, or else cease to deceive
in this point.

Fifthly, what is the reason, that a mixture of good, and A mixture of good and
bad in conversation are not false matter of a Church neither before God nor men*
some bad in a Church, should more make that Church a false Church, then a
mixture of thoughts, holy and unholy, flesh and spirit in a man, striving one
against another continually, should make him a false Christian? But as Rebecca
was a true wife of Isaac, though she had two contraries, an Elect and
Reprobate within her; so is the Church of England a true wife to God; though
she have within her Esaus with Jacobs.

Sixthly, and lastly, If wicked men intermixed make a false matter, it is so in
respect of God, or in respect of men: if they say of God; I answer, first,
that God in his word does acknowledge the mixed Israelites his people, and
therefore is not he to be made Author of this their error. Secondly, if it
were so in respect of God, who sees all men, as they be, then should there be
no true matter of a Church ever; except they will say, that no Hypocrites are
in a Church, which though before men they be holy, yet before God they be
devils, and so he holds them, as he did Judas, before he was manifest to be a
traitor before men. If they say, it is a false matter in respect of men; I
answer, first, that God by his word calls not a people his Church, because men
so judge of them, nor for any of their upright walkings Deuteronomy. 7. 7. 8. with
cap. 9. 5. and compared with Esaias. 1. and 5. etc.
with men, but because he has taken them to serve him; has couenanted with
them, to hold them his people, though they do provoke him to wrath often, and
before men be in some things as the very Heathen. Secondly, the Prophets and
Apostles, who were men and saw how it was with the Churches in their times, do
not so judge Churches false Churches before men upon this ground. Therefore
this position of his, is neither true in respect of God, or in respect of man,
if either God, or his Prophets or Apostles, may have credit with them. His
alleged Scriptures do not prove his position.


Now to his alleged Scriptures, I answer, though he say, they be plain and
manifest for his assertion, yet they do not afford him this assertion, that a
mixed company, is a false Church.

The first place is in Leu. 20. 24. where it is said, Leu. 20. 24. expounded.
that God separated them from other people. The place is miserably wrested from
the sense, and falsely applied, for by separation there is meant, a setting a
part Abraham's posterity to a special service of God, and therein to be a
people differing from all the world. And by other people, is meant such as
worshipped not the true God; what is this to us, who worship Jesus Christ, and
are also a people separated from other nations, such as is there understood? so
the place makes much for us, and nothing to his purpose. Let him produce a
place to prove that Israelites were to separate from other Israelites for their
corruptions, as false matter: else his proof is nothing, but if he would
endeavor it to deceive others, let it be before noted, that the contrary is
plain from the word: for even when Moses spoke from God of this their
Separation from others, even then spoke he of the Israelites as a corrupt
people among themselves, Deuteronomy. 9. 6. 7. 8. and Number. 14. 22. 33. 35. And yet he
tells not the godly of any Separation, to be a body from that mixed Assembly.
Moses was no Brownist, nor any other Prophet of God, to teach this
Schismatic Donatisme. God separated them from Heathen, but he separated not
one part of them from another, because some bad ones were among them. I
separate them from the Heathen (says God) does it therefore follow; Ergo,
separate one from another? from one kind we cannot conclude an other, for this
is a special separation, and as it is meant, so is the place to be urged, and
not otherwise, for if it be, it is but abused.

The second place, is 1. Kings. 8. 53. This place is the very 1. King. 8. 53.
same with the former; and so has the same answer: this Answerer would seem
to affright men with number, because he wants places of weight.

The third place is in Acts. 2. 40. If it be observed, to Acts. 2. 40.
expounded.
whom S. Peter speaks, the Answer is soon and truly made. He speaks to
the Jews, and of such Jews as opposed Christ, and denied him to be Christ:
How follows this to us, from Jews, who renounced the very foundation, even
Jesus Christ, whom we do profess to be the true Messiah, and so hold him? The
holy Ghost says; forsake those that deny Christ; Ergo, says this Brownist,
forsake such as do profess him to be Christ Let him show me by what rule of
reason this can follow. If conscience of holy use of Scripture were in them as
they pretend, thus would they not make it a nose of wax to frame it to their
vain fantasy, as they here wickedly do. The scope with the true sense,
applied to a like case, is a true allegation of Scripture, else is it but a
wretched abuse thereof.

The fourth place is, Acts 19. 8. 9. Why the 8. verse is alleged Acts. 19. 8.
9. answered.
I see not, except against themselves: for first, the Apostle went into the
Jewish Synagogues, to condemn our scrupulous Separatists, who refuse our
Churches: secondly, he desputed openly and boldly, these run here into
corners, or else voluntarily fly their Country to speak and write there their
pleasures. Thirdly, the Apostle taught, only the things appertaining to the
kingdom of God, and no other then what before had been taught by Moses and
the Apostles. Acts. 26. 22. 23. when these teach in their particular way, their
own conceits, as is proved, and shall be after further manifested. The ninth
verse carries only a show as they look upon it: a show I say, only in their
eyes; but not indeed so to any judicious Reader. For if they allege this to
maintain their Separation from us, then it proves not their purpose, unless
we grant our selves to be a people hardened, disobedient, and speaking evil of
the way of God before the multitude, and that their way is that way of God,
which is the whole matter in controversy. Secondly, if their way were Gods
way, yet this place is not against all, but against certain that were
hardened; and therefore unless they have spoken to all our Church, and
disputed with us, and so have made their way known to all, and that all are
found hard hearted, this place helps them not. If they allege it, to prove
that in the true Church there are not a mixed people, let them draw an argument
from it, and show how it follows from thence. The place teaches that the
members of the true Church are to separate from the obstinate wicked, who will
not be won to the Church: so here is of some true members of a true Church,
departing from such as be not the church, but not of members of the true church
forsaking members of the true Church, or one true Church forsaking another for
some corruptions, and therefore it is not to the purpose. This may be retorted
upon themselves, for these Brownists speak evil, yea, and with obstinacy
blaspheme our holy exercises, the preaching of Christ's word, the administration
of the holy Sacraments among us, as I have in my former Book sufficiently
declared. And therefore are we rather to fly from them, then they should
hence conclude to depart from all us.

The fifth place is John. 17. 16. This is understood of the John. 17. 16.
answered.
elect only, such as are so not of the world, as Christ Jesus himself was not
of the world; the whole prayer of Christ teaches this exposition, and he
evidently shows what he means by such as are not of the world, such as he
says, he sanctifies; such as he prays to the father for; such as are one
in the Father and in the Son, in whom Christ is, and to whom he gives his
glory, they behold it, and are where he is, and the love of the Father unto
Christ, shall be in them. Therefore these words are understood only of the
Elect, that are ordained to life. Now then to urge this place, thereby to teach
such a separation in the visible Church, as here is meant, is to seclude all
reprobates, all hypocrites, out of it, and to establish it only of a people
ordained to eternal life, which who they be, man knows not, therefore the
Apostles admitted of Simon Magus, of Demas, for their profession, not because
of their election, which they knew not, as appears by the story. Thus
therefore is this Scripture egregiously abused being understood of the
invisible members, to be applied to the visible members: but this is a common
deceit among them, which the simple see not; but swallow up every text
vnchewed, as serving their turn, if it smell but of a separation, or forsaking
of the world; they never regarding how it is to be taken If this answerer
should childishly object that our Savior speaks of his Apostles, who were
visible members, and of such also as were to be called by the word, which they
should preach, verse 20. I answer he speaks of visible members indeed, but
not of all visible members, but of the elect in the visible Church. These two
differ much, sometime, a visible member, and one also Elect in the visible
Church; even as much as a Reprobate, and one ordained to life: the person of
the man may be seen, but his election cannot. So then though here Christ
speak of such as be in the visible Church, yet he speaks not of them, as
they be members thereof before men; but as they be endued with heavenly graces,
and holy before God, as is evident by that which is said, and proved from the
text.

The sixth and last Scripture is 2. Cor. 6. 14. 18. This place 2. Cor. 6. 14.
18. expounded and answered fully.
is one of their common places, to which they do run upon every occasion, as
their special weapon to fight for Separation, and to defend the same. But this
is very like the former, a flourish to deceive the simple: and for that it is
so much urged by them, I will the more stand upon it, to clear the same from
their wretched abuse of it, in the judgment of any judicious and learned
Reader: in which let these things be observed.

First, the Occasion: The Corinthians were a people converted The Occasion.
to Christianity, and yet lived in civil society among Infidels, called
Gentiles; of which some perhaps being their friends and kinsfolks after the
flesh, would inuit them to their Idol feasts, as may seem. 1. Cor. 10. 27.
to which some would go, and eat of the things sacrificed to Idols, even in
the Idol Temples, as is manifest, by 1. Cor. 8. 1. 10. which some held as an
indifferent thing, because they had heard the Apostle teach that an Idol was
nothing. 1. Cor. 8 4. and so they made no conscience of things external, but
thought any thing lawful therein in that respect. But the Apostle shows it to
be a defilement by Idolatry, which he commands to fly from. 1. Cor. 10. 14.
and here dehorts from. Now the occasion here with us is not alike, we dwell not
in civil society with Idolaters, but under a Christian King, and with a
people professing Christ: here is no public Idols set up, nor any feasting in
honor of them, whereto we are invited. If any secret Idolatry be committed,
and any enticed thereunto, then the occasion being the same, the place is of
force against such, but no defense for these men's Schism, from our public
Assemblies.

Secondly, The scope of the 14. 15. 16. verses is set Scope.
down in the verse 17. that the believing Corinthians professing Christ, the
true God, should separate and come out from among the Gentiles, Infidels; which
separation and coming out, is expounded in the words following: that is, touch
no unclean thing. By touching, is meant a partaing with them in their evils;
according to that in the Ephesians chap. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but even reprove them rather: these last
words showing what it is to have no fellowship with them, it is by words to
reprove them, in judgment to condemn them, in affections to hate them, and
in conversation to avoid them; so touch we no unclean thing.

Now here see this Answerers Scope, why he alleges this place, to wit, to
prove, that none of lewd conversation are true matter of the visible Church.
How agrees the Apostles Scope, and this man's drift together? If Christians must
separate from Gentiles, then are not men of ill conversation, professing Jesus
Christ true matter of a Church: or thus; If true believers must avoid sin,
and every unclean thing, then the wicked and profane are not of the visible
Church. What a mad Argument is this? Here is Tinterton Steeple, the cause of
Goodin Sands.

Object. But it may be they will say, that Gods commanding the believers to
separate from the wicked, is his reiection of them, and if all the godly would
perform the Commandment, there should be no wicked among them: and thus by
the Lords reiection they be not, and by the godly men's obedience, they should
not be of the Church. I know not how possibly they should defend this Scripture
for themselves, but thus.

Answ. But hereto I answer; they force more from the words, then the Lord
gives them, if they happily should make this Objection: for God commands not
his to separate wholly from all the wicked, but from wicked Infidels, Gentiles,
Idolaters, Jews, Turks, Papists, the very Societies of these are to be left as
no people of God; so all the Church falling into that state of Infidelity, and
so judged of the Church, and therefore such are to be separated from, and
hereto tends this place: but for other wicked, which live in the society of
the godly, another course is to be taken; to separate only from their private
familiarity, and if they will not be reformed, then other courses are to be
taken with them, as their sin of obstinacy deserves. For these differing
things are to be ever observed: first, a differing between, a separation
public of the godly from among such as are no Church, and a private separation
of the best members of a true Church, from the worst sort in it: secondly,
between the wicked remaining among the godly, and the godly being of the
fellowship of the wicked; thirdly, between the wicked in life, holding the
public profession of the Church in the Church, and wicked out of the Church,
denying the Faith: fourthly, a difference between separation in private from
the wicked in the Church, and a separation from Gods ordinances in the Church,
for such wicked men's sake. Lastly, between the godly separating the wicked
from among them, and themselves breaking society with themselves, because of
some wicked persons. These things mistaken, Separation is disorderly performed,
and wickedly practiced, and such places as this hereby misalledged, to the
upholding of an ungodly Schism, and breach of true and lawful peace.

Thirdly, The matter found fault with here, is the being The matter entreated
of.
of such together one with another, as ought not to cohere in one, which being
together is set out, first, in the matter, manifested in these terms,
Unrighteousness, Darkness, Belial, Idols: secondly, in the manner of the
being together; to wit, as being one with them, which is noted in these
terms, Yoked, Fellowship, Concord, Partaking, Agreement, which is in sum
thus much, believers are not to be with the wicked in their unrighteousness, in
their state of darkness, as they be under Belial, the Devil, and are
Idolaters, as if they were yoke fellows in one Society and Communion, living
therein at one, and pertaking with them in their evils, and so agreeing
together. What now is this to help the way of the Separatists, who do forsake
here not Darkness, but light; the preaching of the word with us and among us:
not unrighteousness, but the godly fellowship of many fearing God: not Belial
the Devil, but God, whom they have found even powerful among us and us: not
Idols, for what Idols are here set up in our Assemblies to be worshipped, but
Gods worship and divine exercises? If the matter hereserue their turn: Mark
Reader well, they must prove us all to live; first, in darkness: secondly, in
unrighteousness: thirdly, to be in league with the devil: fourthly, that we be
Idolaters, and Idols set up among us, and that we all do as one body cleave
together, as couples yoked in that fellowship and communion, living so,
partaking in evil with concord and agreement: If he do not prove this against
us, he gets nothing by this place but condemnation with God, and shame with all
wise and understanding Readers, for so urging this place against our Church.
The persons spoken of.


Fourthly, The persons to be separated from, here mentioned do nothing fit his
turn to produce this place against us, for he speaks here of Infidels, such
as were no members of the Church: Gentiles, that had not entertained any
Profession of Christ, so as the Argument is from no members of the Church, to
members of the Church, in which kind of reasoning there is no force of
consequence. Because Infidels, Heathen Pagans, Idolaters, led by the devil,
are no matter of a true Church: Ergo, Christians professing Jesus Christ, yet
not in life answerable to their professing, are no true matter of the Church: I
leave him this consequence to prove, if he cannot, let him lay his hand on his
mouth.

Fifthly and lastly, The persons to whom the Apostle speaks, show that he
alleges not the true meaning of the place; for even then, when this doctrine
of Separation from the Heathen was taught, there were of the Corinthians, who
herein did in some sort partake with the Heathen, they were a mixed company;
there were among them dissentions and divisions; 1. Cor. 1. 10. 11. 12.
Envying, there were men carnal: 1. Cor. 3. 3. there was open incest; 1. Cor. 5
1. 2. there was a great abuse of the Sacrament; 1. Cor. 11. drunkenness;
contempt of the poor; one going to law with another under Infidels; 1. Cor. 6.
giving of offense to the weak; 1. Cor. 8. pertaking with Idols in eating in
Idol Temples: 1. Cor. 10. vaineglorious abuse of gifts in the public
Assemblies; 1. Cor. 14. Heresies, some not believing the doctrine of the
Resurrection. 1. Cor. 15. Yea, matters were so out of frame, as the Apostle
beseeches them to be reconciled to God. 2. Cor. 5. 10. They suffered evil men
unrepentant among them, guilty of uncleanness, Fornication, Wantonness,
Strife, Backebitings, Whisperings, Swellings, etc. 2. Cor. 12. 20. 21. Can
worse be said of any in our Church? do any of us receive the Sacrament drunk,
or deny the Resurrection? yet note for all these things in Corinth, how well in
general he speaks of all, for the graces in some, read these places. 1. Cor.
1. 2. 4. 9. 30. and 3. 23. and 4. 15. and 9. 2. and 11. 2. and 2. Cor. 7. 11.
12. 13. Secondly, how he teaches not the godly to hold the wicked a false
matter, neither to gather themselves together from among the other, but to
admonish one another, to avoid private familiarity, as Calvin expounds the 1.
Cor. 5. 11. and to cast out some. He never taught the better sort that they
were polluted, except they separated. This Luciferian Schism, and Pharisaicall
pride was far from his thoughts, and Gods Church then. If this place be good
against us, and sufficient to prove bad livers to be false matter, a mixed
company no church of Christ, and that the Separatists Schism is hereon
grounded, the same had been also as good against the Church of Corinth, and
the Apostle would have urged them to this Brownisticall practice, but neither
does the Apostle so apply it, neither did the better sort so practice, either
there, or in any of the churches in Asia, in which was given as just cause of
Separation, as they can take against us here. And thus much for his first
reason, that the matter of our Church, as he supposes, is not true.

His second reason against our Constitution is, the order Mr. Ainsworths second
reason against our Constitution confuted.
of our gathering, and the cause; to wit, constraint of authority: for the
Order, I have already spoken of it: and if they like not my answer, I refer
them to what Doctor Willet has written, in his fifth general Controversy:
also to Doctor Downchams Sermon upon Revel. 1. 20. which they have not
answered.

Our Constitution was of voluntary professors.
of Christian Religion, in King Etheldreds time, King of Kent; he and
innumerable others voluntarily embraced it, as this Answerer confesses, Page
231. therefore at the first we were not constrained.

a dicto secundum quid. Secondly, the Supreme power gathered, they made
Proclamation of her Majesty's godly intent, which was a kind of teaching,
whereto the people yielded voluntarily, for any thing that any man can say to
the contrary, and howsoever it be, that the inferiors came not to consent, yet
if all the chief did it voluntarily, it is accounted in such a case the Act of
all. Exodus 19. 3. 7. 8. Josh. 4. 2. 8. Hence it is, that when God gave Princes
to rule his people, their People are judged to be according to their Governors.
Actions are specially recorded; the state of the people in them commended or
disallowed; and the people in respect of the Governors scarcely mentioned;
thereby giving us to understand, where Kings and chief Rulers do voluntarily
receive the truth, there the people are to be judged so to profess, as Princes
do, and as their Laws command to be done. Thus we may see how Asae 2. Chron:
14. 2.
is commended, that he took away the Altars of strange Gods, ascribing all to
him, as the principal; who did lead and command the rest; to whose godly
Commandment when the people did yield, though by his power some obeyed in
fear, yet is it said, that the people sought the Lord, verse 7. And therefore
the people are accounted voluntary professors in their chief Governors,
because they obey their Sovereigns voluntary Commandments made in their
Profession, for the advancement of Religion.



A great difference between planting and Reforming.
in Reformation, between which and the planting there is among other this
difference: that in conversion, at the first the Word must be preached, and by
that means must men be brought to a voluntary profession without complusion;
to which purpose tend all his Scriptures alleged: but in the time of
Reformation, Compulsion, the authority of godly Princes, is an approved means
to bring and settle the people in order to the worship of God: A master cannot
compel a man to be his servant before he be, but when he is, then if the
servant fall from him in the time of of his service, he may bring him again by
force: God uses to call at the first by a free means, but in Reformation
after Relapse, he uses other means. As Proclamation of Princes: so in
Hezechias time, by which many returned Princes may compel their Subjects to
Religion.
from Idolatry. 2. Chron. 30. neither were any rejected by so coming, as
false matter of a Church, though they were not cleansed according to the
purification of the Sanctuary then: so then the Lord blessed Compulsion; and
afterward in good Josias time, who compelled the people, 2. Chron. 34. 32. 33.
It is not unlawful for Princes by this example, to compel their Subjects to
Religion, in reforming the Church; yea, and to bind them some way, for better
performance of the duties of Religion: as by taking an oath, 2. Chro. 15. 12.
Neh. 10. 29 by urging some writing, whereto all must seal; Nehe. 9. 38. by
offering a subscription; Esai. 44. ^. by taking and giving of hands; Esdras.
10. 3. 9. Thus the Scripture records the Lords means used to recall men back
to the truth, and to confirm them in their standing, that they may not fall
again. I demand, whether Religious Fathers may not force their children by
threats, and correction to a religious Course: which if hereby they attain
unto but in show, is the family less Religious? If not, then why is a Church
(less a true Church) because Princes, the Fathers of our Countries; yea,
nursing Fathers to the Church, do by their authority, cause many to join
unto the Church, in outward show subiecting themselves to the truth? When many
became Jews for fear of Mordecai, it was noted, as a prosperous success
befalling the Church then, rather than a disgrace and disparagement to it, as
Brownists now take it.

The authority of Princes is great in these things, when God bestows them
upon the Church; and it has pleased him to use them, as great instruments for
his Churches good, which here to declare how, I think it not amiss, both to
magnify their power herein, to free it from contempt, and to show that by
Princes power used for to bring men to Religion, the Church is more honorable,
and not less true, as these Separatists do dream. 1. He Princes have been
special instruments which God has used for his Churches good.
planted a national Church, by a Prince and Prophet, Moses. 2. He Reformed it
by Kings, Josias, Hezekias, and others. 3. He made it more glorious by Kings,
as by Solomon. 4. He set orders among persons by kings, as by David, and by
the Judge and Prophet, Samuel; 1. Chro. 26. 22. 5. He placed and displaced
Officers by them, as by Solomon: who put down Abiathar, and preferred Zadoc.
1. King. 2. 35. 6. He makes Princes and Nobles the deliuerers of his people,
Guides and Defenders of them; as the Judges, Joshua, Gideon, Ehud, Othniel,
Sampson: yea, Cyrus though an Heathen, Zorobabel, and Nehemiah. 7. The holy
Ghost complains, as the greatest want in the Church, that a King was not in
Israel to bridlemen, to keep them in order; so great a good is such authority
to the Church, both to further good, and to prevent mischief, if it please God
to bless his people with godly Princes.

Therefore it is strange, that these men should so disanull Princes care for
the Church bettereth the estate of it, and makes it not worse.
a Church, because Princely authority binds many to obedience, who otherwise
would break out; sithen God has so employed them in Church affairs, has so
prospered them, and commended their endeavors to compel men to Religion. They
ought to pull down Idolatry; they may restrain men from a false worship, and
punish such as therein transgress: if so, then let this Answerer tell me, why
their authority stretches not as well to force men to the true worship,
sithen Josias zeal is herein commended? Indeed, Faith cannot be compelled, but
yet men's bodies may be brought under; and unto the outward means: by which
though such benefit nothing toward God, yet is the act of Princes herein
laudable, and to the Church very profitable: if so, then the people obeying by
constraint, make the Church nothing less true; for if it were so, the actions
of Religious Kings should not be allowed of God, and so praised in Scripture,
for the imitation of the other godly Princes now. Lastly, let Mr. Ainsworth
show, why people compelled by Princes authority should be therefore the more
false matter of a Church, then some of their Company held in through fear of
their censures, to abide with them? can it be worse to compel men in the time
of Reformation, then to hold men in after Reformation?

Mr. Ainsworth proves not how a constraint, makes Page 169.
such a breach in the Church, but that he passes over with silence, and would
disprove our order, and that by two reasons.

First, because it is not found in all the new Testament. I answer; How the
old Testament may warrant the order of a church established in the new
Testament.
first, it is enough, if it be found in the old Testament, and not condemned in
the new, nor any order prescribed absolutely by precepts and rules to tie men
to one, and so to exclude all other, without variation of any circumstance of
place, or person at any time; which to prove, I suppose passes all his, and
all his companies cunning. If then there be no binding Law, there is no
transgression: General Rules are for things indifferent, they guide, but
impose no particulars to a perpetuity. Occasioned practices arising, as time,
place, and persons require, even in Apostolical examples do not bind as
precepts: let them consider of these things. Secondly, if this reason of his be
good, then it follows, that His reason overthrows their manner of making
Ministers.
among them is no true Minister made according to the Law of the new Testament;
because it is not there found, that any, but such were Ministers, as Apostles,
and others, ever made Ministers, which Apostles, or Evangelists, or the
Eldership only, laid hands on such as were made Minister, so they were public
persons; and this is the constant order of making Ministers, by such in the new
Testament, and no one instance can be given of any called and ordained to a
Pastors Office by a company of private men, as they be; and therefore their
course not being according to the constant and perpetual order of the new
Testament, without alteration in this point, it is disallowed, and they no
Ministers by his own argument. Let him herein answer me to every reason as I
do him, and if he prevail by a lawful fight with the weapon of Gods word, I
yield him the victory, and let him hold it.

Secondly, because this order was received from the Church of Rome. I answer;
first, that the argument is not good; because we have it from Rome, ergo, it
is to be disallowed: this can he not maintain; It is not material whence
order is, so it be good. Secondly, this order one over another, was before this
now-present Rome, if Histories may be credited; and if this answer overthrow
not his reason, once again I call upon both him and his associates, to confute
Mr. Downhams Sermon on Reu. 1. 20. And thus much for Reply to Mr. Ainsworths
Answer to this first Error: to which Mr. Smith says nothing at all, but as
it may seem, answers this and the next Error as both in one.

The second Error of the Brownists.
Our Churches Constitution (say they) is a real Idol. Page 79.
My former Answer to this was, that the Scriptures mention no such Idol,
neither take an Idol in this their sense. And to confirm this, I showed my
diligence in searching the Scripture touching this, and also noted the great
labor of Marlorat, who sets down a perfect Catalogue of all the Idols
mentioned in Scripture, and numbreth some 47. and yet none of them in this
sense. And therefore this their real Idol, is but a real idle conceit of
their own brains: Lastly, I conclude, that if a constitution may be an Idol,
they make theirs an Idol; for that, as unto God, they make it the sanctifier
of all things, and without which, no word of God, no Sacraments of Christ, no
prayer, no preaching true out of such a constitution as theirs is.

Reply unto Mr. Ainsworths Answer Page 172.
to this second Error.
MAster Ainsworth at first boggles at it, as if he durst not challenge it for
the gross absurdities of it, but after bethinking himself, he defends it,
but very seelilie. His answer consists of two points: first, that I have said
nothing to disprove it, but that it may for any thing I have said be an Idol,
as he thinks. For that he makes my reason to be this, because I see it not,
and Marlorat names it not, Ergo, no Idol; but the Reader may see, that my
argument is, the Scripture makes it not an Idol, neither is the word Idol, in
the Scriptures so taken: therefore it is not an Idol. He says I do not see
all that the Scripture teaches: I confess it, and if he do not the same, he
is arrogantly proud; but I speak of my sight in this particular, and if I be
ouerseene, The word Idol, is not used in Scripture for a constitution.
he should have given some instance where the word Idol, is taken for such a
Constitution as ours is; but this could he not do.

To Marlorats pains he answers, that both he and I Mr. Ainsworth a Cauiller
at my words.
may as soon number the hayres of our heads, as reckon up all the Idols in the
world. Mark Reader, I say Marlorat numbers up the Idols mentioned in
Scripture, and he supposes that I speak of his reckoning up all in the
world; so he puts the word World, for the Scriptures: what a cavil, or
blindness, or wilful mistaking is this? three times in eight lines, I
nominate the word Scripture, and not at all the word World and yet he puts one
for the other: but he that is so blind to take the World, for the Scriptures,
no marvel it is that he takes Schism instead of the sincere truth, and
their invented constitution for Gods order in religion. Secondly to prove it an
Idol. If it be a false constitution, as before is proved (says he) set up
instead of a true, what is it better then a very Idol? I answer, here is a
weak proof, for such a confident cause on their behalf, and in their
judgment of so great moment: he shows not what is an Idol, nor proves a
false constitution to be an Idol, by either reason or scripture: but first
comes with an if, supposing to be what is His reason is ridiculous.
not: if our Constitution be false, then is it an Idol; this is ridiculous;
for his argument is the very question: as if he had said if our constitution
(as he calls it) false, be an Idol, then it is an Idol. Secondly he asks a
question; a false constitution being set up instead of the true constitution,
what is it better then a very Idol? I answer that first, his ground is weak,
for our Churches Constitution is not false; see what is aforesaid for this.
Secondly, I say, that an Idol is falsely defined by the term Constitution,
without warrant of Scripture, as in my former book I avouch, which he has not
refuted, nor given yet thereto any reason to the contrary. Thirdly, I say, that
he himself, it seems, dare not call it an Idol, but demands of others what
it is, and says, what is it better then an Idol? he durst not say; what is
it but an Idol? Well then, our Constitution is no Idol at all, for ought this
man has said, but this their error remains upon them. He calls me in the
end of his answer a vain man; but Vanity it self is upon him, as his
Answer shows, which the Lord remove from him: this is my recompense for his
railing.

Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer Page 9. 15.
to this second Error.
MAster Smith here falls to the matter, but withal after a discoursing fashion,
holding some truths, but teaching many errors: but two things he avouches
touching this second error? first, that a false Constitution is a real Idol,
Page 9. Secondly, that it is greater and more abominable Page. 14.
then any Idol that can be in a true Church.

Touching the first, he tells us; first, what is a false Constitution, a mixed
company, because it is a false matter, and so a false Constitution; this he
proves not, but sets out his erroneous thought, by a beastly Similitude of a
Horse and an Ass engendring, bringing out a third thing, a Mule: so good and
bad conjoined, produce a third thing, that is, (says he) a false Church. I
answer; first, that a mixed company is no false matter, as is before showed:
secondly, he speaks only of the matter, and omitteth the form, which also
is in the making of a constitution: thirdly, he proves nothing by a Similie,
much less by this filthy one: fourthly, his similie overthrows himself; for
a true Horse and a true Ass do produce a true creature, though not like
either, and not a false one. Again, good and bad men are not substantially
intermingled, as the seed of an Horse and an Ass, to bring out of themselves
a third creature: if they do, that, so brought out is a true creature, and
cannot be called a false one: and if the qualities be noted, good and bad in
one third, the same third cannot be called good, nor bad; but good bad, or bad
good; because it consists Mr. Smith does put a beastly similie in his
Catechism.
by mixture of both: but thus much, and two much of a beastly similie; wherein
he compares the godly, either to an Horse, or to an Ass, but us all to
Mules. And for the holiness of this Similie, it is also in his Catechism, to
be learned belike as one of his principles of Deuilitie.

Secondly, he proceeds to prove a false Constitution Page 9.
an Idol: first, he says it is Idolatry, and against the second Commandment.
What then Mr. Smith, is it an Idol? Is Idolatry an Idol? you miserably are
deceived, and would deceive. But a mixed assembly, is neither Idolatry, nor an
Idol, nor condemned in the second Commandment: for no word condemns such a
company for Idolatry, if otherwise they be not Idolaters. Secondly, he would
seem to have the Scripture for him, and his first place is, 2. Cor. First
Scripture. 2. Cor. 6. 16.
6. 16. of which much is said before: his reason is fetched from these words:
what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? He else were is full of his
Sillogismes, so framed as they be, but here he is only in exposition, because
else his absurdity would more have appeared. Gods true Church is his Temple:
Ergo, a false Church an Idol, for here (says he) they be opposite. I answer,
first, if any such opposition be, it is between the Temple of God, that is,
the true Church, and the Temple of Idols, for he speaks figuratively, and
puts Idols, for a people worshipping Idols. Secondly, if this exposition be
true, that a company mixed be an Idol, who are the Idolaters? This is
ridiculous foolerie. Thirdly, I answer, that the holy Ghost intends not to
set out an exposition of a true and false Church, but rather a Church and no
Church; the believing Christians, and Heathenish Idolaters: which is the true
sense of this place. Fourthly; if there be an opposition, it is between God
and Idols; as if the Apostle had said, you Corinthians are such as worship the
true God, and among whom he will be, as in a Temple, therefore ye cannot give
worship and honor to Idols; so contrary is God and Idols, as if indeed you be
the Lords people, you cannot agree with them: for the godly hate Idols, as
utterly against the honor of the true God, whom they do worship. Thus his
false exposition being overthrown, whereupon his argument does stand, his
ridiculous reason falls also to the ground.

His second Scripture is, 1. John. 5. 21. Babes keep your 1. John. 5. 21.
selves from Idols. Here first (he says) Antichristian Idolatry is especially
meant: but this is most false; he only says, it is enough for me to deny
it: but who knows not that John writ to the faithful dwelling among
Idolatrous Heathen? which Idolatry is chiefly here meant, and so being
general, may be applied against Idolatries of all times. Secondly, he says,
Antichristian Idolatry is means invented to worship the true God in or by:
but this is another falsehood, if he mean that it stands only in such means:
for Antichrist with his, do worship Angels, Saints, and the breaden Idol to
be very God: and if he mean not only, then he defines his Antichristian
Idolatry falsely: thus two errors appear in his exposition, for usually, what
else are his cursed glosses but peruersion of Scripture, and false
interpretation. But how proves he from this place, our Churches Constitution a
real Idol? Even as he falsely expounds, so he ridiculously proves it thus:
Whatsoever means is devised out a man's brain, and used as a means to honor
God in or by, is an Idol. A devised Constitution is of that nature: Ergo, an
Idol.

I answer, first, that it is no argument; his third term is the same with the
first term in the question. His position is; A devised constitution is an
Idol: and his reason to prove it, is; Whatsoever is devised, which is thus
much, whatsoever is devised, etc. is an Idol, but a devised constitution is so
devised: Ergo, an Idol. He befooles his Scholars, with his Mr. Smith
foolisieth his scholars with childish Sophistry. Zach. 11. 17.
childish Sophistry. Secondly, I deny his mayor as an Elench of a false
description of an Idol. He proves it not, but examplifieth it, from a false
Minister called an Idol, Zach. 11. 17. where he uses another deceit; for
Zachary means not that such a one is an Idol; but speaks by way of
similitude, that he is as an Idol. In calling a devised Constitution an Idol,
this man means simply, and the Scripture is understood comparatively: so he
does reason a dicto simpliciter, ad dictum secundum quid. Thirdly, I also deny
the Minor, as he understands a constitution devised, to wit, that it is a mixed
company; for it is not a devise of a man's brain, as before is showed; and let
him show, what he means by worshipping God in or by it. Fourthly, he makes
a flourish with Col. 2. 23. Mat. 15. 9. and hence Col. 2. 23.
makes a proof thus, that will worship, and vaine-worship, Mat. 15. 9.
is forbidden there; and it is a transgression of the second Commandment, and
therefore Idolatry, and so the church wherein it is offered is an Idol. So then
he thus reasons; in what Church vaine-worship is that Church is an Idol. Not
all his deceiuablenesse of unrighteousness, nor all Satan's Sophistry can
ever prove this. He says, that he is blindfold that sees not these things
manifest, so say I, but to wit, manifest folly in him, and manifest falsehood in
the things.

In Page 11. and 12. he discourses fair in show, but partly without truth,
partly ridiculous, but wholly full of deceit; as may appear by what is said,
and the things themselves considered of a wise Reader will show: I Mr. Smiths
Argument full of folly and also falsehood.
come therefore to his other Sillogisme. That which is contrary to a true
Church, is an Idol: But a false constituted church is contrary to a truly
constituted Church: Ergo, a false constituted church is an Idol. I answer,
first, that the proposition is a fallacy of a false description of an Idol,
as is before in the former Argument declared, so the proposition is falsely
constituted: which stands in need of proof.

Again, it is full of absurdity; if every thing contrary to a true Church be
an Idol, then every ungodly man, that lives disorderly, contrary to the holy
orders of the Church, is an Idol. Who worships his Idol? who do hold in him
a divine power, as Idolaters hold in Idols? An Assembly of Jews or Turks, is
contrary to the true Church, they disclaim Christianity, is such a Company an
Idol? Where ever, either in Scripture, or other writings, is a company of men
knit in one, called an Idol? Idolaters such may be, but not an Idol: they
worship an Idol, and if they be an Idol also, then an Idol worships an
Idol. Brownists in Schism, and Anabaptists in their Heresies are contrary to
the true Church of God; therefore Idols by his reason, and such as do esteem
them are Idolaters. The Churches of Asia, were against the Church of Rome in
the observation of Easter, were they therefore Idols? Secondly, I answer to
the Minor, that it has ouer-throwne the Constitution of his Sillogisme, by
altering the term of the Proposition, putting in for a true Church, a truly
constituted Church, which is against the rules of right reasoning: for there
may be a true Church, which may not be truly constituted; for true respects
the matter, but truly the manner also; in which there may be some error.
Again, in the term falsely constituted is an ambiguitie, it is not certain
whether he mean wholly false, or but in part: if he say wholly, then he takes it
not here, as he did before, Page 10. line. 8. for an assembly of unfaithful
men, with some faithful among them, and then the question is changed: if he
say but in part, it makes the proposition the more absurd, and the Minor
deceitful, which must only be understood respectively. And thus his reason is
without reason.

He brings in again, 2. Cor. 2. 6. But thereto he has 2. Cor. 2. 6.
his answer already. Yet hence he now frames an idlement, I should say, an
Argument: That which is contrary to the Temple of God, is an Idol. But that
which is contrary to the true Church, is contrary to the Temple of God; for the
true Church (says he) is the Temple of God: Ergo, that which is contrary to
the true Church is an Idol. This seely schism is without a proof, there is
no tertium argumentum; for the proof and the subject of the question are both
one; and his own words, which he brings for the proof of the Minor, show it,
that to be contrary to the Temple of God, is to be contrary to the true Church:
so then frame his reason after his own exposition, putting for the Temple of
God, the true church, it is this: That which is contrary to the true church of
God, is an Idol; but that which is contrary to the true Church, is contrary to
the true Church; therefore that which is contrary to the true Church is an
Idol. Having thus ridiculously reasoned (if I wrong him, look upon his
syllogism, thou that have reason and judge me herein) he Thrasonically with
scorn calls upon me, and says; Now Mr. Bernard, with all your learning avoid
this place, and I will yield, etc. I beseech thee Reader, now judge between
us; and if I have showed him his extrem folly, to abate his pride herein, mark
whether he the next time show himself a man of his word, and yield unto me.
Truly God confounds the proud, whom he ever resists. Not having done with this,
he ads one reason more, to cloy me with; and thus he frames it: A false Christ
is an Idol; a false church is a false Christ, Ergo, a false church is an Idol.
Here again is Sophistry, for false Christ is taken in the Mayor properly, in
the Minor figuratively, which ought not to be in right arguing, which is ever
without Equivocation, ambiguitie, and variation in the three terms. And thus
much touching his first position, that a false constitution is a real Idol;
for if it be not at all an Idol, as reason shows, and his reasons prove not,
then it is no real political Idol; which is a new Idol of his diuising, never
heard of before.

Touching the second assertion, that it is a greater and a more abominable
Idol, then any Idol that possible can be in a true Church, Page 14. I answer;
first, that it is no Idol, he has not yet proved it, but by ridiculous shows
of reasons, and therefore his 'Predicates perish where his subject vanishes.
Secondly, If it were an Idol, yet may a greater and a more abominable Idol be
found than it; as Moloch, which was brought into the true Church: A mixed people
professing Christ, do honor to Christ, the better sort truly: but Moloch is
no God; it thrusts out the remembrance, the worship and service of the true
God, and makes the worshippers cruel murderers of their children, in offering
them to be burnt for his honor. Is a mixed Assembly of Christian Professors,
such as the Church of England is, a greater and more abominable Idol then
Moloch? He is See Zep. Page 164.
abhominably idle brained that dare avouch it. Thirdly, further to prove it,
he brings in another gross Error; one false-hood to maintain another; to
wit this, for that a false ministry, worship, and government may be in a true
Church; but a true ministry, worship and government cannot be in a false
Church. Strange Paradoxes; the latter should be otherwise then he affirms, by
the Argument of contraries, and in the first he insinuates most grossly that
contraries may agree, and each keep their proper nature: that is, a
Ministry, worship, and Government false, in a Church that is true, and yet he
denies a true Church to be where some men be lewd in conversation: as if some
men in private conversation wickedly behauing themselves, did more take away
the truth of a Church, then a false Ministry, false worship, and a false
government. He will say any thing, that will publish this for a truth, yea,
and hold it as a principle to defend other Errors withal.

The third Error of the Brownists.
THat such as are not of a particular constituted Church (to wit, such a one,
as theirs is) are no Subjects of Christ's Kingdom.

In my former Book, I gave four Reasons, against this Page. 81.
their Assertion; I now add further, that first, this secludes all invisible
members from Christ's Kingdom: secondly, this denies the Catholic Church to
be Christ's Kingdom: thirdly, all that are ignorant of their visible
constitution, to be none of Christ's kingdom: fourthly, that their constitution
is the only visible Circle of Christ's Dominion; in which if men be not, they
be not under Christ: a heavy condemnation to all that either have been, or
now are, or shall be, and yet not of it.

Reply unto Mr. Ainsworths Answer to this third Error.
MAster Ainsworth to this says; first, that I set it not Page. 173.
down in their words. What then? I therefore, says he, do cavil, for that
they grant many of Christ's Subjects; for want of means do not live in a true
constituted Church. The position was Mr. Smiths in his Brownisticall way, which
Mr. Ainsworth disclaimes, and acknowledges many out of their way, by his
disclaiming of this, to be Christ's Subjects visible; for of a visible
Constitution I speak. So then with me he holds this an Error, and the Error
remains upon Brownisticall Mr. Smith the Author; who defended the Brownists
Constitution, (which is only meant in this position) to be the only entry
into life, as the only true Constitution of Christ's Church. But now
Anabaptisticall Mr. Smith, has renounced that Constitution, for as very a
harlot as Rome, in his last book, called the Charecter of the Beast,
published, Anno 1609. And so herein we all agree: I say it is an Error, Mr.
Ainsworth disclaimes it as an Error, and now Mr. Smith renounceth it, though
before his Anabaptistrie he did defend it; so has he herein prevented my reply
to him, and eased me of great labor.

The fourth Error of the Brownists.
THat all not in their way, are without, and do apply against 1. Cor. 5. 12.
Ephesians. 2. 12.
us, 1. Cor. 5. 12. Ephesians. 2. 12. Against this I have set down diverse reasons
in my former Book, Page 82. and how it is to be understood, as Col. 4. 5.

Reply unto Mr. Ainsworths Answer to this fourth Error.
MAster Ainsworths answer, first is, that they hold Page 173.
that all not in the way of Christ are without. So it is Mr. Ainsworth dare not
call their way the way of Christ.
nothing to the matter here; but hereby (mark Reader) that he shows
plainly, that there is a difference between their way, and the way of Christ,
else why does he put the way of Christ in steed of their way, and dare not hold
to the words? If their way be the way of Christ, sithen also Christ's way, it is
but one, he might have held to the words; and if their way be not Christ's way,
as he dare not here avouch, why is he yet a seducing false Teacher to their
way, under color of the way of Christ? Secondly, he iustifies (but yet only
by his bare affirmation) the application of Scriptures against us, as a people
without, till I and my brethren can prove us a true Church: Surely then, at
this present must he disallow the application, for we are a true Church of God,
as is proved, and what he has said to the contrary is disproued. Thirdly, he
excepts against my first reason, as insufficient to disprove the application
against us; Doctor Whitakers, de eccles. Page. 12.
my reason is, that the places are meant of such as never professed Christ at
all; he says it is childish, and asks me why I except not against the holy
Ghost, for applying against the Romish Church, words and speeches meant first
of Heathenish Babylon? Yea, Mr. Ainsworth, must I needs except against Gods
Spirit, because I except against you? No proud conceit. I answer first, the
holy Ghost cannot err in expounding or in applying Scripture: but Mr.
Ainsworth and all the Brownists in the world, both may and do err. Secondly,
the reason of the Holy Ghost, so doing is manifest, for he rightly applies the
places literally spoken of the type, spiritually to the thing signified; and in
so doing, there is both truth and soundness, in the application, from
heathenish Babylon, to Antichristian Babylon, the Romish Synagogue, it follows
well; for that the Holy Ghost calls Rome Babylon; but what is it to us, that are
come out of Babylon? or how can that which is spoken against Heathen Idolaters,
be brought against us, that abhor and fly Idolatry both by profession of
Gods word in that point, and by laws enacted against the same?

My second reason is an urging of them to expound the Phrase, without, by any
Scripture, and manifest if they can that it is spoken of such a people as the
Church of England consists of: but in this was he wholly silent, because he was
not able to give satisfaction.

For my third reason, and the particular branches, which is this, that God
witnesses that we are his people, by giving us his word, Psalm. 147. 19. 20. by
the effectual blessing thereupon in bringing men from a bare profession to a
godly sanctification of life: by Gods gracious protection of us, and mercies
upon us with fatherly chastisements. To all which he answers; that it is but a
boasting: so here then he denies that God has given us his Word, that any are
effectually called, or that Gods gracious protection is over us. The Ravens of
the wilderness will pick out the eyes of all such forlorn bastardly
children, as do so deny God in his so evident works, and their mother to be
as barren of children, and disfurnished, as an Harlot, of her Lords ornaments.
Blame me not Reader, if I herein be sharp; for let the latter Scripture be
considered, and that they hold it, as fitly alleged against us, and thou will
In what account we be with God, in the judgment of the Separatists.
think that I say too little; the place is Ephesians. 2. 12. In which place the
Apostle speaks of the Ephesians before their profession and Baptism, that
they were, 1. without Christ; 2. Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel; 3.
Strangers from the covenants of Promise; 4. without hope; and 5. without God in
the world. If this place be aptly applied against us, as he judges, then he
holds us, the Church of England, as a people out of the profession of Christ,
without Baptism, without Christ, Aliens from the people of God; Strangers from
the covenants of Promise, without hope, without God in the world: and what
then; but as Idolaters and devils? And herein their judgment is worse, for
that they will needs have the holy Ghost to avouch thus much against us, which
if it were so, should be more, then the condemnation of all men and Angels: but
herein (as in many other) they wretchedly abuse both Gods spirit and us.

Reply unto Mr. Smiths Answer to this fourth Error.
MAster Smith to this first, answers two things: First, That all members of a
true Church are within: speaking generally, as Mr. Ainsworth does; but not
particularly of the Brownists Church, as the position is meant: so it is an
answer, and no answer indeed. Secondly, He says, that all members of a
false Church are without: and so they account our Church, and therefore
without: But sithen our Church is not a false Church, as is already proved,
his argument is lost, and we are not yet without.

In Page. 23. 24. he defends the Scriptures, as truly alleged against
Antichristian Churches, which in my answer to Mr. Ainsworth I deny not: but it
rests for him to prove that we be Antichristians, which in that section he does
not.

He answers my second Reason, which Mr. Ainsworth durst not meddle with, and
there he will prove, as he says, that the Scripture Phrase, without, may be
applied against us, and thus he proceeds.

The first Argument; Churches that are in condition equal This proposition is
false, for though in some respect the true church may be worse then Pagans, yet
it follows not that that church is without, that is, no church of God at all,
for that is to be without.
or worse then Assemblies of Pagans, are without. Revel. 11. 2. Antichristian
Churches are in condition equal or worse then Assemblies of Pagans, Ergo,
Antichristian Assemblies are without. The second Argument; false churches are
without; but Antichristian Churches are false churches, Ergo. The third, Dogs,
Enchanters, Whoremongers, murderers, Idolaters, etc, are without.
Antichristian churches are such, Ergo. The fourth, The habitation of Devils,
etc, are without. Antichristian Assemblies, or Babylon, are such, Ergo. The
fifth, Mr. Ainsworth has confuted his Exposition of this, in his book against
Mr. Smith.
The utter court etc. is without: But Antichristian churches are the utter
court, Ergo. The sixth, The serpent and his seed, etc, are without.
Antichristian Churches are the Serpent, and his seed and Angels, Ergo.

All these be easily answered; not to spend time about the syllogismes, and the
falsehood of some parts: I say, they conclude not the question. For the question
is, Whether we, that is, the Church of England be without. See the truth of
this by my second reason in my former book, page 82. and by his own words in
his book, page 25. line 2. Now he concludes, that Antichristian churches are
without: if we be not Antichristian, what is that to us? This here he proves
not, but refers the Reader to the tenth Section of his Book; and if there he
say any thing, the Reader shall there find a Reply. In the mean space, note
here; that he takes for granted all the Minors of these syllogismes be true, as
if we were an Antichristian church; whereby he avouches all the Propositions
or Majors to be as true of us: to wit; first, that in Mr. Smiths ungodly
censure of the Church of England.
condition we be equal or worse then Pagans: secondly, that we are a false
church; thirdly, that we be Dogs, Enchanters, Whoremongers, Murderers,
Idolaters, etc. fourthly, that we be the habitation of devils, the hold of all
foul spirits, the cage of every unclean and hateful bird: fifthly, the utter
court cast out: and sixthly, the serpent, his seed and Angels; for thus holds he
an Antichristian church to be. How he proves us Antichristian, in this section
he shows not: but what an accursed judgment he has of us, may here appear,
to be both odious and detestable.

The fifth Error of the Brownists.
THat only Saints, that is, a people forsaking all known sin, of which they
may be convinced, doing all the known will of God, increasing and abiding ever
therein, are the only matter of a visible Church.

My reasons against this in my former Book are many; from page. 83. to 88.

Reply unto Mr. Ainsworths Answer to this fifth Error.
MAster Ainsworth disclaimeth the position, and says, Page 174.
that they do hold that Saints by Calling, are the only matter of a true
visible Church. He shows not what he means, when he says, Saints by
calling; it had been fit, He expounds not what is a Saint by calling.
to have explained himself, for if thereby he mean, that Saints by calling,
may be any other people, then such as forsake all known sin openly, and do all
the known will of God: what difference make they of their Saints by Calling,
and ours by profession? belike they may be Saints, who forsake not all known
sin, openly committed in the face of the Church, and do not obey the known
will of God, and then, what an idle stir have they made to condemn us for
some of ill conversation among us? sithen such may be Saints, else why denies
he this position? If he mean Saints by calling, to be only such as live
unblameably in a holy conversation before men, without open taint. I answer,
that Gods visible Church consists not of such Saints only, but also of other,
even a mixed company.

First, the Church is a mixed company of good in appearance, The true Church
does consist of a mixed company, and not of Saints only outwardly holy.
and also of bad persons in outward show: this I proved in my other Book, Page
87. whereto he answers not a word.

Secondly, because no Church of God in the old or new testament, after the very
planting, in any space of time, can be showed to be such: but had openly loose
of life, mixed with the rest. Mr. James his Retrait proves this at large.

Thirdly, because the Scripture defines not so the visible matter of the
Church, if any place show it, let them the next time produce it.

Fourthly, because there could then be no conversion in the Church to
Sanctification, for all keep in the state of Repentance, which is contrary to
Jeremy. 23. 22. Ezech. 18. 30.

Fifthly, because the Apostle to the Corinthians had erred, in calling all
Saints without exception, and yet many among them had not repented of evil. 2.
Cor. 12. 20.

Sixthly, because the Jewish Church should not have been Saints for that so
many wicked lived among them, bloody Ioab, cruel Saul, false Prophets, and
others.

Seauenthly, because this holy conversation, which is but one way, by which men
are called Saints, condemns all the other respects by which men are so
called, and if otherwise, they be Saints also, then not only Saints by a godly
life, are matter of a true Church.

Men are called Saints being in one Assembly: first for Why men are called
Saints.
conjunction with the better part: See Page 86. of my former Book. Secondly,
because of birth, borne of believing Parents. 1. Cor. 7. 24. Romans 11. 16.
Thirdly, in respect of the thing whereto they be called, as to the profession
and worship of Christ, which is an holy calling. 1. These. 4. 7. 1. Cor. 1. 1.
Romans 1. 7. Fourthly, in respect of Baptism, by which they are said to put on
Christ: Gal. 3. 27. to be partakers of Christ's death: Romans 6. 3. 4. Col. 2. 12.
to have remission of sins. Acts. 2. 39. Fifthly, in respect of the covenant
made with God, and worship performed to him: Psalm. 50. 5. and reverend hearing
of Gods word. Deuteronomy, 33. 3. Sixthly, in respect of Gods visible presence, as
Exodus 3. 6. Mat. 4. 5. Seventhly in respect of Gods mercy, who will not see the
evil of his people. Number. 23. 21. Ier. 50. 20. If by any of these ways men be
Saints, they are allowed to be matter of the Church, and so the better sort
with them, and they with the best are Saints; and so all are Saints.

Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer to this fifth Error.
MAster Smith, he avouches the exposition, as true, Page. 27. 28.
that a Saint is one, first, forsaking all known sin: secondly, doing all the
known will of God: thirdly, growing in grace: and fourthly, continuing to the
end. For an Hypocrite, says he, is no true member of the visible Church;
because it consists of an inward and outward communion. All this would he
prove by a company of quoted Scriptures: Romans 6. 4. 5. 8. 11. 22. 1. Pet. 3.
11. 2. Pet. 3. 18. 1. John 2. 19. Revel. 3. 5. compared with Romans 1. 7. Ephesians. 1.
4. Revel. 11. 2. and 22. 14. 15. and 18. 2. compared with Deuteronomy. 14. 2. 3. 11.
2. Cor. 6. 16. compared with 1. King. 5. 12. It is his manner where he can
make any open show, though but Sophistically, to deduct reasons from his
Scriptures, but here he but musters them, and sets them in battle array, but
shows not how either they fight for them, or against us; this is the trick of
the older Brownists and only hereby to deceive with show of Scripture. Let any
understanding and indifferent Reader carry this his position to these places,
to wit; That a visible member is no Hipocrite, but a Saint, and such a Saint as
forsakes all known sin, does all the known will of God, grows in grace,
and continues unto the end, and he shall see no truth in his allegation. Romans
6. Romans 6.
shows what men be, that are truly in Christ; and not what they be, that are
in the visible Church. 1. Pet. 3. and 2. Pet. 3. 1. Pet. 3.
do show what men ought to do and be, but not what they 2. Pet. 3.
are. 1. John. 2. 19. is directly against him; for it speaks of 1. John. 2. 19.
the apostacy of some visible members, who were Hypocrites, and had not these
four properties: and when he says, they were not of us, he excludes them
not from being of them visibly, but for not being of the Elect number. So the
Reader may judge of the rest, as impertinently alleged: these have I mentioned
as a guide to the rest; mark but his Position well, and his deceitful abusing
the Scriptures may be soon perceived.

After this he comes to answer my objections against his assertion: I said,
that by his defining of a Saint and a visible member thus, as is above said,
that he defines not a visible member, but one elect, and of the invisible
Church. His answer is by a question, whether I think one so qualified with
the four properties before men, are saved before the Lord? I answer directly,
as he does will me, that I believe so, and all men are bound to think they
are saved before God: and who dare think otherwise, but only Mr. Smith? If we
may not be persuaded, that he which leaves known sin, does Gods known will,
walks and grows in grace, and continues to death therein, is before God
saved, whom may we not think to be damned? He threats to show me my folly for
thus thinking; but in the mean space, he may be judged worse then mad, for
his thinking otherwise, and for writing that it appears not to us, what
Steven, the blessed Martyr was in Gods counsel.

To my second Reason drawn from the Saints of the old Testament, who did not
answer to these four properties; he answers by a discourse of the
difference of the nature and constitution of the old Testament from the new,
only to bleare the eyes of the simple. When he cannot avoid the argument, (to
wit, that David, Hezechias, Asa, and other Saints did sin openly, and in some
things were not wholly reformed, (see my other Book for instances, Page 83.
84.) and yet were true visible matter of the Church in the old Testament; and
therefore men not qualified like his devised visible Saints, may be now also
true matter, and so his opinion grossly erroneous,) then he falls to strange
expositions, and unheard of paradoxes, uttered from his own brain, without
proof, as here Page 29. 30. he tells us; first, that the Israelites were a
holy people literally: secondly, no true holiness was required in that
constitution: thirdly, that all was typical only, as typical Constitution,
Worship, Ministry, Government: and fourthly, that a Saint, was a typical
Saint; an Hypocrite, a typical Hipocrite; and a wicked man, a tipicall wicked
man; so as there might be the Sons of Belial; yea, and the best might live in
open sin, and yet be Saints; to wit forsooth, typical Saints. And his ground
is his own conceit, (he brings no Scripture for what he thus monstrously
avouches) because says he, their moral communion was only invisible, and
no true holiness required of them visibly, and True holiness required in the
old Testament, contrary to Mr Smiths brutish imagination of it.
none were morally polluted in their communion. All which is against the
manifest truth of God; for the covenant made between God and his people is the
ground of the churches communion and fellowship. Now the covenant in the old
Testament was also moral and spiritual, and true holiness required by it:
first, the sum of it was, that God was their Exodus 20.
God, and they his people, which is spiritual, and a holy covenant. Ier. 31. 1.
Secondly, at the making of the Covenant with Abraham, God did require
sincerity, Walk before me, and be upright: Genesis 17. 21. and that covenant
was spiritual also. Gal. 3. 17. Acts. 3. 25. Thirdly, the moral Law is called
then Gods Covenant, which moral Law, is true holiness. Exodus 34. 28.
Fourthly, the Lord required in plain terms true holiness. Psalm. 51. Thou
requirest truth in the inward parts. read Deu. 10. 12. Fifthly, the Sacraments
were in and of their visible Covenant, and so communion for circumcision is
called the Covenant: Genesis 17. 10. now a Sacrament is a Sacrament, for that
there is a visible sign and seal of an invisible grace, the consideration
whereof is required of all that do receive the outward signs. Sixthly, there
were promises made to the old Israelites, even in the very constitution: now
the apprehension of promises require faith, which is an inward grace of true
holiness. Seventhly, every doctrine commanded to be taught openly to that
Church, as then to be received, and for which the true worshippers were
commended, was part of their Covenant; but true faith was taught Heb. 2. and
commended to be the grace, for which they were approved, as is manifest, Heb.
11. which doctrine of faith is a doctrine of true holiness: so also fear and
love. Deuteronomy. 6. 2. 5. 6. 7. Eighthly, there were Sacrifices appointed for moral
transgressions, as well as for ceremonial uncleannesses. Leu. 6. 6. So Aaron
made often an atonement by Sacrifice, for the moral transgressions of the
people, and not only for typical pollutions: now these Sacrifices for such
moral offenses, were of their constitution. Ninthly, the word shows they were
defiled by moral uncleanness, bloodshed defiled the Land, and they polluted
it by that sin: Number. 35. 33. and also Gods name by Idolatry: Leu. 18. 21. and
themselves and the Land by moral uncleanness. ver. 24. 25. Tenthly, and
lastly, there was open rebuke and threats for moral transgression, and the
Transgressors were said to cast off God in so doing, which argues it to be a
part of their visible Covenant; yea, their typical service was abhorred, when
men sinned morally against God: see Esaias. 1. 9. 15. and 58. 2. 10. And David
speaking comparatively between true holiness, and outward service
ceremonial, he says, God required then not this, in respect of the other.
Psalm. 51. 16. 17. Away then with this dreamers Anabaptisticall frenzy, of
typical wicked men, and typical Hypocrites, and literal holiness, without
true holiness: in which he makes the God of Israel to delight then only in
an outward slaughtering of of beasts, and the godly in those days to be in
their visible communion carnal, and brutish, contrary to the evident truth as
is declared manifestly.

But to stop my mouth, that I shall not once mutter, as he says, (oh the
admirabilitie of the man!) he reads me as he thinks a riddle, to the
amazement of all his intoxicated Disciples, and frames his argument both
against the truth and me thus. If in the Old Testament their visible typical
Mr. Smiths Riddlement.
communion was tipically polluted by typical and ceremonial uncleanness
uncleansed: then in the new Testament our spiritual visible communion is
really polluted by moral uncleanness uncleansed; that is, sin unrepented
of. But in the old Testament, their visible typical communion was typically
polluted by the typical and ceremonial uncleanness uncleansed: Ergo. Surely,
such of his as were blinded with his Heresy, and affected with his folly, were
too-tooly moved with a merry conceit at this riddlement, as not to be answered;
through the obscure profunditie of his reason ouer-reaching our poor
apprehensions: which made him say, he would stop my mouth for muttering; but
let us see how I can mutter against it. What, a Goliath? then see the strength
of a pibble stone in a sling; have at a Goliath, let him save his head; for by
his contrarying so daily himself, it seems his brains be already cracked. But
ere I answer, I read him again this riddle: If in his last old years, their
Separatisticall communion was Brownistically polluted, by a Schismatic
rending of themselves from the Church of England, for some supposed ceremonial
and Antichristian uncleanness uncleansed: then in this his new year, their
Anabaptisticall Communion is Smithically polluted by their but half
Anabaptistrie, new unheard of Heresies, even spiritual and moral uncleanness
uncleansed, that is, their sin not yet repented of. But in his last old
years, their Separatisticall Communion was Brownistically polluted, by a
Schismatic rending of themselves from the Church of England, for some
supposed ceremonial and Antichristian uncleanness uncleansed: Ergo. And now
to his argument. His Mayor (says he) cannot be denied, for it is a just
Analogy and proportion from the type to the truth, from the shadow to the
substance. Observe Reader, that the proof stands upon his own coined Analogy
and proportion, he says it is so, but does not prove it by any evidence of
holy writ, not one syllable brought for it. But his then follows not: for
first, mark what he proportioneth, visible to visible, typical to spiritual,
communion to communion, typical pollution to real pollution, ceremonial
uncleanness to moral uncleanness, uncleansed to unrepented: if this be so,
why is not a like proportion from Circumcision to Baptism, from their Order of
Government, to our Order? Which he denies; and if this Analogy cannot stand,
neither can his. His wit, is no more a warrant to make a proportion in some,
then men's understanding here is to make an Analogy in other some. Secondly, it
is utterly false, that their typical pollution, did represent any real
pollution in our Communion: for there is not taught in the new Testament, that
any personal pollution really pollutes the Communion of Saints; this
Brownisticall Heresy, and cause of all the Separations, should have been
proved, but is not, for indeed it cannot. If therefore there be not such a
pollution in the new Testament, it is frivolous to tell us of a type of it in
the old Testament. Now to manifest to all men, that in the new Testament One
man's sin pollutes not an other.
there is no such real polluting of our spiritual communion, these reasons
show it:

Judas in their Communion.

Paul reproved corruptions among the Corinthians: the Angel the Asian
Churches, and never 1. Cor. 11.
taught pollution. 2. Cor. 12.
Reu. 2. and 3.


Reu. 2. 24. 25. yea, this censure of holding them polluted who live in a
polluted estate, as righteous Noah in the World, or just Lot in Sodom, is
reproved. Acts. 10. 15.

Mat. 23. 2. yea, and to communicate in other things, so men do look to
themselves. Mat. 5. 23. 24. So the Apostle. 1. Cor. 11. Read my former Book,
Page 106.

Esaias. 65. 5. Luke. 18. 14. yea, and the Lord justifies the poor publicane
before such. This is also the Luciferian pride of the old Donatists: Calvin,
Instit. 4. 13. 16. Osiander against Anabap. Page 140. 142.



Minor.







Ezech. 18. 14. 17. 20. and 14. 18. 20. and 23. 9. Tit. 1. 15. Reu. 3. 4. and
2. 24. 22. 23. Gal. 5. 10. and 6. 5. One man's conscience, says Mr. Perkins,
Revel. 2. 2. is not polluted by another; yea, ignorance of other men's sins
exempts such as know them not, from the punishment which the offenders receive
for their transgression. Deuteronomy. 1. 39.

Sam. 2. 24. 17.

Romans 3. 3.



own faith, Hab. 2. 4. and answer for what he himself has done in the
flesh; now if it were, as he says, then is he to answer for others, and live
in a society unpolluted by the grace of others, as well as his own, sithen,
except others live well, he is polluted.

Paul says, that the unworthy eat condemnation to themselves, he says not,
to another.

Smith himself, if ever he were himself, teaches the contrary on the Lords
Prayer, Page 88.

in common one with another, but the error of man by himself, out of the
Comunion, for which he himself shall answer, and such also as have fellowship
with him in evil, by which they have a common union, that so agree therein, How
men may be guilty of the sin of an other.
by counsel, consent, commandment, provocation, neglect of duty, flattery,
excuse, or defense thereof: but if a man do none of these, then is he not of
the evil in common with the wicked, though the wicked be in the common union of
good with him, in which communion he is, not as a wicked man, but as one
agreeing with the godly in the best things.





Thirdly, I answer to the Mayor, and demand whether the visible typical
communion, did not represent the invisible Communion of the Elect: and as the
typical unclean were not cleansed till they were washed, and offered up
sacrifice by the Priest; so the spiritual member offending should not be
cleansed, but by repentance and by offering up, by the hand of Faith, hearty
supplications to God, in the Name of Christ our high Priest, who has
sacrificed himself for us? If it be so, then their visible typical communion,
did not prefigure a visible communion of men, but the invisible communion of
Saints, the Elect of God.

Now to his Minor, which I deny to be true, that the typical Answer unto the
Minor.
Communion was polluted: persons were polluted, and others touching them were
polluted, but their communion was not: First, because there was no sacrifice
appointed The Communion in the old Testament, was not polluted by the sin of
one.
for any such pollution, as came upon all for the sin of one or more.
Secondly, though the Prophet reprove the Priests, for not separating the clean
and unclean; yet he teaches not, that for neglect thereof, the Communion is
polluted. Ezech. 22. 26. Thirdly, the Prophets cried out of the peoples
uncleanness, but never took the Communion to be polluted, and therefore held
with the Church in spiritual Communion. Fourthly, because particular persons
were for their particular vncleanenesses to offer up sacrifices themselves for
themselves, and not all for them and themselves, as polluted in their
Communion, though the polluted abode in his uncleanness, for some time: let him
produce evident Scripture for this particular if he able.

His Minor, he goes about to prove by three Scriptures; Number. 19. 13. 20.
Number. 19. 13. 20. Hag. 2. 14. Acts 21. 28. 29. The first place proves not that
the Communion was polluted: But that one polluted, and wickedly persisting and
not purging himself, defiled the Lords Tabernacle; (to wit) to himself; for
the punishment is threatened only against himself. The place in Haggai, is of
ceremonial pollution, but yet speaks Haggai. 2. 14.
of what one unclean touches, making it unclean thereby, and not of one
living in uncleanness, thereby polluting the whole Assembly. Again, he speaks
not of polluting the holy ordinances administered in the Congregation, as the
sacrifices in the Priests hands, which yet appertained to all, but of what the
polluted party touched himself. As if it were said in like case; a wicked
profane man comes to the Lords Supper: he pollutes not what the Minister is
performing, nor what others receive, but what he himself does touch* and
receive, eating to himself 1. Cor. 11.
judgment, as the Apostle says, and not to the rest. The last place, Acts 21.
28. 29. was but a speech of a furious people, Acts 21. 28. 29.
falsely accusing Paul, and supposing a pollution where none was. And let him
show me, where it was forbidden any Stranger without exception, to come into
the Temple: In Deu. 23. 3. is a forbidding of the Israelites to admit the
Moabites, and Ammonites, for a long time, into the commonwealth of Israel: but
what is that to this matter?

An other exception which I take against his position is, that they take places
of Exhortations, admonitions, Commanments, etc. which are only effectual in
the invisible saints, the Elect, among others of the Church, to describe every
visible member by; as if they did reason thus: God exhorts and commands his
people to be such and such; if not, then are they none of his. If they be not
(says he) what Mr. Smiths comfortless Assertion.
God commands, they are none of his people. What child is his fathers, what
subject his Princes, what wife her husbands by this reasoning; for who are as
they be commanded?

Again, the Lord takes a people to be his, before he command them;
commandments are for his people to rule them, and to cause them to obey, not
to make them his people. A man's commandment makes not a servant, but declares
a power, that such a one is a servant already, that is, under his power to be
commanded The rest of the Section is but wrangling a confident auouching of his
own will, but not an evident and plain answer to the rest of the particulars
of my former Book, and therefore I pass them over to the Reader, to compare
them, and come to the next Assertion following; being the sixth error, which he
stands upon so confidently, as if it be confuted, he will acknowledge the cause
of Separation to lie in the Mr. Smiths hazard of all upon one stake.
dust, and they must disclaim their Schism which they have made, and the
Heresies they hold; yea, he will acknowledge the Churches of England, etc. to
be true Churches of Christ, etc. Therefore seeing he has iumpt all upon this
point, all the rest may be passed over, as idle expense of of time, the
victory being in this particular either won or lost. I had purposed once to
have come to this, and omitted the rest before and after, but that it would
have been thought of his Scholars, that what was omitted, was unanswerable;
for their Mole-hilles, are in their own eyes huge mountains.

The sixth Error of the Brownists.
THat the power of Christ, that is, authority to preach, to administer the
Sacraments, and to exercise the censures of the Church, belongs to the whole
Church, yea, to every one of them, and not to the principal members thereof.

I have in my former Book showed this position, to be Reasons against popular
government.
an Error, Page 88.





See Bell, in his last book of the best government. page 6.
Monarchical being by a common consent approved as the best, then why not so in
the Church?

Adam, in Noah, in Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and not in the body of their
Families: secondly, under the Law, the government lay upon Moses, then
distributed in part to the seventy Elders; the charge of the Temple to Aaron:
this continued all the old Testament, after the Leuits were chosen for the
first borne, and Princes given also by God to rule in Israel; in which time the
people were subjects, and had not dominion over them: and this power bestowed
upon special persons, was not conferred unto them by the peoples authority,
but by the Lords choice and commandment; whereto the people were to assent:
and note also, how the Scriptures were committed to the Levites and Elders for
all Israel, and not to the multitude to give to them, Deuteronomy. 31. 9. to which
Chief, he gave the charge to see to the rest, verse 28.

leave, guidance, and direction; the Apostles themselves ordained officers, not
the people without them. Act. 14. 23. Secondly, because the Apostles called for
the Elders, as the chief, and conferred with them, without the people, Act.
20. 17. Thirdly, the Elders did (as it may seem) sit in a Consistory, with
James their Bishop at Jerusalem, without the people, Act. 21. 18. and did
decree a matter from their own judgment, without asking the people their
voice: verse 23. Fourthly, the Elders are preferred before the people, as
superior to them, and therefore set before them. Act. 15. 22. 23. The Apostles
and Elders made the people acquainted with the matter here, A prevention.
who consented, but it therefore follows not, that they had power and
authority, without which the Authority of the Apostles and Elders should be
nothing. Experience shows us, that superiors do sometime require an Assent of
such as have no authority with them, only for peace and love.

Mat. 28. 19. and 16. 19. John. 20. 21. 22. 23. Mark 13. 34. And against the
Apostles substituting of Timothy and Titus; not under, or in equal state, but
over the Church. Of this see more in my other Book, Page 92.

Sacraments, but only special persons qualified and called of God, for that
purpose.

Ephe. 4. 11. 12. is against this popular government: first, because it is
said, that Christ gave officers to the Church, not power to the people to make
them, ere they be: secondly, because the officers are first nominated; as
called of God, to gather a Church and repair it, and to build it up, all this
charge laid upon some, and not upon all: thirdly, because the Church there is
compared to a body, now a natural body has special members receiving power
from the Creator, to rule the body, which faculty and power is preserved in
the body, but not given of the body; as seeing, is given to the Eye: hearing,
to the Ear, and that from God to these members for the good of the body, but
they receive not seeing, and hearing from the body, for then all the body
should see and hear, because it cannot give that power to another, which it
self has not: Even so is it with the Church.

Revel, 2. and 3. the Angels, that is, the chief in the Churches, are
reproved, (not the people) for the abuses suffered: and according to the
general course, must that particular place, 1. Cor. 5. be understood; and not
so, as 1. Cor. 5.
it should oppose a constant course in all other: that one place must yield to
many, and not many to it.

Romans 12. 6. 8. in which we see the gifts and power of governing, to be
bestowed upon some, and not on all, and also against these places; 1. Tim. 4.
14. and 5. 16. 17. where Rule is evidently taught to be in some, and not in all.



christian Magistrates in the Church, when God gives them Of Authority of
civil magistrates in Church Matters, see Bells Regiment of the Church.
to the Church, as being subject themselves to a common multitude in matters
concerning the Church; contrary to the evident witness of the old Testament,
to which we must go, to see how the government was in the days of their Kings
and Judges: for in the new Testament this is not clear, for that in the
Apostles days God gave no Christian Magistrates to the Church.

Romans 13. 1. 2. 3. this understood of Magistrates then, much more now being
Christian: So 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14. Tit. 3. 1. So Ecclesiastical persons
Overseers. Acts. 20. 28. Heb. 13. 8. 17. 1. Pet. 5. 2. 5. 1. Tim. 5. 17.

Precept, that the people should rule; or of Practice, that they did rule over
their Teachers: let the Adversary bring but one Precept or one practice to
satisfy his Reader; I profess I can find none. The place in Mat. 18. 17. is
expounded, and that exposition confirmed by many reasons in my former Book,
Page. 94. 99.



office represent Christ's person, and so do not the people: and therefore we
read not that the people made Ministers, but Ministers made Ministers, and such
as stood in Gods stead removed them from the Ministry, as Solomon did
Abiather, but the people did it not.



which might so much as insinuate any Sovereignty, but subjection; as the name
Sheep, Brethren, Saints, Household of Faith, the Wife or Spouse, Children: but
Ministers are called Overseers, Elders, Fathers, and such like; declaring
authority over the people. If any stumble upon Reu. 1. 6. where the faithful
are called Kings; I answer it is not understood of any outward power to rule
among and over men, of which we here dispute; but of an inward power of Gods
spirit sanctifying the Elect, by which as Kings they rule over their own
corruptions, to which by nature they be in subjection.

Mat. 24. 45. where mention is made of a Servant, that is, the Minister ruling;
and the Househould, that is, the Church ruled.

Mark. 13. 34. but not given to the household or House, which is the Church: So
to Apostles; 2. Cor. 10. 8. and 12. 13. and in them to godly Churchmen, but
not to the people.

Reply unto Mr. Ainsworths Answer to this sixth Error.
MAster Ainsworth first disclaimes this, as unjustly laid to the charge of his
Company: Surely it was the opinion of Smithean Brownists here; and who would
think so maine a point as this, should among themselves be so rent, as one
will deny it, and another sort will hazard, all the rest they do hold upon it,
as truth, and do maintain it as a most infallible verity? If they be thus at
discord in their Principles, they will never agree in circumstantiall points:
who would join to them, who neither agree with any other, nor yet among
themselves. I am glad that Mr. Ainsworth renounceth it as an error, I wish he
so would do in all the rest, then should we soon agree to our comforts.

Secondly, he very badly insinuates that the Protestants and Reformed Churches
do affirm the ruling power which is proper to Christ, and only inherent in
him, to be in the Bishops, in the Presbiterie: which is most false. They hold
no Popelike and Antichristian power over men's consciences, to do as they like,
without the word: but that such an external power they have, as thereby they
may rule in the Church according to Gods word, in setting men in order, in
causing them to keep it, and execute the offices, in which they be placed, in
punishing the wicked, and in giving encouragement to such as walk in Gods
ways peaceably.

Thirdly, he denies that all may preach, but yet some private men may prophecy
publicly: which they would maintain out of 1. Cor. 14. but to this I say;
first, let them show that 1. Cor. 14.
the word Prophet in that place is not an office. verse. 29. Secondly, that
prophecy was ever used out of an office in public, Reasons against their
prophesying.
that is, by one not a Teacher or Pastor in an established Church. Thirdly,
what expositours do so expound that Chapter: Beza is against it in his
Annotations upon verse 29. 32. Fourthly, what Church did ever so practice?
Fifthly, they say, in an article of their faith, 34. that Prophecy is a public
teaching of Gods word, according to the proportion of faith, for the
edification, exhortation and comfort of the church. I would know what
difference between this and preaching? He says that one is in office, the
other out of office: and quotes in the margent for this, Romans 12. 6. 7. but the
Apostle Romans 12. 6. 7.
speaks there of gifts in office, for he speaks of offices: ver. 4. and then
of gifts, which he exhorts to employ well for the Church, and includes
himself, saying; we have received gifts, verse. 6. as noting thereby, what
persons he speaks of, even of such as were in office with him. Sixthly, if
such Prophecy be, it is either by virtue of a general calling of a christian,
or by force of some special vocation; but not by any particular function say
they: and I say, not by the general calling as they be Christians; for then be
they not tied to wait the special call of their company, because that shows
that such do it not by virtue of their calling to Christianity, but by
special authority. Seauenthly, If they may teach, they may also by that very
authority administer the Sacraments: these two are coupled by Christ, and to
whom Christ gave the first, it is evident he granted the last: Mat. 28. 18.
Mark. 15. 16. and the contrary can no where be showed: and yet herein have
these men made a Separation; so in love are they here-with, that as they
separate men from men, so do they one ordinance of God from another.

If this Reply be too short, let him answer Mr. Smith, who answers to him at
large, and condemns him for a new kind of Antichristianisme never heard of
before. Page. 67.

Reply to Mr. Smiths Answer to this sixth Error.
MAster Smith, he takes up as a truth, and as true Page. 40.
owner hereof, what Mr. Ainsworth lets fall to the ground as false; and
avouches that the power of binding and loosing is given to the body of the
Church, even to two or three faithful people joined together in Covenant: in
confidence of truth herein, he calls upon the Kings Majesty, the Nobles, the
whole Parliament house, and all the learned, to consider of the supposed truth
herein, and if he prove it not, to hold him a Schismaticke and an Heretic;
and the way of the Separation to be naught; and the Church of England to be a
true Church, yea, the Church of Rome too: So then beat him out of this, when
he has run Anabaptistrie out of breath, as he has done Brownisme, ten to
one, but the new Anabaptisticall Se-baptist will prove an Antichristian Papist.
And his order in handling this point is thus, first, he would prove no
Ministerial power by succession: then, that the same is primarily given to the
body of the Church: and lastly, he answers some reasons alleged by me in my
former Book against his assertion.

But it may appear that the Ministry ordinarily is by The ordinary
ministerial ordination is by Succession. 1. Reason.
succession.

First, at the worlds beginning, God himself preached unto Adam, whom he
ordained in his place, to teach the succeeding age; after him God raised up one
after another, in order unto Moses, the persons are recorded in Scripture. Genesis
5. Henoch, Jude ver. 14. was a Prophet: so Noah a Preacher: 2. Pet. 2. 5. After
the flood succeeded Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who are called Prophets. Psalm.
105. 14. 15. The next was Joseph, 1. Chron. 5. 1. with Leui, Coath, Amram,
Aaron, Moses, and Miriam a Prophetess. Exodus 15. 20. After the Law given, then
was chosen Aaron, after him Eliezer, then Phinees, Abishua, Bukki, Vzzi, Eli,
Ahitub, Ahimelech, Abiathar, Zadoc: and so one succeeded another to the end, as
may be plainly showed by Scripture: so for four thousand years this
succession continued in the Ministry in the first borne before the Law
ordinarily, and in the tribe of Leui, and posterity of Aaron under the Law.

Reason for Succession.
the Teacher, and then raised up others in his stead: So in the new creation in
the last days came God again to preach, even Jesus Christ; who ascending,
appointed Apostles to succeed him: the Apostles had with them Evangelists, and
before they departed, they ordained Elders, which succeeded the Apostles, and
the other extraordinary men, and so are ranked: Ephesians. 4. 12. with whom God
promised to be to the worlds end; Mat. 28. 20. which must needs be understood
of the Apostles successors, because the Apostle continued but a while.

Reason for Succession.
none allowed to ordain a Minister, but a Minister; I mean an Ecclesiastical
person, as we for distinction sake do speak: as Titus in Creta: Chap. 1. 5.
and Timothy else where, to whom the Apostle speaks, and in him to only
Ecclesiastical persons, as a matter only concerning them, to lay on hands. 1.
Tim. 5. 22. And there is no mention of any which laid on their hands and
ordained, but only the Apostles, Acts. 14. 23. Evangelists, Tit. 1. 5.
Prophets and Teachers, Acts. 13. 1. 2. 3. and the Eldership: 1. Tim. 4. 14.
which Eldership was of all Teachers and Ministers, as is showed before at
large. Thus we see in the new Testament all the Apostles time, that the
Ministry was by succession: Ministers, as it were begetting Ministers by
ordination, and laying on of hands: let one instance be given to the contrary.

Reason for Succession.
kept from time to time, Bishop after Bishop, and Ministers ordained by them:
the Catalogue of them do witness this, and the Stories of times avouch it; on
which we must rely, where the Scripture cease to make further relation: and
especially may we easily believe succession out of men's writings, when we see
the same verified by Scripture, to have been from the worlds beginning, till
Christ, and after, as far as the Story of the Scripture makes mention, it
also promising the same to the worlds end. Mat. 28. 20. And thus by plain
Historical narration both of God and man, we see a succession of the
Ministry, from one Minister to another: and not one instance of any made and
ordained a Minister by the people, but when there were Churchmen, as we
speak, to ordain them. Mathias was not chosen, but when other Apostles were
there: Acts. 1. 15. the Deacons were not appointed, but when the Apostles were
there to ordain them: Acts. 6. 2. 6. Paul and Barnabas, when the holy Ghost
commanded to separate them, had no hands laid upon them but when there was in
the Church Prophets and Teachers present to do it. Acts. 13. 1. 2. 3. And it
is apparent, that the Churches did wait the Apostles coming to ordain
Ministers, acknowledging thereby no such power to be in themselves. Acts. 14.
23. This I speak to show that Churchmen ever ordained Ministers, and not the
Lay People: Calvin in his Instit. lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 2. says, that before
the Papacy, there was a Bishop in every City, to whom belonged a certain
Country, which should take their Priests from him: and if the Country were
large, then were appointed Country Bishops, Suffragans, as we call them, to
perform the office for him: by which it is evident, that the Churches held
this Succession, and was not Antichristian, howsoever the same be abused now by
a popish pride and tyranny. But now to his arguments, whereby Mr. Smith would
refell this.

1. Argument. If Christ's Ministerial power be given Page. 42.
by Succession to the Pope, Bishops, or Presbiterie primarilie, then the
Ministry is before the Church: But the ministry is not before the Church:
Ergo.

Here mark (Christian Reader) that I have avouched Succession affirmatively,
and my proof is evident, even an Historical narration of it from time to
time, and no one instance to the contrary: This man comes with a contradictory
speech, but gives (as was meet) no instance, wherein my general assertion
should be proved untrue, but only frames reasons sophistically, making absurd
consequences upon this Antecedent. Is this a refelling of an evident story of
the truth? will an imagination of absurdities overthrow a true Narration? What
clear History might not thus be ouer-throwne? But to his Argument.

The Consequence is false and absurd, the Antecedent The Consequence false.
proves it not: for make the Consequence the question, and the Antecedent the
tertium Argumentum, and frame this compound Syllogism Categorically, and then
the absurdity will appear. Whatsoever is by succession, is before the Church:
but the Ministry is by succession: Ergo. The Mayor is false in this
generality, and as absurd, as to say, that because there is succession in
Propagation, therefore Adams posterity may be before Adam. If the Ministry
did at the first arise out of the Church, and not from God immediately, the
first Teacher to the Church, then had his Consequence been true. His reason to
confirm his Consequence is a begging of the question, he makes a Ministry
without Christ's power, which is most false, for where the ministry is, there
is Christ's power.

The Minor I deny, first, for form, by his adding of a The Minor denied.
second term in the Minor, which was not in the Mayor, then for the falsehood:
for the Ministry is before the Church. It must be known that there is a
twofold raising A twofold raising up of the Ministry.
up of the Ministry; the first, by God at the first, to beget a Church: so
God made Adam a Minister, to whom he gave a wife to begin the Church, and as
Adam was before his Wife, so is the Ministry at the first before the Church,
the Spouse of Christ, which God winnes to him by his Ministers, Ambassadors,
who bring the word to beget the Church, the word is before it, then such as
bring it also: and it is said, he gave some not only to confirm the Church,
but to gather the Saints to make a Church. Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. The second is when
the Church is once gathered, out of which the Ministers are taken: the former
is before the Church, the latter is with the Church, in respect of the
Ministers persons, this or that man ordained in this or that particular
Congregation, but in respect of their office and ordination by succession from
the first they be before the Church also: therefore his argument is nothing
worth; this let him know, that succession takes not away relation between the
Minister and the Church: for he being sent to win people is a Minister to the
hidden number, not yet called out, and is Gods Instrument to make the invisible
members visible to men, as far as man can see them: so he has no flock
actually till then, but potentially. Yea, Ministers sent of God, may be the
Church in this respect, that they be Christians, and so one edify another,
till others be added, and they be Ministers in respect of an office bestowed
upon them in their state of Christianity, so as if there were none left in a
country but Ministers, yet there in them may the Church be said to remain.
Hence it is, that a Minister administreth as a Minister the Lords Supper to
himself, as a Christian, with others.

2. Argument. If Christ's ministerial power be by succession Page. 42.
to the Pope, Bishops or Presbiterie, then the Ministry of Rome is a true
Ministry: but this is false: Ergo.

I answer that the sequel is very absurd, the Antecedent The Consequence
denied.
proves it not. He is to know that by succession here is meant that true
succession, which is personal succession, with succession in sound doctrine:
for not ordination by succession serves the turn, but to be ordained to the
office of true Ministers; now the Romish Ministry is Idolatry and
Superstition, and the men appointed thereto are ordained sacrificying Priests.
Neither does it follow, that because all true Ministers come ordinarily by
succession, therefore all that have succession, are true Ministers, for there
is required with succession a true office and true doctrine, true Sacraments
and Prayer, about which Christ's true Ministers are exercised. The rest of the
Arguments are mere verbal, and never a Consequent proved.

His third Consequent is, that then men are bound absolutely to sin, in joining
with the sins of the ministers. This man takes a principle of Brownisme
unproven, to overthrow a truth, cannot a man receive the holy things of God,
but he must needs sin with others? Again he avouches, Page 76. that men
were bound in the old Testament necessarily to the Kingdom, Priesthood, and
Temple for worship and service to God, what sins soever were committed, and
yet men belike did not partake then with ohter men's sins: why then now? are
Gods Commandments and ordinances less able to keep a man pure now, then they
were before?

His fourth Consequent from succession is, that then the Lord has made the
ministers Lords over Gods Church. How follows this from succession? May I
reason thus, the Priests were by succession: Ergo, they were Lords over Israel;
who is so seely, as not to see, that here is no Consequence? Succession
inferres no more, then the true use of it may rightly afford, if men abuse what
they have by succession, does that arise from the thing, or the corruption of
the person?

His fifth Consequent from succession is, that then the Pope may excommunicate
the whole Church universal, and the Bishops their whole Diocesses and
Provinces: I leave him this Consequent to prove, for he gives no reason at all
of it; he shall do the Pope a great favor to prove him to have an universal
power, by his personal succession, and that by personal succession he may
claim Christ's power, as he would infer by this his absurd reasoning. If
Excommunication be a casting of men out of the Church; how can he conclude,
that simply by succession a Bishop in authority may cast out all the Church?
so then he casts out the Church out of the Church, or makes a company no
Church, and sets himself without a Church, by this sequel; whence we see, if
his absurdity were true, others more gross would arise from thence: let
therefore absurdities overthrow an absurdity.

His sixth Consequent from succession is, that then the office of the Deacons
and widows are lost. He reasons thus: if succession be interrupted in any
part, then is there no succession at all. All his skill cannot save him from
shame in so reasoning, if he be not grown shameless. But how proves he the
offices lost? Forsooth, because, says he, (Oh, profound conceit of the man
Anabaptisticall!) as a Priest, under the law, came of a Priest, and a Leuite of
a Leuite; so an Elder makes an Elder; a Deacon ordaines a Deacon; and a widow
must ordain a widow; which has not been. A Smiths forge! A Priest came of
Levy at the first; and though Elders may ordain, may Deacons too? it is
beyond his skill to prove: no place in the new Testament in the least syllable
affords him the least conceit of it. The Apostles Acts 6.
ordained Deacons; so to them which succeed in the Ministry belongs
ordination, and the same is among us hitherto: but that there should be
imposition of hands upon widows; who ever heard to this day?

His seventh argument, by which he thinks he may cry Mr. Smiths strongest
argument in his own judgment, is yet from the que stion.
victory, is, That doctrine which destroys it self is false. The doctrine of
succession destroys it self: Therefore the doctrine of succession is a false
doctrine. My answer to this is, that the man here has lost his question, for
he should conclude, that Christ's power is not given to the principal members,
this is the position in question, and he concludes that the doctrine of
succession is a false doctrine. May not we think that he is wild in
wandering? we see neither Religion, nor the law of right reasoning, can keep
him within the bounds of right and truth. His proposition he proves not, and
yet determinatiue and accidentaliter, a doctrine may destroy it self and yet
be a true doctrine; and so till he expound it, it may be denied as false. The
Assumption he would prove, because Election is interposed; by which (as he
supposes) succession is ouer-throwne. A seely reason: is there not a
succession in propagation? yet also an election when men chose women to
maintain this succession: the one overthrows not another, but either vpholds
other. In the old Law was succession, yet also Election, as may appear by the
Law of reiection ordained, if any man were deformed, defective in his parts and
so forth, such were not allowed, therefore others were to be chosen in their
room; and yet the succession good. Mathias Act. 1.
succeeded in Judas stead, and yet was he chosen; so succession was with
Election. But here, as in other places, he deceives his affected associates to
his own will, like Pythagorian Scholars, cleaving to his ipse dixit; for he
reasons, as if we spoke of a succession of persons only: as Eliazar succeeding
Aaron, Phinees Eliazar, Abishua Phinees, as in the old Testament. But the
succession here meant, is of a continuance of Gods ordinance by persons Elected
thereto from time to time, being only of spiritual kindred, by the faith of
doctrine, by which the ordinance is vpheld, and true succession maintained.
After these his Arguments, he frames objections, but none made by me; and
therefore I leave him as fighting with his own shadow.

In the next place we come to his Arguments, set down affirmatively from
undeniable groudns of Scripture (as he says) if he may be believed, who never
believes himself, but gives himself the lie in print twice or thrice in one
year.

His first Scripture, Mat. 16. 13. 20. Hence he frames Page 51. Mr. Smiths
first Argument for popular government. Answered.
his Argument thus: Christ's disciples are Christ's Church. Christ's ministerial
power is given to Christ's Disciples. Ergo, Christ's ministerial power is given
to his Church.

In this Argument he does change the copulative, which ought not to be in a
true syllogism; but this man may as well break the rules of Art, as the faith
of Truth. Again, he uses deceit in the word Disciples, which he expounds by
this Argument to be other, then Apostles, or such as were Disciples sent forth
to preach, when the place of Mat. 16. 13. 18. is evidently against this. He
cannot prove at this time any to be with him but the twelve, as may appear by
Luke. 9. 18. Neither does the place say, that these disciples are Christ's
Church, as he makes show, by quoting it for a proof but rather the verse 18.
in that place of Matthew, manifests that Christ himself made a difference
between the disciples in the person of Peter, and the Church: both which are
there distinctly mentioned: at the most they be but part of Christ's Church, and
not the whole Church, and then so meant, he gains nothing by this Argument.
For the copulative, is given, it is to be taken two ways, primarily and
immediately; or, secundarily, and mediately: if it be taken in the first sense,
and the word Disciples, also for the Apostles, then is it for me, and against
himself; if in the second sense, and the word Disciples taken for the whole
Church, then I grant all, and yet never the worse: for I confess the power of
Christ to be given to the Church mediately, that is, unto others for the
Churches behoof and benefit: If he understand it to be given primarily to the
whole multitude, I deny it, as utterly false, till he can prove, that by
Disciples in Mat. 16. 13. 20. is meant the multitude, which he calls the
Church, and not only the Apostles. If he here say, as in an other place, that
here must needs be meant the common Disciples, called the brethren, the
multitude, because the Apostles were never called Apostles, till after Christ's
ascension: I show him the contrary out of the word in plain terms, Luke 6.
13. where our Savior called his disciples, and of them, he chose twelve; which
also he called Apostles, and this am I sure, was before his Ascension; and yet
is not this man ashamed to avouch the contrary, Page 39. line 10. All that
which follows depends on the proof of his Exposition of Mat. 16. 13. for
all learned Expositours that I can read, or hear of by others, do interpret
it of the Apostles. What is Mr. Smith then to oppose all? and what leuitie is
it to believe him before all, who above all is most unconstant, confidently to
day auouching that for verity which to morrow he will disclaim, as
Antichristianitie?

His second Scripture is Mat. 18. 15. 20. and 16. 19. Page 52. His second
Argument for popular government.
whence he reasons thus: That which is given to two or three of Christ's
disciples, is given to the body of the Church, though many in number. But
Christ's ministerial power is given to two or three disciples of Christ. Ergo.

The Mayor is deceitful through the Homonymie, of the Answered.
word, Disciples, it signifying either Apostles, or other private persons
believers: In this Mayor, it being understood of Apostles, then the Argument
follows not, that though two or three Disciples, Apostles, have Christ's power,
therefore much more the multitude, the body; for so two or three such are not
considered simply as a number of two or three, but respectively, as selected
men to a special calling, in which regard they have the power of Christ. And
therefore his Mayor, which he makes to stand of an Argument, drawn from the
less to the more, is altogether mistaken, and so his whole argument is of no
force, except (as before) he can prove that two or three Disciples, are rightly
understood two or three ordinary Christians: if it were so, it would follow
that two or three women should have Christ's power, might preach, administer the
Sacraments, for they are called Disciples, Acts. 19. 30. Now this is contrary
to the Apostles speech 1. Cor. 14. and never heard to be practiced in the
Church of God: yea, by this, any two or three by themselves may use all Christ's
power without others: so a Congregation may be as many Churches, as there be
two or three persons Disciples, and upon every conceited opinion, walk, after
the Anabaptisticall fashion, by themselves, as goodly Churches, separated
societies. But what greater confusion? If here be not Babel, one speaking one
thing, an other an other, none agreeing; where is Babel to be found?

It may seem that he would have Mat. 18. 15. 20. with 16. 19. to prove, that
by Disciples is understood the brethren, the Common Christians, believers. For
the chap. 16. I have spoken of it before, which is nothing for him, no more is
this 18. chap. of which also have I spoken in my other Book, page 94. 99. And
further I here avouch that by Disciples in the first verse, is meant the twelve
Apostles so called, as is said, by an excellency above others, as being first
and the best: compare this place with Mark. 9. 35. where the Holy Ghost
expounds what is in Mat. meant by disciples; which Exposition is more then all
the idle words of many Mr. Smiths, expounding it otherwise.

His third Scripture is Mat. 28. 16. 20. whence he does Page 53. Mr. Smiths
third argument for popular power.
thus reason: To whom preaching and Baptising is committed, to them the power
of binding and losing is given: The power to preach and baptize is given to the
Disciples of Christ, or to the brethren, or to the body of the Church: Ergo,
the power to bind, etc. He frames not his Argument rightly, neither Answered.
concludes immediately the question; but I let this pass as usual with him,
who but preuents Art, as he does Divinity, to overthrow reason and Religion: I
deny with Moses his Corahs Assumption, for he in all these Arguments does
plead rebelliously, like Corah and his company against Moses and Aaron,
principal Governors, to make all the Number. 16. 23.
people holy, and thereby to have equal power in governing: these he calls
here Brethren, or the body of the Church, or Disciples, and this he grounds
upon Mat. 28. 16. 20. But is not the man determined to sin wilfully, to
hoodwinke his followers, and to abuse God himself, who out of this place will
hold, that the words in verse 19. Go and teach, etc. are spoken to Disciples,
common Christians, and not to the Apostles, and in them only, to such as
succeed them in the Ministry; when first, in verse 16. he nominates only
the eleven, which are called Apostles, Act. 1. 26. Secondly, it is the
universal opinion of all the Church of God, (excepting such Anabaptisticall
Schismatickes) that Mat. 28. 16. 20. is understood of the Apostles and their
successors; and none take there the word Disciples for the brethren or body
of the Church, as this man in his impudent audaciousnesse does.

He would prove his Minor by this reason, because God has promised his
presence to be with his Church, as he promised to be with the Apostles to the
worlds end. If this be a good reason, then an Infant Elect has the power of
Christ to preach, to baptize, for God has promised his presence to such; yea,
to women: and by this, one man may be a Church in himself, (as this man
absurdly once avouched) for God is with a good man, as well as with the Church:
if the presence of God promised to all his ever, may conclude to all, what is
properly given to some, what might not men assume unto themselves? Truly his
Arguments are childishly framed, his reasons grossly absurd, his alleged
Scriptures shamelesly abused, and his audaciousnesse in auouching what he
pleases intolerable: let the Reader in Gods presence judge freely of what I
here lay to his charge, whether I speak the truth or no.

His fourth place is Mark 13. 33. 37. whence he thus Page 53. His fourth
Argument, for Popularitie, Answered.
reasons. Christ's servants have Christ's authority; Christ's visible Church are
Christ's servants: Ergo, Christ's visible church has Christ's authority. He
expounds Christ visible Church to be two or three faithful people; which words
he puts in his Assumption vnlogically, still not concluding the words of the
question. But who sees not a double signification to be in this word,
Servants, which ought not to be in sound reasoning, neither is ever, but among
iangling Sophisters, and Heretical deceivers: Servants, in the proposition is
to be understood, as the word servant, To. 1. 1. for one that is servant in
special office, and in the Assumption for Common Christians, who be all Christ's
servants. His place quoted is a similie, which is not to be wrested from the
scope, nor the parts of the similie taken beyond the intent of the place. In
this place the Lord intends nor to set out any government of the church, the
scope is plainly noted in verse 33. and 35. which is this; that every one
seriously employ themselves in what task the Lord has set them to, watching,
by well doing therein, for the coming Christ, to take an account of us. What
is this to Mr. Smiths imagination? Surely, if any thing about government may be
drawn out thence, it is flat against himself. For first, the Master is Jesus
Christ; then secondly, the house must needs be his Church; thirdly, the
Servants, the Officers; to whom it is said, he gives authority, not to the
house then, but to servants in the house, who are to look over others; for to
every one has the Lord allotted his work: fourthly, the Porter may be Gods
spirit, who watches in the Church, to preserve it from the enemy. Thus then
out of this (if it afford any thing for government) it is plain that the
Church, the house, is governed by servants (who receive authority from Christ)
but it self does not govern: for so it should be the Governor, and the
governed.

His fifth place is, Ioh. 20. 18. 24. with Luke 24. 35. Page 54. His fifth
Argument for popularitie.
whence he thus makes an Argument: If Christ's ministerial power of binding
and losing be given to Marie Magdalene and Cleophas jointly, with the rest of
the disciples of Christ, then it is given to the body of the Church. But the
former is true; Ergo, the latter. The minor is denied; for neither Answered.
Marie Magdalene nor Cleophas, had given to them Christ's

Ministerial power: he has gotten authority now for women Preachers, belike
to ouerthow the Apostles inhibition. It is enough to set down his argument,
the folly of it sufficiently confutes it: but is his reason of force to make
good this his mad Paradoxe? hearken to it, and consider; for sooth he thinks
it is just so as he says, and why I pray you? because (says he) Mary
Magdalene and others, besides the Eleven, were all together when our Savior
gave this power to his Disciples mentioned in Mat. 28. 16. 20. John. 20. 21.
23. and such speeches else where, as concerns the Ministerial power of
Christ.

So then his reason seems to be this: Whatsoever Christ spoke, when all his
Disciples, men and women, Apostles and multitude were together, that was
jointly alike spoken to all of them that so were then gathered together. This
proof, wants Reasons against Mr. Smiths women Preachers.
a proof, and is at no hand to be taken of his bare word: first, because he
is so strange a broacher of opinions, and so inconstantly confident. Secondly,
the argument and reason are both so absurd. Thirdly, because this bare reason
would uphold what is plainly forbidden by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 14. 34. 35.
Fourthly, for that the assertion underpropped herewith is so contrary to the
judgment of all Divines, Councels, Fathers, Churches, and practice of any
womanish authority, in either preaching, or using the Church censures
publicly. Fifthly, because it greatly diminishes the estimation of the holy
men and women in the Apostles days, whom we never read of did put in
execution any such authority, which surely, as they ought, had it been
imposed upon them, so would they have at one time or other showed this their
equal Authority with the Apostles. Sixthly, because it is against that place
of the Ephesians, chap. 4. 8. 12. where the holy Ghost mentions how Christ
gave gifts unto men, ver. 8. whom he made Apostles, etc. to gather Saints, but
no mention is made of gifts to women, for to preach and gather Churches.

His sixth Scripture is Acts. 2. 39. and 3. 25. compared Page. 55.
with Romans 4. 11. 12. and Gal. 3. 7. 9. 14. 15. whence he thus reasons. Unto
whom the promises, the Covenant, the blessing His sixth argument for popularitie.
is given, unto them the Ministerial power of Christ is given: But the
Promises, the Covenant, and the blessing is given unto the posterity of
Abraham, according to the Faith, that is, to all the faithful, who are indeed
the true Children of Abraham: Ergo, the Ministerial power is given to the
faithful: that is, to two or three faithful people, which are a body unto
Christ. This argument is diseased with an Homonymie of Answered.
words; for Promises, Covenant, and Blessing are either general appertaining
to every Christian; or special, which concern particular states of men.
Again, therebe Promises, Covenants, and Blessings, only comprehending things
external, and common favors, whereof the very Reprobates may partake: and
there be Promises, Covenants, and Blessings of internal spiritual graces,
proper to the Elect people of God. All his Scriptures quoted do speak of
these things either appertaining to all, or of such as be proper to the very
Elect: let the places be read and judged of. How then follows the Conclusion
hence to a special power of government appointed to some? By this argument
from these Scriptures, he may as well conclude that little Infants have the
Ministerial power of Christ, sithen the Promise is made to them: Acts. 2. 39.
the Covenant made with them: Deuteronomy. 29. 14. 15. The Blessing is given to them.
Mar. 10. 16. I answer further, if this argument be now good, then was it so in
the Law? for to all Israel was the Promise, the Covenant, and Blessing given;
and therefore belike therewith the power of Jurisdiction; but we see then the
Church never took so much upon them; never did ever any Prophet gather thence
so much: indeed rebellious Corah attempted as much, but the Earth gaped with
wide mouth to swallow up so wretched a Smithean Spirit, as not worthy to live
longer on the earth. Lastly, this makes Simon the Sadler, Tomkin the Tailor,
Billy the Bellowesmaker, and such like to command equally with Sovereign
Authority in Church matters, and to live, if they list, lawlessely: for it is
forsooth their Christian liberty to be tied to nothing. Ah wretched Corah! who
art thou that dare breed such Confusion, eleuate base spirits, suppress
Suprioritie Anabaptistically; and bring a Familisticke Community, even every
man's will to be his warrant; his erring mind his guiding master; and affection
the rule of his actions, as appears among them all at this day? but I hope Mr.
Smith is but in his new Moon, stay to the Months end, and we shall I trust
find him changed.

His seventh Scripture is Esaias. 9. 6. John. 3. 16. and 13. Page 56. His
seventh Argument for popularitie.
13. Acts 2. 36. and 3. 22. 23. Luke. 2. 11. whence he frames this Argument.
Unto whom Christ is given to be King, Priest, and Prophet directly and
immediately, unto them is Christ's ministerial power given. But Christ is given
as King, Priest and Prophet, directly and immediately to two or three faithful
people, wheresoever living together in the world: Therefore Christ's
ministerial power is given to such two or three.

He has nine arguments, and this only is in the right Answered.
form of reasoning, in all the other he plays Childishly the Sophister, and
also in this his best manner wickedly a Deceiuer. The sequel of this Argument
is seely; he would here infer a Ministerial power, which is visible in the
external government of the Church (for of this we speak, and do wholly and
ever in all this dispute understand it, else he does still play the
Sophister,) from inward and spiritual pertaking of Christ's Offices by the hand
of faith, through the spirit. If he thus collect a right, directly and
immediately, to descend to every one in outward government, because they have
Christ their King, Priest and Prophet, then would it follow, that every
Christian man, yea, and woman, may directly and immediately take upon them,
that which is so directly and immediately given them, even as well, as they
partake so of Christ, and are in him Kings, Priests, and Prophets. If they have
the Ministerial power given, as they have Christ given to them, then may they
assume (without leave or liking of any, when they please,) that power to
themselves, even as without man's leave, they take Christ given them by God the
Father: what a groundwork is here laid of all disorder and confusion; yea,
and of intolerable insolency and swelling pride in every particular person?
God is the God of order, and not of such a popular proud confusion.

He would prove his Consequent from Romans 8. 32. The Romans 8. 32.
words are, He gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with him give us
all things also? so in these words all things, he includes, this and that
thing, from a general, he concludes any thing: why may not by his thus absurd
reasoning any Christian challenge to be a King? the unlearned to be exquisite
in all Sciences? the poor man to be rich? for what lets us more to understand
in all things, Riches, Wisdom, Learning, Regalitie, and what not, as well as
he to include Ministerial power; sithen every Christian by having of Christ,
has as much right in these things, which are also his gifts to his Church, as
in the outward government of it? If he has given us these things; why are not
all learned? why take we not possession of riches where they be? and if these
be not here meant, then all things is to be understood with a restraint; and so
then it stands upon an exposition, what is meant by all things, which he yet
has not done: but till he do, he may see his folly with impiety in so
alleging Scripture. Yet for all this, thus far I yield the Consequent true;
that Christ's ministerial power is given for them, to whom Christ is given, in
respect of the efficacy, also the free holy powerful use of it; because
Christ's Ministerial power is for the Churches benefit, to rule it, and to
order such as be in it, and not for others to censure them: for the Apostle
says; What have I to do to judge them that 1. Cor. 5. 12.
are without? but this is far from the right of Authority, to execute that
ministerial power which Mr. Smith pleads for.

Touching the minor, I demand whether he hold that Christ is given to no
fewer then two or three, if he say no, the whole Scripture disclaimes his
heresy; if yea, then one having Christ given to him, that same one by his
argument has Christ's ministerial power in him, and so Mr. Smith may
Monopolize to himself the execution of all offices, and may bind and loose as
often as any new toy comes into his restless brain. But what does this man
with his six places of Scripture? they prove not his Consequent of the Mayor;
do they confirm the Minor? nothing less, for in none of the places is it
said, that Christ is given to two or three. In Esaias is meant all the Elect: so
in John. 3. 16. in John. 13. 13. and Acts. 2. 36. is expressed no number at all
any way, the other places are meant of many; why then abridgeth he the Lords
number? and why so peruersely goes he still on thus to make the out-road of
two or three idle brains Schismatically meeting, to imagine themselves to be
that which they are not?

His eight Scripture is, Mat. 18. 15. 20. compared with Page. 57. His eight
Argument for popularitie.
1. Cor. 5. 4. 5. Mat. 6. 12. Luke. 17. 3. Whence he thus reasons; If one
Brother has power to retain the sins of an impenitent Brother privately,
and to remit the sins of a penitent Brother privately: then a communion of
faithful men have power to retain the sins of an impenitent member
publicly, and to remit the sins of one that is penitent publicly: But one
Brother has power given him by Christ to retain, etc. Ergo, a communion of
faithful people, etc.

The Consequent follows, I grant, being understood Answered.
as the Antecedent of remitting and retaining sins of the same kind; for
then it follows, a minori ad maius: for if one man may forgive injuries
offered, there is no question but the whole Congregation may so do also. But
as he here takes the Consequent, and intends it, as by his drift may be easily
granted; that is, for an Apostolical power of retaining and remitting; I deny
it, and so must stay for a Confirmation; for it seems he took this as
granted, as he does many more of his conceits: but who can grant a necessary
consequence from one thing to an other of diverse natures? The Antecedent is of
a private remitting and retaining of injuries; and so a man has a right, in
respect of himself before men, to forgive the wrong, as the man offending
shall humble himself, or else to claim his own, after a lawful and
charitable proceeding. But the Consequent is understood not of injuries to man,
but sins to God, which the Ministers of God in Gods stead has the Ministerial
power to remit or retain, as the party offending is penitent or remains
irrepentant. The places of Mat. 18. 15. 20. Mat. 6. 12. Luke. 17. 3. are so to
be understood as Col. 3. 13. and as I have expounded the Antecedent: if my
exposition barely set down content not some, let such as doubt, read Bishop
Bilsons Book of perpetual government, Page. 29. 37. and Doctor Sutcliffe of
Ecclesiastical Discip. Page. 124. and also a Book entitled, De rite
gubernanda Christi Ecclesia, without name of the Author: in which this
exposition is defended at large, and other expositions refelled; of which see
more in this Reply afterward. Therefore here is no Consequence, he taking the
latter part as he does, and falsely interpreting the former part in his
misunderstanding the Scriptures, where he seems to ground it.

The Minor is denied, for these places prove not, that a private man has power
given him of Christ to remit sins committed against God, but wrongs done
against himself.

His ninth and last Scripture is, Ephesians. 5. 30. 32. and 1. 22. Page. 58. His
ninth Argument for popularitie.
23. Reu. 21. 2. and 22. 17. from whence he thus reasons; The Wife has
power immediately from her husband, and the body has power immediately from
the head: the visible Church or a Communion of faithful people are Christ's
Spouse, the wife of the Lamb, and Christ's mystical body: Ergo, the visible
Church or Communion of faithful ones have Christ's ministerial power
immediately from him.

There is more in the Conclusion then in the Premises, Answered.
for he puts in the word Ministerial, which is in neither of the former
Propositions, as in right arguing it ought to be. It is no Syllogism, and the
argument is but a similitude: which may illustrate an appoued truth, but proves
not, nor gives resolution to a doubting mind, much less decides this cause in
hand.

And thus having ended a number of ill shapen arguments to defend a cause
worthy no better either Mood or Figure in reasoning, he tells his Reader, that
by all these put together, it appears plainly, what? that the ministerial
power of Christ is in the body of the Church; nay rather, that, oh what? that,
I say, he is himself fearfully seduced by Satan, beguiled, and seeking to
beguile by his childish Sophistry and impious abuse of Scripture such as be
given over with him to believe lies. All men may see what a conceit this man
now has of himself, and of his own opinions, who dare so boldly call upon
the King, the house of Page of his book 41. line. 7. 8.
Parliament, and all the Learned in the Land, in a confident persuasion of the
truth which he holds, and that only upon such seely reasons, so childishly
framed, so without true form, full of Inconsequence, ambiguous terms, and
false Positions, and some of them altogether sometime without any proof, and
yet he calls it, their Faith, and most evident truth of God, Page 54. The
undoubted Truth, Page 36. Wherein he is so confident, as he puts all on hazard
upon this one point, thus makes Proclamation, Pa. 40. line 30. I profess
before the Lord, and before the whole world, that if I prove not evidently my
assertion: first, I will acknowledge the Churches of England true Churches:
secondly, Behold the vanity of the man, who can keep no mean.
the Church of Rome so: thirdly, the Greek Churches also to be true Churches,
and all to have a true Ministry: fourthly, that the whole cause of the
Separation lies in the dust: fifthly, that they must disclaim their Schism,
which they have made, and Heresies which they do hold. Therefore he failing in
this, it is needless farther to spend time with him, in any other of his
singular opinions, wherein he differs from Brownisme. And therefore this point
concluded with him, I need not reply largely upon any other of his answers to
the positions following, which Mr. Ainsworth shall deny to be the common cause
in Brownisme. For it is altogether vain to stand in refutation of any thing,
which this man held the last year, he having of himself left this cause, and
is got out of a Schismatic whirle-poole of fantasies, and is fallen into the
Anabaptisticall gulf of Heresies, in which he lays all upon an other point,
viz: Of the lawfulnes to baptize Infants, Children of believing Parents; which
his present standing he has baulified, I should say beautified, with the like
garnishments as here, and speaks as confidently as he has done in this: for
this is apparently to be observed What a manner of man Mr. Smith is in his
conceits.
in him, great boldness to attempt any course more then a common confidence in
every present opinion: affected singularity from all societies in
Protestancie, in Brownisme, in Anabaptisme: Audacious justifying of his so
singular courses, with Sophistry, with peruersions of Scriptures; contemning
the judgment of all others: Using Protestations of the evidence of the truth,
which he imagines to hold in these, and such like terms: I am verily
assured it is the truth: It is as clear to me as the noone day: It is the
undoubted truth of God: the truth of Christ that it is justified out of the
word, with calling God to witness, protesting before the Lord, and before the
world, if this or that be not thus and so; then judge after this and that
manner his cause, his person: thus has he done in our Church, so in
Brownisme, thus in Anabaptisme: read his works, if you can spend time so
unprofitably, and judge the truth of that I say; with this also that he often
disclaimes the way which he so peremptorily avouches for truth; and because
his unheard of Inconstancy may not disgrace him, he puts shamelessness upon
him, and professes inconstancy, and His Book of Differences in the Preface.
desires that his last writings over may be taken as his present judgment. I
appeal therefore to thee Reader, whether it be meet for any, otherwise better
exercised, to spend time to answer any thing, which he says, who in time
answers himself, and no time is ever himself certainly? Necessity laid
upon me at this present will excuse my misspent labor herein on him, but I
hope not lost in respect of others, for whose sake, I thus lay him open truly,
as he has manifested himself, that if God so please he may see himself by
himself, and some whose persons I yet heartily wish well unto, may take heed
betime to leave him, and others to keep from him as an instrument of Satan,
raised up to deceive the simple hearted.

Now it remains to reply upon his answers to my Reasons, given against
popular government; but for that his Answers may easily be overthrown, by
any understanding Reader: to prevent tediousness, I commend both our endeavors
to the judgment of the wise, only thus much I entreat them; first, to compare
my former Book with his Answer; for he puts in his Answer more then I say
sometime: secondly, take heed of his Paralogismes, and inconsequences: thirdly,
judge rightly of my words, that the sense be not wrested: and fourthly, beware
of his false Analogies which he makes from the old Testament to the New. As in
his first Answer, he would type out by the Levites, the Priests and Kings in
the old Testament, the body of the Church in the new Testament; so as, look
as they had the government then, so have the people now. This his proportion
overthrows the Rule of Kings in Office, and makes the people a King: and if
this be so, why then does not the superiority of Aaron, and degrees among the
Priests, type out superiority now? Suppose not (Christian Reader) that I pass
him by, as not able to answer him, for I protest unto thee, I find no such
cause in his answer, why thou should so think, either touching this, or
what remains to be answered; neither, I thank God, find I altogether such
weakness in my self, as not to be able to manifest his fraudulent dealing,
though I see (in his pride) he attempts greatly to vilify me, and my
labors: but it is, that his Answer and my Reply, both to him and Mr.
Ainsworth, might not grow to a tedious Volumne.

The seventh Error of the Brownists.
THat the sin of one man publicly and obstinately stood in, being not
reformed nor the offender cast out; does so pollute the whole Congregation,
that none may communicate with the same, in any of the holy things of God,
(though it be a true Church rightly constituted) till the party be
Excommunicated.

I have given many Reasons against this, in my former Book, Page 102. 109. and
much here also before, have I spoken touching pollution upon the fifth Error,
which may serve to the further overthrow of this.

Reply to Mr. Ainsworths Answer to this seventh Error.
MAster Ainsworth disclaimes this, as none of theirs either in practice or
judgment; therefore Mr. Smith in his Brownisme here did wrong them, in
defending it, as an opinion of that way, and not I, in laying it to the
Brownists, whom here I knew did defend it: that the Brownists on this side, and
yond side the sea differed, I knew not; but now I well see, how little they be
themselves, in their several companies. But let us see what he says:

that none is to separate for faults and corruptions, but by due order to seek
redress thereof: his reason is, because faults and corruptions will fall out,
and arise in the Church, so long as it consists of mortal men. And sithen he
delivers such a truth, which I gladly embrace, I We may not separate wholly from
true Churches for Corruptions.
will to his reason as the first, add more for confirmation; as a maine truth
against themselves: viz. that we may not separate for Corruptions.

Beza on Cant. 1. 6. Call. Instit. 4. 1. 13. 16.

In what cases a total separation may be, see my other Book, page 108.

Ezech. 9. 4. Mat. 5. 4 Psalm. 119. 136. 139. 158.



at any time God will give them repentance. 2. Tim. 2. 25. Call. Instit. 4. 1.
16 19.

It is lawful to separate from a Church for ill government.

Answ. No; the Government was ill in the time of the Judges, when every man did
what he listed, when there was Judge. 18.
no King in Israel, and much abomination then committed. So in our Saviors
time, Heretics and Sectaries had Rule and Government, false high Priests,
Symoniacal, and temporary, contrary to the Lords Institution. Corruption in
government also in the days of Cyprian, Augustine, Ambrose. In the days of
the Apostles Diotriphes used tyrannical pride, usurped authority, and yet
neither Prophets, nor Christ, nor Apostles, nor the Ancient Fathers did teach
or practice any such separation, as is made in these days.

But we may separate because of a mixed Company, openly wicked, living with the
godly.

Answ. No; first, because the Holy Ghost saw this in the old Testament: Ezech.
22. 26. Mal. 1. 7. 8. and reproved some for it, but never taught Separation
upon it: secondly, the Apostle saw in Corinth, and the Angel in the Churches of
Asia, a mixed company, and never either commanded the godly to separate
therefore, nor left any practice for example to us: thirdly because it makes
not a true church, either false or no church: fourthly, because the godly are
of more force to sanctify one another, then some wicked to pollute all in
there standing considered simply in it self: fifthly, because such as mourn, as
privately avoid familiarity with wicked, labor in their place to reform
them, so continuing are not, nor cannot be polluted by others.

But we may separate, for men's unworthy coming to the Sacrament.

Answ. No; first, because some uncleansed came with the godly in Hezechias
days unworthily (2. Chro. 30. 28.) to the Passover; yet the Lord healed the
rest at the prayers of the godly; so let men pray now: secondly, because this
was among the Corinthians, yet the Apostle prescribes not separation for a
remedy; but exhorts every man to examine himself. 1. Cor. 11: thirdly, Judas
was at the Passover, and some think, at the Lords Supper; and Christ knew him
to be a devil, and yet permitted him without pollution to himself, or the
rest: yea, though openly he told them, that one should betray him; and saw that
the devil then had put it into Judas heart: fourthly, because this is only a
blemish in the Church, greatly to be bewailed and a defect of Discipline, but
no overthrow of any of the true essence or any Doctrine, which is the life of
the Church.

But we may separate, when men are let alone, and sin not punished.

Answ. No; first, impunitie makes not a nullitie: sesondly, it is only (as is
before said) a defect in Discipline, which is a hurt to the well being of the
Church; but is no cause of Separation: thirdly, because sin was unpunished,
among the Jews, Jude 21. 25. Among the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 5. and yet no
separation for it: fourthly, because punishing of sin is not every man's office,
but theirs to whom it appertains: is their neglect, the sin of private
persons? fifthly, because we are rather to use means to such as are in
authority to get sin punished, rather then to fly and run away: by the
one may we do good, by the other do mischief: sixthly, because by our godly
conversation, in being among them, we may win them.

But we may separate, from such as cast off the external government of Christ.

Answ. No; First, because some part of government, besides the word is not of
the essence of the Church: secondly, because many may be ignorant of that
government, and so reject it; is such ignorance a just cause of separation?
thirdly, because it is a great controversy which is Christ's external
government, and therefore in such a case, a Church may not be forsaken:
fourthly, because the Jewish Church cast off Gods government, and yet no
separation taught, but the people exhorted to amendment. 1. Sam. 8. 7. 8.
Iere. 3. 13. 20. fifthly, may children leave their fathers house because their
mother his wife is rebellious, and will not be governed by him?

But we must separate from that Church, where be false Ministers.

Answ. If all be so, we may; but if some only be so, then may we not, but we
must follow the godly Sunamite, leave Baals priests, Ieroboams Calves, and
Idol shepherds; and get us to Elisha the Prophet. First, because there was
false Prophets in Israel; secondly, Heretical Saducees, hypocritical
Pharisees, false teachers and evil livers, and yet our Savior commanded no
separation from the Church, but permitted to hear them with warines: thirdly,
A false Prophetisse in Thiatira tolerated, and yet no separation taught, but
an admonition to the godly to hold what they had: Re. 2. 24. 25. fourthly, It
is to be noted whether the Church approve them or no; and also it is to be
certainly known who are false Ministers: the spirit of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets; it is not in the skill of ordinanarie persons to judge
and give sentence: every one has authority to try the spirits, but it is
meant of such as can try and so judge, and yet not upon their own head, but by
holy conference with the Church, and Ministers of God, to proceed to a
definitive sentence within themselves, as out of Gods word, by Gods spirit, and
the voice of Gods Church in such a case.

But surely we may separate from that Church wherein the worship is corrupted.

Ans. Not so: first, because under the law there was corruption in worship
reproved, Esaias. 29. 13. but no commandment therefore to leave the Church,
neither did any leave it: secondly, the like in Christ's time: Mat. 15. 9.
Thirdly, so in the Apostles days among the Galathians, and else where; yet no
separation from the Church for it: Fourthly in S. Augustines time complaint was
made of humane Ceremonies burdensome, yet no separation: fifthly, because the
godly men did oppose them, and suffered patiently for omission of these when
authority did press them; but fled not away for fear of trouble: peaceable
withstanding corruptions, is a means to reform, and not a Schismatic
rending of men's selves from the whole church, pretending a Separation, to lead
away simple people captives, and to avoid thereby affliction for righteousness
sake. And therefore as Mr. Ainsworth says, we may not separate for
corruptions, but must labor in our place to seek a redress of them; except
the Church become no Church, full of either Heathenish, or Israelitish
Idolatry, as in Ieroboams time, when the Lord has removed his Candlestick.
But if this before set down, be their judgment indeed, then let Mr. Ainsworth
tell me first why do they not stay with us, and seek redress, if any thing
be amiss among us; by due order, waiting the Lords leisure in raising up his
own means to reform disorders, which is the authority of the Magistrate:
for this see the judgment of that wise, holy, learned and moderate, yet truly
zealous spirited man Zanchie, upon Esaias 2. in his Book De Ecclesia, page 225.
Secondly, I demand, why then do they fly the Communion of the Dutch Churches,
and the Merchants Church in Amsterdam, excommunicating such as occasionally
join unto them? if the differences between them be considered, which are very
small, and whether they be corruptions or no is very disputable: it may be
concluded, that the Position here set down by Mr. Ainsworth, either is not
their judgment, or else they practice contrary to their judgment: so like
Scribes and Pharisees, that is, Separatists Hypocrites, they teach and say, but
do not; and are guilty of that which they would blame in us: And if this
Position be true, then be they Schismatickes; for to break peace with the
Churches, where we may and ought to hold communion, is Schism: See Zanch.
ibidem, Page. 119. 120. etc.

The Separatists judgment touching pollution.
much: that if one convict of Adultery, Blasphemy, etc. be by the whole
Church let alone; not rebuked, but pleaded for against such as call for
judgment, all such are sinners themselves, and such an Assembly is not Gods
Church; neither can it be said, that any holy thing is lawfully administered in
such a society, for the sin of them all pollutes them. Mr. Smith answers
him Page 71. and says; this affirmation, and his denial of the Position are
contradictorie, so there is a lie in the one. And my answer hereto is, that
he has affirmed more then he has proved, or can be able to prove, if such a
Church were as he supposes: but he is herein his mere imagination; for what
Church of Christ is so given over, that all ever did, or do plead for
Adulterers, Blasphemers, and such like? And I ask him what be those that do
call upon the Church for judgment, are they members? then all the Church does
not defend the wicked man: his absurd supposition has in it also a
contradiction; for he supposes the whole Church to plead for the wicked man,
and yet supposes also then there to be some pleading against the wicked man:
he cannot tell what he says. I entreat him, the next time to teach his
Scholars better, to speak more wisely, and if he can, let him show first, an
instance of any such church of God as he supposes: for grant false conceits
and idle suppositions, a man then may conclude any thing. His instance of the
Tribe of Benjamin succouring Judges. 20.
Gibeah is very unapt, were they the Church of God, or but some members of the
Church? He supposes a whole Church against some; and here he exemplyfieth it
by some, against the whole. Secondly, that such an Assembly, where one is so
tolerated, is not the Church of God. Thirdly, that the holy things are there
unlawfully administered, so as the godly there who call for justice must needs
separate as he by this doctrine intends, then has he spoken to the
purpose, and somewhat for his cause. In the mean space he tells us, that except
the whole Church do agree together Observe this speech.
to maintain open iniquity, and do despise the word of the Lord calling them
to repentance, he holds it not lawful to separate from them in any wise, in
any thing, till all holy and ordinary means be used for their reclaiming.
Page 181. And in Page 179. he says, it is a sin to make a separation from a
Church for matters controuertible and doubtful. And yet For what and about
what do the Separatists most contend.
for such matters do they make separation: for what and about what do they
chiefly contend? is it not for and about matters of outward government; not
about the substance of things neither, but about circumstances, more about the
manner, then the matter, which makes the controversy endless. I deny not but
the thing commanded must be done, and also must be well done, and prudence is
required to observe circumstances, that good things be thereby done seasonably
and well, for the time, place and person: but this is ill, for circumstances
not observed exactly, to deny the truth of substances, to hold them false, and
to judge things done substantially, as not done; for that they be not perfectly
circumstantiall, especially where both the matter and manner of such things be
very controuertible, as about the circumstances of external government and
discipline of the Church: which herein I will make manifest to the
understanding of every Christian Reader, and especially I intend it for this
end; to stay the minds of many: first, of young A Caveat to young Divines.
Students in divinity, who in a godly zeal desiring the glory of God in the
amendment of all men's manners, are suddenly over the ears, at the very first
onset, in the controversy of discipline, before they have learned in any
small measure to speak rightly of the common principles of Christianity.
Secondly, to stay the minds of Country people in many To Country people.
places, who speak so certainly, so peremptory of this point, as if they
were the profound Doctors of Ancient times, wiser then many of their
deliberate and learned teachers. Both these mean well, their affections are
for good and against evil; but herein is it amiss, that they do presume to
be too soon ripe, aduenturing boldly to run ere they can creep, much less
go: and all this arises upon their erroneous conceit, that these points of
discipline and Church-gouernment, are supposed by them to be so easily
discerneable, so apparent by scripture, as that seely men may judge rightly
wherein the truth thereof does stand.

Therefore to let them see how far otherwise it is, I will It is not an easy
thing for every one to judge rightly of Church-gouernment and discipline.
lay open the intricatenesse hereof, by the inconstant minds of learned men,
their variety of opinions, some holding this, some that; even plain
contradictories in somethings. What herein is the truth, and who do hold it, is
not for me to determine: I leave every man to judge freely, and the Lord guide
him to the best.

First, some hold no government at all, which is but a Familisticall conceit,
yet have they their reasons, making a distinction of a double person in one
man, a Citizen and a Christian; these deny Ecclesiastical government, and the
Anabaptists Civil government, to which they may easily draw some seely
Brownists, as daily they do, and that from the force of their own grounds:
the Separatists hold all to be voluntary professors; now voluntarinesse is
taken away by being under any government: to be subject and ruled is an estate
far from freedom; Christians loose thereby Christian liberty. Christians
Saints need no constraining power, they be led by the spirit; but what proceed
I to speak further of the fanaticall frenzy of these two generations of men:
their reasons have been confuted long since.

Secondly, it is held that there must be an external government There must be
a Government in the Church.
and that rightly, for the well ordering of external means of men's salvation
among the professors of Christ's name, the reasons for it are: first, because
Christ gave Governors to his Church. 1. Cor. 12. 28. Secondly, the Apostle
exhorted some to rule diligently. Romans 12. 8. Thirdly, he mentions such as
were over the Churches in the Lord. 1. These. 5. 12. Fourthly, he allows to
such double honor, that is, reverence and maintenance, even for their well
governing. 1. Tim. 5. 17. Fifthly, for that in the Scripture is a Commandment
for the preaching of the word, for the administration of Sacraments, and other
holy exercises, and all these to be done decently and in order: 1. Cor. 14. 40.
now of necessity there is required a rule and a government both to see things
and persons orderly disposed and so also kept. Sixthly, the untoward nature of
man, which resists order, and desires to wander loosely and at liberty,
requires government: without which experience tells us, that the Church cannot
remain in safety, but Satan would intrude his instruments upon the Church,
and poison it with false doctrine, rend it by Schism, and pollute it wholly
with profaneness of men's lives. Seauenthly, the Church of Christ is called a
kingdom: Mat. 13. 41. 2. These. 2. 12. now in a kingdom is government.
Eighthly, if no society of men can be without government, neither in kingdom,
City, nor Town, then cannot the Church be without it, so long as it consists
of mortal men, though never so devout, yet always herein an imperfect state,
and needs government. Ninthly, till Christ's time from the worlds beginning,
before and in the time of the Law, was there government in the Church of God:
and therefore are we not to think, that our Savior when he came, would make
all that professed him Libertines, and free from all outward government.
Tenthly, we read how the Apostle was, even in his time, constrained to use his
power given him of Christ to rule, 1. Cor. 5. and did punish some. 1. Tim. 1.
20. Eleauenthly, the judgment of reformed Churches manifest by practice, all
of them yielding to government. That there is government is certain, and this
is also as certain, How Ecclesiastical Governors ought to behave themselves.
that Governors ought to rule well: 1. Tim. 5. 17. with diligence: Romans 12. 8.
and without pride and tyranny: 1. Pet 5. 3. Mat. 20. 25. Luke. 22. 25. 26. But
in this firm and most certain truth is very great uncertainty: for though it
be generally held, that there is an Ecclesiastical government, and that there
is a delegate power of Jesus Christ for well ordering and ruling his people,
called the Church, yet herein is great controversy, and very hot contentions
arise on one side and on an other, as men are persuaded of a truth.

Some hold not only a government, but also that in Christ's Some hold a
perpetual government.
testament is appointed a perpetual and an unchangeable form of government in
particular, to which all particular Churches are bound to receive, and to
subject themselves unto, as an essential part of the Gospel upon pain of
damnation: of this opinion besides the Separatists have been others.

Others hold that Christ in the new Testament appointed no Others, that it is
not certain.
certain kind, or perpetual form of government, but that the same is
alterable upon just occasions; as may serve best to the Churches welfare: so as
in some place may be the Presbiterian power; in others Episcopal authority,
both indifferently lawful; as may best fit the people and state in every such
place: of this opinion are not a few, and they have their reasons: thus do men
vary about the very nature of government itself: so also is there much
differing about the persons in whom that power of ruling is, next and
immediately from and under Christ.

Some hold it to be in the Pope with his Consistory of Cardinals: Papists.
but this is held the devise of man, and condemned of all reformed Churches,
which have forsaken the Romish Synagogue, to be abhorred as usurped authority,
and Antichristian tyranny.

Some hold it to be in the body of the Congregation, as may Anabaptists.
be seen here before: others flatly deny it, as a confused popular government;
all in government, and so none governed. How can this confused Chaos execute
their government, and upon whom must they execute it? themselves upon
themselves; or if they put it off to some, then belike a power is given to such
as cannot perform it themselves, but ever by others; they have it, and others
must execute it; Authority they have without ever ability to do the duties
thereto belonging, but by Substitutes. If the Assembly do any thing, that must
be in Christ's name; for that they have their authority from Christ; but
Ministers must by this opinion, do all in the Churches name, preach,
administer the Sacraments in the Churches name. But how this squareth with holy
writ, let all judge.

Some hold Christ's ministerial power to be in the Presbiterie, Reformists.
with the Churches consent: but here also is great variety touching the
Presbiterie: Some holding that it ought to be in every Congregation: others, in
some special place, and the same to be over diverse congregations. Some hold
that this Presbiterie does by divine authority consist of Clergy and Laity:
others deny utterly lay Elders, and that all Elders in the new Testament are,
as we understand the word Churchmen, Bishops, Pastors and Teachers. Some
hold these Church Elders all equal: others directly oppose it, and do defend
Superiority Protestants.
of Ministers in some men called Bishops, whose reasons briefly are; first,
for that they do think them to have Reasons for authority of Superiority.
See Bishop Bilsons Perpetual Government. Doctor Fields 5. book. cap. 27 page
134. And cap. 28. and 29. and 30.
been in and from the Apostles days, confirmed by Eusebius, who deriueth the
succession of Bishops in the four principal Churches of the world: viz. in
Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome, and Alexandria: from James at Jerusalem; from Peter
at Antioch; from Peter and Paul at Rome; and from Mark at Alexandria; and the
same continued from time to time: for further knowledge hereof, let any, that
will, read Bishop Bilsons book of perpetual Government, Page 260. and Doctor
Field. Secondly, because the Scripture mentions a Superiority, some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Teachers; and they be reckoned in order, by
first, second, and third, 1. Cor. 12. 28. as degrees one over another. Thirdly,
because God himself in the old Testament ordained a Superiority among
Ecclesiastical persons: there were the high Priest, and chief Priests, and so
forth; and this order is not forbidden in the new testament. Touching that
place of Luke 22. 25. 26. see Doctor Downham and Doctor Dove of Church
Government, by whom that text is expounded at large: If they err, let it be
showed. Fourthly, because the ground for Superiority is alike in the new
Testament, as in the old; to preserve order, as 1. Cor. 14. the Apostle
commands to maintain peace, and to prevent Schism, which began in the
Apostles days. For these causes was the superiority among the Churchmen with
the Jews, and not for to be types, though the high Priest did type out Christ,
yet did not the other Priests so, in that one was set over another for good
government sake. Fifthly, because God has by instinct of nature in all
societies, moved people to approve of a Superiority: yea, in his works there
is set a supereminencie of one creature above another: thus in the workmanship
of the World, God approues it; in natures inclination he confirms it; in the
Jewish policy he commanded it: what makes it odious in the Christian Church,
sithen it is experienced, that men now are as proud, as affectionate to
singularity, as opinionate to private courses, as unwilling to be in
subjection, all which require a curbing power, as ever heretofore at any time?
Sixty, because such as would have an equality, do maintain an inequality in
their government, and are thereto constrained to keep order, and to prevent
confusion: they make the Pastor superior to the Teacher, when others hold them
both one; and they have a Super-intendent over many Churches. Thus we see the
great difference among the best learned of all sorts, about the persons that
should govern.

There is also differing opinions concerning the punishment Differences about
the punishment of offenders.
of offenders; Some hold that no external power of reforming sinners belongs
to the office of Ministers, but only as by the word they can work through the
spirit, upon men's consciences, by public admonition and reprehension; rebuking
such openly as sin openly: affirming that other punishments whatsoever
appertain to the Magistrate, when God bestows them upon the Church: Others
think that Ministers may suspend, and superior Ecclesiastical Governors
withal excommunicate. And again, there are which utterly deny any suspension
from the communion; affirming that there is neither precept nor practice in all
the new Testament, nor any place whereupon it may necessarily be gathered; but
only an excommunication from all the holy things of God. Others peremptorily
deny excommunication, and do account it but the Popes painted power, an
invention of man, without either Commandment or example in the new Testament:
that it is first found among the Scribes and Prarises, Christ's enemies; that
Heretics and Schismatikes who despise the authority of Princes, make it
their arm and power to conjure their Spirits in Communion with them: they say,
the word is not in all the new Testament, as prescribed either by Christ or his
Apostles, neither the thing intended by it, the delivering of a man up to
Satan being an other thing, an 1 Cor. 5.
extrarodinarie Apostolical power: about this matter Beza and Erastus are long
and tedious.

To conclude the 18. of Mat. verse 15. 20. and Leu. Mat. 18. diversely expounded.
19. 17. are by some held to be the order to be observed in proceeding with an
offender before sentence be given; but in this is as great variety as in any
of the rest: for others avouch confidently that the places do nothing at all
concern Discipline, and Beza is taxed of great ouer-sight, for grounding his
Discipline upon Mat. 18. which belongs nothing to it. Read the book
entitled, Theses de rite gubernanda Ecclesia, the Author without name, and
yet an ouer-sea Presbiterian, who proves that discipline Ecclesiastical has
there no foundation, but it is meant, says he, of private and personal
injuries, which he proves from the coherence of the whole Chapter one part of
it with another, from the phrases and manner of speaking, from the absurdities
which would arise otherwise from it, from Peter's question, and the last words
of Christ's answer.

Now because this place is so much in every seely man's mouth, so much exalted
by the Separatists, by the Anabaptists, so troublesome to the minds of many,
and so much desired to be put in practice by some who yet here see it
neglected, and being persuaded that here the same cannot be put in practice,
and yet ought to be observed as the true rule of Church Discipline, ordained by
Christ, by which some run from us, others remaining yet dislike us, as
careless of Christ's government: I will show the judgment of Divines, who
endeavor by reasons to declare how these men are utterly mistaken, and are
clean from the true meaning of this place; as they do think. Hear therefore
what is, and may be said, touchign this 18. of Mat. verse 15. 16. 17.

First, the Coherence with that before in the Chapter Coherence.
is thus; Christ our Savior tells of scandals and of offenses that shall be
given, and admonishes his disciples of them, and teaches to avoid them, verse
5. 6. 7. etc: Then comes he to injuries offered, and shows how men must carry
themselves toward such as do offer them wrong, in verse 15. 16. 17. etc. That
this is the order, the Text may show, and the matter fitly does agree together;
for he first admonishes his to take heed of offending others; and then
declares how they are to carry themselves toward such as do trespass against
them.

Secondly, the occasion of these words was (as is thought) Occasion.
the state of those days in our Saviors time, wherein the Jews were in
subjection to the Romans, having their authority of Elders greatly diminished
by the Romans, who were Heathen, to whom some Jews became servants: these
were Publicanes; of which was Zacheus, yea, and Matthew, one that sat at the
receipt of custom; for which they were to the Jews very hateful, but therein
servants to the Romans, and so freed from the power and authority of the
Jews, with whom (as with the very Heathen and Gentiles among them) what Jew
soever would have to do for any wrong which they offered, that Jew must call
these publicanes before Roman authority, and convent them there, and not
bring them into any Jewish Court; from which they were exempt by their service
to the Roman state: which liberty was also granted to any other privileged
Jew, which would make an appeal to the Roman Governor, as did Saint Paul: to
whom the Jews might have recourse if they would to recover their rights, or
redress wrongs offered them.

Thirdly, the scope of our Savior, is held in this case here The scope.
to be a moderating of the Jews passions, arising one against another for
wrongs received, that so they might not run into extremities, as man's nature
is both hasty and desirous of the utmost revenge at the first; he advises
them therefore not to deal at the first one with an other, as they must do
with Publicanes and Heathen, men hateful to them, and exempted from all that
power, which yet remained among themselves; and against whom they held it
lawful to use all extremities to the utmost: but to proceed lovingly; first,
after the rules of Charity, which prescribes, first, all gentle means, and
when these will not any way prevail, then to use extremity.

Fourthly, the meaning then of the words is; if thy brother The meaning of the
words. Here be three degrees of proceeding, and a threefold help in reclaiming
the trespasser. 1. The rule of charity. 2. Moses order of policy, as much as
then remained thereof. 3. And lastly, the Roman Sovereignty.
a Jew do injury against thee that art a Jew, go thou to him, and tell him
of it between your selves alone; and if he acknowledge the wrong, and does
give thee satisfaction, thou art to cease further to call him into question, as
being reconciled, and he won unto thee by this thy loving carryage: but if
he do despise thee (as but one to one) yet use not extremity; but again go
to him, and take with thee one or two, before whom thou may manifest the
wrong received, that they may bear witness of it, as also of thy charitable
proceeding, and may be a mean to the same party for thee, to consider of his
evils, to make thee recompense for the same: but if he regard not their
counsel neither; then complain to the authority of the Jewish Synedrion, and
let them persuade him to deal well with thee, to satisfy in what he has
done the injury in. But if he become so graceless and so wickedly obstinate
that he despise it, and so no such means as these will do him good; then use
(if thou will) the utmost remedy, deal with him, as if he were not a
faithful Jew; that is, bring him before the Roman power, and sue him at
Caesar's bar, as if he were a Publicane or Heathen. So then the place is
understood of private and personal suites and quarrels between man and man
Jew and Jew, as the state stood then, of which our Savior did speak.

Fifthly, this to be the sense, reasons are alleged: first, the Reasons to
prove the interpretation.
custom of our Savior in speaking, whose manner was to speak according to
the time, and to teach the Jews then duties of love one toward another, as he
before did, Mat. 5. 23. 26. In which place he speaks Ecclesiastically and
also ciuilly to the Jews capacity, as they might reap benefit, and gain
good by his doctrine, even so in this place. Secondly, the Apostle Peter's so
understanding our Savior, as appears by the words of his question, made upon
our Saviors speech, verse 21. Thirdly, our Saviors answer agine unto Peter,
in a Parable, in which he speaks of such causes as fall out between man and
man, private matters and personal, in which one man has right to retain or
remit the offense done against himself. Fourthly, our Saviors conclusion with
a general sentence, concluding the whole matter. verse 35. Fifthly, the words
and propriety of speech in the Text prove as much; for against thee, shows
the offense to be private, and personal, and such as one party offended might
remit: again, the word Brother, shows how our Savior meant the Jews then,
for no Jew, nor as yet any Disciple of Christ did account any other for brother
but a Jew. Further more the speech, thou have gained or won thy brother shows
a private alienation of mind in the party, that does the injury: which by the
gentle dealing of the party offended, is as it were, recovered again unto
him: besides our Savior sending of the offender back again to the
plaintiffes censure, after he has complained to the Church in these words,
Let him be to thee; by which Beza Annot. by this reason understands the very
word Church, to be meant of the Jews.
is evident such a Church to be meant, as the offender might not regard, and
the Plaintiff not get remedy by, but is dismissed to further proceeding: so
the matter is still personal. Lastly, the words Publican and Heathen, words of
reproach then among the Jews, (who only of all Nations did then disdain the
Gentiles) do declare Christ's meaning to be of the Jews at that time.

Sixthly, the place of Saint Luke, Chap. 17. 3. does help also this Exposition;
which place is the very same with this of Matthew, but that it is more briefly
set down, then it is here.

Object. The word, (...), is of a general signification, and is not to
restrained to be a particular kind of offense, as to personal wrongs and
iniures.

Answ. The word I grant is general, which makes therefore great varying about
it, some translating it sin, some trespass, some offend or scandalize: So as
men cannot tell what is hereby truly meant; Snecanus says, it has a De dis.
pa. 461.
proper signification to sin; Beza says, not all sins are B. de presb. p.
46.
meant, but such as are called stumbling blocks to men's consciences; Snecanus
says, but all sins are here understood, Snec. pa. 460.
as well against God, as injuries against man; Beza, Christ pa. 458. B. pa. 57.
speaks not here of injuries committed: Gelasius contra Alex. Christ speaks
here of common faults, and not of Inst it. l. 4. ca. 12. sect. 4.
most heinous: Call. Christ speaks here of all sorts of sins, even the greatest
that may be. And thus do they contrary one an other, and therefore the
Objection being of uncertainties, is not of force to hinder what is said:
sithen though the word be general, yet the Text it self restaineth it to a
particular, even to personal wrongs: for it is said, not simply if he
trespass; as understanding it generally of any sin to God or to men, but
thus; if he trespass against thee, convince thou him alone, as a matter
between two; thee and him. And the Apostle Peter uses these words, verse 21.
sin against me, and I forgive him; as understanding Christ's words of
personal matters, where one man had authority to forgive, as an offense done
against his own person. And whatsoever Beza in his Controversy with Erastus,
says, yet his noted instruction out of this place is this; We must labor for
Concord, not to revenge injuries: by which it seems in the general he
delivers the truth, and he understands injuries offered, and that our
Savior does aim at concord, and suppression of man's desire of revenge herein.

Object. But the word Church cannot be taken for the Jewish Synedrion, or the
Assembly of authority among the Jews, which was then as well civil as
Ecclesiastical.

Ans. First, the word Church in the holy Scripture, is not always so strictly
taken, as men do now use it, but is used for the assembly of good or bad,
Christians or Infidels, met together to consult and determine of causes,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, Psalm. 26. 5. Where the Septuagint, do
translate the word Assembly, by the word ((...)) Church: So in the Prou. 5. 4.
In the new Testament the word is taken largely, Act. 19. 32. 39. 40. in which
three verses the word translated Assembly, is the same which is here ((...))
translated Church. Secondly, Beza himself by Bez. An.
the word Church, understands it as spoken here of the Jews; that is, the
Elders assembled, who exercised judgment in those days: which Assembly of
Judges as here they be called the Church, so in the old Testament, were they
called the Congregation, which is all one. Number. 35. 12. 24. 25. Josh. 20. 6. 9.
The Exposition therefore stands warrantable by the word, and this objection is
also of no moment against it.

Objection arises out of the ver. 18. where mention is made of binding and
losing; as if Christ had before established a rule of Government to his Church,
and herein declared the authority and power thereof, bestowed first upon the
Apostles, and then upon the Ministers or Elders their Successors.

Ans. First, the face of this Objection is from mistaking the application of
the words, binding and losing, as properly and only to be understood of Christ's
Ministers in this place, when yet we do see in the former words, a binding and
losing to be allowed to private persons: for what is, thou have won him,
verse 15. but a losing, if the offender hear him? and what is, be he unto thee
as a Heathen and a Publican verse. 17. if he will not hear, but a binding? and
yet these allowed to one man or two, though private persons, if the sense were
as the obiectour would have it, and not to Ministers only. Again here is no
mention made of any Ministers; neither does Christ in this Chapter speak of
any particular office of public persons, but of such things as concerned the
people of God, even the Jews then, as Christians now: why then should the
sense of all the rest be made answerable to this, and not this verse
interpreted so as it may agree with the rest? for although these words may
carry such a show, as to draw this verse to the Ministry only, by the
foresaid mistaking, yet if it be observed: first, that the words are general:
secondly, that therefore the exposition of a general may be brought to a
necessary coherence of diverse particulars: thirdly, that our Savior in some
sort expounds this difficulty in verses 19. 20. speaking of the agreeing of
two or three; by which it may seem, he has reference to verse 15. and 16.
thereby to confirm the peace made between the two parties, either alone, or
with their witnesses, declaring how acceptable it is to God, least it should be
despised: there is no cause why this 18. verse should make a jar in the apt
exposition of all the former and latter verses, agreeing very fitly together.
To conclude, it cannot be denied, but that to bind and lose, belong unto the
Ministry, which power our Savior gave his Apostles afterward: John. 20. 23.
which they did, and Ministers now do perform by virtue of their office
standing in Christ's room and stead, and so do they bind and lose otherwise
then do common Christians, yet it therefore follows not, that these
Christians do not or may not bind or lose at all. Ministers do pray, teach
and endeavor to bring men to Christ, and this is his office, and as public
persons; yet others may teach also: so are Parents commanded, Deuteronomy.
and every Christian man is bound to edify his brother, 1. These. 5. 11.
but not by authority of special office, or as public persons, such as
Ministers be. And therefore we see this Objection also does nothing hinder the
exposition.

Sixthly, therefore hence may be concluded, that this place is not, nor cannot
be a rule for discipline, though it be chosen as the foundation whereupon the
government of Christ should be builded; to which purpose are these reasons.

Reasons why the 18. of Mat. is no rule of Church-gouernment absolutely.




Church is meant the Jews Sinedrion, and therefore if Christ's government be
here established, it should be answerable to the Jewish Sinedrion; but the
Apostles in no place ever set it up, or any like it, neither gives the least
taste thereof in any of their writings; and says a learned man, I rest secure
that no ancient father ever made the government of Christ answerable thereunto.
That no such thing was in the Apostles days these reasons show: the Apostles
prescribe no order, nor give instruction to them: in Churches out of order
there is no reproof of their negligence, nor in any other Church any
commendation of their diligence, no mention by Luke in the Acts of any such
proceeding to be in use; which with all or some of these things, should some
where have been mentioned, if any such thing had been.

(...) (...). 18.
Popular, E iscopall, or Presbiterian: but says Beza not Popular, and
avouches that such as do take here the word Church for the assembly of the
whole multitude, do err very grosely: and say others, not Episcopal
authority: and say we, not the Presbiterian power mixed, as we say of Lay men
and Church men; and therefore if all these say true, there is here constituted
no government at all.

made else where to perfect it in all the new Testament. If they say it is
perfect, then is all sorts of sin here brought in, subject to the Churches
censure, wherein the Church may intermeddle; then also here is comprehended all
the parts which they do make of discipline. But first, here a man is not to
proceed against his Brother for any sin; as not for sin against God, for
sin against the Magistrate, for sin against another: but for trespasses
against himself, as the words be, trespass against thee, which in the Lords
Mat 6.
Prayer, and in this Chapter we be taught to forgive: but Mat. 18.
by what warrant can a man remit trespasses done against another? how can he
pardon rebellion against God? or public crimes against the Magistrate? if a
man commit murder, by the order here, the party which first sees him, must
tell him of it; and if the Offender show penitencie, the other is to rest
silent, contrary to reason and religion elsewhere; and therefore as before is
said, here only is understood personal injuries to a man's self, and no
discipline ordained to urge private persons to proceed thus for sins against
God, against Magistrates and other men. Again, this is a rule for sins
private and more secret, but not for public and open sin. Secondly, it is no
perfect rule for the parts of discipline, not for suspention, if any such thing
be, it is here wholly forgotten, as else where; as some say in all the new
Testament. And how is excommunication here ordained? First, it is not said here
as in 1. Cor. 5. either let him be delivered to Satan, or put out him from
among you: but let him be as a Heathen and Publicane; by which our Savior does
permit the party oppressed to seek further remedy, as is aforesaid.
Secondly, the Church here, whose office it is to censure and excommunicate, if
any such thing here were intended, does not proceed against the person
obstinate, as the Church ought, but referres him over again to the plaintiff,
the private party offended, which in the order of discipline is not so.
Thirdly, our Savior in all the degrees of proceeding, does make the first
party offended the principal; he must admonish, he must take witnesses, he
must tell the Church, and to him must the man he as a Heathen and Publicane. In
all which is plainly a proceeding in a personal action between party and
party. Fourthly, our Savior says not, when he speaks of the Church, that
the Church should excommunicate the offender, and hold him as a Heathen and
Publican: which in all likelihood and proper speaking, he would have done, had
he herein intended to advance the Churches authority in disciplinarie causes:
but let it be noted, that here our Savior makes not the Church Oyer and
determiner, no nor to do more then the very witnesses, neither does it proceed
further then they, but only the party offended is allowed to go on.
Therefore may it be concluded, that our Savior herein did not intend to
advance the Churches authority and government thereof, but a private and
personal cause as is declared, and therefore here is no precept or rule of
discipline.



the name of sin, of offending a brother: to bring any matter, that may fall
out between man and man before the Church; even to a Tailors making of a
Dublet and a pair of Hose.

this place, and therefore they err from their ground in this point, without
warrant from hence.

And thus it appears how little this place (as Divines do expound it, does
serve for Discipline in christian Churches. If any do ask, why I allege not
the Authors of every Why testimonies of men are not alleged.
Reason; my answer is, for that I see reasons to receive prejudice by the
persons: a weak reason is by the countenance of a man of fame made stronger
then it is; and a sollide reason of one of no great note, is condemned through
the mean estimation of the person: we do conclude by reason, and live by the
faith of the word of God, which two are sufficient to guide every reasonable
Christian man, though the parties alleging the same be not nominated.

And thus have I evidently laid open, what variety of judgment there is in
this matter of Government, as a What manner of government is to be wished.
point vndeterminable by mean wits: for my part, I wish government to be such,
as may agree with the general Apostolical rules of guiding particular
actions, most for the furtherance of the Gospel, the peoples salvation, the
maintenance of sound Doctrine, the reformation of the ill disposed: that most
may serve for the overthrow of Antichrists Kingdom and power, and for the
preservation of unity in the whole Church, and in the particular members of
the same, not neglecting for worldly policy the holy Scriptures, or lightly
esteeming of the Apostles practices, or approved antiquity, an universal
consent of the Churches of God; which he grant us for his glory and praise for
ever. And thus much may serve for Reply, to Mr. Ainsworths answer to this
seventh Error: for touching that he says, Where all sin, they be all
subject to punishment: it is not denied; and is idle, and nothing to the matter
in question: which is: Whether the sin of one notorious man, defiles the
whole Congregation, though many therein lament it, and are vexed in their
souls, for that such a one is not punished by lawful authority? He makes
one to sin, and all other to sin with him, and so to deserve the same
judgment, which is a matter not called into question. But ere I end with him
in this, let it be well observed, what a people he only allows men to
separate from: first, an Assembly, What people only Mr. Ainsworth allows men
to separate from.
not Gods Church; secondly, which with an high hand sins and blasphemeth the
Lord; thirdly, whose sacrifice is abominable; fourthly, that wherein it cannot
be said, that any holy thing is lawfully administered; fifthly, wherein all do
agree to maintain open iniquity; sixthly, which does despise the word of God
calling them to repentance: If they do not thus (says he) we hold it not
lawful to separate from them, nor in any wise at any time, till all holy and
orderly means be used to reclaim them. Whence therefore it may necessarily be
gathered that Mr. Ainsworth either does censure us to be such a people (and if
so, what more accursed diudgement can be given against us?) or else their
separation, by his own mouth condemning it, is unlawful.

Mr. Smiths Answer to this seventh Error, and a Reply thereunto.
Master Smith would prove the position true, by one Page. 71.
maine Reason, that Christ's Ministerial power is given to the Church: whence
he concludes a pollution in every member, that lives where any open known
sin is suffered, as a consenter thereunto; if the party offending be not
reformed, and separation made for the same, after due admonition. Having thus
laid his ground, he gathers conclusions. But I have already showed else where
before, that the Ministerial power is not given to the Church; and the chief
proof for that is, Mat. 18. which how Divines expound it, is also showed:
therefore his immediate ground for defense of this Error being very false, and
the ground of that ground very uncertain, his Conclusions are vain, and
nothing worth.

For the place to the Corinths. 1. Ep. chap. 5. verse. 6. 1. Cor. 5. 6.
Answered.
where a prouerbiall speech of the Apostle is urged: I answer, that the words
be a similie, and must be enlarged no farther then the nature of the thing is:
it is true that sin is as Leaven, and the people in one Assembly is as a
lump, in which a wicked man is as Leaven; but we must know the Leaven
leaueneth not the whole lump wherein it is put but as it is mingled with the
whole lump, and as every part of that same takes the Leaven, else it is not
leauened: So is it with the Church, such as allow and any way communicate with
the wicked man in his sin, they are leauened; but such as Cloe, reproving the
offender, and complaining thereof, seeking as they may in their place
Reformation, they are not leauened, because they do not take Leaven. Beware of
the Leaven of the Pharisees (says our Savior) he wills not his disciples to
leave the Assemblies: but to take heed they take no Leaven of them: showing
thereby, that a godly and careful Christian may be where Leaven is, and yet
not be leauened with them. Again the Apostle does not say that the Corinthians
are leauened, but rather the contrary in the same place, Ye are unleavened:
Verse 7.
which the Apostle would never have said, if the incestuous man had leauened
them Further more the Apostle no where does teach men to draw this Doctrine of
polution, and so separation from it, though he had cause often speaking of sins
and corruptions to urge it, had he ever intended it, as this man does urge it.
He cyteth some places Number. 19. 13. 20.
in the old Testament, precepts ceremonial, which he applies to the new (as
he pleases) to which I have made Hag. 2. 14.
answer before, and now I say only this; let him prove by Gods spirit, that
is, by the words of the holy Ghost in the new Testament, any such intendement
of Doctrine shadowed out therein unto us, as he frames to himself, and then
he thereby neither shall be deceived, nor deceive others. If any such thing had
been meant thereby, the Apostle who had just occasion to speak of it, in 1.
Cor. 5. 6. where he speaks of Leaven, would not have forgotten such places to
have urged them here; or in the Epistle to the Hebrews, or some where that the
Church of Christ might not have erred from the true use thereof, nor have lost
the great benefit which might have come to it thereby. His last reason is,
because Kings and Priests neglecting their duty were polluted with the sins
of such as they should have punished: and therefore says he, so is the whole
Church now. The force of this reason is, because he makes the people, even all
common Christians, now Kings and Priests, even in external government, as the
Kings and Priests ruled in the old Testament. But how hereby he overthrows the
Kings Supremacy; how falsely he interprets the names of Kings and Priests
given to Christians now, I leave for all to judge. This Error of Popular power
is his groundwork also for his answers to my reasons, against this seventh
Error, on which stringe he often harpeth in seeking to confute my arguments.

In my former Book, Page 103. I show first what is not What it is, not to
consent to sin.
a consenting to sin, and so on the contrary what it is to consent: first not
in judgment to approve of it, after the measure of his understanding:
secondly, not in affection to like of the same: thirdly, not to be silent at
it, but in place fitly to reprove it: fourthly, in countenance to manifest
dislike thereof: fifthly in life to be contrary, and to practice virtue: sixthly,
not to be careless of it, but to seek the reformation thereof in his place,
as far as he is able; this I say, is not to consent to sin in others,
though the party offending remain in the congregation, and though such a
party not consenting, come to the holy things of God, when the other comes
also.

Mr. Smith to this answers, that I do falsely interpret consent, Page 73. Mr.
Smiths Answer.
for says he, a man may do all this, and yet consent: and he would prove it
by Ely, 1. Sam. 2. 12. 23. who did all this (as he imagines) and yet for that
he did not to the utmost which the word required at his hands, to wit, to put
his sons to death, he did consent to them, and so forth: In like manner
(says he) except men make a separation, they do not to the utmost of the
word, and so do consent.

Smith thinks I come short in setting out consent, Page. 73.
and I think that he far ouer-reacheth: for though Ely did not all he ought,
yet can it not be said, that he consented unto them This should he have proved,
but he leaves it because he cannot prove that consent is when men show dislike
of sin, as I have said, and yet do fail in some degree. Ely was not guilty
of sin, for consent to their sin, but for neglect of part of his duty.
Again, his example is not fit; Ely was a public person, and a Judge, but our
speech was of private men: Ely went not so far as he might and ought, but
private persons can go no further to reform then in the degrees mentioned.
Touching separation for personal faults I have showed it not to be lawful,
but Schismatic. His alleged Scriptures to prove separation, the first,
Act. 2. 4. is altogether idle, the second Act. 2. 4. and 19. 9.
Act. 19. 9. understood of separation from blasphemers of Christ, and a people
which thereby became no Church, and therefore is nothing to prove a private man
to separate from a true Church, for the personal sin of an other: the last
place, 2. Cor. 6. 17. is at large answered before. 2. Cor. 6. 17.


In the second place, after I have showed what is not to consent to sin, I
prove in the 104. of my former Book by Godly are not polluted by some wicked
coming to the Sacrament.
many reasons, that such as do not consent as is before declared, are not
polluted by the sin of an other obstinately impenitent therein, though the
godly come to the holy things of God, and that wicked party come also to the
same.

there was no sacrifice for such a pollution under the law, and yet for all
other; and therefore this was not under the law accounted pollution, to wit,
for a godly person to come to the holy things of God, when a wicked man came
among them. Saul did come to worship God; so did Ioab no doubt, also the soones
(...)ly, with whom were some fearing God; yet do we never read, that it was
accounted a sin to the godly, neither did they ever offer sacrifice to make
an atonement unto God for it, as a pollution, that we read of.

But he says there was a sacrifice appointed, and he brings Page. 74.
Objection.
the example of Beniamits consenting to sin, Iud. 19. and 20 the Israelites
fearing for the Altar made, Josh. 22. and Achans sins, for which wrath came
on Israel. Josh. 7.

Leu. 4. 13. Ergo, a sacrifice for the godly being in Gods service with some
wicked. How the place proves this and his reasonlesse reasoning makes good
his purpose I see not.

that godly people in the old Testament are never any where reproved for being
at the administration of holy things, though wicked men were there. It is not
mentioned by any Prophet to be a sin; there is no precept forbidding it;
there is no example of punishment upon any for so doing: it is not therefore a
sin. Indeed the Priests were reproved for not separating the clean from the
unclean, Ezech. 22. 26.
because it was their office so to do.

Mr. Smith to this answers thus: first, that their communion Page. 74.
Objection.
then was typical, and their persons typically clean, though wicked in their
lives, and so could not pollute one another: secondly, he says, that the
carnal Priests in the old Testament, were type of the Saints in the new
Testament, who succeeded as spiritual Priests, and therefore are polluted by
not distinguishing and separating the clean from the unclean now.

generation, to be merely in shadows, as if the Law moral were not in their
covenant, that wicked men then could not pollute, for only sacrifycing some
beast, and yet nothing now, no profess of faith in Christ, no asking pardon
for sin, as men do, that say the Lords prayer, and in the Assembly, every
Lords day, confess their sins, and crave pardon, can prevent pollution, but
either must there be a casting out of the wicked, or a making of a wicked
Separation. He also would here make Saints by calling, and priests in Christ
spiritually, to be one with the Priests in office in the old Testament: and
cites for it Reu 1. 6. and 11. 1. Reu 1. 6. and 11. 1 Jude ver. 23. 2. Cor. 6.
17.
Jude verse 23. 2. Cor. 6. 17. The first shows we are called in Christ, Kings
and Priests: Ergo, so outwardly in the church by office? Prove this
Consequence. How does it follow to reason from carnal, as he calls it, to
spiritual; from an outward office, to inward grace? he is void of wit and
grace, who reasons thus to deceive the simple. The second place, by which at
his breaking out here he deceived so many, is expounded and fully answered by
Mr. Ainsworth in A book entitled, A defense of the holy scripture, etc. page
11 12. 13. 14. 15.
his Answer to Mr. Smiths Book of Differences, in which Answer Mr. Ainsworth
does note in Mr. Smith, Dotage, blindness of heart in iudgeing spiritual
things; blasphemy in wretchedly expounding this place; that he was induced to
this impiety by being deceived by Satan; and that he interprets Scripture
after his own fantasy: all which he by reason manifests unto him, in
confuting his false exposition, and giving a more likely sense of it himself,
to which I incline, and so I commend it to him, as my Answer hereto at this
time. The third Scripture is to no purpose: the last, which he brings in so
often, have I answered before. He makes an objection himself, and answers it
himself, so as it is out of his own brain; the sum whereof is, what before
Page 30. he delivered, touching typical cleansing, though the party were
morally unclean: to which Mr. Ainsworth in the foresaid book, Page 119.
answers, and says, that herein Mr. Smith is not only a typical but a real
Seducer and deceiuer of minds indeed: and gives both reasons to manifest Mr.
Smiths absurdities, and also alleges many Scriptures to confute his folly
herein.

that the Prophets neither taught this doctrine, neither made separation from
holy things, for the wickedness of other men, which they would have done had
it been sin: for they mentioned many evils, rebuked both Priests and people;
commanded also Separation where the Lord commanded; but such a corruption as is
here supposed they neither mentioned by word, nor showed by practice. Therefore
under the Law, there was no such thing.

To this Mr. Smith answers principally to two things: first, Page 76.
Objection.
that the people then made no Separation, because the utmost means to reform
abuses was in the Magistrate, and so ought to depend upon the Lord for redress
of things, to wit, by the Magistrate.

that I say, the Prophets taught no such thing; so he leaves the doctrine, the
rule of practice, and bables of Practice, before he prove the former: and yet
what he says is very much for us, who have christian Magistrates, whose
authority cannot be now less under Christ, then under the Law; which if he
deny, then must he recall his oath, which he has sworn for the maintenance
of Princely supremacy under the Gospel. A lawless man, in a lawless place
may not say any thing against God and against his Sovereign.

in the old Testament the people were necessarily tied to the Kingdom,
Priesthood, and Temple, for the worship and obedience of God.



that the holy Scripture plainly teaches the contrary: and that many ways.

First, by acquiting him that is godly from the transgression of other men,
though they be mixed together in the partaking of Gods ordinances, as these
Scriptures prove. Ezech. 11. 20. 21. and 33. 9. and 18. 14. 17. 20. and 14. 18.
20. Tit. 1. 15. Reu. 3. 4. and 2. 24. 22. 23. Gal. 5. 10. Let the places be
What may be collected from these scriptures.
read, and the understanding Reader may see, first, a difference between the
godly and wicked: secondly, one man's transgression is not laid to the charge of
another: thirdly, that God approues of the godly, though intermixed with the
wicked: fourthly, that godly men may keep themselves undefiled, though many
wicked be in the same Church and Assembly with them. And in all these places
where these truths are warranted; the holy Ghost takes no occasion to speak of
pollution by the sin of another, and yet if he had intended any such
doctrine, in these places he had most fit occasion for the same.

Mr. Smiths idle answer is thus much in effect, that the Page. 77. Objection.
places do not acquit men, who are either principals or accessaries to other
men's sins.

those that fear God may partake of holy things, though the wicked come
thereunto, and not be polluted: he omitteth this, and tells us of men partaking
together in sin, which is not in question.

Secondly, by declaring it to be a sin, for the godly to leave the worship of
God, for the wickedness of other men coming thereunto. 1. Sam. 2. 24. 17.
Where the place is plainly contradictorie to his assertion, and the
translation is good, as learned and judicious Divines do hold, and have so
written unto him in private, answering him fully, what he could object against
this place, by a Reioynder of theirs unto his Reply, to which (ever since he
fled from us) he has been silent; and albeit the pride of his heart, will not
let him acknowledge his false gloss; yet he lets his hold go, and runs to
his former, vain, and carnal conceit of the only Ceremonial cleanness in
the old Law, sufficient, as Page. 78.
he thinks, to keep them from all moral pollution of any son of Belial: of
which enough is spoken before, unto so an absurd and unproven Assertion.

Thirdly, (which is in my other Book my first reason,) the Holy Scripture
admits men, and grants them liberty to come to the holy things of God,
though wicked men openly sinning be there, so be it that a man walk well
himself, as it becomes him toward God, and without doing wrong to his
neighbor, Mat. 5. 23. 24. 1. Cor. 11. 23. where Matt. 5. 23. 24. 1. Cor. 11.
23.
the Apostle speaking of abuses among the Corinthians prescribes a remedy,
every man to examine himself, and so to eat: he commands not to examine an
other; nor to mark how others have lived, but how they have behaved
themselves; he tells not that any coming unprepared polluteth the
Congregation, but the offender eats damnation to himself: he speaks
nothing of pollution, nothing of separation, which had been very necessary
upon this occasion to have taught, if Gods spirit had ever instructed them
therein: especially if we consider how after once or twice admonition, they
did not amend. 2. Cor. 12. 21.

Mr. Smith answers that of Mat. 5. 23. 24. by giving the Page. 78. Objection.
Exposition of it; that a man not rebuking his brother, does hate him.

Reconcile, and to win his brother again, imports just cause of displeasure
in the party to be reconciled, taken from the party going to sacrifice, which
cannot be for not reproving him; for who is so offended because another man
rebukes him not, as for it, he will be out with him? and for which the party
omitting of his duty, is not to proceed on to worship God? It is meant of
personal wrongs and injuries, and not of omitting the duty of admonition:
none but a man compounded of santasies, and audaciously bold in his conceits,
would ever understand the place so, contrary to the judgment of all men, the
propriety of speech, and common reason it self. Our Savior speaks before of
ill terms, and railing, and then does conclude this rule thereupon: neither
are the words thus, if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest
that thou Mat. 5. 23. 24.
have some what against thy brother; to wit, a duty of admonition to be
performed, for his offending thee: but the words are, that thy brother has
ought against thee: so is it not an ill in him not reproved by thee, but an ill
in thee, for which thou ought to give to him satisfaction. The place, Leui.
Leuit. 19. 17. Expounded.
19. 17. alleged to show, that such as do not rebuke another for any sin
they see him commit, does therefore hate him, is (as I take it) misalledged:
for it is understood of hatred arising in man's heart for wrongs received by
another. A man injured, naturally hates the offending party, Example in
Absalom. 2 Samuel 13. 22.
and rather wills to go on with hatred in his heart, then to come unto the
offender lovingly to tell him in plain terms of it, to cause him to surcease
to sin. Now the Lord here meets with this cankered corruption of the heart,
and wills even the party receiving wrong, rather to go and deal plainly
with his adversary to win him, then to let him rest in his wrong doing, and
himself still to carry hatred against him also for the same. The place is
meant therefore of personal wrongs, as the very next verse 18. does declare,
where he speaks of auenging, and of mindefulnesse of wrong, which indeed are
the fruit of the hatred of the heart, and a continuance of the same; and the
words in the middle of the verse, is not to show that omission of our duty to
rebuke, is hatred of our brother, but that plainly to rebuke him, is a means
to win him, and so to remove hatred out of our own hearts.

His answer to 1. Cor. 11. 28. is, that it is meant of such Page 78. 1. Cor.
11. 28. Objection.
an examination, as has regard of the rule in Mat. 18. 15. 17. wherein if we
fail, we are polluted, and so cannot eat and drink without hurt and
judgment.

Matthew is to this matter in question, I have showed what Divines do think.

To the 2. Cor. 12. 21. he answers, that I must prove Page 78. 79. 2. Cor.
12. 21. Object.
to make this good, that the Corinthians were impenitent in sin; first, that
they despised Paul's second admonition: and secondly, that then the faithful
did keep communion without sin.

Cloe, by whom the Apostle was made acquainted with the disorders in the
Church: Secondly, because the evils were open, and not secret or private, which
must not be therefore proceeded in after Mat. 18. Thirdly, because one
Admonition of an Apostle, was more then two of private men; yea, not only
equal, but greater then the admonition of the whole Church, so as to despise
but once his Admonition was as much as if they had been admonished in the
third degree, according to the rule in Matthew, as he would here ignorantly
have it. Thus that which he held to be too hard a task for me, I have easily
gone through, and how sufficiently to satisfy an indifferent Reader, I leave
others to judge.

that this his doctrine of pollution by commixion with the wicked, dissolues
the bonds of allegiance between God and his people. As if because another does
sin, I may not do my duty to God: He will come to the Sacrament, therefore
may not I? he offends God, therefore may not I serve him? What Divinity is
this? what King may have subjects, what Master his servants by this doctrine
full of folly and confusion?

Mr. Smiths answer is, that communion must be kept, Page. 79. Objection.
but not with Jews, Turks, Pagans, Papists, and that communion must be
performed after a holy manner.



In the third and last place, in my former book, Page, 108 by certain
principal heads, to which all the causes of true separation may be reduced, I
do show how men may see the dec^i^ of the Separatists in urging scriptures for
separation from us impertinently. Places under the Law are referred to these To
what heads the places for separation may be reduced.
heads. 1. Idols of false Gods: as Israel from heathenish Gods. 2. From Idols
of the true God: as Judah from Isreal's calves. 3. From ceremonial pollution.
Places under the Gospel are to be referred to these topic places. 1. From
Jews not receiving Christ, but railing on his very person. 2. From Gentiles
without Christ. 3. From Antichrist and his assemblies, where he is acknowledged
head, and whence all receive their power, as the now Church of Rome, and all in
subjection to it. 4. From private familiarity with open offenders and
excommunicate persons, in a true christian Church, unnecessarily; when neither
Religion commands, Charity binds, nor our special calling warranteth us so
to do. If all the Scriptures may be reduced only to these heads, and so
intended, and not otherwise, then all places are perverted which be alleged,
first, to separate from true Churches for personal corruptions, or for When
places alleged for separation are perverted.
some defects, or for some superfluous things: secondly, to separate our selves
from the holy word and Sacraments, because some impenitent live unreformed in
the same: thirdly, for the separatists to abuse any of the places, speaking of
separation to maintain their Schism, and to apply them against us, except
they can prove us to be some such as the Scriptures intend, and that we be some
of these.

Indeed Mr. Smith says, for what will he not say? that we Page 80.
are Idolaters, and that we make Idols of the true God, etc. But sithen he but
says it, and what he says is as very false, as foolish, and as absurd, as
far from truth, I end this here with him, as unworthy answer, as the Reader
may judge.

The eight Error of the Brownists.
THat, they say, every of our assemblies be false Churches. For the overthrow
of this Error, I have spoken much at large in my former Book, Page 109. to
128. and albeit I have given many reasons for the true constitution of our
Church, all which are against this their opinion, yet for that this is a most
maine point of controversy, and upon which all the rest do principally
depend, I will confirm the contrary to this for truth: to wit, that we are a
true Church of Christ, and our assemblies assemblies of Christians, as they
stand by the laws of our land, confirmed by Acts of Parliament. What M.
Ainsworth, and M. Smith have said to the contrary, I will in their due order
bring in, by way of Objection, and answer them as I may, and many reasons
which they make against us, I may well take the very same and return them
back against themselves, and what they seem to confirm their arguments by,
make it only as an objection, and so answer it, as occasion shall offer it
self. If Reader I do confirm our cause, let not either the obiecting
Forewarnings to the Reader.
of corruptions among us make thee believe without judgment that we cannot be
a true Church: for turn thine eyes upon Israel in Esaies days; upon Corinth,
and the Churches in Asia in the Apostles days, upon the reformed Churches in
other countries, and see whether they have been or are without their blemishes:
or the orderly living of some few gathered together with a will and purpose to
do well, as they do like best, dazell thine eyes, and bring thee to an
imagination that such only are the true Church: for consider, first, that there
is greater difficulty to govern a commonwealth, a whole Nation, under one
Supreme power, then for a hundredth, two; three, four or six hundred to Three
necessary considerations.
govern themselves, or to be governed by many ouer-seers, whilst all do
voluntarily incline one way, and be also under persecution, as they think. We
read of small styrres in Abraham's family, while they were no more, and yet we
see all went not well there neither, nor in Isaacks household, nor in Jacobs:
but when Israel became populous, what a do had Moses to keep the people in
order? had not God put to his helping hand to destroy by extraordinary
judgments many of them, Moses and Aaron, as mere men could not have governed
them: let this be remembered. Secondly, consider how it fares with those few,
what contentions is among them, what Heretics do daily rise up from among
themselves, what divisions, and out breakings there is continually, and thou
would never condemn so much the evils, which fall out in a whole Nation; it
being withal observed, that there are not so many or great contentions in some
whole large Parishes here in seven years space, as have risen up among them
in one year, and less space. Thirdly, consider not only among us such as be
lewd, but observe the lives of such, as make conscience of their ways; for why
should thou follow rather the spirit of Schismatics, then the Lord
himself, and his Apostles? The Apostle saw the good things, which were among
the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 11. 2. and commended them for that which was good as
well as rebuked them for evil, so does the Lord, Reu. 2. 2. 3. who also does
so much respect the good, as for their sakes, though few, he does give that
title to all; which is, the deserved commendation of some, as Deuteronomy. 1. 23. 24;
where that which was the report of two is spoken generally of twelve: so for
some Saints, all are so called, 1. Cor. 1. 1. compared with Chap. 5. and 2.
Cor. 12. 21. He speaks good of them out of his mercy and love, who were in
themselves far from it. Numbers 23. 21. What children are they who will not
esteem of their mother, as their father does, who will see her wants, with
Cham, and publish them with bitter reproaches? but the good of their mother and
brethren will they not see; but by vild and odious comparisons do obscure the
same: this malignant spirit is of Satan and not of God. Weigh well Reader,
what I say, and the Lord give thee good discerning of all things.

Reasons further to prove a true Church.
manifest it. 1. Because by the warrant of the word, they cannot call us a
false Church. For let it be noted, why any were called false brethren; and
consider them and us, and there shall not be found the same cause in us, to
make our whole Church, to deserve that name. Grant that there be some false
brethren, some false prophets: so were there some such crept into the
Apostolical Church: yea and received of many to the hinderance of the Gospel:
yet were not therefore the whole churches themselves called false churches:
They boast much of the terms of Scripture: where do they find that the holy
Ghost does call a Church, either for some Error in doctrine, or for
corruptions in manners, a false Church? they invent new terms to deceive the
people. In all the new Testament, there is no mention of any false church,
neither that there shall be such a one, in any such term: we are not
therefore a false church. If they give us any other name, the same shall well
manifest their Error, which is one cause, why I do stand upon the very
term, as well as I consider of the matter intended by it.

Because we are a Church of Christ, in what degree soever: now a church of
Christ, is a true church, because Christ has no false body, no more then he
himself is a false head. We be a church of Christ; first, because we
profess his Name, Romans 15. 20. where the Congregations and Churches planted by
others, is only thus described by these terms: where Christ was named:
secondly, because we have received Baptism, as the seal of his promise, and
seal of grace, Book of differences, page 5.
as Mr. Smith himself calls it; Circumcision made the Israelites children to
be called the Lords, Ezech. 16. 20. 21. why has not Baptism the like force in
Gods mercy, that we should be called Christ's? thirdly, because we have his
word, by which a people become Christ's Disciples, Mat. 28. 18. Mark. 16. 15.
and is thereby preferred with God, before all other people. Romans 3. 1. 2. and
9. 2. Psalm. 147. 19. 20. fourthly, the testimony of Reformed Churches, who
acknowledge us to be a true Church; which testimony of true Churches, and
allowance thereof, is approved by the Apostles, alleging of them for the
comfort of other. Romans 16. 16. 1 Pet. 5. 13. Romans 16. 19. 1 These. 1. 7. 8. 3
Ioh. 6. 2 Cor. 8. 18. 19. 23. 24. Saint Paul alleges for the credit of his
Ministry, the approbation of three Apostles, Gal. 2. 9. though his authority
was from God, and needed not the authority of men: of which more is said in my
former book, Page 178. 179. 180.

Because, we be either the church of Christ, and so a true church, or the
church of Antichrist: for in the new Testament, all churches professing the
Name of Christ, are to be referred to one of these two: But we are not the
Church of Antichrist: because our Church has departed from the Pope and the
Church of Rome, and is come out of Babylon, as Gods people are commanded.
Revel. 18. 2. in open renouncing of him, by Profession, by Doctrine preached
and penned, by laws enacted against him and his religion; and lastly, by
practice, in promoting the holy Scriptures above the authority of the Church;
in advancing his Majesty's Supremacy, who in his own person with the whole
Churches praise to God therefore, does oppose that Antichrist, and under
handwriting does justify the same unto all Christian Princes, and Kingdoms.
And if all this will not manifest this truth to the wilfully blinded, let them
consider the Papists condemning of us as Heretics, and as no church of God,
because we have forsaken them, they excommunicate us, they rail on us, they
seek our blood with deadly hate. Now as our Savior speaks of the world, and
his Disciples, John. 15. 19. the same may be said of us, and the Church of
Rome, If we were of it, it would love us as her own, but because we are not of
it, but the Lord has chosen us out of it, therefore it hates us.

Object. But they say, we hold and practice many things which that Church
holds and practices.

Ans. Be it so: but we neither hold them nor practice them, as they be the
decrees of that Church, as themselves do; nor for that we yield in subjection
to them, but for that we judge that such things may be allowed and practiced
so of us by the warrant of the word, though the Romish Church did not so: for
our laws, our doctrine and Profession in the true intent and our right meaning
is against all Antichristianitie.

Object. But they say, though we become from that Church, yet was it not
voluntarily.

Ans. I have before said much to this, yet will I here say something more, to
the further clearing of this point. Our Church made a voluntary departing, in
the Beginners of Reformation, her late Majesty, with others, who stood out in
Queen Mary's days: these professing in time of persecution, cannot be said
otherwise to become Gods Church, then by a voluntary inclining of the heart by
the motion of Gods spirit. This first Company, who and how many soever they
were, were the Church of God, from which the other, which did adioyne to them,
by what means soever, became one with them, to be called together the Church
of God; and thus after Apostacy, began the Church of England to be reformed.
And it is here to be noted, that the Planting and and reforming are differing
things.
planting of a Church, is one thing and after one manner; but the recovering of
Gods people out of the hands of their enemies, shaking off spiritual bondage,
and reforming of it from corruptions, is an other.

This may be made plain by a similitude from the person A Simile to set out
the difference between the first constitution of a Church, and the after
reformation of the same.
of Job, who first by Gods making, at his first constitution was clean and
comely; but by Satan through Gods permission, was Job filled full, and covered
over with botches and soars, as made him hardly to be known to his friends,
and loathed of the nighest to him; yet was Job there still under the scabs, and
not utterly destroyed, but the very same essentially that was before; so as to
exalt Job again, God was not to make a new Job, but these botches and byles
which ouer-shadowed Job, was to be cured, and he cleansed of them, that Job
might appear again like himself, as God made him, and not as Satan had
defiled him. So is it with the Church; first, in the planting purely
constituted, but Satan he comes and pollutes it with the botches and byles
of Antichristianisme; which does not utterly destroy the Church, but covers
it over so as the true children of the kingdom can hardly discern the same;
which Church is to be purged of these abominations, and made to appear, and
to come out from under these scabs, but not to be made a new. For the first
planting or constituting The differences between planting and reforming.
of a Church, differs much from the reforming of a Church after backsliding.
First, at the planting it is constituted of Christians, before no Christians at
all: but in the reformation after apostacy, the Church is not re-establshed 1.
Difference.
of such as were no Christians by their fall, and made Christians by
reformation, as if they before had lost their Christianity; but were
Christians under great corruptions. Secondly 2. Difference.
in planting, Infidels become outward Professors of Christ, who did not before
acknowledge him: but in Reformation. Professors of Christ become outwardly
more holy, and purer from corruptions; Apostates in corruption become
Apostolical in Religion, and that which once they were before. Thirdly, in the
first plantation is required a 3. Difference.
profession of the name of Christ, and such as profess to believe in him are
to be baptized, having never before been admitted into the Church nor
baptized: but in reformation there is not required a profession into the name
of Christ, nor that the parties returning should be baptized, because they held
a profession of Christ, and lost not their baptism, but repentance and
profession of amendment of life is only required. We may see this true for
the planting of Churches by the Apostles; and for reformation of Judah, after
the great Idolatry of Achah; and the Israelites turning to God in Hezechias
days, in which was no gathering again of the foreskinne, for renewing of
Circumcision, but after repentance, and submitting of themselves, though some
of compulsion, as in Josias time, yet were they admitted, as Israelites, and
accounted the true Church of God. Either the not understanding, or the neglect
of this, made M. Smith seek a new Baptism, as if the Romish Church had made
an nullitie of all Christianity, he might as well have betaken himself to a
new God, and Christ. And the not making of this plain causes the simple
people to think that the Gospel in the last time of reformation, was only
thrust upon us, and not received of the Church voluntarily. Fourthly and
lastly, in planting, Paul must go before with 4 Difference.
the word, but in reformation Josias may compel with the fear of the sword;
for in this the Authority of Kings is great, who are nursing Fathers to the
Church: Fathers because they beget, as it were public Churches, which
otherwise are more hidden in secret places: Nursing, because they uphold them,
defend them, and do cause such as be under them to maintain them. Thus was,
as is said, Judah brought back by Hezechias, Josias, and others, as we also
were from Antichrist, by our Godly Josias, King Edward, and by our renowned
Elizabeth, that Queen of Sheba, who delighted to advance the wisdom of her
Solomon, the word of Jesus Christ. Miscreants do despise this grace, and
cursed are those Catiffes, which mock at these means, which the Lord has
raised up to us his people, who has stretched out his arm for our
deliverance, to the terror of nations: else had many of these censorious and
condemning Separatists perished in the womb, or had been borne to dye, by an
untimely death.

We be a true Church, for that we are a company having Reason that we be a
true Church.
Christ Jesus for our head, and we of his body: him we hold, and no false
head, and therefore can be no false Church. First, because we do all profess
him, which is a token of Christ's Jesus is our head.
Faith in the heart. Romans 10. 9. and the Apostles judged such worthy to be of
the Church in their time, and thereupon did admit men, Act. 8. 37. 38. and 16.
31. 32. and 8. 12. 13. And it is a token that such in some measure have Gods
spirit. 1 Ioh. 4. 2. And the confession of his name, is a part of our praise,
Heb. 13. 15. which he will honor in the day of judgment, and acknowledge
such for his, if they continue to suffer for it.

Object. Papists do profess him, and Anabaptists, and other heretics, yet
hold not Christ the head.

Ans. First, in that they profess him, so far they hold him, but in that
they add to their profession such things as they do by consequent, they
thereby deny him: secondly, we hold the head Christ, because many have the
graces of his spirit, Romans 8. 9. which cannot be denied, if the declaration of
these graces before men, may witness the same: and this life from the head, in
many gives continuance of the Churches being, though many also be corrupt, and
some dead.

Mr. Ainsworth Page 127. contradicts the maine reason, and would prove the
contrary, that Christ is not our head.

Object. First, says he, because our Church was constituted of the members of
Antichrist.

Ans. To which I answer, 1. That we were so reformed, as is said, and that
many were no Antichristians in time of Popery: and 2. that such as did join
to our Church, became thereby of the body, and were then to be accounted no
Papists, or members of Antichrist. He is a Separatist, who does embrace that
way openly, and leaves other Assemblies, be it with what heart or enducing
cause soever it may be. An Infidel is a heathen, but when he joins unto
Christians in professing Christ, though it be as many did become Jews, for
fear of Mordecai; yet is he not to be held a heathen, but a Christian. So
though our Fathers were Papists, yet becoming Protestants for fear of
Elizabeth, they were no more papists, but Protestants outwardly. 3. Grant they
then were Antichristian members, yet we are not, who never knew Popery; must
the Children be made guilty of the Parents sin, having been ignorant
thereof, and yet do condemn it? It is contrary to these truths of God, Deu.
1. 39. Ezechi. 18. 14. 17. Yea the children of Edom and Egypt in the third
generation might enter into the Lords congregation. Deu. 23. 8. how much more
may we be held to be of the Lords congregation?

Secondly, he would not have Christ our head, because that the Magistrate did
compel men to the faith.

An. I answer, first, that yet by their grant he was the head to such as did
compel, though not to such as were compelled: so then her Majesty, and all
that first voluntarily gave themselves to his name, had Christ for their head.
Now let them prove by any truth of God, that they lost the head by some coming
in by compulsion Secondly, I deny that compulsion by the Magistrate does cut
Christ the Head from the members of his body. The Magistrates authority herein
is commended: 2. Chron. 34. 32. 33. and their endeavor accepted: 2. Chron. 30.
20. and the people commended also for doing their duty toward God, though it
was not before, but after the Magistrate had commanded the same. chap. 31. 5.
Again, the urging unto goodness is no hurt unto it, neither makes it men
unholy, or less good, if they have goodness in them.

But the Scriptures do teach that Christ's flock should be voluntary. Psalm.
110. 3. Acts. 2. 41. Genesis 9. 27.

Answ. First, it is true of the members invisible, who as they be of the body
of Christ before men, so are they also before God, who do voluntarily subject
themselves by the spirit. Secondly, it is understood of such as come to Christ
in the planting of Churches, who are voluntary: but these places are not
against the authority of Magistrates in the time of Reformation; for then one
Scripture should be against another: for in one place is allowed compelling by
the Magistrate; in another, if it be as they would have it, is allowed only a
voluntary people.

Thirdly, he would not have Christ our head, because there be so many wicked
among us, who in man's judgment do not partake of his Spirit.

Ans. I answer, first, that it is an ill censure to condemn all for some; or
to deny the Covenant in Isaac, because of Ismael; and to Jacob, because of
Esau. Secondly, the similitude from a body and the head, which the holy Ghost
uses, overthrows this his fantasy. There may be in a body corrupt members;
yea, some dead, and yet others receive life and motion from the head; neither
do these loose their head, because the other have lost their life from the
head: but so long as they remain conjoined to the body together, so long are
they of it, and have al one head one with another. Do the living branches of a
tree lose their right in the true root, because others be withered? then we
see common reason and Gods work in nature might teach him to disclaim this
error. Thirdly, he here makes no difference between the Elect and Reprobate;
the ineffectual calling of the one, and the effectual calling of the other:
to the one is Christ the Head, giving them his spirit, and is head as a
redeemer to them: and to the other he is also a head, but only by his common
graces, and in his sovereign power over them, as the Lord. Fourthly, the
visible Assemblies professing Christ, are called his body, not for that all
therein, are truly his members, no not in the judgment of men, in respect of
some men's open impenitencie for the present, but for the Elect sake, who are in
the rule of Charity, to be held to be, as if any where else, so among such as
do profess the Name of Christ; for whose sake the wicked are reputed rather of
Christ's Church, than the godly because of them, held to be without Christ.
Fifthly, by this the Jewish Church in the days of the Prophets, and of Christ,
had not a true head; nor Corinth, nor many other Churches in the Apostles
days; for the good and bad were mixed together in one Assembly: if these for
this cause were not without Christ, neither are we.

5. The true Church has Christ for the Mediator and Page 131. 5. Reason that
we are a true Church. 1. Reason. Christ is our Advocate.
Advocate; this he acknowledges: but our Church has Christ for Mediator and
Advocate, and this thus proved. First, our Church does teach this by one
consent in public Records, which is the Churches mouth to the whole world,
witnessing her faith, for as by writings we know, and are thereby led to
believe the faith of other Churches, so must other gather our faith, and think
we believe what we write. Secondly, this is manifest by our prayers, which be
only made to God, in the Name of Jesus Christ only. Thirdly, we do condemn
the Papists, for making the Virgin Marie, Saints, or Angels, mediators to God,
and we do reject it, as Idolatrous. because we do partake of the covenant
made unto us by God through We partake of the heavenly covenant.
Christ; which I thus make good: one part of the Promise and Covenant. Ier. 31.
33. 34. Heb. 10. 16. and 8. 10. an other part thereof. Ier. 32. 40. of that
Roman Antichrist, which is an other part. Exo. 6. 5. the Book of the
covenant. Exo. 24. 7. the holy Commandments and the Gospel, the words of the
covenant. Exodus 34. 28. and it is a special prerogative to Gods people to have
the word of God, as is showed before; from Romans 3. 2. Psalm. 147. 19. 20.

Object. The Papists have it, as well as we.

Answer. The Papists have it not, as we have it: 1. We have it as the only
rule of our faith and works, and the judge of all controversies, and so do
not the Papists hold it. 2. We have it free for every one to look into, in a
Papists have not Gods word as we have it.
known tongue, so have not they. 3. We have it expounded unto us in many
places, so as to many it becomes effectual to reclaim them from a lewd
conversation, superstition, and vanity, so have not the Papists it. 4. We
have it in our Doctrines, in all the maine and fundamental truths which we
hold, agreeing to the holy Scriptures: but so the Papists have it not: and
therefore the Objection preuenteth not the face of the fourth reason. Fifthly,
because we have Preachers, by and with whom Gods spirit does work, which is
also a part of the covenant, and of Gods promise to his Church. Esai 59. 21.
Iere. 3. 15. we have the Sacraments, the seals of the Covenant. Genesis 17. 10.
because we make a profession of the true God, to be our God, which also is a
part of the Covenant: for it is said in Osea, chap 2 that God will make with
his a covenant, verse 18. and that he will say to them, thou art my people,
and they shall say to him, thou art my God. And therefore do we partake of the
Covenant, and so have we Christ our Mediator and Advocate; for Mr. Ainsworth
confesses that such as partake of the covenant have Christ for a Mediator and
Advocate.

Mr. Ainsworth on the contrary would prove, that we have not Christ for our
Mediator and Advocate, whose reason is:

Because we are not, as he says, under the covenant: but Page. 132.
the contrary to this have I proved.

Object. He would prove, that we be not under the covenant: first, because of
the exceeding evils that be among us, so as the Law cannot be written in the
minds and inward parts of such.

Answ. First, if he speak this but of some, then his consequence follows not
against all: secondly, if of all, his own conscience shall condemn him for
falsehood and lying: thirdly, by this reason, hypocrites are not under the
covenant, because the law of God is not written in their hearts. The place in
Jeremy 31. 33. is not understood barely of a member of the visible church, but
so of it, as withal he be an Elect Saint, for such only are called
effectually, and have Gods law by Gods Spirit written in their hearts.

Object. Secondly, we are not, says he, under the Covenant, because we have no
promise that our sins and iniquities Page 133.
are forgiven: being with out faith and repentance.

Ans. This is still general of all, as the Church is publickely and generally
constituted; of which he says, without repentance Page 132.
no promise of pardon, without the promise no faith, without faith no covenant
or testament, and without this no Mediator. So as he does judge us an
irrepentant and faithless people, without a Mediator, without the covenant,
and without the hope of pardon. Can more be said of Pagans, Jews, Turks,
Papists, Heretics, or other miscreants? But the ground of this cruel censure
is, that he judges the Church of England, Page 66.
as it is by Law constituted, to be no true Church of Christ; which I have
showed in part, and yet more fully will I manifest to be their Error, which is
the ground of this outrage: for if we be in that standing the Church of
Christ, we have the promise of pardon: though much should be amiss among us;
because so we are of God beheld in Christ, and Page 196.
not as we be in our selves. If this his judging of us were absolute, as of
all and every one among us, then has he condemned himself by condemning Mr.
Smith, who has said as much: but being respectively, as we live in such a
Constitution; he may except in his mind some particular persons, but he
condemns all public persons; as his Majesty, the Counsel, the house of
Parliament, to be all without faith and repentance, because by them this
Constitution is maintained, and by them has force and being. But howsoever he
does conceive of us respectively, It is wholly uncharitableness to consider of
persons and of a people but respectively, that is, but in this and that
particular, which makes a sinister censure.
and so indeed sinisterly, his Argument so is not good: for consider the best
Christian respectively, as he is in corruption naturally, and not as he has
grace withal, and so is he without faith and repentance: So consider the
Apostles, in our Saviors time, when there was great confusion in the Jewish
state, as members of that body, they were without faith without repentance: and
thus by considering men, and Churches respectively in the worst part, no men,
no Church of Christ shall have either faith or fear of God. But neither does
God so, nor religion teach so, nor charity so suffer any to consider so of
Gods Church and his people. Let themselves be considered in their Schism, they
have neither faith nor repentance, nor promise of salvation. They be not (say
they) in a Schism, and we say, we are not in a false Constitution. But they
say, we are convinced of it by them; and we say, they are convinced of it by
us, and disclaimed of other Churches for the same: so as, if thus respectively
we be without faith and repentance in their judgment, they also in the same
regard are Schismatickes, and having neither faith nor repentance in our
judgment; and if their opinion of themselves, may clear themselves hereof, so
may the like do us: what reason to the contrary?

Object. Thirdly, he would prove us not to be under the Covenant, because God
is not our God, neither are we his people: which is the sum of the Covenant,
and that says he, is wanting unto us: but how does he prove this? for that
says he, we be not come out, and separated our selves, as in 2. Cor. 6. 16.
17.

Ans. But the falsehood of this may appear by what has been said, and how
that his proof confirms not this wretched opinion of us is before declared,
where at large I have spoken of the quoted Scripture.

Object. But he says, that Christ is no Mediator of a mixed company. John. 17.
9. 16.

Answ. It is true, understood as men are before God, for so Christ is Mediator
only to the Elect, and only the Lord knows who are his: but in respect of
men he is Mediator Christ is the Mediator of a mixed company before men.
of a mixed company, of Peter a Professor, and of Paul a Persecutour. If his
speech were true, then had not Christ been Mediator to Abraham's Family,
whilst Ismael abode in it; nor of Isaacks, while Esau did stay; nor of Israel,
while there were false Prophets, or whilst Saul and his wicked Courtiers did
live; nor of Thiatyra, one of the Churches in Asia, whilst Iesabel abode
therein; nor of any Christian, while he remains in the state of imperfection;
his faith mixed with doubting; his knowledge with error and ignorance, and so
forth. For as he may reason from the bad part in a Church, to ouer-throw the
whole body, so may he as well reason from corruptions in a man, to overthrow
the whole persons hope of Christian salvation. Again, if it be true, he
says, that the godly do loose their right in the mediation of Christ, because
of wicked men among them; then may they not in that standing be prayed for: for
we may not pray for them, for whom we know Christ prays not for: but how
wicked and false this is, may appear by our Saviors praying for the open
wicked upon his Cross: and he came to save Sinners, that is notorious wicked.
1. Tim. 1. 15. 1. John. 2. 1. 2.

Object. But perhaps he will say, we may not pray for them in their
wickedness.

Answ. We are to pray for them in their wickedness: for if they were not
wicked, then needed they no praying for: it is one thing to pray for them in
wickedness, and another to pray for prosperity of their wickedness; the
first is lawful, the latter wicked and unlawful. For his Scripture Ioh. 17.
9. 16. I say, it is understood of the Elect, John. 17. 9. 16.
who were not of the world, nor seen of men; and is nothing to the purpose in
hand. If he take the word world literally, then let him expound John. 3. 16.
where God says, he John. 3. 16.
loves the World.

He goes on to prove us not under the covenant, because we were constrained by
authority to profess religion as we do: but of this sufficiently before. His
last reason is, because, as he says, we do offer up a strange worship, not
required of God: but he but barely avouches it, and we have as good authority
to deny it; and till his word be of more authority with us, we must let the
reason of his reason lie still as without reason.

Every true Church has Christ for the Prophet: this Reason that we are a true
Church of Christ.
he avouches page, 136. But the Church of England has Christ for the Prophet
of the same. First, because we acknowledge him, and none other to be that
Prophet foretold, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. and confirmed so to be, Act. 3. 23. The Church
of England has Christ for the Prophet of the same.
Secondly, we do receive him so to be by faith, by entertaining the words of
the Prophets and Apostles, as the indictment of his spirit, and bearing
witness of him, which we do hold to be the only rule of Faith and
Obedience. Thirdly, we have the same published by his servants, by whom he is
effectual, revealing unto many the heavenly will of his Father, as he says,
Ioh. 1. 18. and has opened their understanding, as in Luke 24. 45. And he has
given to the members of his Church a mouth, and Wisdom, where against all our
Antichristian adversaries have not been able to speak, or resist. Luke 21.
15. He has opened the hearts of many to attend to Paul's preaching, as he did
Lydiaes. Acts. 16. 14. And therefore is he our Prophet, in thus performing by
his word and spirit that office among us.

Ainsworth will not have Christ our Prophet: first, because, says he, we have
not his ordinance of prophecy, to wit, as they have devised it, that private
persons should stand up in the public assembly to interpret Scriptures. Beza
his judgment is to be made of it. 2. by this reason all the reformed churches
in christendom had never yet Christ for their Prophet, for none do use this.
3. The argument is not good, if it were a necessary ordinance, to conclude that
we do want the whole, for defect in some part. 4. We have Parents who at
home do instruct their families in many places, both out of the principles
which they have learned; and also out of the Holy word, as far as they do
understand. 5. They conclude a necessity now from an extraordinary act in the
Apostles time, and only from an example of act they conclude, as if the same
were a commandment imposing the same upon Churches. He in his answer to Mr.
Smiths Book of differences, does acknowledge that the having of 1. Cor. 14.
a Psalm there was extraordinary; let him then show by what reason we must
hold Prophecy to be ordinary, and he has said something; in the mean season
nothing.

Page. 136.
we have not teaching by office, that is, Pastors and Teachers, mentioned.
Ephesians. 4. 11. And his proof for this is, because we have Archbishops, Bishops,
Deanes, Priests, as he calls them, etc.



a great part of Christ's word, and Scriptures, Page 138.
and of the graces of his spirit, are here never spoken of, nor heard, nor
suffered to be uttered.

of the Church of England, in which is comprehended all the Parishes in the
Kingdom, and all the members of the same. Now consider, first, the preaching
of the word in many places without restraint; for he that can preach may by
Law handle any portion of Scripture to his people. Secondly, consider of the
learned writings, the large Commentaries; the published sermons, and it will be
found that there is no portion of Scripture not spoken of. Though much want be
in many Parishes, yet his speech is nothing true of the Church of England taken
in so large a sense: As wants are to be bewailed, so the truth is to be
defended. His last reason is about some points of Discipline, of which see
before, Mat. 18. 15. 17.

7. Every true Church has Christ for the Priest and Sacificer Page 141. 7
Reason that the Church of England is a true Church.
of the same, this is his own. But the Church of England has Christ for the
Priest and Sacrificer. First, because we acknowledge no sacrificing Priest by
office, but only Jesus Christ, our high Priest: and do condemn all the
Christ Jesus is our Priest and only Sacrifice.
Shauelings of Antichrist: our Sermons, Laws, Writings and Practice show this.
Secondly, because we do believe and teach, to depend for salvation upon only
his satisfaction and intercession, without any merits of our own. Thirdly,
because that in all our confessions, we humble our selves before God in Christ,
and in our prayers ask all for Christ's sake, and in our praises, laud the Lord
through Christ; let the Churches faith, and practice of this be seen in the
Book of Common Prayer, which is the Church of Englands witness herein to all
Churches.

Ainsworth will not have Christ our Priest: first, because our sacrifices and
gifts are not offered up by Christ, nor our Church reconciled unto God by him,
as he says. No heathen, nor Infidel worse then we, if this were so: but we
deny it; let us see his proof of this: because, says he, our confessions,
prayers and praises are Idolatrous, with which Christ has no communion:
Again, we deny this; but thus would he prove it: Because we read, says
he, a written leitourgie, etc.

Smith cast out all reading of Scriptures also out of his public worship of
God; so out of one evil springs another: and Mr. Ainsworth to help himself
against Mr. Smith, Page 36. says, that God never gave Books to read for
prayers unto him; and yet we know that certain Psalms were penned for that
purpose. Deuteronomy. 26. 3. 15. Psalm. 22. 1. and 92. and many other: which is
contrary to that he affirms. Yea, the Lord tied them unto words. Numb. 6. 23.
24. which they must needs either read or get without Book, and so be stinted,
which is all one. He particularizeth many other things, besides stinted
prayer, which he says, are Idolatrous: but we denying all, he says we
must stay for proof of every particular till the next time: if he think that
we should look out, what they have written against these in particular in
their books; I think they should read the defense of them in our books, and
either answer them soundly, or cease repeating them thus often without any
proof. Thirdly, his arguing is weak, for he thus reasons: where corruptions
be in the Church, to that Church is not Christ a Priest: let him prove this if
he can, and show what corruptions do take away the benefit of Christ's
sacrifice from a Church. If he could truly from the word convince men's
consciences herein, he might rest with one of these main reasons propounded, as
enough to make all men fly that Church, which has no fellowship with Christ.

that Christ is not our Priest, because of Page 142.
the wicked among us.

Judah in Esaies days, nor the Jews in Christ's time; nor the Corinthians, had
received benefit by Christ; for that there very wicked and impenitent persons
were among them: but if it had bin so dangerous as he makes it, even to the
loss of Christ; surely some Prophet, or Christ, or his Apostles, would have
evidently taught it: which they did not, and therefore it is not to be believed.
Among all his reasons whereby he aggrauateth the greatness of this evil, he
makes it a breach of the second commandment: by which (says he) (observe
good Reader, how these men will avouch any thing, and that under show of
Scripture) all Idols, Images and similitudes are forbidden to be brought into
the church. Mr. Ainsworths gross understanding of the second Commandment.
Now says he, these wicked ones are lively images of Satan, pictures of the
devil, which are as he says, more horrible, then the bringing of images and
representations of beasts, of fowls and fishes. Did ever any Divine, any
Church under the cope of the whole Heavens, so expound and enlarge the meaning
of the second Commandment? The words are, thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image, etc. who makes to himself among us the picture of a devil? who
sets the shape of the devil upon a wicked man, to make a representation thereof
to himself? who falls down to a wicked man, apprehending in him the devils
image, and does worship him with divine worship? and yet if his Exposition be
true, and that an Image did comprehend a wicked liver, such things would follow
necessarily. He that considers this allegation of the second commandment,
need not wonder, that they dare pervert other Scriptures less known, and more
hardly understood. Not to have the wicked curbed, and duly punished is a great
evil, but yet men may not belie Gods truth, to make that as a means to amend
that evil; the truth is strong enough of it self, it needs no lying
interpretations upon the Scripture to defend the same.

Every true Church has Christ for the King thereof: Reason, that the Church of
England is a true Church. Page 146. We have Christ for our spiritual King, and
only Lawgiuer.
this is his own Doctrine. But the Church of England has Christ for their
King. First, because by our Doctrines and writings allowed by our Church we
acknowledge no other lawgiver having any authority over our consciences, in
matters of faith and obedience between Christ, and us, but he alone. Let our
authorized writings, our Churches witnesses, for this be examined, and see
whether any doctrine be against it. Secondly in baptism we have made all a
solemn vow to him our Lord and Sovereign herein. Thirdly, because we have
renounced that Antichrist the Pope, and all his usurped Tyranny in this
behalf, as against Christ's prerogative royal herein. Fourthly, because we do
hold his laws the rule of our spiritual life, and as Christians to be subject
to the same, neither are any laws made to bind conscience before God, but for
outward order, peace and unity sake; neither do any out of knowledge
otherwise subject themselves Christ Jesus has manifested his kingly power over
us.
unto them. Fifthly and lastly, because our Savior has manifested his kingly
power over us: first, in subiecting us all in these things now mentioned unto
him: secondly, in subiecting many thousands truly by his word and spirit to
the power of his will, standing members of the Church of England; of which
there have been both public persons, as Bishops, and others also, which did
shed their blood for the Gospel, the scepter of Christ's Kingdom, and such now
still are there ready to die for the Name of the Lord: thirdly, in putting into
the heart of our King, for his heart is in Christ's rule and governance; and
into the hearts of the Nobles, and other, in their great meetings to ordain
Laws against all spiritual power of that Antichrist, who is against Christ:
fourthly, and lastly, in defending us by his great power, not only as he is
God, but as he is the Prince of his people here, defending the Gospel against
the Romish Synagogue, and the conspiracies of the same: and this do we
acknowledge publicly to be done unto us for no other cause, but for his
Gospels sake.

Obeict. But Mr. Ainsworth would not have Christ to be our King. First, because
(says he) we have not Christ's Officers appointed by him to govern us, that
is, Pastors, Teachers and Elders.

Answ. I answer; first, that we have Christ's officers appointed to govern;
the civil Magistrate, the Kings Majesty, the ruling Elder next under Christ in
all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as civil: then have we Ecclesiastical
Governors under him, Bishops, who be also Pastors and Doctors: which
ancient orders be in the East, South, and Latin Churches; where have been and
are, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons: and all these be in the Church of England.
Of the authority, power, and jurisdiction of Bishops, much has been said of
many, and not by these answered, and therefore needless for me to say more,
then before is said already.

Object. Secondly, says he, because we have not the ordinance of Christ
prescribed in the 18. of Matthew, practiced, nor suffered to be practiced.

Answ. For answer to this, remember what is said before.

Object. His third reason is again, for that the wicked men live in the
Church, who are no Subjects of Christ's Kingdom.

Answ. Of this also much is said before: it is only often by him repeated to
fill up room it seems, or else a reason for every thing against us, as he
does make it, but though he repeat it again and again, yet the weight once
felt, it is of no more validity at one time then another, but once answered
well, is ever overthrown.

Object. Lastly (says he) this Church wants the power of Christ against Sin,
Satan, Antichrist.

Answ. I answer, we have spoken, and we still do speak of the Church of
England, and that it wants not the power of Christ; for there is in it the
preaching of the word, which is Christ's power, Romans 1. 18. there is the power
of admonition, suspension, and Excommunication, what is then wanting of Christ's
power? If they mean that it is not in every parish, that is not enough to deny
it to be in the Church of England, in which is comprehended all Parishes, and
all Superior power over these Parishes, in which is this power of Christ. And
therefore the Church is a true Church, having Christ for the head; King,
Priest, and Prophet of the same. And thus much for Mr. Ainsworths reasons
retorted upon him against himself, by which (in page 127. of his book) he
endeavors both weakly and untruly to make our Church a false Church: But
these same are sufficient reasons to maintain, that we are a true Church
doing as we be by law established.

Now I will in like manner deal with Mr. Smiths arguments: Answer to M.
Smiths Arguments, which also are turned against himself.
by which he would prove us to be no true Church, Page 83. He making the
Majors, and assuming negatiuely, and I taking his Majors, such as they be, and
assuming for our selves affirmatively.

The first Argument.
THe true Churches of Christ were established of men, that The first Argument.
did repent and believe, and show their faith by their works, that were Saints,
and faithful visibly, and of these only. Mat. 3. 6 Page 84.
Iam. 2. 18. Romans 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Ephe. 1. 1. Mat. 28. 19. The Propositions
are all M. Smiths.


Observe here how this Proposition is to be understood of a Church in planting,
that is, of a people no Church, who did not profess Christ, but to be a Church
of Christ, and not of a people professing Christ, to be only reformed; and
therefore herein he deals deceitfully, and speaks not of the like case,
playing the Sophister. I have showed how there is a great difference between
the planting and reformation of a Church once planted. Again, there is degrees
of repenting, of faith, and showing forth works, which he does not express,
as had been fitting. None of the Scriptures speak of any Church to be reformed,
but of Churches either in the gathering, as Mat. 3. 6. and 28. 19. or gathered,
as Iam. 2. 18. Romans 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Ephesians. 1. 1. That of James is against him;
for it seems he found fault with such as boasted of Faith, and had no
works; the other show that they were called saints, but how, and wherefore, I
have already showed: so as he alleges them not so fitly as he would make his
credulous Scholars believe, whom he would persuade to hold these seely reasons
to be undeniable Arguments, page 83. yet if this his proposition be good, it is
for us; whence I assume contrary to him.

But the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England were established of such
persons, repentant, believing, showing their works, etc. Ergo, true Churches.

Smith denies the Minor, upon this reason, because at the time of reformation
was, first, compulsion of all sorts: secondly, a mixture of all profane, etc.

men were compelled; I ask by whom? as also whether those that compelled were
not voluntary, and the servants of Christ, or the same, that such as were
compelled by them? By answering hereunto, they shall find her blessed
Majesty, and the compelling number, which were the Church of God, to be
repentant, faithful, and by drawing others to God, after the example of good
Kings, to show their works, to be visible Saints, and Saints only. Secondly,
he confesses that such as were compelled were newly, though hardly drawn
from Antichristianisme, this being true, from his own mouth, that the
compelled were such as had departed from Antichrist newly though hardly, they
were therein partly voluntary, and not wholly compelled, as he would make his
associates believe.

The second Argument.
THe true Churches of the Apostolic institution, consisted The second
Argument. Page 84.
of a people separated from unbelievers, whether Jews, or Pagans, or other. 2
Cor. 6. 17. Reu. 18. 4. Act. 19. 9. and 2. 40. 47. and 5. 13. 1 Timothy 6. 5. If
this proposition be meant of any other instance of time, then in the first
gathering, and the word other, comprehending any other than Jews and Pagans,
and such unbelievers only, I deny it to be true, and the quoted Scriptures
prove it not. Acts 19. 9. is to some purpose, as I have expounded the
proposition, but the rest show not that they did separate, but were exhorted
thereunto: The Separatists conclude that men are so, because they ought to be
so, but very absurdly.
now the exhortation to a thing argues what ought to be done, and shows that
such as be exhorted either do it not, or are slow to it; but is no argument at
all that such do it, or are such persons as they be exhorted to be. Rich men
are exhorted to be rich in good works and ready to distribute. 1. Tim. 6. 18.
Are they therefore so? or may I in defining a rich man set him out by this, and
quote this Scripture to prove it? yet such are his proves, which I wish the
Reader to consider well of. He and the Separatists conclude, and would prove
men and Churches to be so and so; because the Scriptures command, exhort, and
thereby teach, that they ought to be so. Their wits and wills cannot make this
right reasoning. But I assume the Minor.

The Ecclesiastical Assemblies of England consist of such a separated people:
Ergo, true Churches, etc. That we be separate from Jews and Pagans who can
deny? and for Unbelievers to be taken in the new Testament for a people
professing They cannot by Gods word call us unbelievers.
Christ as we do, I challenge all the Brownists in the world to show me that
term or name to be given to such by the holy Ghost. Men in the Church may be
condemned for a measure of unbelief, but yet not called therefore unbelievers;
if such men do profess, as we do in our Church the Lord Jesus, and become not
absolute Apostates from Christ, as at the first they were without Christ, they
are not to be called unbelievers.

Smith Page 84. denies this Minor; first, because the persons which submit to
Antichrist and his Abominations, are in the Lords account equal with Pagans,
etc.

first it must be meant of such as submit to Antichrist so as they acknowledge
him the head, and they members of his body, else not: if out of his forge he
can beat out the contrary with the hammer of the word, I charge him to do it,
else is he herein deceived, and would deceive. Again, if it be so, yet it is
not spoken properly, but figuratively and in respect by way of comparison, as
Esaias 1. 10. If such terms as he does produce them for be given to make such
a people no Church of God, but to be Sodom indeed, and Gomorrah indeed, then
had not the Jews in Esayes time been Gods people, which is contrary to verse
2. 3. where the Prophet in the person of God, calls them his children and
People.

inordinate livers, from persons excommunicated, etc. as 2. Tim. 3. 5. Tit. 1.
16. 2. These. 3. 6. 1. Cor. 5. 11.

first, that here he concludes, as before, it ought to be so: Ergo, it is so;
which is very absurd reasoning, and very false. Secondly, this is to be
understood of a private separation, but not of a Schismatic dividing of men's
selves from the body of the whole Assembly, as he intends hereby, and is the
matter in question.

The third Argument.
THe true Churches of the Apostolic institution were by The third Argument.
Page 84.
Baptism gathered into the Covenant or new Testament of Christ. Mat. 21. 19.
20. Acts. 19. 4. 5. and 10. 48. Mat. 18. 20.

Here note, that he says not, baptized into the name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, after the words of Christ's institution: Mat. 28. 19. for he used
not these words in his new baptising, so some have testified: thus dare he
alter Alex. Hom. Iam Wh.
laws and ordinances, an intolerable audaciousnesse against God, the practice
of Gods Church, and the words of the Institution. The place Mat. 18. 20. is
idle here, and nothing to the purpose, but to fill up spare room. But I assume:

The Ecclesiastical Assemblies of England were by Baptism gathered into the
Covenant or new Testament of Christ: First, they were and are all therein
Baptized: and secondly, their Baptism is received as the seal of the
Covenant, or new Testament: thirdly, at Baptism there is a repetition of the
Covenant, exhortations to embrace it, and profession made of Faith therein
before any be baptized: see for the truth hereof the practice of our Church in
the Book of Common Prayer. Ergo, the Ecclesiastical Assemblies are true
Churches, etc.

Mr. Smith denies this Minor, and says, and only says, (for he proves not
that which he says, to overthrow the same) that the Apostles, did baptize
indefinitely into the whole new Testament of Christ: but our Assemblies (he
says) do not profess the true Faith of Christ: and are therefore not
baptized into the new Testament of Christ indefinitely, etc. This he does but
affirm of his bare word, which I deny, and our profession and practice cries
shame upon his impudent belying of us herein. In the order of our
administration, I demand of him, either in the exhortations, or in the prayers,
or in the words of the Institution, or in the answers made; what one restraint
is made of the Covenant, whereby it may appear that we baptize any
respectively? this ought he to have showed, and if he had been able he so would
have done; till he do it, he is to be herein held as notorious a Sclanderer,
and deprauer of Gods Church, as any enemy of our Christian profession
whosoever.

The fourth Argument.
THe true Churches of the Apostolic Institution, had The fourth Argument.
Page 85.
Christ's power Ministerial in the body of the church. This proposition, he
says, he has confirmed before; and I say, I have answered the same before,
and have by many reasons manifested the falsehood thereof, that Christ Jesus,
nor his Apostles, ever established any popular government in the church. His
assumption therefore I grant as for us, and so this his fourth Argument must be
forged a new, to make his conclusion follow, as a truth. To let this fourth
Argument go therefore; I thus frame for us a fourth reason in the room
thereof.

All the churches after the Apostolical Institution, had the Ministerial power
of Christ in certain principal members. The Church of England has so. Ergo,
the Church of England is after the Apostolical institution. He grants the
Minor, Page 86. the Mayor is manifested before, in answer to this proposition
of the fourth Argument in his defense of popular Government; against which,
this Argument may be made. The true churches of the Apostolic Institution,
had not Christ's power ministerial in the body of the Church. For it was first
in the Apostles, they did commit it to the Evangelists in their absence, and
where no Who had authority over Churches in the Primative time: see Doctor
Field 5. book chap. 22. and 25.
Evangelist was left, they committed it to the Elders, who were elected out of
the people, and ordained by the Apostles, to rule and ouersee the flocks. That
the Apostles had authority over churches, it is evident enough; first, by
their planting of them, 1 Cor. 3. 6. secondly, by being Fathers, begetting
them, 1 Cor. 4. 15. 9. and 2. thirdly, by propounding causes, ordering, and
perfecting of them, 1. Cor. 11. 2. 34. Act. 1. 15. and 6. 2. 6. and 15. 13. 22.
fourthly, by the Apostle determining a cause, and inflicting punishment
himself upon transgressors. 1 Timothy 1. 20. 1 Cor. 5. 3. fifthly, by the
Apostles appointing some over Churches, 1 Timothy 1. 3. Tit. 1. 5. The Evangelists
had authority over churches; for they received that authority not from the
Churches, but from the Apostles, 1 Timothy 1. 3. Tit. 1. 5. as the Apostles did
receive theirs from Christ, and not from man, Gal. 1. 1. And they had power
committed to them by plain precepts to their own persons, without mentioning
any Coadiutours, 1 Timothy 1. 18. and 3. 15. and 5. 21. 22. and 6. 14. Tit. 1. 5.
The Elders had authority over the churches, for they received their ordination
and placing in the Churches, from the Apostles, and Evangelists, with the
Churches consent. Act. 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. The Apostles do call them, and give
them a charge to see to the Church, and to govern the same, Act. 20. 17. 28.
and this was done without mentioning any power to be in the people, the
multitude: and this is the universal opinion of all Churches, and the practice
of both Greek and Latin Churches, unreformed, and Reformed.

But the Anabaptisticall Assembly of Mr. Smith, has Christ's ministerial power
(if it be that power) in the body of the church. Ergo, the Anabaptisticall
Assembly of Mr. Smith, is not of the Apostolical constitution.

The fifth Argument.
THe true Church of the primitive Institution Apostolical, The fifth Argument.
Page 87.
had Christ Jesus for their Mediator; that is, their King, Priest and Prophet,
1 Timothy 2. 5. Heb. 9. 15. Gal. 3. 15. 16. Ioh. 17. 9.

The Ecclesiastical Assemblies of England have Jesus Christ, for their
Mediator, that is, their King, Priest and Prophet. Ergo, true Churches, etc.

Mr. Smith denies the Minor, upon the same Reasons that Mr. Ainsworth before
has done, from whom it seems he had them; but I have in my answer to Mr.
Ainsworth, both defended this Minor in the particulars, and made a Reply to
what he says to the contrary; which may suffice, as an Answer to Mr. Smith
also.

The sixth Argument.
THe true Church of the Apostolic Institution has The sixth Argument. Page 87.
Christ for the Head, and is a true body unto the true head Christ, truly
united by the spirit of Christ. Ephesians. 1. 22. 23. 1 Cor. 12. 27. Gal. 3. 16.
Ephesians. 5. 23. Understand Reader, that we dispute of the visible church, and not
of the invisible: speaking of the visible Church. First, the scriptures are not
well alleged, being understood of the invisible Church properly. Secondly, the
proposition it self is false, being understood of every particular Church, and
every particular member of the same: for first, these words, truly united by
the spirit of Christ, are to be understood only of the Elect: secondly, they
do seclude out of the Church secret hypocrites; for they are not truly united
to Christ: thirdly, it makes the Churches Apostolical not to have Christ
their head, etc. even Corinth, and the Churches in Asia, of whom John Revel. 2.
and 3.
speaks, which had in them such as had the spirit of Satan, whereof the
Apostle says, 2 Timothy 1. 15. that all they which were in Asia were turned from
him; which does not befall such as be truly united unto Christ: fourthly,
particular 1 Cor. 12. 27.
Churches are not the body of Christ, but members of his A particular Church
is but a member of the whole.
body, and that not by the spirit, as the company of the Elect be, but by an
outward profession of their Faith, and representatiuely; because who so joins
to one particular true Church, as to the Church of Christ, does so adioyne
himself to all. For otherwise, if every particular Church were the true body
of Christ, then had Christ many bodies; one head should be to many bodies: then
also every particular Church should abide with Christ, and never fall away; in
it there should be no Hipocrites, no Reprobates, because in Christ's true body,
there be none such: and therefore in this proposition he is in doubtful
terms deceitful, and in the matter understood after the question erroneous,
if not Heretical. But expounding it thus, to wit, that a particular Church,
first, has Christ for the head, as men do receive common graces from him, and
as the whole is taken Synechdochically How a particular church may be judged
the body of Christ.
for some, who in the rule of Charity are by their fruits to be judged elect:
secondly, that it is his body, first, in profession of faith, secondly
representatiuely, as setting forth to others the whole Church, by holding with
it the same God, Word, Faith, Profession, Doctrine and Sacraments, whereby thus
I say, expounding it, I do assume that:

The Ecclesiastical assemblies of England have Christ for the head, and are
his true body, united by the spirit of Christ. And therefore true according to
the Apostolical constitution.

I have before proved that the Church of England has Christ for the head: and
if he be the head, it is his body, which has received many gifts of the
spirit, and in it are many visibly, who do truly seek God, and do
voluntarily serve him; which he, page 87. cannot deny, though else where is
plainly of another mind respectively. And thus much for the insufficiency of
his Arguments against us, and the same made good for our selves, and that very
justly against him.

The Church which Reason that the Church of England is a true Church.
has true matter, form and properties of a true Church, that is a true
Church. This will not be denied.

But the Church of England has true matter, form and properties of a true
church. Therefore is it a true Church.

minor I have already proved in my former book. First, because we have a
true and no false head. Now a true head cannot be conjoined to false members of
Christ, but to true members, which are the matter of the Church.

M. Ainsworth to this says, that Jeroboam might so have Page 181. Objection.
pleaded for himself and his people.

Jeroboam with his Calves, and we do that abhor such detestable Idolatry, to
that people, I leave unto any understanding Reader to judge; and do refer
the Reader to a further answer to this afterward, made to M. Smith, obiecting
the same.

Smith he says, that we have a false head: which he would prove by saying
fantastically, from a fantastical spirit, that we do worship God in a
fantastical Christ, etc.

Jews who hate him, against Turks who do debase him under cursed Mahomet,
and against Papists, who do deprive him of his glory herein many ways; and
lastly, how we against all other Heretics do maintain the holy Truth of
this second person our Savior, the English Confession The harmony of
Confession.
agreeing herein with all other Churches does manifest the same, and not
hitherto has it ben taxed of any learned men, or found fault with by any
Church of Christ in this point, that so now these fantastical spirits should
judge us to be worshippers of any fantastical Christ.

we be either true matter, false matter, or no matter: but first we are not no
matter; for such are they which make no profession of Christ at all: as Jews,
Turks, and other Pagans, Assemblyes of Rebels against Christ, and no Churches
of God at all. Secondly, we are not false matter; for if any may be so
termed, this matter be the Papists, who sit in the Temple of God and do
endeavor to undermine it; they be the Anti-christians, for Christ in mere
Profession, but against Christ in very fundamental Doctrines, as the
controversies between us and them do declare. Now from them are we departed
so far, as the Reformed Churches do hold us a true Church, and the Romish
Synagogue condemns us for Heretics. Therefore, being neither no matter, nor
false matter, we be true matter.

true matter are all such as are baptized, and openly profess, that Jesus the
Son of Mary, is the Son of God, made Christ the Lord, by whom only and
alone is salvation: that this is true matter, I do thus manifest it.

First, because it was the principal doctrine which the Proofs of this Reason.
Apostles taught to gather a people to God. Acts. 2. 36. and 9. 20. and 10. 42.
and 19. 4. 5. and 18. 28. Luke. 24. 47. 1. Cor. 15. 3. and 3. 11. Secondly,
because such as did make this profession were judged by the Apostles, and
Apostolical men, worthy to be admitted into the Church, as fit matter of it.
Acts. 8. 37. and 16. 31. 33. Thirdly, because it is the sum of the whole
Gospel, and Covenant in the new Testament, in respect whereof, there is no
other point of Religion necessary, but as it tends either to bring men unto,
or to confirm them in this maine truth. Hence it is, that S. John concludes
his Gospel with this scope. Ioh. 20. 31. this is that Corner stone laid, to
which all must be coupled, and on whom all other doctrines must be built. Ephesians.
2. 20. And therefore sithen such as do profess this truth do summarily and
in general profess all the Evangelical doctrines in Gods Book, such must
needs be fit matter of the Church.

Ainsworth does grant these, as truths of God: for he does pass them over
without gainsaying any thing. But Mr. Smith, who will deny any thing, denies
this before set down, to be the sum of the Gospel: and why forsooth?
because (says he) the sum of the Gospel is this; that Jesus Christ the
Son of God, and the Son of Mary, is the only King, Priest and Prophet to
his church* governing, sacrificing, making intercession and Prophesying after
that holy manner, and according to those rules which he has prescribed in his
Testament.

Sum of the Gospel, that is, a short Compendium of all that which is
comprehended in the Gospel, and in few words so contained, as all in the
Gospel may be brought unto the same. Now what says he, which is not briefly
comprehended under the name of Christ, by which is signified his offices, of a
King, Priest and Prophet? so as he says no more in sum then I have said,
and therefore herein he shows both a spirit of contradiction, which is his
nature, and therein obstinately grown by the work of Satan, and also great
folly in adding these words; after that holy manner, and according to those
rules, which he has prescribed in his Testament, except he understand them,
as prescribed to us, that we might believe. For if he mean the government of
Christ, his sacrificing, intercession, and prophesying in his own person, and
his holy spirit, then this prescribed order after the rules in the new
Testament, is not a binding of Christ to literal rules as men be, but only an
informing of our judgment, how by faith we may apprehend Christ's holy
performance of these things. But if he understand within these offices of
Christ, the outward government, sacrifices, intercessions, and Prophecyings of
the visible Church, as by all likelihood he does, for he does add these
words, to bring into the sum of the Gospel the visible Church practices,
then belike Christ must not be believed to govern, sacrifice, pray and
prophecy by his spirit, except the same be performed in the visible Church:
thus he binds the performance of Christ's offices to the external actions of
men. Again none then do believe and hold the sum of the Gospel, except he
know and hold how the Churches of Christ visibly is governed, how sacrifices,
prayers, and prophecyes are to be performed* oh the wickedness of man! what
will not an Heretical spirit peruersely bent, teach, to have his own will!
But I assume:

The members of the church of England are baptized, and do openly profess this
sum of the Gospel: Therefore they be true matter of the church of Christ.
The Minor is true: first, The sum of the Gospel professed of all.
by the doctrine of the Church: secondly, it is publicly preached: thirdly, it
is by Laws maintained: fourthly, by none, as he stands by Law a member of the
Church, opposed: fifthly, by the blood of Martyrs confirmed: sixthly, in Schools
defended: seauenthly, in it Children are catechized, and so is universally
professed.

Ainsworth answers, first, that it is not rightly and Page 182.
truly professed, though it be professed.

I answer, that it is rightly and truly professed according to the doctrine
and the faith of our Church, which all do profess according to their measure
of knowledge.

yet it proves not all the Church to be true matter of Christ's church, except
they all make the like profession.

alike profess the same: and this he would prove because many are wicked and
ignorant: so then, because all do not alike practice, and because all have not
the like measure of knowledge, therefore he concludes, that all do not alike
profess, and therefore the Churches doctrine, the preaching of the word, the
wholesome Laws of Magistrates, and the sound knowledge in this, in many
thousand particular persons, must all be as nothing, because others are not as
they be: how his Brownisticall Divinity can prove these things I see not; till
he do it, his deriding of my thus reasoning Page 183.
from these seven things before mentioned, may be turned upon himself as his
own folly does deserve.

In the mean space, I do avouch: First, that all that be In what respects we
all do make a like profession.
by Law, members of the Church of England, do make a like profession in these
respects; first, because they do stand members and so by law are in the same
profession, which the law does maintain: secondly, in as much as this point is
not contradicted of any: thirdly, in that the most ignorant, or profane being
in particular informed, and demanded how they believe in this point, they will,
and by experience it is found, they do acknowledge this whole truth; the sum
of the Gospel mentioned: fourthly, In that their voices be in all the laws, as
Ministers and people do consent to chose some for them, one in one place, and
an other in an other, for the Constitutions and Acts decreed upon, not against
the word of God: fifthly, by the hearing of this truth published and preached:
and sixthly, by all offering their children unto Baptism, and all receiving the
Lords Supper, the seals of this truth and sum of the Gospel: and thus do
all make a like profession.

Secondly, I say, that the general profession of this truth, after this
manner, in these six things, makes such as be in many things ignorant, to be
true matter in that Church; so it be, that there be withal other who in
judgment and conscience intertaine the maine truths of God from the beginning:
for we must know, first, that the How a people are a true Church, though
wicked men do arise up among them after the first constitution. 1. Cor. 1.
Reu. 2.
Church takes her name of the first beginners, Act. 2. 47. in which place, by
church is meant such as our Savior left behind him, and are numbered, chap. 1.
15. secondly, that that Church never loses the name of a church, so long as
such do continue, or the like do arise in their steed by a continual
succession, though in time wicked ones do arise up among them. Thus Corinth,
and the Churches in Asia, held the name of the Church, because there were such
as did maintain the truth first published and received. Now the late Queen
with many other, did voluntarily begin reformation, they of knowledge professed
this truth, and many of them suffered for it, against Popery; let this man
tell me whether they were to be accounted Gods people? If he say yea,
considered by themselves, then say I, the same truth in the same degree
hitherto maintained, makes such still to the true people of God; and for the
mixture of others arising in the Church, let him, if he and all his can, prove
that the Church so cease to be a Church, and the good nothing to be esteemed,
because of the bad among them: thirdly, I say, that the better part gives the
name of the whole, though the same be fewer in number by many; thus Sardis is
called a Church, for the few names Reave. 3. 4.
there: fourthly, I say, if by a like Profession he mean (for the word is
ambiguous) either; first, a like in particular knowledge How many ways the
word ( alike) is to be taken.
of all maine points distinctly, then he thrusts out the two Disciples going
to Luke 24.
Emaus, and Thomas, for their not believing a special maine truth, for a time
to be no true matter. So many in Esa. 1. 3. and 5. 13. John 7. 49. John 3.
Esai his time, who speaks generally Alike in profession.
as of all, for the general ignorance of most among them: by this his reason,
the common people had not been of the Church of God, they were so ignorant of
the Law; yea, Nichodemus had not been a true member of the Jewish Church: but
all this is most false, therefore though some be not like other in particular
knowledge, yet may they be true matter: or secondly, a like in quality, that
is, one A like in quality.
to profess, as truly and as sincerely as another, then hypocrites before
men, are hereby thrust out of the Church, as no true visible matter; the
contrary is manifest in Judas, admitted by Christ; in Simon Magus, admitted by
Peter, and by Demas, commended by Saint Paul: or else thirdly, a A like in
degree.
like in degree of grace, then he condemns all for false matter, who are not
alike bold with Peter; a like learned and painful with Paul; a like
Prophetically inspired with Saint John; a like devout with Annah; a like holy
in conversation with Zachary and Elizabeth: then had those whom Saint Paul
reprooueth, 2 Cor. 12. 20. 21. been false matter of the Church at Corinth, and
such as Esai and other reprove, false matter of the church of the Jews; all
which is untrue: no place once affording the very least conceit hereof. Let him
therefore the next time show what he means by the like Prof^ssion differing
from these three, and show how any with us so differ, and that all for the same
are no true matter of Christ's Church: fifthly, and lastly, I say, that the
general profession of this truth, makes such a one true matter, though he be
ignorant, and withal disorderly. For True matter twofold.
we must know that true matter is twofold; good matter, and bad matter; as
Timber and stone is true matter for building, yet not all Timber and stone good
matter; so a woman lawfully married is a true wife, but every true wife is not
a good wife: so every subject, though a true subject, yet may not be a good
subject: these with other are at large set down in my former Book, page 115.
And thus is it with the matter of the Church, every one which professes and
holds this maine Truth and Sum of the Gospel, is to be admitted as true
matter into the Church, as the Eunuch was, and if he may be admitted, then
being Acts 8.
already in the Church holding that profession, he is to be judged true matter
of the Church, though of ill conversation, but thereby not true and good, but
true and bad matter. Hence it is that in 1 Cor. 5. 11. 2 These. 3. 15. warning
is given to take heed of some for their bad conversation, yet are they then
called brethren: if any that is called a brother, 1 Cor. 5. 11. admonish him as
a brother, 2 These. 3. 15. by giving them terms of brethren, he teaches that
they be not to be held no Christians, or false Christians, but by their
conversation bad Christians, and so as ill livers not to be approved, but not
as enemies to be rejected, 2 These. 3. 15. And the Apostle writing to a mixed
company at Corinth, calls them all Saints by calling, that is, in that they
were added by a visible profession to the Church (for many are only called,
but few are chosen, Mat. 22. 14.) and never makes exception of the evil
livers, as false matter among them, though after he reprove them, as unworthy
matter for their ill conversation.

To this distinction of matter Mr. Ainsworth says nothing, but carpeth at the
setting down of false matter; his words are not worth the rehearsing, Page
182. M. Smith, he yields this distinction, and denies nothing of all I have
said, but only that I set not down the sum of the Gospel, to which I have
made answer. And thus have I showed, that we be true matter of Christ's Church.

We have the true form of the true Church.
we have the form of a true Church. That the true form makes a Church to be
a true Church, will not be denied. Now that we have the form of Christ's true
Church, thus I prove.

First, by one of Master Smiths own Arguments, be it weak or strong, Page
115. They that are the true matter of the Church of the new Testament, have the
true form. This is his own. But we are such true matter, as I have proved.
Ergo, we have the true form, being united together; for so is the proposition
to be understood.

Secondly, I prove it thus, If God has visibly couenanted with us to take us
in Christ for his people, and we so again to take him by Christ for our God,
then have we the form of a true Church. For this couenanting mutually does
give a being unto a people to be Gods people, Deu. 29. 12. 13. This is the
Lords setting up of a people to be his people, and the peoples setting up of
the Lord to be their God: as Moses speaks. Deu. 26. 17. 18.


Now in the Lords doing of this; first, he gives them How God makes a people
his people.
his word, which is 1. his ordinance to make men his people, Mat. 28. 19. Mar.
16. 16. 2. His power to subdue them, Romans 1 16. 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5. Heb. 4. 12. 3.
It is his means of reconciling a people. 2 Cor. 5. 20. 4. It is that by which
he extolt a people above other. Psalm. 147. 19 Romans 3. 1. 2. and thereby as it
were they be set a part and sanctified unto God to be his people. Secondly,
this word ordinarily he sends by men who are hereto ordained, Mat. 10. and 28.
19. Ephe. 4. 11. 12. and these be called his Ambassadors 2 Cor. 5. 20. who do
bring men unto God by that word; so we see did the Apostles, Acts. 2. 3. etc.
Thirdly, with this word he adds seals to confirm his Covenant: thus did
he in taking to him Abraham, Genesis 17. 1. 10. he gave him his word, and the
seal to confirm it. So had Noah before him, Genesis 9. 1. 8. 12. So Adam and Eve
before all, a word and seals, Genesis 2. 16. 17. So to the Israelites coming out
of Egypt, he gave them his word by Moses, and seals to confirm the same,
which is well known. And as in the old Testament, so in the new, a Word, and
Sacraments. Mat. 3. 3. 6. Mat. 28. 19. Acts. 2. 14. 38. and 8. 35. 38. and 10.
48. And thus are a people set up of the Lord to be his people: and in these
three things only do stand Gods visible act in choosing for his part a people
to be his: respecting no goodness in them, but choosing them of his love and
mercy. Deu. 7. 7. 8. and 9. 5. John. 15. 16.

Here note, that God does thus make a people his who were not his before
visibly; but to recover his people fallen How the Lord reformeth his people.
from him, and to hold them still with him, he then reformeth them, and
brings them back chiefly by the power of Authority; so did he bringthe
Israelites back again to Gods worship by valiant Captains, after the people
had fallen by Idolatry: for they fell from Gods true worship: Judge. 2. 11. 12.
then the Lord punished them: verse. 14. then when they cried, chap. 3. 9 the
Lord raised up Judges and delivered them, Judge. 2. 16. and while such Judges
did live, they did continue in the true worship. verse 19 So did Iehosaphat
bring the people to the Lord again: 2. Chron. 19. so did Hezechias and Josias.
And thus does God make and continue a people his people. But I assume this
first part of the Consequence:

God has visibly couenanted with us to make us his people. God has made us
his people so as he has made others.
First, he has given us his word, which was in the first conversion of this
people to Christ, his powerful hand. Secondly, he sent it by his servants
whosoever they were, that brought this Nation first to the Christian Faith.
Thirdly, he gave withal the holy Sacraments, so as then hereby the Lord for
his part made us his people, by the self same means that he ever made any
other to be his.

Object. But we fell after.

An. True, so did the Israelits as is declared: but God has brought us again
by such blessed means as is before showed at large, after the like manner, as
he brought his people from Idolatry and bodily misery withal. And therefore,
if thus God couenanted with others, he has also so couenanted with us.

Now see also how a people do covenant with the Lord, How a people do make
God their God.
visibly to take him to be their God, as Judah did. 2. King. 11. 17. First, it
stands in an outward hearing such as preach Christ, and an outward profession
of faith to that word preached, and especially to the sum of the Gospel, in
what degree of knowledge soever: for as inwardly the word written in the heart
by the spirit, and believed by a true sanctifying faith is a true couenanting
of God and the Elect, and is the form of the invisible Church: even so
outwardly Gods minister Romans 10. 9. 10.
preaching to the ear and we hearing it, and professing faith unto it, it is a
visible couenanting with God. Thus is the receiving of the word mentioned,
Acts. 2. 41. 1 Cor. 15. 1. and the Eunuchs hearing of Philip, and his
profession of Faith to that he heard, held his couenanting with God, so that
he had the seal set thereunto for confirmation. Secondly, it stands in
receiving of the Sacraments; first, of Baptism, by which visibly, the
forgiveness of our sins is sealed unto us. Acts. 2. 38. by which visibly we
are buried with Christ: Col. 2. 12. have put on Christ: Gal. 3. 27. are saved
by it: 1. Pet. 3. 21. secondly, of the Lords Supper, whereby we are together
one body. 1 Cor. 10. 16. And thus do people according to the Scripture visibly
set up God to be their God and have couenanted so with him.



Obedience a fruit of the couenan^.
as a fruit thereof: for God covenants with us to make us good, and we
covenant with him to become good, not that either before, or in the Covenant
we be actually good. Deuteronomy. 26. 17. 18.
Our visible Covenant is in words, our performance of particulars in act
follows afterward: yet thus far an actual obedience is even at the Covenant
making; to wit, an outward attention to that word, which we profess to
believe, and a receiving of Baptism, if then it be offered: I speak of
Christians newly converted to the profession of Christian Personal offenses do
not argue no Covenant.
faith. Secondly, I deny that want of future obedience in personal
transgessions does argue that no Covenant has been made, or then to be
disanulled: if so be, first, that the fundamental points of the Covenant be
held by us, that is, that we do profess him our God and no other; hold his
Word to be our rule and none other; his Sacraments to be the seals and none
other: for in these three is the foundation of the Covenant, the persons one
and the same, In what does the foundation of the Covenant stand.
the writings one and the same, the Seals one and the same: this binds each
party to other, to perform the particulars of the Covenant thus made, and the
party offending in some things for matter of fact, not disanulling any of
these three, is only liable to reproof, and punishment, but yet the Covenant
does stand firm. A man and a woman do covenant together lawfully in marriage,
the word of mutual promise passes solemnly between them to perform mutual
duties, and the man gives a token to confirm the profession of his love and
truth therein, which she receives: now she after is a very disobedient wife,
and breaks the particulars of the Covenant; but herein is she just, she
holds none other her husband; she stands unto the general Covenant, and she
keeps the token thereof: Though she be disobedient otherwise in many things,
yet is there a Covenant made and remains, so as yet there is true man and
wife. And thus is it with his Church, as the example of the Israelites does
show; of whom it is said, that they were a stiff-necked people, Deuteronomy. 9. 6.
who often provoked God to anger. Psalm. 95. and always resisted the holy Ghost:
Acts 7. 51. yet had they couenanted with God, as Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Moses tells
them. Secondly, if the Lord on his part break not, the covenant holds: for
though the Lord complain that Israel had broken Covenant, yet were they for
all that his people, until he cast them off and chose another to serve him. It
cannot be proved therefore that a people have not couenanted with God because
of their personal evils in the Church; nor that therefore they be none of the
Lords people, except it can be also proved, that God has cast them of, and
chosen others. Now also I assume the latter part of the Consequence, which is
this:

We have visibly couenanted with God to have him for our We have taken God to
be our God.
God. We do hear the word preached, we do profess faith to that word, we
entertain it, as Gods word; and we do receive the Sacraments; our words,
writings, and practice show this to be true. And therefore if these have made
other people to be in covenant with God, then the same do so make us in
covenant with God. And therefore also have we the form of a true Church.

Mr. Ainsworths answer is one, and the same threadbare Page 184.
Objections often repeated, and answered by me; that we were compelled, that
many are profane, etc. But I have answered before to such frivolous Objections,
as not of force to prove that either we never did covenant, or that if we have,
it is thereby dissolved: I leave him these two to prove, and to answer what I
say to the contrary.

Smiths answer is, that the Papists have the word Page 89.
and the Sacraments, and says, we are inferior to many of them in profession
and practice.

in our state; yea, and in Profession (a thing never heard to be uttered of any
but Antichristians themselves) to be better then we?

Properties of a true Church.
we have the true properties of a true Church. The first is, if it were a
property, for here I take Mr. Smiths devised property for one (because he
esteems so of it, as all the rest are with him nothing without it,) which is,
the interest and title to all the holy things of God. If this be a property,
Page 90.
yet we have it, for (says he) else where, the true property Page 115.
arises from the union of the matter and form: Now we have true matter and
form, as is proved; and therefore also this Mr. Smiths property of a true
Church, which he makes the master property, to which all other are
underlings. This he makes a chief and first property, that so he hereupon
may with two or three out-runners make a separation from among Gods people
Schismatically, to take authority to themselves to do any thing in the
Church, which he calls in page 114. 115. assuming the new Testament,
assuming the Ministry, assuming all the means of their edification to
Salvation: this makes two or three Straglers, to hold themselves a Church
forsooth, to take upon them to expound the Scriptures, to make a Minister, to
censure and Excommunicate, and to do what their barraine brains, shall by the
supposed motion of the spirit fantastically lead them unto. The misled I
pity, but the leaders are worthy of that they deserve.

He has taught them to assume so fast as he has made M. Smiths Assumptions
has brought his followers into Consumptions.
many very Asses, in consuming their estates in following him so variable a
Changeling, who as Mr. Ainsworth says, in three sundry books, has showed
himself to be of three several religions.

If this which he calls a property, were a property, Preface of his book
against Mr. Smith.
yet we have it, if true matter and form may produce it. But because he
notoriously beguileth herewith the people, let them know, and he also for his
learning, who thus speaks to other, as setting all to School, that this
which he calls a property, is not a property, but a Difference between a
Privilege and a Property, they be not one: It is a property of the wicked to
do wickedly, but it is no privilege.
privilege; the difference whereof is, that an essential property arises
from within, but a privilege from without: the one, to wit, the property
essential, makes to the being of the Church, the other to the well being, but
not simply to make it to be: of the one there can be no want, of the other
there may be visibly. To make this plain, take the similitude of a man and
wife, used (as I have showed before) by the Holy Ghost often in the Scripture:
the properties of a wife is, first, to hold only such a one for her husband,
whom she has chosen: secondly, to keep to the words of the covenant, by which
she was and is tied to that husband. These two are essential properties, by
which she is a wife, and and without which she is no wife: there be other
properties also, as obedience, and care for her husbands well fare, with other
more; but if she fail in these, yet is she a wife, so long as in the other
she remains constant. Now the privilege of the wife, is to have interest,
and title in her husband, to assume (to speak as Mr. Smith does speak in his
diuinicall Dialect) his body for her use, and to have also interest and title
into all that which he has, All which though she has right unto as a wife,
and thereby has a better being for a wife, more joyfully and comfortably to
live; yet these things not being the wives properties, but such things as be of
the benefit of the Covenant and should come from the husband, by him to be
performed, and for the bettering of her estate, to be granted unto her; though
she be deprived of all these in respect of use (for she cannot be deprived of
the right unto the same, in respect of his promise) yet is she a wife: even so
is the Church, whose properties are:

The first property is, to hold out to profess the person couenanted The
first essential property of a true Church.
with; that is, the true God of Israel, even Christ Jesus, who has taken her
unto himself, to be her King, her Priest, and her Prophet; this property our
Church has, as is proved by particulars before: and this is an absolute
essential property, without which she is no Church, the change of the person
disanuls on her part the Covenant utterly: which is when others are served and
worshipped with the honor due unto him. Deuteronomy. 29. 25. 26. this is called a
forsaking of the Lord, Judge. 2. 13. Ier. 16 11. and 2. 11. 13. 2 Chronicles. 24.
verse 20. with 18. 1 Kings 18. 18. and 14. 9. and 9. 9. Deuteronomy. 32. 15. 17. and
31. 16. 20. And also whoredom, the breach of spiritual wedlock. Osea. 4. 12.
13. 17. Judge. 8. 32. Hence it may appear whether the Papists Church have not
forsaken God, and whether they do lie in spiritual whoredom or no: by
worshipping Angels they hold not Christ the Head. Col. 2. 19. by worshipping
the true God in Images, or under visible forms of God, that is, by any
representation to the eye, for God cannot be represented, it is to cast off
God, and to make other Gods. 1. Kings. 14. 9. whose whoredom Osea does set
out, as if he had been sent unto them, chap. 4. 12. 13. 14. 17. And therefore
these men cannot say that the Papists do profess the person of Christ to be
their King, Priest, and Prophet, as we do, who have made an exchange as we
see, and do make men Priests and sacrificers to God for them, and dead men,
called their Saints, Intercessours; in all which as in other particulars more
they renounce Christ: all which our Church does condemn, and is altogether
free from in doctrine and practice.

The second Property is, to hold the words of the covenant, The second
Property
that is, to profess that the written word of God by his Prophets and
Apostles, is only the words of her Lords covenant, as the bond of his
promises, and her faith, and also the only and sole rule of her obedience. In
which Scriptures she only shall find Christ, Ioh. 5. 39. above which she may
not presume, 1 Cor. 4. 6. neither adding too, nor taking from the same, as the
first Prophet and writer, and the last Apostle and last writer, and one
between, as it were in the midst, do give all warning of. Moses, Deu. 4. 2.
and 12. 32. Solomon, Pro. 30. 6. and John, Reu. 22. 18. Now this is also a
property essential to hold the true words of the covenant, which binds each
party on either side, that have made a covenant. God is no way a God in Christ
unto a people A prevention.
to make them his Church visibly, neither does covenant with them so to be, but
as he does give them his word, to beget them, and to witness to them the
same. And therefore the word of God is called Gods covenant, Leu. 2. 13. Deu.
29. 1. Exodus 6. 4. Leu. 25. 25. 42. Ier. 11. 2. This can they not say that the
Papists do; for they do hold an other word then Gods word, to be the words of
the Covenant; to wit, Traditions, the supposed unerring voice of the Church;
when as the words of the Covenant are only Gods words. God first offers
himself unto us, he only makes the writing of the Covenant, man does not
meddle with the inditing thereof, the Church is only to consent thereunto, as
the truth of God, the ground of faith, and rule of obedience, and so receive it
at him. The Papists therefore by their traditions and unwritten verities, as
they call them, and by their imagined unerring Ecclesiastical constitution,
imposed as truths of God, grounds of faith, and rules of spiritual obedience,
do interline the Lords covenant, and add a new word thereunto, contrary to
his will, and so do make the commandments, that is, the words of the covenant
of none effect by their traditions, Mat. 15. 3. So do they go also a whoring
after their own inventions, as the Psalmist says; and in not keeping to the
Lords Psalm. 106.
commandments, have turned away from him. Now our King. 9. 6.
Church holds to the covenant, for we do hold no words to be the words of
the covenant, but the words of God, written in the holy Scriptures, by the
Prophets and Apostles: for this see our book of Artilces, our book of
Controversies against the Papists in this point, allowed by public authority.

The third property is, to maintain the publication of this The third
property.
Covenant, by the reading of it in her Assemblies, and by the interpretation
thereof, to which she does attend: by this the Church is kept in visibilitie,
and is set as it were on a hill; by this means wisdom cries in the
streets, and calls her lovers and friends to come unto her: by this her
Lords banners are displayed, and trumpets sounded to gather the Lords host
together, to march all under his colors: by this is held out his Scepter, that
all may know under whose government they be. And this is a true and essential
property of the Church visibly seen, by which it is set forth, Ioh. 10. 27.
and wherein she does continue. Acts. 2. 42. 1 Cor. 15. 1. Which property of
so meeting together being lost, she Note here then what an evil men of place
commit, who neglect the public Assemblies by staying at home: and whether this
be a sin in the Ministers, who then teach privately, it is to be considered of,
especially in an orderly estate of an established church inhibiting the same.
cease to be a visible Church, and is but as a scattered flock, sheep
wandering without a shepherd. Now this property has our Church, which is
gathered together in many Assemblyes, where the words of the Covenant are read,
and the same in many places interpreted unto them. We have no Papistical lying
legend, or other humane trash in an unknown tongue, for the Church comes to
the Law and to the Covenant, which is only written in the words of God, and
not of man.

And thus we do see the maine and essential properties visible, by which it
is a Church, and also visible and open to the eye of all: the want of the two
first makes it no church; the want of this third no visible Congregation. And
where these be, there is a true visible Church. To use the Sacraments, to pray,
and to have care one for and over another, are duties of the Church; but yet
because the Church may be a true church Of the use of the Sacraments
without the use of the Sacraments for some long time, as the Church of Israel
was for many years, so it be not done of any careless neglect or contempt:
and for that such as be either no church of God at all, or an Antichristian
Assembly, may have and usurp the seals put to a blancke, as Ismael and Esau
out of the Church had Circumcision, as Turks now have, and the Papists,
Baptism: I have not set it down to be so essential to the being of the
Church, and the visibilitie Of Prayer.
thereof as the other. For Prayer I confess it also to be the property of the
Church. Acts. 2. 42. and 4. 24. and 20. 36. by which Gods worship and his
Church are Synecdochically set forth. Genesis 4. 26. Acts. 9. 14. 1 Cor. 1. 2. And
they be called the wicked which call not upon God. Psalm. 14. yet because it is
only the effect of the Covenant, the fruit of faith after the Covenant be
made, and a holy means to sanctify our profession, and the use of holy
things, but yet not primarily of the essential being of the Church; either to
be at all, or to be visibly, but does necessarily follow, as an inseparable
grace, upon the very being of the Church; I have omitted that also. The third,
which is, Of care for each other.
care for and over one another, though it be essential for the well being, yet
is it not simply for the being of a Church, neither does it rise so primarily
in such fullness from the covenant, as either the use of the Sacraments or
prayer do: but only it follows by a consequence, and arises naturally from
the Church considered as a body, a fellowship and society; which whither it
be Ecclesiastical, or civil, is to care for the preservation of the several
members, to keep up the whole. And further, because that the Church is a
Church, though there be in it divisions, and members tearing 1. Cor. 3. 3. 2.
Cor. 12. 20.
in sunder one another, as it fell out in Corinth, I have passed it over more
briefly, and set it in the last place.

By all this which has been said, we may well see, that What wants and
corruptions may be in a Church, and yet the same be a true Church.
the use of some of the Properties, may for a time want; as the use of the
Sacraments, the care for one another, and the use of Discipline; so as
corruptions may be, even in the administration of the Sacraments, and yet the
Church be a true Church; and the reason is manifest, for if the Sacraments may
be wanting, and yet a true Church, then the abuse of the Sacraments corruptly
administered, cannot make the Church a false church, which is true without them.
Again, there may be corruption in prayer, both in the matter which men ask,
and in the manner of asking, so be, the two first properties remain sound, and
yet the same people be a true Church: because the person giving the Covenant,
and the Covenant it self is held, by which (as is showed) the Church is a true
Church: as also because (as we have heard) that prayer is a gift indeed from
God, but has his being in us, and used by us, and we being imperfect, it also
may so be. Lastly, there may be corruption in the translation of the word, and
in the Churches interpretation of the word, and so false Doctrines arise, and
be maintained; yet not being in the fundamental points of the Covenant before
mentioned, the church may be a true church, though corrupted. For it is to be
known, that the words of the covenant, that is, the holy scriptures have wholly
their existence from God; as he did by his Spirit extraordinarily inspire the
Prophets and Apostles, penmen of the same, 2 Pet. 1. 21. but the ordinary
interpretation has the being from us, which is either true or false, as God
does please ordinarily to inform men's judgments to see the true sense of the
holy Ghost: and therefore the Church not denying the Covenant it self, but
acknowledging it so, (as is aforesaid) rejecting all words or traditions, put
in room thereof, the same church remains a true Church, though she
misconceiue the sense in some places of the same, and so collect some false
doctrines from the same.

Whence I also conclude, that though corruptions were in administration of the
Sacraments, in translation of Scripture, in prayers, yea, and that care over
one another be greatly neglected: all which are nevertheless great corruptions
to be lamented, and ought carefully to be amended with all diligence for the
Churches prosperity, yet in such a church for all these corruptions, may be a
true Church: which may serve for answer to Mr. Smiths holding of accidental
corruptions Page 90.
obstinately defended, to make a false church; which appears by these things
to be as false, as he is variably inconstant.

Now touching the Privileges of the true visible church, The Church may want
for a time her privileges.
these be for instances some of them: first, to be called by these titles,
Saints, faithful, Elect; secondly, it is given to them to suffer for Christ;
thirdly, to be the Arc to keep the Books of the Covenant, the holy
Scriptures, the Records of Heaven; fourthly, to set too the Seals unto the
Lords Covenant; fifthly, to use the Keys to open and to shut the Kingdom of
heaven. These be the Privileges of the spouse of Christ, for her beautifying,
for her glory, and honor among the sons of men; yet may she be without
affliction a time, and be without use of Discipline in the church censures; yea
others may have the book of God among them, and the seals, and for all this
she may be a true Church: for, privileges the husband may hold back from his
wife, denying them unto her in respect of the benefit of them, and bestow also
some of them upon other persons, and set some over her in his displeasure to
overrule, in what otherwise, if she did please him, she might have liberty
in, and yet be his true wife, and he her husband; but her essential properties
she cannot want, neither he take from her, and still to remain a wife. And so
is it with the Church; Her essential properties do remain, which God never
takes from her, as sometime he does for a time her privileges, Lam. 2. 6. 9.
in his displeasure, as he took away the Temple, Altar, and sacrifices at
Jerusalem from his people, and yet they remained his Church, and were his
people. To them it was a privilege to have extraordinary Teachers, Prophets,
which the Lord took from them for a long time: and Lam. 2. 9.
yet a true Church: for privileges are not of the essence and being of a
Church, but for the honor and well being of it, whereof, for her sins she
may be deprived for a time. And thus much for proof that we are a true
Church, in matter, form, and properties, with answer unto what Mr. Ainsworth
and Mr. Smith has said to the contrary.

We be a true Church.
a true Church, is, hat Assembly of people which was once truly constituted,
and after never divorced by the Lord, was and yet remains a true Church. For
till the Lord do divorce a people they be his Church still; neither can a
Church divorce her self, she may do acts worthy of diuorcement, and may
provoke her Lord to divorce her, but it is at his choice to retain her still,
as it is with a husband, who may retain an Adulterous woman still for his
wife, as the Lord did Judah; whilst the Candlesticker remains, and is not
taken away, the Church remains.

But the people of this Nation was once truly constituted as in the beginning
I have proved) and was never yet divorced by the Lord, neither the Candlestick
removed. Therefore it was, and still does remain a true Church of God.

Or thus, That people which has recovered the essential causes of the true
Church, it is a true Church. But so has the Church of England. Ergo. I only
propound these, which if they deny, considering what has been said. And here
I call on them again to show, what is truly spiritual diuorcement, These are
necessary points to be known, and yet not showed to us by the Separatists.
and when it may appear, that the Lord gives a bill of diuorcement. Likewise,
what is the remoouing of the Candlestick: all which I desire to know for my
learning; let them show these things, and the prime and very essential causes
of the Church, and they perhaps herein will effect my purpose, that is, give to
themselves satisfaction, and so declare to others, that they have erred in
judging so untruly of the Church of England.

The ninth Error of the Brownists.
THey say that all our Ministers are false Ministers.

That this is an Error in them, I have in part showed in my former Book, Page
128. as I there understood it, to wit, of such as are sent of God, and are
admitted and set over congregations according to the truth, and true meaning of
our Laws, and the Book of Ordination: and so let my mind be taken, that I
need no more to make mention of my meaning, though the words of my Reasons, be
in general terms: and therefore thus I proceed to prove such Ministers to
be lawful Ministers of Christ, and his Church.

The first Argument.
THE Ministers of the Church of England, are either The first Argument, to
prove our Ministers true Ministers.
Christ's, or Antichrists: For in the new Testament this distinction may
comprehend all Ministers, as of and under one of these two; and those that be
Christ's Ministers, are true Ministers; and those that be Antichrists, are the
false Ministers: But the Ministers of the Church of England are not Antichrists
Ministers.

in doctrine, and by oath Our Ministers are not Antichristian.
to the Supremacy have renounced him: and so do continue preaching against
him. Their doctrine from Scripture is their calling of God to witness their
departure from him: their oath the best outward trial of truth in man, and
their Preaching an open publication to all men of their faith against
Antichrist, what can be further required? now this is done by many, and may be
witnessed by thousands.

Romans 6. 16. John. 8. 34. 2 Pet. 2. 19. Now they be not in bondage unto
Antichrist, whose tyrannous authority with his laws, as far as they be
judged contrary to Gods laws, are by our Church abolished.

John. 15. 19. and the Devil is more polliticke then to be divided against
himself, for then could not his kingdom endure.

Snatchers catch at the name Priest, which it pleases the Church to let
remain in Ecclesiastical laws still, as being of ancient use, and coming of
Presbiter, as some think, signifying an Elder; or of Proesti, whence the
Latin praeest, signifying one set over: so a Priest by the Etymon of the word,
is an Elder, set over other. In it self then it is a word of honor, by which
also the elect of God are called, and by Christ thereunto advanced. Reu. 1. 6.
The Papists understand it in the abuse, we take it not in their sense, our
Churches meaning is well known both by Law and practice: it is therefore
childish to contend about a word or name, when the matter is out of question;
and yet these men do not more often use any name then this, to make people
believe, that we are Popish Priests. and to bring us into contempt with the
credulous vulgars, and such as be of their own stamp. Therefore I conclude,
we being no Ministers of Antichrist, we then be the Ministers of Christ.

The second Argument.
Pastors and Teachers are Christ's true Ministers: for The second Argument, to
prove our Ministers true Ministers. (...).
these be reckoned up among the rest, as sent of Christ. Ephesians. 4. 11.

But the Ministers of the Church of England are Pastors and teachers. A Pastor
is a term taken from Shepherds: so then it is for Christ's Minister to play
the good shepherd, as our Savior calls himself. John. 10. Now this is in
keeping, feeding, and governing his flock, as Beza notes upon Act. 20. 28.
The word Teacher is one that is qualified with (...).
gifts and understanding or ought so to be, John. 3. 10. who instructs them
that lack discretion, and are unlearned. Romans 2. 20. Now such have we, thus
exercised in all these things: What proof should I make of this? Is not the
thing known to all, so as herein needs no more to be said, except all the
persons should be named, and so inquiry be made after them, which if these
men, credulous in every conceit to themselves, but incredulous of evident
truths among us, will not believe, let them take pains to go every where and
see, if they want not eyes to behold the same. And therefore are these true
Ministers of Christ.

The third Argument.
THe Ministers called and sent of God, and of his Church, The third argument,
to prove our Ministers true Ministers.
are true Ministers; this is undeniable, and granted of all. But Ministers of
the Church of England are called and sent of God, and of his Church.

First, they are called and sent of God, which calling and Called and sent of
God, and how.
sending of God, is the preparing of men with gifts and graces, to be able to
execute in some measure, the office whereunto he does appoint them. Thus Esaias
shows his Commission from God, by the spirit of the Lord upon him, that is,
the gifts and graces thereof. Esaias 61. 1. Thus the Lord declares his sending
and calling of Bezaleel and Aholiab, by giving them gifts of his spirit for the
performance of their charge. Exodus 31. 2. 3. So our Savior did call his
Apostles, and gave them a power, Mat. 10. 1. to accomplish that which he did
charge them to do. verse. 5. 7. 8 In like manner before he sent them upon
their universal Commission, he did speak of those things which concerned the
kingdom of God. Acts. 1. 2. Luke. 24. 44. then he opened their understandings
to understand the Scriptures: ver. 45. then he promises them power from above:
verse 49. which was the power of the holy Ghost, Acts. 1. 8. for which they
were to wait a time: Luke. 24. verse. 49. then he blessed them: verse. 50. He
breathed on them, to receive the holy Ghost, John. 20. 22. which according to
his promise came upon them visibly. Act. 2. 4. And thus were they furnished,
and did proceed on to execute their great charge imposed upon them. Thus we
see what is Gods calling; I speak not here A prevention.
of extraordinary, though the instance be from the Apostles, as if all should
be so furnished now, and in that manner, but the purpose of my speech is, to
show hereby that God does send none, but he qualifieth them with gifts,
extraordinary persons with extraordinary gifts, by an extraordinary means, or
without means; but ordinary men with ordinary gifts, by a common means,
giving them natural gifts; by the holy scriptures, grace and by study,
learning, but he sends none, but thus either the one way or other he does
qualify them for their vocation. Now it is manifest to all Christendom, that
we have men worthily qualified with gifts both of Nature, Art and Grace, and
such therefore sent of God. Which furnishing with gifts makes a man fit matter
for the Ministry, and Gods spirit moving him to desire to employ that way the
same gift, is as it were the internal form of a Minister, or Gods ordination
by the imposition of the hand of his spirit upon that party for the
Ministry, to whom nothing wants but the visible calling of the Church: and
thus we see the calling of God.

Secondly, they be called and sent of Christ's Church, for Called and sent of
his Church.
that the Church of England who has called them, is the church of Christ: this
is at large before proved. And therefore Ministers of the Church of England are
true Ministers.

The fourth Argument.
MInisters, that have what the Apostle requires to the The fourth Argument, to
prove our Ministers true Ministers.
making of true Ministers, they be true Ministers. For the Apostle describes a
true Minister of the Gospel, and shows what a one he ought to be, 1 Timothy 3.
Tit. 1. and else where in his Epistles.

But Ministers of the Church of England have those things Many of our Ministers
have those things which are required in a Minister of christ. First, Ability
to teach. Secondly, a desire to employ their gifts for the Churches good: with
Graces.
that the Apostle requires to the making of true Ministers. This I will
manifest in particulars.

First, he requires ability to teach others, 2 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Timothy 3. 2.
ability to exhort: ability to convince gainsayers of sound truths. Tit. 1. 9.
Now such have we, who by word and writing manifest this before God and man.

Secondly, the Apostle requires a desire in men furnished with gifts, to
bestow their talents that way to the Churches good, 1 Timothy 3. 1. And also
graces, holy virtues, to adorn their profession, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Tit. 1. 6. 7. 8.
and 2. 7. And such have we, men who have entered with desire to bestow the
benefit of their gifts upon the Church, before any other calling, and many
there be of unblameable conversation. For the truth of this I appeal to their
own consciences, which will, if they be not cauterized, accuse them of great
impiety, if they dare deny this. To nominate persons is full of
inconveniences, I therefore omit them. If I should nominate the dead, who
living were godly men, and members of our Church, famous for learning, and no
less for piety, the Separatists would say, they prove not that we have now
such. To which I answer, that God being the same, the Church no worse the
means all one, why may they think the same graces to be now denied, which
before were bestowed?

Thirdly, the Apostle, and other penmen of the holy Thirdly, Presentation,
Probation, Election, ordination.
Ghost, do show that there is required in the present entrance into the
Ministry, these things: Presentation, Act. 1. 23. and 6. 6. Election, or
choice out of those that be presented, Act. 1. 24. and 6. 3. 5. and 14. 23.
Probation, or trial of the parties gifts and graces, 1 Timothy 3. 10. And
ordination, Titus 1. 5. Act. 14. 23. with imposition of hands, 1 Timothy 4. 14.
Act. 6. 6. and Prayer, Act. 13. 3. And this order is observed of us. None come
to the Ministry but they be presented, and chosen; yea, by the book of
ordination are to be carefully examined, and are ordained with imposition of
hands. Thus we see in the substance, there is nothing in any point wanting, in
making of Ministers by our laws, which the word of God does require. The
exceptions they take are about circumstances only, and in some manner of
doing, which do not make an nullitie, or a falsitie of the deed done. Though
some Patrones do present partially, some Ministers enter by Simonie, and
others deal corruptly, they have therein no defense or color by Law, which
utterly condemns (well agreeing to Gods word) all by-respects in presenting,
and all iuggling tricks every way.

Object. But they will say, the people ought to choose their Ministers, Act. 1.
and 6. and 14. 23.

Ans. These places indeed testify that such examples of practice thereof were
then, but there is no precept for the perpetuity of it. Again such elections
of the people were ever when the Apostles were among them, and not else, as the
very places show. Furthermore, the people were very judicious, and were able to
make a choice then it seems, whereas it is now far otherwise with many.
Lastly, in all these places we do see indeed an Election among the people, but
the people did not assume it as a right of themselves, but upon the Apostles
exhortation, and a grant unto them, for the time the people made the choice.
Read, and see whether these things be not so. Indeed I confess a double evil
to be in the choosing, when either an ignorant bad people be left to do,
without wise guides, what they list; or a Muck-wormly Patron is suffered for
hope of greedy gain to tyrannize over Gods people, to set over them at his
wicked pleasure either an ignorant fellow, or a lewd wretch, when many of the
people being of good understanding do desire better.

Touching Bishops and Archbishops, I say, first, with Beza: Against D. Sarania.
Page 111. Page 120.
If the reformed Churches of England do continue underpropped with the
authority of Bishops and Archbishops, let her truly enjoy this blessing of
God, as they do imitate the examples of the old holy Bishops, and if they
endeavor as much as they can, to reform the house of God, according to the
rule of Gods word, we may obey them, and honor them with all reverence.
Calvin to Sadol.
Secondly, I say with Calvin, if there shall be brought unto us an Hierarchy,
wherein the Bishops shall so rule, as that they refuse not to submit themselves
to Christ, that they so depend upon him, as their only head, and that they be
knit together by no other rule then by the truth. Then surely, if there shall
be any that shall not submit themselves to the Hierarchy reverently, and with
the greatest obedience that may be: I confess them worthy of severe
punishment. Many learned men have stood for their callings, as justifiable, but
with Caueats touching corruptions, for which, condemnation lights upon the
person, and not upon the place.

Fourthly and lastly, the Apostle requires of Ministers, Fourthly, diligence
in Preaching. etc.
as also Christ commands, Mat. 28. 18. that they feed the flock, Act. 20.
28. 1 Pet. 5. 2. that they preach diligently, etc. 2. Tim. 4. 2. And many such
have we in many places, blessed be God, and blessed be the means, and
vpholders of the same. And thus things being true, I conclude, that therefore
these Ministers of the Church of England, be true Ministers.

The fifth Argument.
IF sound Doctrine be the trial of true Ministers, then have The fifth Argument
to prove our Ministers true Ministers.
we true Ministers: who do preach the truths of God, the judicious Hearers of
many can witness the same, and the extant labors of many published after the
preaching of the same, may confirm this.

Object. If it be said, they preach not all the truths of God, and they preach
some-time error also.

Answ. I answer: first, let such Objectours instance particulars if they can,
wherein they omit any truth, and wherein they teach an Error, and thereafter
shall they receive answer. Secondly, all truths to all are not revealed at
once, it is enough that they do publish the truth to them known, as it shall
be held fit; for not all truths known neither, are to be published at once:
Our Savior taught what his Disciples could bear, John 16. 12. and not every
thing at once; and Saint Paul gave first milk, and after strong meat. 1. Cor.
3. And for particular erring in some things, who is so perfect, as not to say
he does err in something? for if a minister could not be a true Minister for
doctrine, because he erreth in something, then Mr. Smith, Mr. Ainsworth, and
all the rest of that way are no true Ministers; for we do condemn them for
false doctrine, and one of them does condemn another reciprocally, and if
therefore they will believe either us or themselves, if this should be true,
they be no true Ministers; therefore though there be some errors of the least
sort, which either strike not at the very root of Religion, or the maine
branches of it, at the foundation or maine pillars of the same: they are
nevertheless true Ministers.

But sound Doctrine is the trial of a true Minister. 1. Tim. 4. 6. Ier. 23.
22: in which Jeremy does show what Prophets God sent not, such as stood not in
his counsels, nor declared his words: and therefore on the contrary, such as
do stand in his counsel, and declare his words, are sent of God. Therefore
have we true Ministers of Christ.

The sixth Argument.
THey that have Gods ordinary and daily assistance in their The sixth Argument
to prove us true Ministers. Mr. Iohnsons words in his Book against the hearing
of our Ministers. Page 2. 1. King. 22. 21.
Ministry, are his Ministers; and so to be approved as true Ministers, being
called by the Church: for God works by and in his own Ministry, and does not
assist false ministers ordinarily, and daily, if he do extraordinarily at all.
For the spirit of Satan is in the mouths of false Prophets; and he has
promised only to be with such as he sends, unto the end of the world. Mat.
28. 20. Now therefore with whom he is, they must needs be judged to be sent
of him, and approved by him.

But Ministers of the Church of England, have an ordinary and daily assistance
of God in their ministry. Gods assistance appears in his effectual working
men's conversion by them: for conversion is by the word 1 Cor. 4. 15. To. 1. 16.
through the Spirit, and not by word delivered without 1 Cor. 3. 5. 6. 2 Cor. 3.
5.
the Spirit, and it is not in man to move the heart to grace; God does take the
power of conversion to himself, Deu. 30. 6. Acts 16. 14. the means is the
word. Iam. 1. 18. Examples hereof we have through out the Acts of the
Apostles. Therefore if men be here converted, God does aid the Ministers, and
is with them, by the power of his spirit in that work. 2. Cor. 3. 3. by which
the Apostle proves, to have the power of the spirit in his Ministry, by the
conversion of his hearers.

Object. But it may be (some will say) none are converted: as Mr. Ainsworth
does, page 180.

Ans. I shall fully, by Gods grace, answer this, when I come to refute him
therein: in the mean space let it be but granted, that I may proceed to the
next part of this minor to be proved, to wit, that this assistance is also
ordinary and daily. Ordinary, for that the means are ordinary; the persons
or instruments by whom God works, are ordinary also, and it is done in an
ordinary place, in a Church reformed, and in an ordinary time, and therefore
cannot be held extraordinary any way. That it is daily, the evidence hereof is
in particular men leaving their natural course to return unto God, of which,
instances may be given from time to time. Therefore the Ministers of the Church
of England are Gods Ministers, and so true Ministers.

Object. But by this some may gather (but untruly) that therefore such as
reclaim men from evil ways, are only true Ministers.

Ans. I answer such a Cauiller, that the scope is to prove that God is with
these; not that therefore he is wholly from other: again this is but one
reason, but there be more besides, which are sufficient to prove a lawful
Ministry: and lastly, Ezechiel the Lords Prophet shall go to the people from
God, and God be with him in the truth, though not in the peoples hearts to win
them by that truth: he may save his soul, though he cannot save others,
Ezech. 2. 3. 4. and 33. 9. So the example of Noah and Lot, do show the same.

Now by this sixth Argument it may appear, how corrupt a Book that of Mr.
Iohnsons is, the Title whereof is; Certain Reasons and Arguments proving (but
very weakly) Published Anno 1608.
that it is not lawful to hear, or have any communion with the present
Ministry of the Church of England. For with whom God keeps communion, whom
he does stand by, aid, and countenance, their communion is to be kept of man;
those persons men may hear and join unto, help and countenance: but, as we
hear, the Lord so does to Ministers of the Church of England, and that is
visibly manifested by the effects of his Spirit, who works by them. And
therefore communion may be kept with them, contrary to his Assertion in that
Book; the reasons there given might be easily made for us, and so nothing
against us but in show, if it be considered what, first, be the substantial
What to be observed cauteloussy by the Reader, in reading M. Iohnsons Book.
parts of the Ministry; the true word, the true Sacraments, true prayer, kept
substantially sound: secondly, that the administration be only that word,
those only Sacraments, and that prayer be made to God only, in the only Name
of Christ, according to the pattern of true prayer, in the measure of grace,
and truth that God shall give: thirdly, that the persons whom they disclaim
under the names of Prelates, Priests and Deacons, be considered as not opposite
to the names of Pastors, Teachers, Elders and Deacons, mentioned in the
Scriptures, Prelates as in disdain they term them, being ruling Elders for
Government, Pastors and Teachers, for their instructing of the people: Also
many of the Priests (as they scornefully name them) being Pastors and Teachers
also; the Deacons being many of them agreeable to the Apostles description, 1.
Tim. 3. 9. fourthly; that the things they find fault with, be but of
circumstances not of substance, of the manner of doing and not of the thing to
be done, the reasons (I say) may in many of them be good for us; and the Book
of no force to withdraw any from us. And let the Reader consider but this, how
idle he is in the very beginning page 3. 4. 5. in which he stands to prove
that we are no Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists; as if we held any such thing:
here he flourishes with his quotations, and does triumph in a battle with
himself: but by such a course, in which he goes about to prove us to have no
true Ministry, he may as well so make no Church of God in the world to have
a true Ministry; then what is become of Mr. Johnson? he should be found
also, an non est inuentus, in the Records of Christ's true Ministry

Again note, in his endeavor to prove us no Apostles, Prophets, nor
Evangelists; he sets himself to the task roundly, but when he comes to
that which is more material, to speak of Pastors and Teachers, then as a Fox
he makes a train, and prefaceth his Reader to delude him, Page 6. and says
before he speak of this, for further clearing, and better discerning of our
state, he must make observations. Who sees not here his deceit, and how that
it is not easy to discern such a difference of our Ministry from that he
pretends to find out in the Scripture, disagreeing from it? The other callings
are plainly different, if these had been so, why does he fetch about so
before he do come to the matter, his preface being nothing to the matter, but
to preiudicate his Reader. But that I intend not, and I hope I need not,
others I trust, are willing to undertake the same, his labor might be manifest
to be but a flowrishing show. But thus much occasionally I note by the way,
having already two adversaries, enough and too many to deal with at once,
being also otherwise charged with more necessary duties for the good of Gods
people.

The seventh Argument.
The seventh Argument, to prove our Ministers true Ministers.
THey that have the true Properties of true Shepherds, are Christ's true
Ministers. I need not prove this. We have true properties of true shepherds.
1. Property. John. 10.


But Ministers of the Church of England have the true properties of true
Shepherds. John. 10. First, these go in by the door. verse. 2. that is, by
Jesus Christ: verse 7. by his call and the Churches, which I have proved at
large.

Secondly, the Porter opens unto them. ver. 3. By the Porter 2. Property.
(says Page 101.
M. Smith, but very ridiculously) is meant the whole Church: which is against
himself, and against common reason; so has his new ways intoxicated his
brains: for he says but two lines before, that the door is in the Church,
and now the Porter is the Church: the first is an improper speaking, for the
door to let into the house, is not in the house, but at the side of the house,
and a Porter at the door of the house, in no reason can be the whole house.
Men lose very reason by Gods just judgment, when they be madded by their own
fantasies in religion. The Porter therefore inuisibly letting men into the
Church by Christ the door, is Gods spirit, who does qualify true Ministers
with gifts and graces, and is forcible by them to win people, and visibly the
Porter is the authority committed by the Church unto some for admitting men
into the house, the church of God: And this is a sensible exposition according
to custom with us now, and then in Judea; from which the speech is borrowed.

Thirdly, they call their own sheep by name; verse 3. that 3. Property.
is, they take notice of their people, of their growth in religion, and do
abide with them, diligently watching over their flocks; as by law and
faithful promise made in the open Congregation they be bound in their
ordination.

Fourthly, they lead them forth, verse 3. that is, from Pasture 4. Property.
to pasture, from milk, the grounds of Religion, to strong meat: catechizing
and otherwise interpreting the holy Scriptures unto them.

Object. But some people are bad says Mr. Smith. Mr. Smiths objection to the
third Reason. Answer.


Answ. What then? does not the Minister therefore his office? The Rider leads
his Horse to water, though he drink not when he is at it. Ezechiel leads out
the people, though the wicked who follow not, do perish. His weak answering
herein, and M. Ainsworths passing over this tenth of John, shows that it is
so strong a hold for us, that they cannot overthrow it.

Object. But M. Smith further denies this, because we speak (says he)
against Brownisme, etc. as if that were truth, and so we should not lead them
forth in the truth.

Answ. But how little affinity Brownisme has with the truth, has been, and
is manifest, even by Mr. Smiths own mouth, in his new Anabaptisme condemning
the same.

Fifthly, they go before their flocks; verse 4. that is, in godly 5 Property.
conversation: M. Smith denies this, because says he, godliness is not in a
false Church, Ministry, etc. This objection we see is but his fantasy, so to
think of our Church, Ministry, etc. Therefore are these Ministers of the
Church of England, true Ministers. It is then wickedness to them, to apply
this Scripture, John 10. against us, and thereby call us thieves and robbers,
and it is impudent bold hardiness in M. Smith, to say hereupon, that he dare
(mark Reader his words) in the true fear of the Lord, call the best of us all
a Page. 101.
spiritual Thief and a Robber; yea, a Wolf that comes to rob and to
destroy. The man is at liberty to rail, and to speak evil, but the Lord
does rebuke him.

Reply unto Mr. Ainsworths Answer to this ninth Error.
NOw I come to M. Ainsworths Answer to my former Book, in which, as now more
at large in this, I speak of the gifts, calling, etc. of our Ministers so
qualified.

Object. To this he makes this answer, that it is a boasting Page 186.
as Papists and Anabaptists will do, etc.

Ans. I answer his imputation of boasting is but a fruit of his own vanity,
who in their way of singularity by an ouer-weening of themselves, do measure
unto us, what abundantly flows from themselves. The Papists (says he) do
object such things, but do they, or can they so truly object them to us, as
we by the warrant of the word, can object them to these men? if not, his
casting the Papists boasting upon us, is idle: he does dislike the Anabaptists
boasting; out of that let them lively see their own Picture, bone of their
bone, and flesh of their flesh, as natural children, lively sprung from their
immediate Parents. For the grounds of the Brownists, Schismatically Separating
from us, are the Anabaptists foundation, on which they built their heretical
brotherhood. But I come to the particulars, which in my other book he does
except against.

Object. First, he denies that qualification with good gifts is Page 186.
a proof of a lawful Minister.

Answ. To which I answer that by dismembring what I have conjoined, he does
but deceive the Reader: for this M. Ainswroth does sever deceitfully what I
conioyne together.
reason with the rest together, reckoned up in my former Book, and whereof I
have now in this also before largely spoken, do show and prove who is a true
Minister. He uses in the beginning this deceit with his Reader, as I have
noted in my reply to his answer unto my Probabilities. I never dreamed that
one qualified with gifts for the Ministry was a Minister, but that
qualification making him fit matter, and declaring his calling by God, if the
Churches calling be added thereunto, and his office performed faithfully, then
is he a true Minister of Christ Let this his setting a sunder of the
particular branches of my whole reason be noted, that he lead thee not from
that truth, which I avouch.

Object. Secondly, he excepteth against our Ministers Page 187.
calling, and his ground is, because (says he) our Church is not a true
Church.

An. But we see this his condemning of our Church to be altogether from his
imagination, and now also proved to be flat against the evident truth: his
sandy ground has made his building weak. Touching his other questions, I
refer him for resolution, to the practice of our Church, the Laws, and
Constitutions thereof, as also to the statutes and ordinances of our nation, by
which he may be instructed and receive satisfaction to his scoffing demands,
and for further information he may read the books of diverse who have written
at large of the same.

Thirdly, whereas I have avouched in my former Book, that there be many
Ministers, Preachers in and of the Church of England, who do preach the true
doctrine of Christ, administer only his Sacraments, perform their office
faithfully, live conscionably, and have Gods gracious assistance in their
ministry to the benefit of many, etc.

Object. He says, these be fair words, etc. as but barely affirmed without
proof.

Ans. Surely, I must confess, that I had not though any of them so far void
of shame to deny this truth. Is it possible that such as pretend such a care
to maintain truth, should so hood-wincke themselves, as they dare so
impudently deny this truth, evidently shining among us, the beams whereof
spread forth unto all the reformed Churches in Christendom? But how would he
disprove my speech? forsooth, for that there be some careless of teaching
among us, and of loose life, (whose amendment or remouall I heartily wish,)
and for that some be dumb and cannot preach; a thing greatly to be lamented.
But how does this overthrow what I say of many others, where did he learn to
conclude thus, where some are bad, all are naught; where some cannot preach,
there none can preach? and yet this is his manner of reasoning, if he did
frame his superfluity of words into a more solid reasoning, as the
understanding Reader may well see. He shows a gibing and mocking spirit, in
speaking of our ordinary prayers, wherein he takes pleasure, it seems, to
have us in dirision, but as he does it profanely, so also he writes of us
lyingly: for mentioning only such things, as be appointed in common and daily
prayer, as occasions fall out, he says, that this is enough for Priests (so
he in contempt does term us) to do in the Country Parishes: and yet he
omitteth to reckon the reading of the holy Scriptures, which is appointed by
the same Book: likewise he may see that every Minister upon pain of
suspension, is to Catechize his people every Lords day, and every one that can,
is to preach also every Lords day, by our late Ecclesiastical constitutions,
and therefore it is untrue which he says, that the bare reading of ordinary
prayers is enough. They profess a love unto the truth, and yet dare against
truth belie the church of God, and their mother.

Object. Fourthly, he says, that my speaking of Ministers Page 189.
converting souls, is but a vain boasting. His reasons be: First, because of
our (as he says) disordered and idolatrous estate, etc.

Ans. I answer, first, this is more then he has proved, he barely says it,
but gives no reason, as was meet in so grievous an accusation of a whole
Church. Is it true that we be Idolatrous, because M. Ainsworth says so? when
his words are a divine and an unerring Oracle, he may be believed: till then,
his words are herein, but as wind. Secondly, I answer, that therefore by his
reason, it is more likely that our Ministers here should convert some, because
many are bad, for if all were good, there were no matter to work upon. If he
mean that all are Idolatrous, and disorderly, all lamentably ignorant and
profane, he is as impious in himself for so thinking, as ill conceited of us.

Object. Secondly, he would prove our converting of some to be but a vain
boasting, because such as be converted are (as he says) Infidels before, and
yet are members of our Church, which how it can stand with the rules of Gods
word, has (as he confesses) never yet been showed.

An. Well therefore, I will show: first, that here is conversion in the Church,
and secondly, that yet such so converted, were not before that conversion
Infidels.

The first I thus prove: If men in our Church formerly There is true conversion
in our Church.
profane and irreligious in many things, have visibly forsaking that lewd
course, by no compulsarie law of man, but by an inward fear of God wrought by
Gods word preached, Many of the latter sort departed from us.
as themselves have confessed, then have such men been converted, and so a
true conversion wrought in our Church by the Ministry of the word. The latter
will not be denied, if the former be proved: for what is a man's visible
conversion, but an outward confession of sorrow for sin, a leaving of the
same, and an endeavor to do well voluntarily, after the good pleasure of God,
manifested unto him? Prou. 28. 13. Mat. 3. 6. Luke 15. 18. 21 24. But such a
conversion has been, and is daily wrought in our Church, and the instances
are infinite. For proof of this, I refer him unto many thousands now with
us, who will avouch thus much, and I also appeal to the hearts and consciences
of such of themselves as are departed from us. Did they not here leave off to
do wickedly, as nature first led them? did they not rejoice in the word, which
before they carelessly neglected? did they not suffer mocks of others, once like
themselves, for not still running to the same excess of riot, as in times
before? And did they not Ezech. 18. 30.
out of compassion to others, seek as they were commanded, the souls safety
of others? and all this by the word, and voluntary subiecting of themselves
unto the same; God, Angels, and their own consciences do witness this to be
true, if they dare deny it. But I hope better of some, who I trust (at the
length) will see our Church to be a true Church, and return, as some have done
to their mother again, or at the least will reform their opinions, unto the
godly judgments of the reformed Churches, as they hold of us, and lovingly
consent with us, that God may show them mercy in this their great schism, and
gricuous rending of Gods Church, to the hinderance of the Gospel, and the
great advantage of the enemies thereof. Men converted in our Church, were not
before Infidels.


The second point, viz. that such so converted are no Infidels before, I
manifest, first, by distinction, for there is a double conversion, the first is
primarily the profession of Christ, and before this are men Infidels, and not
of the Church of Christ visibly; so were the Romans, Corinthians, Ephesians
and the rest converted from Gentilisme to Christianity: the other is
secondarily to sanctification of life, and this is of members in the Church,
who are not borne in personal holiness, but are brought to a godly
conversation by the word in their appointed time. And thus is the word to
convert or return used in Scripture, and understood of such, as be members of
the true Church, though lewd and very wicked before their change of life. Esai.
6. 10. and 10. 21. Iere 31. 18. 19. Luke 22. 32. and therefore this conversion
does not presuppose infidelity, as the not profession of Christ does.
Secondly, If where conversion is, there must needs be also before infidelity,
then when men do sall to Idolatry from God, and be brought back again, that
is, be converted; then must there be a rebaptisation; for Infidels are to be
baptized. This man, Mr. Ainsworth and Mr. Johnson also, does acknowledge a
conversion now from Antichristianisme, are therefore all such before Infidels?
then has not M. Smith done ill to be again baptized: for whosoever in the
scripture are called Infidels, are wholly without the Church, and must by
baptism be admitted into the Church: he uses to quote Scripture often, if he
use but a word, or do but allude unto a place of Scripture, why does he not
here quote Scripture to prove the use of the term Infidel? let him (if he
be able) show that any by the Scriptures are called Infidels, who profess the
Name of Christ, though very lewd in life and conversation: if he cannot, as I
am sure he cannot, why does he herein leave the Scripture, and take upon him
besides and against Scripture, so to conclude as here he does?

Two Scriptures I quoted in my former Book Romans 10. Page 129. Romans 10. 14. 1.
Cor. 9. 2.
14. 15. and 1. Cor. 9. 2. jointly with the other reasons, to prove that these
are true Ministers, which find the blessing of God upon their Ministry. The
first place in the Romans he passes over, as belike, not knowing well how to
answer it, for that the holy Ghost there evidently tells us, that such
Preachers which so preach, as people thereby do hear, believe and call upon
God, are sent of God, and to be received with gladness, whose feet are
beautiful and do bring glad tidings of peace and good things. But he falls
upon the second Scripture taking or leaving as he best aduantageth himself.
But what is his answer?

Object. First (says he) Apostles were sent to convert Heathen, and for this
he quoteth Scripture, to prove that which no man makes doubt of. But
Pastors are set (says he) for to feed converted Christians: for this also he
has his Scriptures which we do not gainsay.

Answ. But the Scriptures say not that Pastors are to feed only converted
Christians, for who then shall feed such little ones as are borne in the
Church, and reclaim such as fall to wickedness in the Church to convert them
to sanctification?

Object. Secondly, says he, The work and seal of Paul's Apostleship was
seen in Corinth, by separating the believers from infidels, and gathering the
saints only into the communion of the Church under the officers given by
Christ.

Ans. Mark here this man's answer, who first speaks not a word of the
Apostles doctrine, as if separation and the rest had been or could be before
the power of his ministry in converting them; belike separation makes men
believers. He is wondrously in love with this point of separation, and would
make his scholars believe that it can do strangely, make of Infidels belieuers
without preaching the word before, else why omitteth he to speak of the
Apostles preaching? for by this God wrought upon the people to make them his,
before a separation was made, or before they were called Saints and in
Communion under Christ's officers. Separation and gathering of the Saints is not
conversion it self, but the fruit of conversion, and signs of men converted,
the one arising from hate of wicked men, and the other from love to the godly,
which are ever more or less in men converted. If the Apostles work and seal
of his ministry was not before officers were set over the people, what, and
whose work was it to make Disciples? as Christ commanded, Mat. 28. 18. and as
they be called Act. 14. 20. 22. before they had Elders set over them, verse. 23.

Mr. Ainsworth after this does but repeat what I have alleged and made answer
before unto, and given reasons thereof, page 129. to which he could not
answer, yet would he make the same objection again. Belike he thought men
would read his answer without comparing it with my book, indeed if so men
do, it were easy to carry away a cause, and much labor should be spent in
vain, nothing said, and much said, yet never the near to give any man
satisfation. He quoteth 2. Cor. 6. 14. etc, to prove that the work and seal
of Paul's Apostleship was separation 2. Cor. 6. 14.
of believers from Infidels; If the man were in his right mind and that the
conceited excellency of his separation had not bewitched him, he would never
so absurdly have alleged the place to prove this point.

First, the place neither mentions the Seal of his Ministry, as in 1 Cor.
9. 2. neither does expound his meaning as does 1 Cor. 4. 15. and 2 Cor. 3. 2.
3. 6.

Secondly, the place shows not their separation, but is an Exhortation from
the fellowship of Infidels, whereby is manifest rather, their not whole
separation from Idolaters, as the place it self, the judgment of Divines
thereon, and the exhortation in it own nature does plainly euince: the
Apostle says, be not unequally yoked with Infidels, Ergo says Mr. Ainsworth
they had made a Separation. A ridiculous consequent; by as good a reason we
may conclude that all gods people are come out of Babylon, because John (Reu.
18. 4) bad them to leave Babylon; and that men are such as they should be, for
that they are forbidden to be what they are: such Doctrines would make a speedy
reformation, that we need not such Schismatic departures, neither have we
by his Doctrine any wicked among us, for we have exhorted, and do still dehort
men from their profaneness of life and conversation, and then why makes he
with his a separation? Therefore sithen by his consequence from hence we be
separated, as he would conclude of me, so say I that Mr. Ainsworth is a false
Doctor (as his works show) if he be any at all.

He skips over an Objection and an Answer, made concerning our Ordination by
Bishops, Page 142. and also the place of John 10. Page 143. he passes by, and
comes with a slight answer unto that which I lay to their charge in making
their Ministers by merely lay men, and such as are no Ministers at all: my
reasons against that practice is laid down in my former Book, page. 144. 145.
he answers nothing particularly to the several reasons and Scriptures as he
ought, and as he would, if he could have opposed the truth with any show of
truth, but the stream runs too clear from the worlds beginning for him to
throw in dirt and not be seen; or to turn the force of such a current, and
he not be drowned with resistance, yet will he blunder the water with his
feet, and withstand the stream as well as he may, and therefore he says,
that because I say that we have the calling of our Mornai, does in his Book
of the Church confess also; therefore I teach a plain Apostacy from the
Gospel unto Popery. Reu. 18. 4. I then demand, may not Gods truths and his
ordinance received among the wicked, be carried forth from among them, and the
same be acknowledged to be thence received, but we must needs thereby teach to
go back again unto them? The Babylonians took away the vessels of the Lord,
and afterward the Jews received them again, at the hands of such as were
wicked and Idolatrous, might they not receive them, but must needs teach that
therefore men must leave Jerusalem, and turn back into Babylon? Does not Mr.
Ainsworth, know, that it is one thing to receive once a good thing with
corruptions ignorantly, and another thing having received that good and cast
off the corruptions, to return again, to receive the good with corruptions,
when there is no cause? Again, I demand whether the Apostacy of Antichrist
ouershadowing the Church of God, does make a flat nullitie of all Gods truths,
and his ordinances, so as they be no truths nor ordinances of God, because the
same pass by them, and for that we receive them from them? If he say no, then
why does he dissallow our ordination absolutely? If he say yea, then are we
not baptized neither they themselves, and so are no visible Christians received
into the visible Church by Baptism, for we received our Baptism from them by
succession? If our Baptism must needs be held true, then why not ordination?
What disanulleth one ordinance of God more then an other? and if the holding of
our receiving the Ministers calling from them, make them a true Church, what
lets but the same may be concluded likewise from Baptism? and that more
strongly, sithen Baptism being a visible badge of the visible Church of
Christ, and the knitting of the members together, which are by the word won
to the profession of the faith?

To the retorted Argument of the Papists against us, which he does bring, if
what I have said do not content him, let him send to the first framer of the
argument, who is able Doct. Sutcliffe.
enough to wind him out of this his supposed laborinth. For my part when I
plead with a Papist, as I now do with a Brownist, he shall see me answer as
I may, or if he had framed the Papists Reason from him, either to maintain
themselves against us, or to overthrow us in what we do stand in against
them, he should have had a present Answer. To conclude this, Mr. Ainsworth
has not yet overthrown my Reasons made against their course in making of
Ministers, but that they do stand as no Ministers, being made so as no
Scripture does give warrant, nor any practice of the like recorded in the word
of God, from the worlds beginning. All he has said against us to defend
himself, and his fellows, is but his imagination of some supposed absurdities
that may follow thereupon; but if any absurdity should follow, yet the
Argument is not dissolved,

Touching Mr. Gyffords complaint of such evils as are amongst us; I answer,
that albeit he has justly so lamented, yet his testimony will not prove what
this Answerer does bring it for; to wit, that we do vainly boast of
conversion, but indeed have no effect of our Minsterie, let any mark, but why
he brings in that record, and frames it in an Argument, then the vanity of
this his allegation will there in appear.

Reply to Mr. Smiths Arguments against our Ministers.
MAster Smith, as M. Ainsworth has done, opposes Page 92.
this truth, which I hold concerning the lawfulness of our Ministers: and
would prove us all false Ministers, his Arguments are these:

The first Argument.
THe true Ministry cannot be raised out of a false church. The
Ecclesiastical Assemblyes of England are false Churches: Therefore the
Ministers are false Ministers.

Mayor, but a changed term; for there is great difference between the word
Ministry and Ministers: he pretends Art, and shows nothing less: but this
is his Logic for poor seely Layicks, and good enough for them that would
overthrow Universities. Again, I deny the Mayor; for first, why may not as
well true Ministers arise out of a false Church, as a false Ministry,
Worship, and Government arise out of a true Church, as himself avouches? Page
14.
Secondly, we see by experience, that Luther, and other worthy Ministers of
Christ have been raised up out of the Romish Church. Thirdly, again I demand,
why true Ministers may not arise out of such a Church, as well as true
Baptism, or as Gods people being in it, and yet come out from it? If so much
of Christianity does remain in the Antichristian Church, as makes the people
still Gods people in the constitution of it at the first, which at length
comes Reu. 18.
forth, then what lets but so much of the true Ministry may remain, as may
also make such as at length depart out of her, true Ministers? especially, if
it be true which Mr. Smith says, that what particulars I have alleged, Page
99.
for to approve our selves, the same are also in the popish Ministers? But he
confirms his Mayor by that which before be delivered touching Christ's
ministerial power given to the Congregation, and by that which he has said
against succession. Which proofs are before overthrown, and so his Mayor
lies in the dust: and if his reasons were not refelled; yet are they very
ridiculously alleged to prove his Mayor, except he can frame them better to
it, then I see how: for thus his Mayor depends upon his reasons the calling
of Ministers is not by succession, but from the body of the Congregation: Ergo,
the true Ministry cannot be raised out of a false Church. Here again, is
Tinterton Steeple the cause of Goodwin sands.

The Minor I deny also, for the Church of England is a true Church, as I have
before proved at large, and answered his reasons, on which in his assumption
here, he only did rely, without any further proof. But his ill shapen
Argument does well serve to be turned upon himself thus. The true Ministry
cannot be raised out of a false Church. But M. Smiths Anabaptisticall Assembly
is a false Church: Therefore neither M. Smith, nor any else of that Assembly, is
a true Minister. The Mayor he holds true: the Minor may be confirmed, because
(as he says) a false Baptism See his Book against M. Clifton.
makes a false Church, or such are no Church which are not baptized: but he,
and those which were baptized by him, are either falsely baptized, or not
baptized at all. For first, they hold our Baptism as no baptism; and so in
that respect are not baptized. Secondly, he says, that true Baptism is when
one baptized does baptize another into the In his answer to me, Page 91. line.
28.
faith of Christ, capable of Baptism. Now he did baptize, and was not
baptized before, as he acknowledges, and he did baptize others not capable of
his Baptism, having received before a true Baptism, in matter the water, in
form the words of the institution pronounced: now let him prove if he can, by
the new Testament, that any so baptized as we be, or by the approbation of any
Orthodoxall Church, that such are to receive Baptism again: if he cannot,
then were they not capable of Baptism and so by his own words are they not
baptized. Thirdly, that baptising which the word does not warrant, is a false
baptising; for thus they do reason in other things: for the word warranting an
action, makes it truly divine in Gods worship. But first, M. Smith did
baptize himself contrary to the scripture (which commands one to baptize an
other. Mat. 28. 18.) and contrary to all examples in Scripture, even in Christ,
Mat. 3. 3. neither can the like act be showed to be done by any since Christ
was borne: sithen then his act being in the intendment of him divine, and the
truth thereof depending upon the Scripture, it being against the Scripture,
without warrant of Christ, of his Apostles, or of any Christian Church, it must
needs then be a false baptising, with which all the rest are polluted, as
being the beginning of their Anabaptisticall constitution, and by which all the
other entered into baptism. Fourthly, their baptism is false, because it
wants the true form; for they held not the Witness Ia. Wh. and other more.
words of Christ's Commanding so to baptize, viz. in the name of the Father, the
Son and the holy Ghost: now the form Mat. 28.
being false, it cannot be true. And therefore we may well see, that they be
not a true Church: for he says, that a true Constitution and true Baptism
are one* and so on the contrary In his book against M. Clifton.
it must follow, that a false baptism makes a false constitution.

The second Argument.
THe true Ministry has a true office, in execution whereof M. Smiths second
argument against our Ministers.
it is exercised, Romans 12. 7. 1 Cor. 12. 5. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. The Ministry of
the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England have not a true office, in execution
whereof it is exercised. Therefore the Ministry of the Ecclesiastical
assembly of England, is not the true Ministry.

Ministry for Ministers: but I omit this and other childish points not to be
stood upon, leaving them to acute scholars to see into and judge of.

The Mayor understood of Gods ordaining the Ministry, and wherein it should
be exercised, is true, but understood as it is exercised by men, who are
subject to err, the Proposition is not ever true; for Ministers having a true
office may yet not be ever exercised in the execution of the same through
corruption, and yet for want of right execution it cannot be said to be
therefore no true office. Nadab and Abihu had true office, yet offered up
strange fire, and for it was punished, nevertheless their office remained
still true. Again this proposition is absurdly delivered; for it is not a
proper speaking, to say the Ministry has a true office; but the Minister, or
Ministers have a true office. He speaks so, as if the Ministry and office
of Ministers were differing things, when they be all one. But as he takes
authority to himself to change the administration of Baptism, so may he
change right reasoning, and true speaking, for they hold that their spirits
are not to be tied. His Scriptures and Proposition want some agreement, neither
does he truly define in his words a true Ministry from these places; but
rather thus:

The true Ministry of Christ is an office, Romans 12. 7. to be exercised
extraordinarily by Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and ordinarily by Pastors
and Teachers, 1 Corinthians. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. for the repayring of the Saints,
and for the edifying of the body of Christ. Ephe. 14. 12. This is evident out
of the words, and therefore for his Mayor I deny it as a sufficient
description of the Ministry.

The Minor I also deny; for we have a true office: to Preach the word of God,
and to administer the Sacraments of Christ, are the true office of Christ's
Ministers, Mat. 28. 18. Ephe. 4. 12. but this is our office by the law of our
land, by the book of ordination, and is seen by our practice. Therefore we
have a true office.

Object. But he would prove the contrary by one only reason, which is,
because, says he, the ministry of the Church of England does arise out of
the Ministry of the Church of Rome, and so, says he, must needs be of the
same nature.

Ans. But this I deny, except that which comes and arises of another, be
produced so one from another without any hindering cause, as that the one
essentially does make another, as his similies, which he brings do declare,
as light enflaming light, and a man begetting a child; thus things naturally
arising one of another, must needs be of one nature: but it is not so with our
Ministry, and the Ministry of the Church of Rome. Our Ministry arose not
from the Romish Church, as from a voluntary procreating cause, as he absurdly
makes a similie of a father and his son; but it arose from under the bondage
of that Church, through Gods power retaining the good and leaving the evil
thereof. Therefore that which arises out of good amongst corruptions, is not
of the nature of the corruptions, but of the good ouershadowed with those
corruptions. Who knows not that Gods people are in Babylon, and that they do
arise out of the Romish Church? does it therefore follow that when they are
risen out of it, that they be of the same nature with it, because they do
bring the good things with them there learned and received from under the
corruptions?

Again, he teaches in this his Reason a gross Error, for he extends not
our Ministry, and the orignall thereof, beyond the present Antichristian
state of the Now Church of Rome; but teaches that there it had his first
foundation, which is most untrue: for our Ministry thus refined from the
Popish Church, has the beginning from before Antichrist was hatched in the
Romish Church: as may appear by the Greek Churches at this day, in which are
Archbishops, Bishops, and other inferior officers over Parishionall
Assemblies, and in which they have read Prayer, and other like exercises of
Religion with us; now these Churches are more ancient (at least some of them)
then the Church of Rome, and were before that Roman Antichrist, and therefore
our Ministry is for originalitie to be considered before the now Romish
Church, though it did run a time through it (as pure water from a pure
fountain may do through a dirtie channel for a while) till God gave it a
clearer issue. This being considered, his similie from refining of Sugar, to be
still Sugar, is fit for us; for our Ministry being as Sugar, but heretofore
full of dross, by refining it from the Romish Church, we have it more pure,
but not still to be therefore of the drossie corruption, as he would persuade
his Disciples.

Lastly, he asks who can bring a clean thing out of that which is unclean?
I answer, the Lord can; as he brought light out of darkness, and makes him
alive by grace, who is dead in sin. Also if the unclean thing be not
absolutely unclean, who need ask this question: for out of that which is
partly unclean, and partly clean; may a clean thing be produced: now the
Romish Church is not so unclean, but there is some clean things in it, as
such truths as we do hold and teach for the truths of God, by the warrant of
the word. It is therefore no wonder, that any should ask how clean things may
be brought from an unclean thing, wherein clean things are.

The third Argument.
THe true Ministry has a true vocation and calling, by Election,
approbation, and ordination of that faithful people, Mr. Smiths third Argument
against our Ministers.
where he is to administer. The Ministry of the Ecclesiastical Assembly of
England: has not the true vocation and calling by Election, Approbation, and
Ordination of a faithful people, where they do administer: Therefore the
Ministers of the Ecclesiastical Assembly of England: is not the true
Ministry.

Act. 6. 2. 6. and 14. 23.
Scriptures, Act. 6. 2. 6. and 14. 23. 1 Timothy 3. 10. and 4. 14. But these
Scriptures do not prove that the body of the Congregation, which here he
calls faithful people, did ordain and make their Ministers. Nay Acts 6. and
14. do plainly show that the Apostles did ordain them, and not the people;
if the contrary there can be showed, let me bear the blame for ever: and the
1 Timothy 4. 14. shows 1. Tim. 4. 14.
also the contrary, for there is mention of the Eldership; and Mr. Smith (as is
before set down) holds that all the Elders were Pastors, then here by his
own exposition, is he greatly deceived, to confirm from the Ministers and
Pastors ordination, lay persons ordination: see here Reader, how herein he
crosses himself.

Object. The Minor I deny; and he would confirm it thus: because we are made
Ministers by Bishops, etc.

Ans. But if the Patron do choose for the people, as he ought a fit man, and
the Bishops do truly examine him, and finding him apt to teach, and of a
godly conversation, do so ordain him, what let is there herein, why his
calling is not good? If ignorant persons, bad and of lewd behavior be
ordained, it is wickedness against Gods Law, and the law of ordaining and
making Ministers, and such personal corruptions God will duly (at length)
punish, in such offenders whosoever, except they repent; but yet the lawful
authority of Bishops to ordain may stand good, being an Ecclesiastical
practice, for many hundredth years in the Church of God. And here I do
confess, that it is sin in any to ordain a bad and lewd fellow for a
Minister, or to set a blind guide over a people, and it is cruelty in
covetous and accursed patrons, for lucres sake, or other by-respect to thrust a
badde, or insufficient man upon a Congregation, when the people desire a
better, whose souls he makes sale of, as men do of beasts in the market
place; an evil not to be suffered in the Church of God, neither indeed do our
laws allow hereof, though such evils pass unpunished many times.

In the next place after these three reasons, M. Smith seems Page 96.
to make answer to my reasons given in my former Book, by which I do prove
that we have true Ministers of Page 128.
Christ, as now in this book I have before sufficiently showed. His seeming
confutation of my former reasons are but idle cauils, and tedious discoursing,
to beguile the simple plain hearted.

converting men he answers first, negatiuely, that here are none converted to
the true visible Faith, taught in the new Testament.

the Lord works inward conversion by the Ministry of the Land, and the
hearers feel it in their Consciences: by which Note what M. Smith.
he acknowledges the Lord to countenance it, and to make it lively in the very
consciences of men, which is the confesses to be wrought by our Ministry.
first and most excellent fruit or effect of the Ministry; for there
begins Christ's work of his word: Act. 2. 37. and 16. 14. Heb. 4. 12. 2.
That therefore if the heart and conscience be converted, can that Ministry be
denied to have an outward effect? If the first be true, as there he
confesses, and also does acknowledge the same of himself in another place:
then the latter cannot be denied: for as S. Paul says, if we believe in the
heart, we will confess with the mouth, as the instances of such as were
converted mentioned in the Acts, do declare. 3. In denying us true visible
faith, he speaks both falsely and most improperly, and so also absurdly:
falsely, for can there be inward conversion, and not true faith? It is most
strange to hear of the hearts conversion, and of no Faith, when this is first,
and the other follows upon it: Absurdly, in calling Faith a visible thing; for
it is the most secret grace, though from it do arise lively fruits to
demonstrate it, which fruits nevertheless are not Faith it self, no more then
an effect may be called the cause of it self. It is said in James, that Faith
must be Iam. 2.
showed by works; works of Faith are visible, but not Faith it self. He
speaks therefore absurdly, and coyneth a distinction foolishly, as he does
Religions to himself daily most fantastically. 4. If he mean by true visible
Faith, the true fruits of Faith, and deny that we have no visible fruits of
Faith, he does us great wrong, and for truth of this, see what before I have
said of visible conversion.

Secondly, he answers by concession, be it says he, that we do convert to
the visible faith, yet it is no proof of the truth of our Ministry, that we
are true Pastors, and Page 95.
and why forsooth? because, says he, A Pastor conuerteth not properly, but
feeds men converted. I answer, first, that he grants they convert, but not
as their proper work, yet they do convert: secondly, I have before proved
against Mr. Ainsworth, the vanity and falsehood of this distinction.

Secondly, to the Scriptures which I alleged Page 129. Romans 10. 14. 15. 1
Cor. 9. 2. to be compared with 2 Cor. 3. 1. 3. and 13. 3. 5. to prove that such
as convert men to the profession of the faith of Christ, and do call upon his
Name, are sent of Christ, for that the Apostle, that is, (as I said) one sent
of God, does so confirm his Ministry; Book of their confess. page 31.
and because, they confess that Christ does not workeby false means.

so we would prove our selves Apostles, when as I used the word, Apostle, in a
double sense: in one sense, only from the Etymon of the word; applying it to
Romans 10. 15. whence I thus reasoned. They that convert souls, are sent of God:
so does the place prove, and the word, Apostles, signify taken in the large
sense. But the Ministers of England convert souls, therefore the Ministers of
England are sent of God. that no man can convert to the true faith of Christ's
new Testament, which is visible, except he be sent of God. And therefore we
proving, that we convert men, as himself acknowledges inwardly, and as I
have proved outwardly, it follows hence, from his own grant, that we are
Ministers sent of God. Yet against the force of reason, and the word of God,
from a perverse spirit, he says, we pervert men, and are the instruments of
Satan, sent by the Lord in his wrath to keep the people in bondage from the
obedience of the faith taught in the new Testament, which fury and outrage of
his spirit, both religion, reason, and his own confession forced from both,
has bett down in him.

Secondly, he rayleth upon me for auouching, that the 1. Cor. 9. 1. Objection.
word, work, 1 Cor. 9. 1. is understood the Lords effectual working by his
Ministry, in the conversion of souls to God, and not the outward settling of
them, neither only nor chiefly into gathered Assemblies. His reason is because
men are not converted to the true faith, till they be converted Page 96.
and established in the true Church, if it may be found. This is most false, or
most absurd: first, his ( if it may be found) shows that there is a conversion
belike some time, and not an establishing of such a one into a visible Church:
secondly, what says he of the twelve men, Disciples, Act. 19. 1. what visible
Assembly were they established in? and yet were converted: thirdly, this is
against the order of receiving men into the true Church; for the Apostles did
first judge them converted to the true faith, before they received them into
the Church, an instance is in Act. 8. 37. and so of all the rest: and yet here
this man says, they be not converted to the true faith, before they be
converted and established in the true Church: Folly dwells with the wilful.

For my expounding the Scriptures, I refer them to the judicious Reader to
compare them together, and to the learned Commentaries of Divines, amongst
other, M. Calvin, who calls the Apostles work, the conversion of the
Corinthians, and that the Lord had sealed his Apostleship by their faith, 1.
Cor. 9. 1. 2. and says also 2 Cor. 3. 3. that the Corinthians faith was the
Apostles work: his doctrine, the Lords effectual work thereby. The bringing
of people to embrace that, is more Apostolical, than the gathering of companies
together, which both false Apostles, Heretics, and Schismatickes have done,
and now do. And whereas M. Smith, to make good his abusing of the word by his
wretched glosses, brings in 2 Cor. 3. 7. where mention is 2 Cor. 3. 7.
made of Moses, a comparison between the persons of Moses and S. Paul, as if
the holy Ghost intended to set them two out, he does herein seduce his
Disciples, and abuse the place; for there Moses and Paul are not compared, but
the Gospel and the Law, the ministration of both, by the Ministers of either
Testament; of which see Interpreters upon that place. The Apostle mentions
not their gathering into a company, but his teaching of them, 1 Cor. 4. 15.
and winning of them to the profession of Christ, which is their conversion to
the faith of Christ, called the seal of his Apostleship, 1 Cor. 9. 2. by which
they be made Christians, and Gods Church, though they be not in one place. And
thus much to this: I leave his railing and rauing spirit to be rebuked of him,
who says, that the rayler shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

Thirdly, that which I speak, page 129, 130. touching conversion by private
persons, he would obscure by a tedious multiplicitie of words, in his Book,
page, 97. 98. but applies it not to overthrow my reasons, which remain
untouched, and therefore till, as a direct answerer, he refell my reasons, and
make more evident the truth, I let him pass, as shooting at rouers, both
deceitfully and idly.

Fourthly, to that which I say, touching the qualification of our Ministers,
their Calling, Doctrine, administration of the Sacraments, faithful execution
of their Ministry, conscionable living, and Gods assistance in their labor.
He tells us if we would believe him, that the Popish Ministers Page. 99.
have all these; and says, that they do preach the true doctrine of Christ,
and administer his true Sacraments, and so forth; proceeding to set out them to
condemn us, but all verbally, without proof, and therefore I deny, what he
says, till he prove it, and in the mean space desire him a better guide then
that lying spirit, even the grace of Gods spirit, to learn him to speak the
truth.

In the next place, he answers to the answer of an Objection from popular
power, to overthrow ordination by Bishops, which before is replied unto. To my
Similitude of marriage, that as a faulty entrance in marriage, so the substance
be kept, cannot disanull it being made, nor make it false; no more can a
corrupt entrance into the Ministry, make it either a false, or no Ministry.
He answers summarily thus much, that matter or form being false, the
ordinance cannot be true: but he says, our Ministry cannot be true, because
our Assemblies are false. Where first note his folly, how he makes the
Assemblies part of the Ministry, either for matter or form of the
Ministry, which was never heard of before; else why makes he the same the
reason to overthrow either the matter or form, which he stood upon, for other
accidental circumstances disanull not Gods ordinances, as he confesses.
Secondly, his ground is false; for we be a true Church, and therefore by
saying we are a false Church, he cannot prove our ministry false; my
similie therefore is good, and not yet of less force, by all that he has said.

Fifthly, to the place of John 10. before spoken of, he answers both absurdly,
and falsely, as I have in my Reply to M. Ainsworth upon this place fully
declared.

Sixthly, and lastly, to that which I say in my former book Page 144.
against their Ministers, he answers, and says, that I call them unlawful,
but I dare not say false: But if he say true, himself says, the Brownists
Ministers are Antichristian, and such are, by his own account, false; and why
may not I dare so to call them, if (I say) he speak truth: for himself now I
dare call him both an unlawful and a false Minister; for that he does teach
continually false and absurd doctrines; because also he peruerteth Gods truth,
to the destruction of his followers, as is by me made manifest, and very
effectually by M. Ainsworth in his answer unto him, and so I hope will he be
more and more manifested by others an Anabaptisticall Heretic, and a man
nothing but dreams, and vain in his imaginations.

Object. But he says first, if Ministers be by succession, then are they true
Ministers; because (says he) they were ordained by our Bishops.

Ans. I answer first, that they have renounced, as he confesses, that
ordination; and therefore by it can be no Page. 102.
Ministers. Secondly, he challenges to be Minister by the popular power
before spoken of, and denies any succession to be in the new Testament. To
which I answer, that the first is fully answered before, that there is no
popular power of ordination in the new nor old Testament, and therefore that
cannot make them to be, which is not it self. because the Church elected
Mathias, there being then no Apostles, Acts. 1. the Church elected Deacons.
Act. 6. and Elders Act. 14. Peter, and the other ten with him at that time? I
have also before showed how contrary this is to truth of Scripture, and
contrary to all Divines that either are or have been, except he can produce
their testimonies. Again it is false which he says, that the Church did
elect Mathias; for it is said they presented two, Act. 1. 23. and the Lord did
make the choice. 24. 25. how impudent is he that will so plainly gainesay the
Text? Of the other places have I also before spoken, to which I refer the
Reader. And thus much for the ninth Error.

The tenth Error of the Brownists.
Our Worship (say they) is false Worship.

What I have written against this in my former book, Page 146. 151. I wish thee
Reader to consider, for that among other things, thou may see the order of
Service under the Law, and the Service used in the Primitive Church, gathered
from the Scriptures, which these Adversaries nayther do, nor are able to
gainesay. And for further manifestation of our Worship against this their
Error; I thus reason:

The first Argument.
THe Worship only of the true God according to his word, The first argument
that our worship is true.
is true worship: But such is the Worship of the Church of England established
by Law. Therefore the worship of the Church of England is true Worship.

Mayor is not denyable; the Minor I do prove: We worship only the true God
and none other, Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity; if they deny this,
let us know what God we do worship, which they do not, or the true Church
never did. We do worship him after his Word: His word requires in true
Worship, a true God; so have we: Deuteronomy. 6.
a true Rule, which is it self, to direct us in that worship, which we have,
even the holy Scriptures: it requires preaching and opening of the Scriptures,
Mat. 28. Acts. 15. 21. which also we have: it requires knowledge of that we
do; Prou. 19. 2. and so verily many have: it requires true Sacraments, Mat.
28. 1 Cor. 11. to be administered; and those have we: it requires true Prayer,
Psalm. 50. which is a request made for things lawful, unto God, in the Name of
Jesus Christ; and such are our prayers: it requires in these the heart; Josh.
22. but that being unknown to man, and Charity teaches to think the best, we
must also be thought so to worship him; unless they will condemn us all for
Hypocrites; which let them show how they either can or dare do, by the word,
if they do: lastly, that it be done in the true Church, and so is ours. Psalm.
99. These things I do assume, let us see what they can deny, for yet I know
not.

The second Argument.
THe Worship not forbidden in Scripture, is no false Worship, The second
argument that our Worship is true.
but true: The Worship of the Church of England is not forbidden by Scripture:
Ergo, it is not false Worship, but true.

The Mayor is evident; the Minor I thus make manifest by all the parts of false
Worship, mentioned in the Scripture, and condemned, whereof we be free. First,
it forbids We are not guilty of the false Worship condemned in Scripture.
false Gods; Exodus 23. these we abhor. Secondly, the worshipping of Images
and Idols, Exodus 20. the Sun, Moon and Stars, forbidden, Deuteronomy. 17. 2 King.
17. and 21. and Angels. Col. 2. Revel. 22. All which we all condemn, and do
not at all worship. Thirdly, it forbids all voluntary will worship, to serve
God after the minds of men. Esa. 29. 13 Mat. 15. 9. Now this also do we
preach against, reprove, and often do punish the offenders in such a case:
neither teach we the precepts of men for doctrines of Scripture, nor do we
any thing appointed by man, and not warrantable by the Word, which any of
knowledge do take as holy things of God, or as any part of hiw Worship, in and
by which God is said to be honored: this our Law and Church Constitutions are
against: we have free liberty to preach against any abuse of any thing which
is used in the time of our Worship, and may rebuke such as put holiness in any
thing, but what is agreeable with the word of God: none can deny this, which
knows our Laws, and hears our teaching, and observes the practice of such
as worship with understanding. And therefore we not being guilty of any such
thing as the Scripture condemns, our worship is not false, being so
considered truly, as I have said.

The third Argument.
THat Worship which is after the manner of the Worship of The third argument
that our Worship is true.
the true Churches of God, set down in the word: that Worship is true and not
false: But such is the worship of the Church of England. Ergo, it is true and
not false

The Mayor is true, it being understood of the Churches Our worship is after
the worship of the true Churches of God.
manner of Worship, which the word commends unto us, else a true Church may
err in Gods Worship. The Minor I thus confirm, the order and particulars of
our proceeding in Gods worship agreeable to the true Churches of Christ.

First, we are appointed and do meet together at set times: Public meetings.
so the Jews in the old Testament were commanded by the Lord, Deuteronomy. 31. and
so did Act. 15. 21. So in the new, 1 Cor. 11. 17. and 14. 23. and that on the
first day in the week. Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor 16. 1. and so all sorts every where,
Justin Mart. Apo. 2. Tertul. in Apol^orat.

Secondly, we begin our Service with Confession and solemn Confession and
Prayers.
Prayers to God: so did Gods people in the established Church of the Jews.
Esdr. 9. 5. 6. and 10. 1. and these Morneus against the Mass. Page 18.
our prayers and this Confession made in Faith, taking hold of Christ, is our
spiritual sacrifice, which is auailable for us, and accepted with God as the
outward sacrifice made under the Law. Leu. 16. 15. 16. And thus prayers were
used in the Morn. pa. 23. 24.
Primative Church, both general and special. Act. 20. 36. 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2.
Acts. 2. 42.

there was no set form of Prayer.

first, there was set forms in the old Testament, as is proved in my other
Book, Page. 191. Secondly, these be no where disallowed in the new Testament,
neither by plain words, nor by undeniable Consequences: their conceit of
saying, it quenches the spirit, is against known experience, and is the
groundwork of M. Smiths casting off reading the Scriptures in the Assembly.
Thirdly, says Morneus, saint Augustine expounds Saint Paul, Page 20.
1 Timothy 2. to mean solemn Prayers; and this worthy Morneus does say, that we
have both precept and prescript form of Prayers, and for this cites Mat. 6.
9. 10. Fourthly, the Grecian Churches, as has been told me by one of that
Constantine Achilles.
Nation, a Grecian borne, that they have had, and still have set form of
Prayer: which Churches were planted by the Apostles, and never yielded
subjection to the Romish Synagogue, yea, it is a practice in all reformed
Churches, who have renounced Antichrist: how then can these men hold it
Antichristian?

Thirdly, we read Psalms and portions of holy Scriptures: Scriptures read.
so did the Jewish Church. Deuteronomy. 31. 9. 14. Nehe. 8. 1. Morn. Page 19.
and 13. 1. Luke. 4. 16. 18. Act. 13. 15. and 15. 21. and so were charged to do
by the Apostle: Col. 4. 16. and a blessing is pronounced upon that exercise.
Reu. 1. 3. And the same continued in the Churches of God; for says Morneus,
the Service of the Christians, for order, was derived from the Jews, Morn.
page. 25.
which the Apostles, it seems to me, did countenance in the Synagogues,
sitting silently at the same, till they had leave to speak, Act. 13. 15. To
this purpose was some appointed to be Readers.

Fourthly, we have singing of Psalms: so had the Jewish Psalms sung. Just
Mart. in Apol. 2. Cypr. lib. 2. Ep. 81
Church, as all David's Psalms do manifest, and Christ himself did use the
same, Mat. 26. 30. so approved by the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 18. 19. Col. 3. and
practiced in the following ages. Preaching.


Fifthly, we have preaching in many places, and so had they in every Sinagogue,
every Lords day, Act. 15. 21. Morn. page 3. Pliu. Epist. Tert. de anima. Eusebius.
lib. 4. S. Hillarie on psalm. 65.
Neh. 8. 8. Luke 4. 16. 22. Act. 13. 15. 16. So also in the primitive Church,
Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 14. 23. 31. The same not to be despised, 1 These. 5. 20. And
this most necessary duty continued in the purest ages following, as Authors
do make mention.

Sixthly, we have the Sacraments administered: so had the Sacraments.
Jewish Church, which they were bound to receive upon extreme Morn page 22.
and 31. Just. Mar. Apo. 2 Eusebius. li. 7. 6. 22. Tertul. in his Apol. Orat.
penalties, Genesis 17. 14. Numb. 9. 13. Exodus 4. 24. and so did receive them.
Ios. 5. Exodus 12. 28. 2 Chronicles. 29. 15 and 35. 1. So in the Primative Church
Mat. 28 18. Acts. 2. 41. and 8. 38. and 10. 48. Mat. 26. 26. 27. 28. 1 Cor. 11.
23. Act. 2. 42. And the same continued in the true Churches of God after. Just.
Mar. Apo. 2. Prayer and praises in the end.


Seauenthly, We shut up our religious exercises with a Psalm: so did our
Savior, Mat. 26. 30. And with Prayer: so did the ancient Church of the Jews,
Numb. 6. 23. 2 Chronicles. 30. 27. As they began their Sermons with invocation,
Morn. page 23:
as Neh. 8. So in the Apostles days, Act. 20. 36. And practiced in the after
Ages; to which prayer the people with one consent said, Amen, Neh. 8. Just.
Mar. Apo. 2.

Eighthly, all in a known tongue, as the Apostle commands, In a known tongue.
1 Corinthians. 14. and so practiced, as their gifts of tongues given for that end
declare.

And thus do we see our worship in matter and manner to be the same with the
true approved Churches of God. Now these things being thus, how can our worship
by them be judged false and idolatrous?

Reply to Mr. Ainsworth.
MAster Ainsworths answer is, that they doubt not to Page 194. Objection*
affirm our worship to be false, even an humane invention: and his reasons
are, because Apocripha books are read; because Sacraments are administered by
unpreaching Ministers, by our service Book; because of our observation of holy
days, etc,



But first, he bids me prove Apocrypha to be the true Page. 194.
word of God. This I leave him to do, if he can; who among us do hold it
Canonical? do not we in our writings witness the contrary, and that we
approve them not, farther then they do agree with the Scriptures?

Secondly, he wills me to prove the Sacraments administered by unpreaching
Ministers to be true Sacraments. To which I say, if they be not true
Sacraments, See for this Call. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 15. sect. 16.
then are they not Christ's Sacraments, and being none of Christ's, they be
truly and indeed no Sacraments at all; and so Mr. Ainsworth, and many of his
company, baptized by such, must needs run with Mr. Smith, into
Anabaptistrie. The circumcision in Israel in Ieroboams time, was never rejected
of God, nor condemned of the Church in Judah, in Hezekias time, but such were
admitted to the Passover as truly circumcised, else they should not have been
allowed to eat thereof. There is, the water, sprinckling of it, and the words
of Institution added thereto, which are the external and essential parts of
Baptism. Lastly, it is universally held, that Baptism among the Papists,
administered by popish Priests, is true Baptism, albeit therefore it does not
follow that Christians well instructed should carry their children to them, if
they may have their children baptized by other: There is one who gives many
reasons for this. Buca. cap. de bapt. loc. com. 47.


He tells me, that I do not meddle with their reasons given out in many
books, but he cyteth none, against many things which we use, and they deny,
and what then? are therefore their reasons good, and we the worse? so may then
I say, that they do not meddle with many men's reasons printed in several
Books, to defend, what they oppose, and therefore their reasons good, and M.
Ainsworth in the Error. And thus have I made Reply to M. Ainsworths answer to
the ten Errors of their way: He has made answer, as I do charitably
think, to have us reform our corruptions, as he judges them, and I have
made a Reply, to have them forsake their Errors in condemning us for a false
Church most unjustly. If they do well, who enuieth them? we wish that they
may see our good, and cease unjustly to be troublesome both to us and
themselves.

Reply to Mr. Smith.
Page 103.
MAster Smith, to prove our Churches worship to be a false worship, makes
Reasons, such as they be, which are these:

The first Argument.
THe true worship of the Lord cannot possibly be offered up in a false Church.
The Ecclesiastical Assemblies of England, are false Churches. Ergo, the
worship offered up unto the Lord in those Assemblies is false worship. To pass
by the mayor not sound, which he does not prove, though he pretend only the
proof of it: for he says, true worship is Then by his own confession it may
be in it, else how can it defile the worship of God? so here he contradicts his
own proposition.
defiled by a false Church, and that God will not have every Communion of men
to serve him, and that it is not acceptable to him. This is the sum of his
confirmation, which how it proves the mayor, I leave to be judged. The minor I
deny, which he proves not, as supposing it before proved, which I have
disproued: and so this Argument is easily answered.

The second Argument.
THe worship which is offered up unto the Lord, by a false Ministry is a false
worship. The Worship of the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England is offered up
by a false Ministry: Ergo, a false Worship. The Mayor is still unsound,
neither does he prove it otherwise then the former; to wit, by Gods not
accepting the worship by a false Ministry but such a reason proves not the
Worship it self false. God does not accept of any wicked man's worshipping of
God in a true Church, by true Ministers rightly worshipping, Esa. 1. Does it
therefore follow from Gods not acceptance for the man's wickedness, that
therefore the worship it self is false Worship, and not of God? none can
truly say so. The Minor is false as I have proved before; and now not by him
disproued. So then the Mayor being unsound, and the Minor false, this reason
also is not worth a rush.

The third Argument.
Jewish, that is, literal, stinted, imposed Booke-worship is false Worship.
The Worship of the Ecclesiastical Assemblies of England is Jewish, that is,
literal, stinted, and imposed Bookeworship. Ergo, false Worship.

The ground of this Argument he makes his proofs out of his Book entitled,
The differences of the Churches of the Separation, to which he refers his
Reader: now this book of his, is since confuted in most things very soundly,
but chiefly this proposition here avouched by Mr. Ainsworth, who it seems
can in a good cause do worthily well, which I wish his employment in ever, and
cease to defend untruths against us, in which he is very barraine and without
judgment. Therefore for the Proposition I do commend to the Reader his A
defense of the holy Scripture, Worship, and Ministry, against. Mr. Smith.
Answer at large. The Minor I deny, which upon so false a proposition he takes
to be true, without further proof: in which he denies all reading of
Scripture; yea, so much as for a Preacher to look upon his Text of Scripture
in the public Assembly: and yet if this Sathanicall bewitchment of him were
true, nevertheless the Minor is in part false; for all our Worship is not
literal, stinted, and imposed upon a Book; for many Sermons are made by
meditation, and uttered by the help of memory without any Book: so many
prayers are made freely, as occasion of times be, and not read upon a Book; so
as herein he speaks untruly of the Worship in all the Assemblies of the
Church of England.

After these his Arguments, he cauils with my reasons in my former book,
first, pressing his book of differences, Page. 105.
as if it were not confutable, but, as I have said, it is sufficiently in this
point confuted to his shame. Secondly, to that I say, we do worship no false
Gods, nor the true God with My former Book. Pa. 146.
any false worship, and therefore our worship is not false: He answers, that
Israel might so have said in Ieroboams Page 105.
time, and when Aaron made the Calfe. But how unjustly they might so say, as
we may, and how falsely this man utters such words, the holy Ghost himself
shall give sentence: for does he not say, that Israel had Priests for Devils,
2 Chronicles. 11. 15.
and for the Calves which Jeroboam had made? And is it not said, that the
Israelites did worship the Calfe, and that Exodus 32. 8. 23.
they said, they were the Gods which brought them out of Aegipt? So they
worshipped Devils, and false Gods, yea a molten image for God, how can it be
said then, that they might say, as we truly can, that we worship no false
Gods, nor the true God with false worship, as they did?

Lastly, he takes for granted our worship to be the invention of man, and so
concludes in a verbal sound of words without any proof, as the Reader may
see, that our Page 106.
Church is a false Church, and so an Idol our Service book an Idol: that we
have a false Christ, and so an Idol; and so he says that our faith is false;
our doctrine false; the word not the true word; neither the Sacraments, nor our
Communion true: all which if he could as easily prove, as affirm, he had
needed no farther to have troubled himself with other discourses, these had
been enough to have removed us out of our way, or else to have perished in our
standing: but sithen he, nor any schismatic Heretic is ever able to
justify this against us, the contrary herefully being made plain against him,
he is to be judged, as such wicked speeches deserve, so uttered against the
true Church of God, and his mother, if he be not every way a Bastard,
unworthy to be acknowledged a natural and true Son. And thus also have I
ended with M. Smith, whose reformation I wish, and not to presume above that
which is meet to understand, but to understand according to sobriety, and Romans
12. 3. 16.
not to be wise in himself, as the Apostle admonishes all.

There remains somewhat to be replied unto upon their answers unto some
particular opinions of theirs, set down in my other Book; but for that at the
first I have Page 151.
mentioned them briefly, as to let the world judge of the vanity thereof, and
considering they be of no moment from that which is already handled, which
being thoroughly understood, sufficiently may furnish the meanest Reader of
understanding with better and more reasons to answer them, then they have said
to defend them; and lastly, this my Reply being grown into so great a
quantity, I pass them by, and leave them, as not fearing any indifferent
Reader to be seduced by them in such things.

For a Conclusion, I wish them to consider the truths of The Conclusion.
God, to acknowledge us the true Church of God, as we be indeed; let them not
by a false condemnation of us, in what we are not to be condemned; maintain
therein their Schism from us, and by untruths seek either to draw more, or
hold whom they have so gotten from us, through error of their minds. If M.
Ainsworth can prove substantially, that we be no Church of Christ, this one
matter is sufficient to insist upon, to remove any honest heart fearing God, to
fly from every thing which may justly be disliked in any Assembly; but if not,
let Gods fear appear in them; let sincere love of true speaking declare it
self in them, by acknowledging us to be what we are by the warrant of the
Word; and cease to call us false Churches, Antichristian Churches, so shall
they be less condemned, and the truth on both sides appearing, peace will
follow, and with truth holiness, without which none shall see God.

Thou see, Reader, the causes sufficient to hold thee A brief repetition of
reasons against them.
back from the Separatists Schism: We are a Church truly constituted; by
lawful means reformed; Saints by calling; that their is no example or warrant
for any to separate from such a church as ours is, as they do, with
condemnation. It is opposed by the godly Learned: no Church gives them the
right hand of fellowship: The Lord has by his fearful hand reproved the
Ringleaders. It is like old Schismatics: it is occasioned through
coffeehouse; violence of passion enforces it: ignorance with a good meaning
in many vpholds it: if ever they had grace, here in England they found it: here
we feel the power of the word: here are such as truly fear God: the best
churches hold us a true Church; God has adorned it with worthy men of God, and
with the crown of Martyrdom. The Godly here remaining, are more charitable
then the Separation: we carry a pity to them, and yet they do reject all
communion with us: yea, behold how Satan confounds them by divisions, and how
deadly they condemn one another.

Mr. Smiths Censure and observation of M. Iohnsons Church, and the rest.
THeir Constitution is as very an Harlot, as either her Mother In the charecter
of the Beast.
England, or Grandmother Rome, out of whose loins she came. That the Church
of the Separation is an unnatural Daughter to her Mother England, for that
she being of the same constitution by Baptism, dare call her an Adultresse,
and an harlot. And therefore cannot with any truth (retaining Baptism) or good
conscience, separate from it as a false Church.

That they craftily and subtly draw back, being guilty in their
consciences, to defend their Errors.

We protest against them (says he) that there is no ordinance of the Lord
true amongst them.

That the Separation is the youngest and fairest Daughter of Rome an Harlot.

That the Separatists of Mr. Iohnsons Church, do confidently of self love,
and self conceit, fill their mouths with ill terms, therein treading in the
steps of all Antichristians their predecessors. And lastly he warns them not
to be wise in their own eyes, through Pride, and to take heed, notwithstanding
their Syrene songs that they prove not a cage of most ugly and deformed
Antichristian Heretics: So reckons he of them now.

Mr. Iohnsons Censure and observation of Mr. Smith.
THat he has forsaken the truth of Christ, seduced with In his Epistle before
his Book against Anabap.
the error of Anabaptists. That his grounds and assertions pervert the Gospel
of Jesus Christ; bereave the Church of the grace and favor of God to young and
old; take away comfort from Christian families; deprive kingdoms and
Commonwealths of Christian Kings and Judges. That he fills his mouth and pen
with falsehood and blasphemy: peruerteth Scripture, abuses the people of God,
etc. The Goliath, defying Israel, and provoking to battle and combat.

Mr. Ainsworths Censure and observation of Mr. Smith.
He attributes to him Folly and shame: That he frets In his defense of holy
Scripture.
within himself, speaking with a stiff neck: he reproves him of insolency,
swelling words of vanity: that he writes to set out the fraud and malignitie
of that Boaster. That he yields small hope of good: that out of a proud heart
he has stirred up strife: that no constancy is found in his mouth: that he
says, vnsaith, and contradicts his own grounds: that he fights against
himself, and the spear which he tosseth turns into his own heart: that he
is a false Prophet. All this in his Epistle.

That God has stricken him with blindness, that he is benumbed In the Book.
Page 3.
in mind; drunk with the wine of violence, proclaims open war against
Gods everlasting Testament. That he Page 4. 5.
has graced the Porch of his building with imposture and fraud, and secondeth
his fraud with injury. Page 8.


That Mr. Smith is a deceiuer, properly so called, digging a pit to serve his
Heretical humor, and hide his blasphemies, into which by Gods just judgment
he is fallen. He calls him 10.
a proud Gentile, given over to blindness of heart: that God 12.
himself is highly blasphemed by his wretched exposition of the 13.
old Testament. That Satan has deceived him: he calls 15.
his exposition, Dotage, fancy, worme-wood: that he is taken 20.
in the snare which he set for the righteous: that he seeks to abuse them
by equivocation, and to shrowde himself in a conceited fancy. That he is a
windy cloud, carried too and fro, and rather then he will forgo his error he
will contradict what before he had well written. That his Writings are
Heretical, 23.
and that his lying tongue varieth incontinently: that he wauereth as a Reed
shaken with the wind; forgetting himself 31.
like a drunken man: that he fights against himself, and will be found a
Calumniator both of them, and of Israel, and of Christ himself. That he
coggeth the Reader with the dye of deceit. That he is tossed in the sea of
error, and so reeleth 40.
too and fro staggering like a drunken man. That he opens 41.
his mouth against heaven. He likeneth him to Julian the Apostate, 42.
and Elimas the Sorcerer, stricken blind with Anabaptistry, a just recompense
of his former error. That he has 45.
no will to forsake his error. He calls him the accuser of the 52.
Saints. He tells him of blasphemous opinions, and that sophistical 56.
reasons, are the pillars of his heresy. That he deals like a false Page 60.
61.
Coyner, and one like that hunteth the souls of Gods people, setting reasons,
as haies to entangle them. That his words are rough and crooked. That the curse
hangs over his head: that his 63.
heart is stricken with the darkness of Aegipt: that he is the enemy 64.
of Gods Book: that Lucia could not have written more reprochfully 65.
of the holy Scriptures: that in his Arguments remain but leasings. That a
seduced heart has deceived him: 68.
that he cannot deliver his soul. That his Logic is not like every 80.
man's: like the raging Sea, he casts up mire and dyrt. And 91.
thus till he repent, lies he under censure and condemnation of the
Separatists.

Mr. Smiths words in his Epistle to the Reader, before the Charecter of the
beast.
IT cannot be accounted a commendable quality in any man, to make many
alterations and changes in Religion, in such weighty matters as are the cases
of Conscience. Inconstancy is much to be blamed in matters of salvation. The
wisest and most religious men have been always most constant in their
Profession and Faith: inconstant persons cannot escape the deserved imputation
of Folly, or weakness of judgment therein.

Now who ever more inconstant then he? of himself he has given sentence.

Therefore ye poor seduced souls, leave such wavering Reeds, that are tossed
too and fro with the wind of their own fantasies, arising from the
humorousnesse of an instable mind, violently forced with the passion of
unruled affection. Even so be it, Amen.

Lord remove the causes of contention, and give thy peace unto thy people.
FINIS.
THE TABLE OF THE Principal matters handled in this Book.
OF the Presbiterie. Page. 5. Seven Probabilities that the way of the
Separatists is not the good way of God. 38. Schismatickes who they be, and what
are the causes of their Schism. 46. 63. The Romish Church is in a true
Constitution, and why yet we forsake it. 50. 130. A Covenant have we made with
God, and have renewed it. 51. 250. Separatists abuse the holy Scriptures. 62.
117. Separatists do condemn truths as falsehood. 89. Separatists describe a
Church not truly. 93. Separatists do force untruths upon such as would join
with them. 105. Separatists general sins in their way. 105. Separatists
especial errors in the same way. 108. 150. 158. 160. 164. 177. 204. 240. 290.
324. Brownisme the ground of Anabaptisme. 77. Brownisme makes a breach of a
lawful Communion. 86. The Constitution of our Church is a true Constitution.
123. The Word may be heard among us. 87 And spiritual communion may be kept.
88. We be voluntary Professors. 129. 145. The Church of England is a true
Church. 94. 242 Christ is our Head. 247. Christ is our Advocate. 250. Our
Prophet. 255. Our Priest. 257. Our King. 259. Our People are true matter of the
Church, as they stand by Law. 271. We hold soundly the sum of the Gospel.
273. And do in some sort make alike Profession, and how. 273. The Ministers of
our Church, ordained according to the truth of our Laws, made in that behalf,
are true Ministers. 290. Such are not Antichristian. 291. Our Worship is true
worship. 325. And is after the true Churches of God. 327. Saints, who they be,
and why so called. 165. True holiness required in the old Testament. 81. One
man's sin polluteth not another. 171. 174. How many ways one becomes
guilty of other men's sins. 174. What it is not to consent to sin. 230.
Popular government not to be approved. 177. What is to be thought of the
Separatists laicall Prophecy. 182. Of Ministerial succession. 184. Of a mixed
Assembly. 134. 165. 254. Corruptions may be in a true Church. 93. Planting and
reforming differ much. 146. 245. 246. Princes may compel their subjects to the
outward means of Religion. 146. God has used Princes power to advance
religion. 147. And to reform abuses. 278. Idol, a word not used in Scripture
for a Church or a Churches constitution. 155. Separation may not be made from a
true Church with condemnation of it, as a false, or no church. 205. From what
people to make a full separation, by the Separatists judgment. 228. Of
variety of opinions about Church government and discipline thereof. 212. What
government is every were to be wished. 227. To what special heads all the
places of Scripture for the Separation, are to be reduced. 239. To know when
places for separation are perverted. 240. Three necessary considerations to
prevent rash separating from us. 241. Papists have not Gods word as we have it.
251. The separatists have only a respective consideration of us, and that ever
in the worst part, which is not warrantable in them. 253 Unbelievers in the
Scripture are other manner of people then true members of the Church of
England. 264 Of the Authority Ecclesiastical in the beginning. 267. How a
people are yet a true Church, though wicked do rise up in it. 274. Matter of a
Church, as it is true, so is it also good or bad matter. 276. How God makes a
people his people, and how again they take him to be their God. 277. 279.
Properties and Privileges of the true Church. 282. 283. 284. True conversion
is in our Church. 306. The Properties of a good Shepherd. 301.
The places of Scripture which are expounded, taken out of the Old Testament.
Exodus. 19. 6. 60. Leuiticus. 19. 17. 237. Leuiticus. 20. 24. 136. Zachary.
11. 17. 155. Haggai. 2. 14. 175.
The places of Scripture expounded, taken out of the new Testament.
Matthew. 5. 23. 24. 236. 237. Matthew. 18. 15. 20. 217. John. 17. 16. 139.
John. 10. 1. 2. 301. Acts. 2. 24. 137. Acts. 19. 9. 138. 1 Cor. 5. 217. 227. 1
Cor. 11. 236. 238. 1 Cor. 6. 14. 309. 1 Cor. 9. 1. 321. 1 Cor. 14. 182. 2 Cor.
6. 14. 18. 140. 145. 153. 2 Cor. 12. 21. 236. 238. 1 Peter. 2. 9. 59. 60. 1
John. 5. 21. 154.
FINIS.

